Roll calls closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rest for today's
invocation led by the gentle
lady from Lee Representative
Senna Cortez.
Could you please bow your heads
and pray with me.
Dear heavenly Father, we come
before you with humble and
grateful hearts. Thank you for
the cross and the sacrifice of
your son that brought us
forgiveness and redemption and
hope. Thank you that out of
everyone that you could have
chosen to be in this position,
you chose us, and I pray that
we'd be good stewards of this
position and that we'd multiply
our talents.
Help us to fully embrace this
one beautiful wild and precious
life that you've given us, Lord.
We stand on your word, and I
thank you, Father, that your
word says that if my people,
which are called by my name will
humble themselves and pray and
seek my face and turn from their
ways, then I will hear from
heaven, I will forgive their
sin, and I will heal the land.
Lord, I just ask that you heal
our land, heal our communities,
heal our counties, and heal our
state. I pray, Lord, that
You would be gracious to us,
that he would look down and
smile on us, Lord, that You
would give us your grace, your
favor, and your peace, and help
us to remember that before we
were state representatives, we
are representatives of you. And
when this is all said and done,
we want you to say, well done,
good and faithful servant. Thank
you so much, Father. We love
you, we trust you, and we lean
into you in Jesus' precious name
we pray. Amen.
gentle lady from Bern Lee,
Representative Torres Velasquez
with the pledge of allegiance.
And the gentle lady from Bern Le
Representative Nicole Chavez
with the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
Li
Young lady from Santa Fe. Good
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Good
afternoon, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objection.
It is so order. Good afternoon
members.
Welcome to Legislative Day 17.
AKA Dave 50 5.
4, but who's counting? Not me.
Announcements. The gentleman
from
Otero Representative block thank
you Mr. Speaker. Happy Saint
Patrick's Day to you Patrick's
Day to you, gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. So on your
desks are a little, little
shamrock pins just to celebrate
our great Irish Americans. We
had a memorial to celebrate them
and so there's also a
certificate running around. I
won't uh have everyone read it,
but Mr. Speaker, I do have a
special treat here. We have
James Lamb from the New Mexico
Fire and Police pipes and
rum, and he will be doing some
bagpipes for us this morning,
Mr. Speaker. So he's gonna come
right on in to bagpipe.
Thank you gentlemen, that was
beautiful and I am wondering how
come you're not wearing your
green suit today. It is Saint
Patrick's Day. Speaker, I
believe you may be color blind.
This is green suit and a green
tie and a green pin. I, I did
try my best this morning, Mr.
Speaker, but it's not as green
as your suit. I will give you
that.
Thank you. I don't wanna get
pinched.
General lady from Lee
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
In the rostrum today, we have
esteemed guests from my hometown
and I am beyond grateful that
they are here. But Mr. Speaker,
with your permission, I'd like
to yield the floor to the
gentleman from Lee County and
then I'll tag team with him in
just a bit from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady from Lee.
Mr. Speaker, today we have um.
12 guests from Lee County,
Hobbs, Lovington area with the
Head Start program. And, uh, Mr.
Speaker, if you don't mind, I'd
like to ask each one of them to
stand as I call their name.
Cynthia Gonzalez.
Blanca Madrid.
Moshar
And Herica Sperberg.
Marcus Sperberg.
Alexandra, oh, I'm gonna destroy
this one.
Chaboya and Michelle Federico.
Claiborne and Griffith?
And
um
Uh, Dean Young.
And Mr. Speaker, I am missing
one person. I apologize, uh, Ms.
Griffin, uh, is here as well. I
apologize. Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen, all the way from, uh,
this is, uh, Head Start and
Hobbs, right?
I'm, I'm sorry, I did not hear
you. This a head start in Hobbs?
This is Head Start in Hobbs and
Lovington Mr. Speaker, and, and
body, I, I saved one for the
last, Miss Patricia Grovey
Evans.
Mr. Speaker, and
Buddy, I'm not gonna read the
certificate today, but I would
like the body to, to recognize
Patricia for 40/40 years of
service for Head Start and Early
Childhood in Lee County.
Amazing. Welcome to the house.
Thank you for your service.
Mr. Speaker, with that, I will
turn it back over to the
representative, the other
representative from Lee County.
Thank you so much to the gentle
lady from Lee.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and our last one
that stood up at the very end,
just wave your hand, Brianna
Grande, let's give it up for
her. Welcome to the house.
And Mr. Speaker, I just want to
say that Mrs. Grovey has changed
the landscape of Lee County for
the past 40 years with her
advocacy for early childhood. So
thank you so much for your
meaningful and your life
changing work. Mr. Speaker,
something that you should know
not only is she an amazing child
advocate. We go way back with
our Zumba days and this lady can
get down, Mr. Speaker. So thank
you so much. Alright, welcome to
the house.
Did you say Zumba or jazzercise?
Mr. Speaker Zumba. I don't know
what the difference is between
the two, but it sounds hard to
do.
Congratulations.
General lady from Bernard Lee or
Representative Hochman Beal.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Happy
Saint Patrick's Day to
everybody, please don't pinch
me. I do have a pen. Um, I have
the pleasure of introducing my
shadow for the day, Mr. Speaker.
This is Finn Thompson. Finn, uh,
is a junior at the Albuquerque
Academy, and he is very
interested in political science
and maybe going to law school
and so, um, he thought he was.
want to shadow me for the day,
so, um, just wanted to introduce
him and welcome him to the
house. Welcome to the house and
you've got some pretty cool
highlight reels from your career
as a football player at academy.
Very good. Welcome to the House
Speaker. That's why we, uh, we
got him on Team Hochman v. Hill
to do social media because this
guy is pretty good at it.
Good. He should be on the house
football team. We're gonna
change the basketball game to
football next year so he'll be
on the house football team, um,
folks, we've got a, I've got a
few very special guests joining
me today. I want to start with.
Uh, I'm gonna ask you all to
rise and be recognized. We've
got Teresa Madrid, Joaquin
Rodriguez, Eliza Rodriguez, and
Leslie Garcia Moreno. Welcome to
the house.
These good folks are doing
incredible advocacy work with
young families and it is an
honor to have you all join us
here today, and I believe your
two kiddos are on spring break.
That's probably why they're
here, um, so welcome and I hope
you guys get to hang out and,
and watch us do some good work,
uh, the other guest I want to
introduce, she needs no
introduction, uh, but she is our
former majority leader, former
chair of the House Judiciary
Committee, longtime member of
this house, Majority Leader
Representative Gail Chasey and
her
Granddaughter Lucy Beam. Welcome
back to the house.
I gave Lucy a special speaker
pin, and I told her that will
get you free meals everywhere
and then I looked at Grandma and
I said, don't let me down.
Can't prove me wrong.
Gentle lady from Son of Aur Lee
or son of Keats. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I rise today in sport
in support of a House Bill 28,
Irish American Day as a 3rd
generation American, um, I grew
up in a very chaotic large
robust ethnic house, um, that
told us stories of our
challenges and struggles as we
came to the land of opportunity.
And as um time came, I might
have distanced myself from my
immigrant story, but I want to
take today to reflect upon it
and uh and be grateful for it
and also uh thank our, uh, my
gentle friend from Otero for
having me on this memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from Bern Leoa Garcia.
Are, are you want to be
recognized, but only, only if
you talk about the San
Patricios, otherwise I'm not
gonna recognize you.
And no speaker, not some
Patricio, but something
something something close behind
my speaker.
Estima speaker, I would like to,
uh, kind of start off our Saint
Patrick's Day, uh, session with
a classic.
Irish joke Eskimo speaker.
And this question is to you,
Estema speaker. Why do the Irish
only use 2039 beans to make
their famous Irish.
Being soup.
Estima speaker have no idea and
I'm afraid of the answer
because if you add one more,
it'd be too farty.
All right.
The gentleman from San Juan is
furiously writing that joke
down.
He's gonna use it next year.
The other gentleman from
representative, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I rise today to
recognize and salute our
freshman class of
representatives, particularly
because the journal had a
wonderful article and
particularly showed pictures uh
of our.
Represents Senna Cortez for me
and Mejia from Chavez. Mr.
Speaker, I particularly and
uniquely appreciates freshmen,
having been a freshman 3 times.
So a salute to them. They're
doing a great job. They've been
instrumental to great bills and
it's a pleasure to work with
them, Mr. Speaker. So I just
want to congratulate them. Thank
you. Big round of applause for
all of our rookie members of the
house.
Now, even though you're a 3 time
freshman, you never got an
article written about you.
Mr. Speaker, I'm still waiting,
but, however, since I am
uniquely a 3 time freshman or as
uh I'm often referred to as a
three peaked.
I will be signing autographs
later in the rotunda.
Very good.
Uh, there's also a, a, a
freshman dinner that, uh,
freshmen have to put on for the
entire caucus, so you're in
charge of that.
Done, Mr. Speaker.
Great.
Uh, folks, I'd like to, before I
go to other members, I'd like to
recognize in the gallery, uh,
representatives from the hubs
Head Start programs. Welcome to
the house.
And then also a special guest of
Representative Luhans, uh, we
have Toby Luhan, her father.
Wherever you are, please rise.
There you are, rise to be
recognized. Welcome to the
house.
Gent lady from Donana Socorro
Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
moment passed.
But I, I, I, I was just gonna
say as a second term freshman,
I'm really happy to hear that
the word freshmen can now be
used again because we were
saying first term and I'm really
glad that this song is back. So,
yes. Well, I still call you all
rookies, um.
Much to the
frustration of some of you.
Um
But the dinner is real. You guys
have to have a dinner for us.
You guys got 5 days?
Chop chop
Any other announcements?
All right.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
See, no objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to has been referred
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 387
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted. G. Andres Romero
chair, I move adoption of the
committee report.
report for Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senator
387. All those in favors by C
and I.
Of the supposed name
You guys have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully
submitted. Greer, I move
adoption of the committee
report. of committee report for
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480.
All those in favor by a 9.
All the supposed name
CAA committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 57, has
had it under consideration,
reports with recommendation that
it do pass, respectfully
submitted D Wanda Johnson chair.
Move
We're an adoption of a
Favorable committee report for
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Memorial
57. All those in favor, say I.
OK, let me correct this one
because apparently I said the
wrong word. We are on adoption
of a favorable committee report
for House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Memorial
57. All those in favor of the 5
but say no.
I suppose
The IA a committee for adopted.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speakerman,
your government elections in
Indian.
I'm a rookie, Mr. Speaker, uh,
your government elections and
Indian Affairs Committees, to
whom has been referred Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42
has added under consideration
and reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair.
We adoption of favorable
committee report for house.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate 42. All
those in favors I say 9.
Also Boney
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services commit to has
been referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 219 as amended, has had it
under consideration report with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We're adoption report for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 219 as amended.
All those in favor of saying no.
I suppose,
the.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, I move to the next
order of businesses messages.
See no objection to this order.
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
concurred in-house amendments to
Senate Bill 82 as amended by the
House, respectfully submitted
Sherry De Lohan, Senate chief
clerk. Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 66.
House Bill 161, House Bill 175.
House Bill 214, House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 308 with emergency clause
and return same herewith
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansenate chief clerk. Message
will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 122 as
amended.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 247.
Senate Bill 377 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in engross copy of Senate Bill
199 has been read in full and
signed by the officers of the
Senate in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Hanson and chief clerk will be
entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of Senate Bill
75 as amended, has been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate in open session
and request the signatures of
the officers of the house,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, Senate chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate Bill 283
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house, respectfully
Gentlemen from Donana.
Madam Speaker, I move that we go
to the next order of business,
3rd reading of legislation.
No objections, so ordered.
Gentle lady from Bernna Leo, are
you ready on item number 23.
Yes, Madam Speaker, would you
please get me to that point?
all action necessary for placing
House Bill 244 on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitutiongentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
House Bill 244 will provide for
raising the minimum age.
Of the magistrate court judges,
uh, to the age of 28, which in
current statute is the age of
18. Thank you.
Seeing no debate, gentle lady,
to close.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I move that house bill 244 do
now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 244. The
vote is now open.
The
Vote is now closed.
Hey, the boat is now closed by a
vote of 50 in the affirmative
and
She'd like to vote yes, yes.
Yes.
Yes, yes, yes, by a vote of 51
in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 244 has
duly passed the House.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Hold on a second.
gentle lady from to, so you're
ready on item number 47. I am
Mr. Speaker. Can you get me to
that point? Let the record
reflect that all actions
necessary for placing.
House Bill
348 as twice amended amended,
uh, has been placed on final
passage and it's been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
general lady to explain the
bill.
Mr. Speaker, the last time we
increased penalties for people
stealing water was in 1907
before we were even a state.
This bill increases penalties
from $100 a day to $2000 a day,
and with that I stand for
questions.
There is debate. The gentleman
from Colfax, Curry Harding Qua
San Miguel, and union
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield, Mr. Speaker,
I gladly yield to my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, when I
saw this bill come up, you know,
water is something that is
enormously important to me, uh,
who uses it is important to me,
and, uh, that we keep our water
rights invalid is very important
to me. So I had one question
that I asked the
State engineer and I, I think,
uh, I wanna sort of get it out
there, what it was, and that is,
is their notice, you know, if
you're just going along there
and you, uh, our water in your
garden or
Uh
It wouldn't be for that, but,
you know, if you're, if you're
using water.
And then there's not somebody
gonna come in and just
All of a sudden, you own
thousands and thousands of
dollars, uh, you'll be given
notice first. Is that correct?
That you're in violation Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, you are
correct.
So that's, that's mostly, uh,
like a, like probably uh call me
out that this, this bill is not
gonna make it where you just
suddenly are surprised by the
fact that you're in violation
and you all these millions of
dollars that you will be
notified. They will say, you're
in violation, you're using water
that's uh illegal and um if you,
we, if you cease and desist and
you're, you're good. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
See no further debate, journal
lady close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I move that House Bill
348 as twice amended do now
pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 348 as twice amended. The
vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by.
A vote of 51 in the affirmative,
0 in the negative. House Bill
343 is twice amended, has duly
passed this House. My apologies.
House Bill 348 as twice
submitted has duly passed this
house.
Gentlemen from Valencia, are you
ready on item number 43. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. We give me
that
reflect that all action
necessary for placing.
House Bill 456. Yes, house 456,
on final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution,
gentlemen, to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 456 increases the limits on
services that can be procured
for architectural engineering
and construction, um, through
state agencies and public bodies
and with that I stand for
questions.
Seeing no further debate,
gentlemen are close.
Mr. Speaker, I moved that House
Bill 456 to an E pass.
For our final passage of House
Bill 456, the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 55 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative, House Bill 456 has
duly passed this house.
Gently gentle lady from Bernard
Leo are already on item number
33.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill 73 on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'm
presenting Senate Bill 73 which
amends the motor Vehicle Code,
uh, especially as it relates to
traffic, uh, to, to persons
riding bicycles. It does
specifically two items, Mr.
Speaker. One, a stop, it allows
bicyclists to proceed through a
stoplight before the the light
turns green if the bicyclist has
stopped and if there is no
approaching pedestrian bicycle
or vehicle and a, it allows.
the bicyclist to proceed through
a stop sign or yield sign
without stopping if there's no
approaching pedestrian bicycle
or vehicle.
As it requires to bicyclists to
stop at any stop our yield sign
and with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions.
There is debate. The general
from Catri and Sierra Socorro,
and Valencia, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady from
Brutal Leo yield.
I yield to the gentle lady. And
so, um, Mada, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I didn't read this
bill, but you just stated in
your opening statement that
allows them to not stop at a
stop sign or a red light if
there's no oncoming traffic. Is
that correct? Uh, Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentle lady, no, that's not
correct. It allows them to
proceed to a stoplight before
the stoplight turns green, if
the bicyclist has uh stopped and
if there is.
no approaching pedestrian
bicycle or vehicle and with the
yield sign, it allows them tour
to proceed through a stop sign
or a yield sign without stopping
if there's no approaching
pedestrian pedestrian bicycle or
vehicle.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, thank you for
that. Why would it be if we're
supposed to treat bicyclists and
watch for them on the road just
like a vehicle. Uh, I worry that
this could inhibit their safety,
uh, and also inhibit the safety
of, of motor vehicleists that
might accidentally hit them
because maybe they didn't see
them, they maybe they stopped
and then, so they're you're
allowing them to go through a
red light after they stop and
there's no one coming.
bicycle could go through a red
light, but a vehicle can't and
so uh that's a concern for me
for safety, um, when I know, uh,
when I'm in Albuquerque, say
like on Rio Grande, I see
bicyclists breaking the law all
the time. And, and it worries me
if someone, if someone, if I hit
a bicyclist,
I would, I would feel horrible.
And if, but if they're breaking
the law, I, I always tell my
kids, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
doesn't matter if you're dead,
if you were in the right or the
wrong.
And so I, I, this is a concern
for me and, and I, I don't think
I'm gonna be able to support
your bill, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
There is for the debate. The
gentle lady from Bernardo and
Torrance, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, with
the young lady from Bernalo
please yield.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker. Yes,
gentle lady, I yield.
I was gonna laugh then she would
say no.
Sorry,
for some reason that just seemed
extra funny today. OK, I wanna
make sure I understand this. So
Mr. Speaker, generally, I.
I don't know if there was
amendments because I just have
this bill that's in front of me
and it says.
So when they come to an
intersection with a stop sign or
a yield sign.
And if there's no approaching
pedestrian bicycle or.
Any traffic they're allowed to
proceed so.
I'm let me take tramway because
we're familiar with tramway
because we that's part of my
district and your district close
to your district. So Mr.
Sellini, so they're on tramway.
They're in that bike lane.
Then they could go through that
red light, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, if there's nobody,
there's no pedestrians and
there's no other cars, is that
what I'm understanding, Mr.
Speaker Delaney, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, know if
there's a stop light, they must
stop first, so they don't have
to wait till the light for the
light to turn green, but if it's
a, if it's a stop sign or yield
sign, they can proceed through
it if it's safe.
OK, so Mr. Speaker Delaney.
OK.
So they stop at a red light,
they don't stop, stop sign, if
for some reason because one of
my biggest fears is not seeing
somebody on a bicycle. Same
thing when I ride a motorcycle,
right? I'm scared to death,
somebody won't see me. If
somebody doesn't see them and
they ran the red light, how does
that play out with the trial
attorney, Mr. Speaker Delane,
how does the trial attorney
proceed because
If I'm the one that hit them, my
lawyer's gonna say, well, they
ran the red light, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they would not say that uh if
you pass this legislation.
Mr. Speaker, I think they would
because if I stop at that light,
it's red, they go through it
somebody's coming across and
it's green for them and they hit
them.
My big concern about the is the
liability and I can't support
this bill either because as it
is in my district we have a lot
of bicycle riders that go up
there and they ride through the
whole lane. You can't go around
them. They run through lights
all the time, they, they take a
lot of press. I'm not saying
anything against bike ride. I'm
just saying some, just like some
motorcycle riders and some
people who drive cars on be law,
but speaker and gentle lady, I
can't support your bill because
I'm thinking about the liability
of somebody stops at that
railway didn't stop the stops, I
think it's clearer than
somebody.
hits him and I don't want to
make our our people driving
vehicles, uh, responsible for
that. I, I'm finished. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker John.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Colfax, Curry
Harding Qua San Miguel and Union
Representative Chapio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman.
Gentle lady, I, I think, uh, Mr.
Speaker, that what I have is
probably more of a comment and
it's along the, the same lines
as what Representative Lord just
made right now today, if I'm
coming home from church and I'm
Smoking along there and I, I'm
obeying the law and going the
speed limit and I, uh, the
bicyclist pedals out in front of
me, and I accidentally don't see
them and I hit them, uh, because
they ran a red light.
It's very clear in law today
that the fault was that of the
bicyclist because they ran a red
light.
If we pass this law, that it is
not clear that the liability
rests with that person that ran
the red light.
Uh, I certainly.
Uh, maintained that I would not
be at fault because I was just
driving on the highway passing
through a green light.
And um
And uh the bicyclist is the one
that came out of nowhere at a
red light. Mr. Speaker, I
wouldn't just make a statement
without allowing you a chance to
refute that.
So.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. I'd like
to remind you that under the
terms of the statement that's
been changed in section 66 of
the New Mexico Civil statutes.
It says that if the light is
red, they must stop, and then
the bicyclist has the uh the
authority to proceed if there is
no approaching pedestrian
bicycle or vehicle, so it would
be inappropriate, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. gentlemen, to say that they
ran the red light. They have
permission to
proceed after stopping and
determining that there are none
of those items that I just
listed that were in their
pathway.
So thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I, I just
think it muddies the water a
little bit and I'm, I'm not
comfortable with that. Thank
you.
There has been a request for the
gentlemen to remove their
jackets if there's no
opposition, so ordered.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Rio Riva,
Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr. Speaker with a
gentle lady from Berna Leo
Yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I yell.
Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.
Thank you very much, gentle
lady.
Contemplated whether or not I
wanted to speak on this matter,
no questions, simply just a
statement really in regards to
the district that I come from
and when I see a lot of these
bicyclists come, and I know
reference was made to Tramway
Boulevard, uh, that's a, that's
a large bicyclist thoroughfare,
as well as Highway 313, uh, in
San Di Pueblo, and I know that
when I'm traveling through there
it makes me wonder in regards to
what laws do these bicyclists
have to follow, uh, more so even
in the town of Berna Leo cause
we've had some individuals that
have just flown through red
lights and we've flown and and
disregarded yield signs and so
forth. And so, when I think
about a law like this, it makes
me question even more whether or
not we're making our streets
safer or even more dangerous and
uh I, I know that for a fact
that when we look at our, our
more rural communities, right?
We, we, we share the road and,
and I share a lot with, with the
bicyclists and automobiles in a
tractor and sometimes those
bicyclist pass me looking at me
like, what right do you have on
this road? So it's a
a little bit of a confusing, uh,
issue that that we're bringing
up now and, and, and to those
points, I, I can't stand in
favor of this either. So thank
you very much, gentle lady.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker.
There is for the debate. Joelman
from San Juan Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I yelled.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I've been guilty for a long
time.
Um, I'm a bicyclist. I'm, I'm
clipped in as I'm coming up to
that stop sign or that red
light, um, you know, bicyclists,
we do everything we can to not
have to unclip and, and stop and
so we'll turn our handlebars
every which way we can to keep
us going right in that one
position, um, I understand what
this is doing, um.
I'm not, I'm not sure that it's
um.
I don't know, I don't know for
sure why um.
Because we've been breaking the
law for a long time and we're
probably gonna continue to break
the law for a long time and so
I'm not sure what this is
actually trying to do for the
law and, and is this an
insurance bill?
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no it
isn't.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, then can I ask you who
brought it to you or how did it
come to your attention?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it was
brought to my attention by
people who use bicycles as their
major uh mode of transportation
and in other states where this
law has been passed, it has been
shown to make bicyclists who use
bicycles as their major form of
transportation, a safer way for
them to travel.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
then, then, um, you know, I,
this might be a slippery slope
we're going down, but I'm, I'm
good with it because I'm
probably gonna continue to do
what I've been doing for years,
so thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
The gentle lady from Donana,
Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Vernal Leo
please yield? Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I yield.
Thank you, um.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, so for folks of the
chamber, I'm a bike commuter.
I'm on my bike all the time. I
don't, I barely drive when I'm
back home and I really believe
that this is a very important
piece of legislation, not only
for this um society that's very
car car centered because it is
it and and but this bill will
help with the flow for car
safety, um, but in addition to
that, when it comes to those of
us who are on cycle on on our
bicycles.
We don't use this, we, we're not
on our bikes just for
recreation. Many of us get
around because it's, it's the
only form of of transportation
that we have and so this bill
specifically helps um for when
we start to stopping at stop
signs and at lights, especially
traffic lights, traffic lights
right now are made up of um they
their their sensors are only
work for cars. So as a cyclist
can be standing, can be
Standing waiting for the light
to turn green. Green for a very,
very long time and so a lot like
this allows for us to be able to
move through this, um, uh,
through a red light when when
it's safe, um, much quicker so
that we can get to where we need
to go, um, furthermore, and I
think this is a really important
is that there are a lot of
people who ride bikes, um, who
maybe they've had trouble with
getting a driver's license or
um, whatever issue might come
up, um, they have to, they, they
are, they are, they're they're,
they're only form of
transportation is a bike, and
so um when we're, when we're
talking about that issue when it
comes to um issues dealing with
law enforcement, things like
that. This limits that amount of
interaction with law enforcement
because of our ability to
navigate systems within the
cities much easier and so I know
that folks are really concerned
about safety.
This has been shown since the
early 1980s that this this type
of law actually improves traffic
safety and improves the flow
and, and when we're talking
about actually, um, um, being
treated as vehicles.
Uh, I mean, I think this just
adds to that safety measure, and
so, um, Representative, I'm
really happy that you brought
this legislation forward, um, I
would.
As always, I offer, if anybody
ever wants to come out and
commute with on a bike with me
when they're visiting Las
Cruces. I'm happy to share um
what it's like to not only be
able to get around on a bike,
but also the fact that because
we're such a car centered
society, um, we can't always be
faulting people on bikes, cars
are so heavy there's people
drive so fast that if there's
any type of, of additional law
that
can help to protect cyclists
like this one like I, I think it
helps both us and the drivers
and so again representative, I
thank you for bringing this
legislation forward.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bernaleo
please,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I yield.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
do have a couple of clarifying
questions.
And, and so let's start with the
first one. We're talking about
bicycles, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady that are on a paved road or
Uh, a concrete asphalt road that
has stop lights on it. I
understand there's parts of this
that deal with stop signs and
and yield signs, but I want to
make sure
We're suggesting that a bicycle
in a travel lane.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
pull up to a stoplight.
Not seeing anybody coming and go
through the stoplight. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
correct. They must stop first
and make sure that there is no
oncoming traffic of any type,
and then they can proceed.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so that means you want the
intent of this bill is to change
New Mexico's laws with respect
to uniform traffic codes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, if
it means that we are looking at
changing the, the uh traffic
codes as they pertain to
bicycles only.
Mr. Speaker, and generally that
just turned it around
completely. No, we're changing
law to go against uniformed
traffic code if this piece of
legislation would, were to pass,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you, when as a pedestrian, when
you walk up and you have a red
hand.
Sitting there and you choose to
go across, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, you understand that
alive or dead after getting hit,
you're the one at fault, not
the, not the driver.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I do
recognize that, but it's also
important to recognize with
respect to this legislation that
the bicyclists will not be given
a traffic ticket or cited if
they pers after they have
stopped and proceeded safely to
the intersection.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand that, and, you know,
I'm not an attorney and I didn't
stay at a Holiday Inn last
night, but we are actually going
against uniformed traffic codes
by doing this, that changes
that, that this changes law in
many different places and
looking at the FIR, it's not,
it's not complete with all the
different places, laws would
have to change and, and, uh,
have to be rewritten to.
apply to this, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this will also
require any new, um,
Any new driver that's going
through driver's ed to be taught
that now they have to look for
for bicyclists.
Going across the road.
Against the traffic light. We're
teaching, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that the laws only apply
to some people.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
not correct. So the, the uh
responsibility is on the bicycle
list to first stop and make sure
that they can proceed safely
through a traffic light if it is
still red when they decide to go
forward. The same as you, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if you
were deciding to cross the road
if you saw a red hand. Only in
this instance, we are, we are
exempting them from having been
cited for traffic violation.
Because they chose to stop,
watch carefully, and then
proceed. That is the major
difference and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it's important for me
to make sure that you understand
and the members of the body
understand that there have been
at least 11 states that have
passed this exact law for people
who use bicycles as their major
form of transportation and that
there are 12 more states that
are working to pass similar
legislation because it does keep
bicycle is safe.
Mr. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand that we have other
states that are doing this have
done it and are doing that just
because somebody else does
something doesn't make it a good
practice to do.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's not gonna do any good for
that bicycle rider family.
Mhm
If they get hit in an
intersection going through a red
light and somebody else has a
green light, especially if
you're on a 40+ mile an hour
road.
Where you may or may not be able
to see that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I, I hear what
you're trying to do. I see what
you're trying to do. I see the
opposition, uh, and, and uh
support that, that you've gotten
from, from
The gentle lady from, from
Donana, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, I can tell you this is
gonna be bad law and, um, trial
attorneys are gonna have fun
with this one. Thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker.
There is the debate the gentle
lady from Santa Fe represented
Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady from Berlio, uh,
please yield, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I yield. Thank you,
um, Mr. Speaker, generally, I, I
want to commend you and thank
you for bringing this
legislation um to us.
I don't know if you know, but um
how many deaths there are, um.
By our bicyclists out there. I
know that we've
In this very chamber have
honored those that have.
Been killed because they choose
to ride their bicycles and have
been and there's been neglectful
actions and what I just want to
say is I commend you because
this brings awareness and well
my question to you, will this
bill, does this bill help bring
awareness to uh to motor
vehicleists and bicyclists in
our state, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you Mr. Speaker general
lady for that we have to really,
uh, we all should really look
and examine our a little further
our bicycle laws, and that's
what you're doing in this
legislation, uh, uh, both you
and our senator there. I just
want to say thank you because
any awareness, any, any
education that we can build in
this regard to the to um
Our bicyclists and their, uh,
and the laws that surround them.
I want to say thank you because
that brings awareness and
And that's what the state needs.
I participated in, in, um,
advocacy work down all the way
down in Donana County and did a,
you know, bike rides in the
communities to make sure that
we're building a real awareness
and that sort of thing and in
Albuquerque and here in Santa Fe
where I don't even ride my bike
here because I just don't
believe that there's enough
awareness around the laws and
what you're doing with this is,
is doing that and making sure
that we're going to have a
safety at the the.
Um, forefront of this
legislation and I just wanna say
thank you because if we can save
And bring awareness to those
that that use their bicycles for
travel, um, either for
recreation or for um.
Because they haven't that that's
their their source of um.
Transportation, I just want to
say thank you and just tell this
body to really recognize that
and, and, and the more awareness
and education that we can bring
and if it's through uh.
Bringing better laws and putting
those forward, I want to say
thank you, thank you.
Mr. Speaker, thank you, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, thank
you.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind gentle lady from
Bernalillo, please yield. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I yelled.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm, um, I remember seeing this
bill in appropriations and
finance.
And um I, I noticed there's not
a definition of bicycle in the
bill, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, could you tell us if this
would apply to motorized or
electric bikes.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
although it's not defined in
this particular piece of
legislation is is defined at
other places within our
statutes.
Thank you. And so, Mr. Speaker
and kind gentle lady back to the
question, um, so no definition,
but does the supplier would this
apply to motorized bikes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
only applies to class 12, and 3
bikes, not to motorized bikes.
Thank you very much.
There is for the debate, the Joe
lady from Bernardo represented
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and uh
well the gentle lady from
Bernalo Yild.
Mr. Speaker, lady, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I too, um, really
happy that you brought this
forward because this legislation
actually supports um multimodal
transportation forms. It not
only supports the cars, but it
also supports people who travel
on bicycles and bicycles are a
really important um
transportation mode for people
who don't own cars, and I think
that uh.
giving clear guidance in terms
of how the cars and the bicycles
interrelate with each other is
really important legislation and
so I, I
Just stand to support your
legislation, really. Thank you
so much. Albuquerque, as you
know, we have all forms of of uh
multimodal transportation, we
have our, our bus system, we
have our automobiles, we have
our bicycles, um, and we have
the rail runner and I think it's
really important that um that in
all of these forms, people know
that they can get from
To and from their jobs, they can
get home, they can get to
recreational activities, so I
commend you for bringing this
forward. Thank you.
Thank you.
gentleman from Curry the Baca
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel, Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker or the
gentle lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I yield.
So Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady on the on the debate you
said that it doesn't include 12,
and 3 class bikes, but then when
I look it up on the Internet,
e-bikes have a Class 12, and 3.
So that kind of
confuses me a little bit whether
the e-bikes.
are included in this or not?
Mm
This uh
Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
bicycles that are electric
bicycles that are class 12 or 3,
they travel less than 28 MPH.
are considered bicycles.
OK, so, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, what I'm
understanding then is that the.
12, and 3.
E-bikes are.
Also included in this bill, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
they are.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
So what concerns me is.
I take my grandkids out bike
riding.
And I have an 11 year old and he
just loves to bike ride.
But
He isn't as cautious and as well
aware about.
The timing of how fast a car
gets to the intersection and the
stop signs and all that, so we
always put him in between.
The lead bike and the bike in
the back because we usually go
out in, in numbers of 3.
So does this legislation in any
way.
Consider a younger child.
The speed that he's gonna get
through the intersection.
And his visual.
And his understanding of, of how
fast the car would get to the
intersection because I think
what we're hearing here in this
debate, Mr. Speaker and General
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
Is how safe is this gonna be?
And wondering, uh, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, if you
considered that in children and
if I feel like we're putting
children in a worse place than
we are an adult, if we pass this
law. Do you have any comment
about that, gentle lady?
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, I do. I
would like to a gentleman, Mr.
Speaker, to remember that this
does not take the place of um.
Your own personal knowledge and
whether or not you should
proceed. It doesn't say, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, that if you
come to a stop light and you
stop and you want to go through
it that you should go. You still
have the opportunity to use your
discretion. Remember, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, that this
law primarily is focused on
those who use a bicycle as their
major mode of transportation.
And in the 11 states where this
piece of legislation has passed,
it has been proven to be
effective.
And reduce um
Motor bicycle incidents and
accidents.
Did
And with no difference in
whether or not they were
juveniles, Madam Speaker, uh,
Mr. Gentleman.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, so.
How are we going to educate the
public.
About this new law that's coming
into play because, because I'm
gonna have my grandchild that's
18 years old.
Coming down the street and here
comes a bicyclist.
And there's a stop sign.
And he decides that he has
enough room to make it.
And my grandson coming down the
street.
winds up hitting him.
Because he's used to the
existing law today.
And we passed this law, how are
we gonna educate those people
and make sure
Or that balance is about
somebody being liable for it and
not. Madam Chair, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, one of
the things that I'd like to
remind you of your colleague who
spoke before, who indicated that
he rides a bicycle on a regular
basis and often runs a stop sign
or a red light. And so, but Mr.
Speak Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
one of the things that I want to
emphasize is this a piece of
legislation again is gonna focus
on individuals and is focusing
on individuals who use a bicycle
as a major point of
transportation and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I
still believe very strongly that
you're gonna tell your grandson
whether they're in, if your
grandson is driving a car or if
they're driving, riding a
bicycle, they are still to
always be vigilant of their
surroundings and what's
happening. What we have found
out consistently, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, is that those people
who use bicycles as their major
mode of transportation. This has
really uh helped with them with
respect to cutting down on
incidents, accidents, and
helping to.
move there bicycle uh movement
forward
and
And we'll work with the
Department of Transportation on
Education, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, if that's a concern,
but people must always continue
to use their own intuition on
whether or not they should
proceed.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, it, I, I have a real big
concern.
About preventing the accidents.
And on top of that, the
liability switch is going to be
now the liability is gonna
switch fully on the person in
the automobile.
And
Even though there was a stop
sign there that bike rider is
going to be allowed to run that
stop sign.
And if the accident happens.
Well, the liability is going to
be on the person that had the
right of way on the road and it,
I just,
I just can't support this bill.
I, I know that bike riders don't
always stop at those stop signs.
But
It has to be their
responsibility to stop because
that car that has the right of
way.
Is expecting his right away and,
and not expecting a bike rider
to
Maybe fail in judgment about
Where and how fast that car was
coming.
So
Madam chair and, and Madam
Speaker, I just, I just can't
support this legislation today.
Thank you for your debate.
Seeing no further debate that
generally need to close.
Madam Speaker, thank you very
much and to the body for
listening to the debate
regarding Senate Bill 73, but
it's important to remember that
this legislation was brought by
individuals who use their
bicycle as a major mode of
transportation. The legislation
When it is passed we never
intersect or interfere with the
person who's own discretion and
ability to know when they should
proceed or not. Right now, this
will help individuals who use
this as a made up a bicycle as a
major mode of transportation to
prevent from being uh cited for
running a stop sign or.
To for we're not stopping our,
uh, not stopping the red light
with uh with that, Madam
Speaker, I, I ask that I move
that Senate Bill 73 do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 73. The vote is now
open.
vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 27 in
the negative. Senate Bill 73 has
duly passed this house.
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Are
you ready on item number 34.
Yes, ma'am, you get me to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate tax, business, and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 175,
uh, on, on final passage has
been taken and is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, general lady to
explain the bill. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Um, the child
care facility loan fund
currently is limited to
providing loans for health and
safety improvements to existing
facilities. SB 175 expands use
the fund to include loans for
expansion, a childcare programs,
and the creation expansion of
high quality childcare programs.
For employers employees, the
expanded scope will make loans
from the uh fund accessible to
new providers and existing ones
and expand childcare services,
resulting in improved access to
childcare for more children and
families. Uh, my, uh, expert
today is Marquito Russell, and
with that we stand for
questions. There is debate, the
gentleman from Lee County,
Representative Pettigrew.
Mr. Speaker, and, uh, actually,
um,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
would you, uh, Madam Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from Lee
County. Thank you very much, um.
It wasn't going to stand up and
ask questions on this, but I did
get asked the question this
morning that I feel like this is
a good place for, we talk about,
uh,
Inside of this to make loans for
providers for health and safety
improvements.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
Today I had my Head Start group
here from, from Lee County and
we're talking about different,
different improvements that need
to happen on within that
facility from safety doors to
parking lots.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady would
a fun like this be something
that they could use, apply for.
For this, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
you're going to make the lady
very happy today. Thank you.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from McKinley
County, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady yield, Madam
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady from McKinley County. Thank
you. I, uh, have a couple of
questions. The first is how's
the loan capitalized?
Uh, Madam Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, I confer with my expert,
there's $10 million in the
appropriations, um, bill right
now. There's already 1.74
million in the fund from last,
uh, uh, session.
Thank you. And, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how are
the, how's the repayment
structure?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, it's
for the life of the asset and um
with as with many NMFA loans,
it's a low interest, uh, loan,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
All right, thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you.
See no further debate, the
gentle lady to close. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. I now move that
Senate Bill 175 do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for a Senate Bill
175. The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 66 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate tax,
Business Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 175 has duly passed his
house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on item number 54.
Yes, Madam Speaker, would you
get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Judiciary substitute for
House Bill 586, uh, on final
passage has been taken and is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution generally to
explain the bill. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Uh, House Bill
586 amends the Healthcare
Consolidation Oversight Act, um,
and the purpose of this bill is
to ensure that there is a fair
review process, um, to protect
the interests of patients as
well as the workforce when New
Mex.
hospitals have a change of
control, um, we, until last year
we were one of only 11 states in
the nation that had no oversight
over these transactions, um, at
the same time we have the
highest proportion of private
equity ownership in our hospital
system in the nation.
Last year we passed Senate Bill
15, and Senate Bill 15 was
intended to be a one year
temporary process, um, Senate
Bill 15 from the 2024 session is
repealed automatically on July
1, 2025, um, and Madam Speaker
and members, I wanna thank the
hospital association, um, I
wanna thank Loveless and
Presbyterian for really working
uh with me over the last week as
we sought to find
Uh, legislation that would
strike the right balance between
protecting um the uh quality the
affordability, the accessibility
of health care in our local
communities while still allowing
for um hospitals to access the
needed investment, um, and
opportunities that they are
seeking out, um, to ensure that
they can continue to provide
quality health care, um, and
they've been terrific to work
with, um, as well.
well as I know we had feedback
from the medical society as
well, um, and so the bill you
have before you
takes the law that is currently
into effect and adds the
components of whistleblower
protection.
Public comment and public notice
and enforcement um and it also
moves the oversight authority
from the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance to
the healthcare authority, um,
and that is a request, uh, that,
uh, we uh had from a number of
the stakeholders and we think
that's the appropriate place
because the healthcare authority
does have licensing oversight
over these facilities they have
great expertise in these
facilities and so um we are very
pleased uh.
With that change and so we've
been working with a broad set of
stakeholders on this legislation
to make sure that we are
striking that balance, um, and
ensuring that our
Health care, uh, sector can
continue to grow but not at the
cost of patient care, um, and
that's what we're trying to seek
in this bill um is really
supporting uh our facilities and
supporting our local healthcare
leaders and professionals, um,
but still making sure that we
have great quality patient care
and then our workforce is also
supported as we go through these
transactions, so with that, uh,
madam.
Speaker, I would stand for
debate.
The gentleman from Oro County,
Representative Locke.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, with
the kind gentle lady from Santa
Fe, please yield.
Yes, Mr. uh, Madam Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from
Otero. Thank you so much, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. So
thank you for this.
Bill and so I've been, I've been
reading through it and I just
wanna understand so.
How does the bill expand the
original definition in the
judiciary Committee substitute
from the word transaction in
section 2A compared to the 2014
Act.
Um, yes, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentleman from Matero, um, so we
are making the definitions of
merger and acquisition more
accurate so that we can ensure
that we are capturing those
kinds of transactions, um, we're
also including and making
extremely clear that we're
talking about change of control
for a hospital. So we're not
trying to pull in other types of
transactions, um, and we wanted
to include real estate because
we are familiar with.
um some transactions that have
occurred out of state where the
real estate was used as an asset
to devalue it, and we want to
just make sure, particularly for
hospitals that are county owned
that we are protecting those
assets or, or uh are owned by
the local community. We wanna
make sure that those assets are
not um leveraged in, in a way
that would devalue the asset of
the community, um, and then
we're adding a, uh, the
acquisition of an independent
healthcare practice, but only if
it is by a health care provider
organization that is affiliated
with a health insurer.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. So then
regarding the actual transaction
itself.
Uh, what is the legislative
rationale for including
independent healthcare practices
and the definition of that.
Madam Speaker, gentleman from
Montero, I want to stress that
independent healthcare practices
are only included if they are
being acquired by a health care
provider organization that is
affiliated with an insurer, um,
and that is because when you
have uh an insurance company
that is also owning physical,
uh, uh, health provider
organizations, there are um more
specific reviews that should be
conducted just to ensure that
patient care, quality,
accessibility, affordability.
are not compromised.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So then, for
example, uh, there was a
hospital, well, the hospital in
my district, it was a hospital
and it got acquired by another
health system, so Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, in that instance,
would this be something that
could be subject to.
This, if it did happen after
this is enacted.
Yes, Madam Speaker and gentleman
from Montero, if um the
acquisition resulted in a change
of control, then yes, it would
be included and um the public
would be notified so the
community in Almogordo would be
notified that these changes were
occurring. Part of that was
because we learned that in many
communities where these
transactions happened, the
patients did not know about
changes in services until they
showed up at the hospital
doorstep wanting or needing
those vital health care
services.
says only to find out that they
were not offered necessarily in
the same form.
All right, thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. So when
it comes to the actual practice,
is there like a threshold of the
size of the practice or the
value of the practice with the
extremely broad scope of the
bill, I think, is there any kind
of actual
Specifics when it comes to the
size and who is subject to that.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
no, you may be thinking of the
other uh other legislation on
this topic, but this bill simply
limits it to uh health care
provider organization that is
affiliated with the health
insurer, so that those are the
only acquisitions that would be
covered. This leaves independent
health providers to uh sell
their businesses to whomever
they like it, but if they sell
them to uh an uh an organization
that's affiliated with insurer,
that's.
where this review would be
triggered.
Got it. OK, thank you so much,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
And then I'm also wondering,
Did this remove
The sunset date for the
healthcare consolidation
Oversight Act.
Yes, madam Speaker and
gentlemen, there is no sunset in
this bill.
All right, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady that helps
me on that one and then.
I know we put it in the
healthcare authority. I know
there was talk about putting it
in other places, so the
healthcare authority are, do
they have the appropriation to
oversee this?
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen, so
they already have the division
of Health Improvement which
licenses all hospitals and other
health facilities in the state
and uh they are able to uh do
this oversight through uh that
part of the health care
authority.
OK, great, good to know that
they have the resources. So
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Will the requirement for a
pre-notice conference will this
what, what will the conference
look like? Is there some kind of
framework on how that needs to
be put forward.
Well, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen from Materra, I'm glad
you brought up the pre-notice
conference because I think
that's one of the ways that this
is really trying to support some
of these transactions and strike
that balance because the parties
that are part of the transaction
can meet with the healthcare
authority in advance and uh
understand whether a transaction
that they're contemplating even
has to go through this process
which I think is is really
helpful uh to know yes or no,
um, and that way.
they don't have to waste a lot
of unnecessary time filing, uh,
a whole notice and formal
documents if it's if it's really
not necessary. OK. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and general lady,
and then I'm wondering how does
this work when it comes to rural
areas, because what if a rural
area medical practice can't
really afford the
Money to go through the
oversight process. How would
that work regarding them? Let's
just say they were being
acquired.
Yes, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, so that's uh really
important consideration because
certainly if a hospital was
facing solvency issues, um, so
actually um we have a whole
section about uh whether uh if
a.
Uh, party needs this transaction
to maintain solvency, the health
care authority can grant them a
waiver.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle ladies. So.
When there's a waiver process,
is it kind of guaranteed if they
prove that there is, there's not
financial backing to do this
process, or is it on a case by
case basis because Madam
Speaker, generally, I know some
of these places, they, they're
really just.
Small margins and they don't
have a lot of.
cash on hand, for example. So
Madam Speaker, general lady,
would it be kind of a mandate
almost that they must
Grant the waiver if it is such a
circumstance as that.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
the authority can, uh, determine
whether the transaction is
urgently necessary to maintain
the solvency of a hospital or if
there's an emergency that
threatens the continued
provision of immediate
healthcare services and the
authority is granted um the
ability to agree to an immediate
approval of a transaction with
with or without conditions, um,
without going into that review
process, um, and so madam.
speaker, gentlemen, we're trying
to ensure that if there was a
hospital in trouble and an
entity stepped forward to
provide needed investment that
that could be enabled through
this bill.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady and then at the
healthcare authority would it be
a board of people or a kind of a
committee of people who would
decide this, or would it be the
secretary?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that
would be handled by the division
of Health Improvement and
ultimately the approval lies
with the secretary.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. So then
theoretically,
If the Secretary changed.
And it was a different kind of
department then madam Madam
Chair, and Madam Speaker,
generally could they
Go
Across the process and just
rubber stamp whatever they like.
As the secretary.
Regardless of the circumstances
of the case as well.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
no, they would still have to
follow the process laid out in
the bill.
OK. Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I see, I
think I'm, I'm on the
committee's substitute.
I think it's page 14. It talks
about reducing growth in patient
costs is a key factor in
transaction approvals, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how will
we measure this? How do we know
that the reduction
Reduction of growth in patient
costs is something that could
come out of a merger.
Could it be just they want to
keep the hospital open at any
cost and maybe it could increase
the actual cost of healthcare
just to keep it there. How is
that?
Uh, considered
Well, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
because the healthcare authority
is the um sort of preeminent
entity in the state that's
monitoring health care costs,
they will be uh very able to
understand what the sort of
typical growth in the cost of
health care is and um Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
entities also provide an annual
report for 3 years, and so they
can um provide that report on
any uh issues that were flagged
in the review.
You, so there would be that
monitoring for just 3 years
after the transaction.
All right, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
what if the transaction was.
was expedited like we talked
about earlier, would they still
have to keep 3 years' worth of
records in that case.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and then when it
comes to the actual
Evaluation criteria, it says
that we're gonna check whether
it will maintain or increase
access to services and in
underserved areas, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, how are we
going to measure that. I believe
that's on page 4, no, that's on
page.
Yeah, I believe it's 1419 to 22
of the committee substitute.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
the uh.
Parties will need to propose if
they are gonna make any changes,
so some examples of that that
we've seen have been um at an
ICU closing, for example, or on
the other hand, you know, new
patient services or new urgent
care clinics being opened and so
that would be part of the
proposals for um the plan after
merger acquisition and so the
healthcare authority would just
be looking to see our patients
going to be the same.
we're better off before and
after this transaction, um, and
are do we see any things that we
need to consider as this
transaction goes forward.
OK, Madam Speaker, or Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so when it
comes to the transaction,
And if it will benefit people in
the.
In the future is that based
solely upon after it is been
granted because, Madam Speaker,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
seems to me like it's something
that we're having to forecast.
Is that kind of the correct
thought process on this. Speaker
and gentlemen, the, the point at
which things will be uh compared
to is before the transaction. So
it is not this bill does not say
how hospitals or healthcare
organizations have to infinitely
grow their
Services, it's just how does the
transaction impact
affordability, accessibility,
quality of health care and the
point at which that starts, like
your baseline is basically right
before the transaction.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentleleti, and then
what if it would reduce that
kind of access because they are
kind of downsizing when it comes
to buying out a hospital and
then downsizing so that they can
get back on their feet. How
would that be levied versus
something that is growing and
and increasing the amount of
options in that community.
Well, madam, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen, um, that would be
part of the review to understand
and if there was a a solvency
situation.
The transaction may not even be
in review, but if they, if, if
an entity comes in and is
acquiring a hospital and says,
and with that acquisition we are
reducing these 5 services that
that's what the health care
authority would be reviewing.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So I'm just
wondering how does the HCA have
the analysis and the analysts
who will give that objective
opinion on future potential
growth.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so not only is the healthcare
authority sort of the preeminent
agency that understands health
care the provision of health
care in the state, um, they get
annual cost reports from every
hospital currently, um, this
legislation doesn't impact that,
but that is a basis on which
they can do some comparisons.
All right, thank you, Madam, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
That
Did help me on that one, but I
still kind of under, I kind of
just want to understand what
other kind of.
Things we're looking at when it
comes to that because things can
change repeatedly and rapidly in
the healthcare sphere. So for
example, the cost of a certain
drug or the cost of insurance
for these medical uh providers,
so is that something that's also
considered?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, and, you know, the
healthcare authority is, is, uh,
on top of that because they also
administer the Medicaid program,
which is where a lot of these
costs show up first, um, but
yes, and that can all be
considered and um there's
certainly nothing in this
legislation that requires
hospitals to be out of sync with
the market.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
internally.
Pardon me, so, uh, page, I think
it's on page 14. I'm looking at,
I think we wrote the words.
That the healthcare authority
must assist whether the
transaction may foreclose
competitors in certain markets.
How are we defining foreclosed
competitors, and I might be on
the wrong page, but that's the
gist of what I read.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen
that is existing law.
All right, thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. So,
Does this change that in any way
then, when it comes to
foreclosing.
Competitors are we in in any way
giving more burdensome
requirements.
To that in the bill because we
have all these new reporting
guidelines and is that something
that we have to chiefly consider
because it's current language,
of course, but it's also
something that we must consider.
I, I'm, I'm just trying to find
the tears of of consideration.
What is the most important to
the least important, and I guess
maybe that's the question I have
for you.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, one
of the reasons why, uh, I
appreciate the structure of this
legislation and I have gotten
positive feedback from some of
our uh friends uh representing
hospitals is because it makes
the criteria for evaluating
these transactions extremely
clear, um, and so it is in that
in that list that you're looking
at items 1 through 8, and the
health care market share is also
something that is subject to
antitrust and uh.
oversight as well, so this is
not bringing in anything
unusual.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Since there is AG
oversight and
Other federal oversight as well
when it comes to antitrust, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
wondering then.
Isn't this just one more
roadblock that they would have
to go through to be able to
create a solvent hospital, for
example. I'm just concerned that
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
could be one more stumbling
block to
Providing healthcare, especially
in rural areas, because it's one
more provision that they would
now have to follow. So could you
just help me address that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
reason this legislation is so
important, is it because it puts
patients and health care
workforce at the center, so this
is the one place where we're not
just looking at market share,
but we're also looking at can we
make sure that patients are
taken care of, can we make sure
our workforce is also taken care
of even in the midst of these
kinds of transactions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and so I like you, I want
to make sure that these
healthcare workers and of course
the patients have access to the,
the care, but Mr. Speaker
General Lee,
In some cases, I'm just
wondering if this could.
Deter some entities from even
considering.
Application or attempt to
acquire another entity because
there is even more burdensome
regulations on this. I'm just
wondering how we, we balance
that with the current oversight
mechanisms that are already in
place.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
there has been at least one
transaction that's already gone
through this review process
because we're just we're basing
this on what is already in place
in statute, um, and Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that's part of
why the timeline is quick, you
know, it's 120 days, um, and we
want to ensure that if uh there
is investment that is desired to
be brought into the state of New
Mexico. We want to welcome that,
but we also want to ensure that
patient care.
And that our healthcare
workforce are both taken care of
even as that new investment is
coming in.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady and so
I, I get that, but I, I also
have to weigh myself the cost of
healthcare in general and then
also with our malpractice
insurance.
clearly or maybe hopefully maybe
this year we can address that,
but it doesn't appear so. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I just see
all these different factors
involved. And so in my
community, for example, we had
an out of state firm from Texas
that has a very large footprint
in the Southwest, they acquired
our hospital.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, they actually increased
the amount of services in our
area because we got even more
doctors we had people being able
to be referred up here to Santa
Fe to Christa Saint Vincent. And
so, Mr. Speaker, general lady.
I'm just wondering, so in that
situation where we're adding
more, more services were
increasing access to people.
I'm just wondering, do we think
that this could be a stumbling
block from someone like that, a
Texas firm that is very large in
the southwest from coming to the
state because they do have
additional requirements. I guess
that's kind of the, the big
situation that I have with this
bill. I, I like the idea in
theory, but I want to make sure
that in practice, we're not
pushing people away.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
great, I mean, great points, and
we are um there are 40 states
that have these kinds of
reviews, uh, in place,
different, different variations,
um, and I think this one really
strikes the balance between, you
know, welcoming folks that want
to help expand and improve our
health care system, um, and also
just ensuring that the patients
and the providers are protected,
so, um, that's the balance we've
really been focused on.
And you know, I agree with you
that we want innovation and we
want um partners, but we also
need to make sure that our folks
here at home are taken care of.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I guess I agree
with you. I, I do. I think that
we want access, but I, I also
think that when it comes to
Another hurdle, it could result
in no healthcare access
whatsoever if that hospital
doesn't get acquired at all, if
it could even, it couldn't even
be in financial.
problems, it could just be.
They, they want to sell the
hospital for some reason and in
some instances, an out of state
firm says, OK, we might be
interested in this, and then
they say, oh, look at this, this
process. There's another
bureaucratic process that we
have to jump into. I just have a
few concerns when it comes to
that one because I would rather
have some people having access.
to something than having no
access at all in these rural
areas, so I, I still have some
concerns, but I will continue to
listen to the debate. I, I see a
few names out there on the
board. So, Mr. Speaker, thank
you so much, gentle lady, for
the answers, and I appreciate
the, the thoughtful debate.
There is further debate,
gentlemen, from Sandoval,
Representative Martinez. Mr.
Speaker, will the, uh, kind of
lady from Santa Fe yield for a
few questions. I yield to my
friend from Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um.
I'm, I'm looking at page 3 under
the definitions and I asked this
question in.
Judiciary.
And for some reason it just it
stuck in my head, so under the
the
Um, organizations that would be
affected by this if this bill
passes.
Or dental service organizations.
Um
Can you tell me if those are
different than the regular
dentist that I go to.
Um, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it, it is an organ
it's a, it's an organization
that is made up of a number of
dental providers, so not an
individual.
dentist office.
But, uh, a group of dental
providers.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and the
dentist that I go to has.
I believe 3 different offices in
3 different dentists, would they
be considered a dental
organization?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
So they're locally owned.
So from what I understood, this
was basically geared at.
Some of these out of state
corporations and, and.
Other investors
Um, that we're taking over
these.
Organizations.
Why then is my locally owned.
Dentist's office included in
this.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
they would only be included if
they were acquired by a health
care provider organization that
was affiliated with an insurance
company. So that is on page 6,
lines 1 through 3 and so so for
for that dental practice that
you're speaking of, they could
be acquired by any number of
entities and that would not be
in this bill. They they would
not be in this review process.
But if they were acquired by an
organization that was affiliated
with an insurance company, they
would be a part of this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so, um,
The, uh, as far as I know
they're not owned by
an insurance company they're
owned by the three dentists that
operate the.
The practice
But they're in the process of
Requiring another office, get
moving out of one of the offices
that they have acquiring um a
building for themselves.
Would they then be required to
report this?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
no, because they are not having
a change of con well, first of
all, they're not a hospital.
And second of all, they're not
being acquired by an entity
affiliated with an insurance
company, so nothing in this
would impact them wanting to get
a new office or build a new
office or anything like that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so.
The only way this would be
triggered is if that dental
office were, were to be bought
out by an insurance company.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Thank you
Very much for that, um.
I want to go over to page 15.
I believe there was a little bit
of discussion on this, but I'd
like to.
Continue that conversation.
So on page 15 line 9.
Um, they're talking about
current and future wages,
benefits, working conditions,
employment protections and
restrictions and so on.
So
What, what is, what would be
necessary to report the doctors.
Wages and how do they.
How do they determine what the?
Future wages would be.
Um, because I would think there
would be some type of
negotiation at times.
How what's gonna trigger that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
someone's getting ready for
their for their big belt.
It wasn't me, Mr. Speaker.
Why are you blushing?
Because it was hilarious.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
I'm part of the backup course on
that one, so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, what they would
basically have to report is the.
Uh, proposal so if part of their
proposal is changing the
structure of the workforce, um,
for example, converting, uh,
staff to contract or they have a
big plan to increase the number
of physicians they're hiring or
or any number of things, um,
beef up the nursing staff,
anything, all of that would be
part of their proposal and their
plan to, uh, what as to what
would happen in this.
transaction and so that we're
not specifying um the parameters
or that they have to, you know,
specifically pay a certain wage
or do anything like that, but in
here what they're basically
talking about is their plans. So
if they do have a plans that
would really impact the
workforce, then that would be
part of what they submitted and
that would be subject to review.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, can you explain to me what
You mean by impact to the
workforce.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for
example, you might have an
entity that would wanted to come
in and say here's some things
that we wanna do now by
contract, um, rather than have
employees in-house or here's
some additional capacity that we
want to bring in. We see that
perhaps um we're not we don't
have enough respiratory
therapists serving this patient
population so as part of our
plan we're gonna be hiring, you
know, 5 more respiratory
therapists and this is how.
they're gonna serve, uh, this
patient population better, um,
you know, any time there's gonna
be a large transaction like
this, there's going to be plans
about here's all the things that
we plan to either keep in place
or change and so we just wanna
make sure that the providers are
local folks are um not
experiencing wild changes in um
their compensation, their hours,
their ability to provide care,
uh, that's what this is intended
to address.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, so this
final report, is it gonna be
A conglomerated report.
Or is it going to be very
individual, so.
A Martinez's doctor's office has
to report this information, the
public can the public then go on
and find out what.
What the Martinez practice is up
to.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
not the details of the
transaction, um, but there is a
summary that is uh provided to
the public of what the um things
and that is on page.
Um
It's, it starts on.
Page 11, um, where we talk about
posting on the public and so
what would be public would be a
statement describing the
proposed transaction.
The goals, how that is going to
affect health care services and
then it goes on into, you know,
what is the geographic area,
what kind of services are
provided and will any be added,
reduced, eliminated, so, so
those are the things that the
public can uh see immediately um
and be able to chime in and and
we think this is a really good
thing for for everyone involved
because as I mentioned earlier,
sometimes patients don't realize
that.
Healthcare services either are
available or are not available
until they desperately need them
and um this just gives some more
transparency on that.
Mr. Speaker, um,
Uh
So there's not going to be
proprietary information.
Addresses
Um
You know, I'd hate for.
Somebody to get the doctor's
address because they didn't want
to prescribe a certain
medication or
You know they had a bad day that
day, so they didn't smile when
they saw them in the waiting
room.
None of that is going to be
available, is that correct?
No, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, certainly not through this
and, and in fact we specified
business address as well, just
to be specific about that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady, um, I appreciate
the conversation.
There is for the individual
leader from Donana Sierrasoro,
Representative Doll.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Religion
lady yield. Um, Mr. Speaker,
and, uh, I gladly yield to the
gentle lady from Donana Sierra
and Socorro.
Thank you to decide if I support
this bill, and I'm wondering if
Are we seeing an increase in the
independent medical our our our
our independent medical
practices being sold more
frequently than they have in the
past. What is, what's the
problem that this is fixing?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
first I will say that the focus
of this is hospitals, so, um,
most of the transactions that
will be subject to review are
hospitals, um, the only way that
independent healthcare providers
are included is if they are
acquired by a an organization
that is affiliated with an
insurance company and that's
just because there are certain
things that we really need to be
careful about when you have an
insurance company.
requiring medical practices in
terms of ensuring that the
network doesn't change, um, and,
and is, is, is fair and sort of
similar before and after that
transaction, um, but I, I do
want to underscore, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the
focus of this is hospitals and
just ensuring that hospital, uh,
the quality of care and the way
that we're taking care of our
workforce and addressing the
workforce would be the same or
better, um, after any kind of
transaction.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. I, I did
not hear this bill in committee,
so I was trying to read it as I
go. And so you do have a
definition on page 3 of a
healthcare provider
organization, but it does not
include hospitals. So what is
this referring to in the
reference of like where, where,
where is it applicable? Can you
tell me on the page where it is
applicable to those that would
be included in healthcare
provider organization.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so it's just at the top of page
6, lines 1 through 3.
Um, that we that that really
show how those health care
provider organizations are
incorporated and that's in the
definition of transaction. So
items 1 through 5 are all
specific to hospitals.
And then item 6 is the one that
is an independent, but that's
where you'll see it's only where
they are, uh, acquired by an
organization that is owned or
affiliated with the health
insurer.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady, and, and
back to the question, are more
independent medical practices
being sold in New Mexico?
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady on
occasion, I don't know that we
can give a, a full trend, um,
there's certainly, uh, been one,
health insurer affiliated
organization that has acquired
some, but I would, I wouldn't
necessarily characterize it as a
trend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady, because I, I
am aware that right now, it
doesn't seem like NMPSIA
incentivizes folks to use our
independence folks for surgical
care or even to, to stay inside
of the state. Do you see, I'm
just hoping that we're not
trying to make an accommodation
when really what we should be
doing is raising the, the
Medicaid reimbursement rates.
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so,
um,
This is only really dealing with
the acquisition and and the
quality accessibility
affordability of care, um, and
while I agree with you, raising,
uh, reimbursement rates is, is
critical, um, this, this, this
one, this bill does not address
that or, or really impact that
or, and I would say it's
definitely not an alternative to
that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and thank you, gentle lady,
because I just, I know that like
there was independent owned and
operated OBGYN.
that were in private practice in
Farmington, but because of
risks, liability, um, premiums,
different things, they actually
sold, I think they merged with
the hospital there. Um, they
merged into the hospital, um,
but the hospital is not an
insurance provider, so they,
this bill would not apply to
them and those private owned and
operated businesses could be
sold without any intervention at
all.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
only if they're sold to an
organization affiliated with the
health insurer. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, I just want to make
sure like for the record that
we're not preventing private
business owners from selling to
whom they choose.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
correct. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you, gentle
lady. Um, I, so on,
I, I, I think that's all. Do you
consider that this, when, when I
was, I was trying to switch over
to page 14.
I don't see a committee or
anyone that creates a framework.
Are you laying all the
guidelines down within this
bill, and there's no, it's not a
framework, there's nothing to
fill in the blank. It's all
here.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
and I think that's one thing
that all the stakeholders
appreciated is that the criteria
are super clear. So later on
that page, um, it, it lists the
items that are to be considered
and um we're, you know, there's
no surprises. Much of this is
already in the law that has been
in existence for the past year,
um, so, uh, yes, absolutely, uh,
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentle
lady. I really appreciate that.
Some of these
Bills, I, I truly support in, in
theory, but when it doesn't have
guard rails, and when it doesn't
have a lot of framework, it's
hard to support. So I really
appreciate that this is
specific. So I guess my last
question is, if someone is
selling and they do want to sell
to an insurance company. Now
they have to get the state's
permission to do so, or they
just have to notify you?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so they could do a
pre-notice conference to
describe this is what we wanna
do, um, and the secretary at
that time would basically use
what is listed in this bill to
ensure, you know, to determine
whether the person the uh
parties needed to submit
something for review or not, um,
so without knowing exactly, but,
but they would start with that
pre-notice conference. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you,
gentle lady.
to close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, thank you Bari
for the great debate. Uh, I move
that House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 586 do
now pass.
final passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 586. The vote is now open.
Roosev about to close.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 41 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 586. Haulli passed his
house.
The lady from Bert set up by the
horn. Are you ready on item 49?
Can you get me to that point?
action necessary for place in
House Bill 426 on final passage
has been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution general lady to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, this bill
essentially allows
The owners of the mobile home.
Households to purchase their
park. In other words, the land
that is underneath their home,
Mr. Speaker, rental rates, we
are here because rental rates
have increased by almost 25%.
In mobile home parks in
Albuquerque and in many other
parks around the state,
particularly Albuquerque Meadows
is one that is um very close to
my district and very near to um
my friend from Bernalillo.
And when these folks folks' rent
went up and they went to go look
to see and talk to management,
they found that their home,
which was their land where they
have their home that was
recently sold was owned by a
Florida-based company.
There's been a wave of these out
of state companies looking at
mobile home parks because they
are profitable investments.
Mobile home university is an
online resource that I used to
learn about how profitable
mobile home parks can be, they
say that the advantage of a
mobile home park is the expense
ratio. It's much lower, almost
20% lower than that required for
apartment complexes.
Additionally, they make a great
investment because moving your
home is extremely cost
prohibitive. It costs $5000 or
$10,000 to move your
manufactured home. This means
that folks will keep paying
rents until they are eventually
priced out.
Manufactured homes represent
35,000 residents in New Mexico
and it is the largest stock of
affordable housing in our state.
At any point, we have the
highest proportion or the 2nd
highest proportion of people
living in manufactured homes in
the whole country. San Juan
County has the highest rate of
manufactured housing of any
county in the whole country.
This bill aims to provide the
opportunity for residents to
compete.
With those out of state
companies who don't have skin in
the game, who don't own the
homes on the land.
Mr. Speaker, the way that this
bill provides that opportunity
is the following. The bill works
when a landlord has received an
offer that he intends to accept.
He must then provide notice to
each household in the mobile
home park.
On the day that the notices are
received, the residents then
have 75 days to form an entity
and offer a purchase and sale
agreement that is substantially
equivalent to what the
landlord's third party has
offered.
There are the 90 days to secure
financing and conduct due
diligence, and that is a
standard time period in the
industry according to mobile
home University.
The closing time is to be
specified in the purchase and
sale agreement.
Mr. Speaker, I've been really
grateful for the committee
process because I think that
that process has actually made
this bill stronger. We did
listen and we continue to
listen. In committee there were
exceptions that were added to
providing notice for closure,
transfer to a family, transfer
between business partners and we
also added a provision that does
allow the owner to accept the
third party offer lock in the
deal, so to speak, provided that
they will comply with the notice
um of the.
section. So Mr. Speaker, um.
I stand for questions.
There is debate. The general
lady from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from
McKinley McKinley.
Thank you very much.
Can't see exactly where you're
at because we're fighting
flowers anyway, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we had a discussion
earlier, sponsor and I and there
there's a couple questions that
I had and I hope she's been able
to do some research, Mr.
Speaker, um.
Excuse me just one second.
Mr. Speaker, um, I just wanted
to ask inside of the purchase
offer, how is the environmental
contamination issues dealt with.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, could you explain a little
bit more what you mean by
environmental issues. I will,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
have, uh, in my district what I
would consider uh slumlord.
slumlords that uh rent these
slots, uh, in trailer parks.
And when I was actually years
ago when I was a intern, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, there were
some of these trailer parks that
actually had raw sewage coming
out of them onto the ground. And
I would bet that if we looked
hard, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we would see some of that even
today.
So my question is, um, when
you're putting together a
purchase offer.
As a nonprofit, how would those
kinds of things be dealt with
because they're they're hard to
project in terms of cost and
clean up.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you for that question. Uh,
I would, as I understand the way
that the real estate um process
works is that there would be a
time to complete due diligence.
So, um, including that 90 day
period that is specified in the
bill and that that due diligence
would include things like um
environmental investigation and
decisions as to whether or not
to purchase that property, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh mobile home university, which
is uh somewhat of an authority
on these sort of transactions,
uh, states in their book on how
to purchase these properties
that one of the most important,
uh, number 35 and the elements
to consider as part of the due
diligence process are to
investigate whether or not there
are hazardous materials, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, what
they recommend is to not even
consider buying a park without
having a phase one environmental
study done. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I would assume.
that that would also apply to
the mobile home park owners as
they are um as the mobile home
park residents who are
organizing as an entity to
purchase this um process just
the same way that any other um
corporate entity would.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you explain what a phase one
environmental.
Encompasses.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, mobile Home Park University
does not specify that. I imagine
it's different for every state.
Maybe you can help me with that,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady. I
can, Mr. Speaker, um, and
actually, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, there are funds available
in the environment department
for Brownsfield cleanup and in
that fund they do they do a
phase one environmental but
generally it does not get into
the depth. I think that when I'm
thinking of.
contaminated areas.
They're very expensive,
especially if you have to move
dirt. If you have to move the
dirt in any way, um.
But what I'd like to say, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I like the
idea.
Of having uh a notification to
go to the, the, I guess it'd be
leases or renters. I like the
idea of that, but my question
is, is are is this basically
giving them a first ride of
refusal.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in a
way, yes.
Can you explain how?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
what this bill does is that it
does provide for the residents
to the opportunity to be able to
match the price and the terms
and conditions that a third
party offerer has made 2, the
land, the, the landowner, so,
um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it gives them that time period
buffer, uh, to be able to get
that together and if they are
able to, um, it asks that the
owner.
Uh, not refuse or delay in the
execution of the closing on on
the property.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do
they have to own the property.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the, uh, own the home or the
land, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the land that their trailer is
on.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, no,
they do not have to own the
land. They only need to, um, be
a resident of that and the way
that it's defined in the um in
our property law code is that
the resident is defined by a
household that has a lease with
the uh mobile home park owner.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
would
Someone is deciding to move into
one of these trailer parks, are
they given to say this bill
passes and is signed into law,
would they've been be given some
kind of information then that
they are aware they have become
a.
Participant uh in a first ride
of refusal negotiation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I would like to introduce my um
expert guest witness today, uh,
Maria Grego with the Center on
Law and Poverty, um, and really,
really grateful for the work
that they've done on this bill
and working with us, um, and all
the sponsors, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
You know, our organizations are
are organizations that want to
save these communities, um, and
I have been working with folks
who live in mobile home park,
um, in mobile home park houses,
um, they are prepared to educate
mobile home parks around the
state about what their rights
entail. However, what is
included in this bill is that
this notice is provided their
notice of their rights of this
in this section are provided
when the uh notices.
go out in general. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, if
a landlord would have the
intention to accept an offer of
his sale of his mobile home
park, uh, then he would need to
notify them of their rights.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what, what percentage of the
renters would have to
participate or agree to to do
this. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, 51% of the resident
households would have to um
approve that they want to
purchase the park.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
resident household is the
actual.
Trailer facility.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, the resident is defined in
this um property code as any
person or family of such person
owning a mobile home that is
subject to tenancy in a mobile
home park under a rental
agreement, so it would be um 51%
of those households that would
have to agree they want to
purchase the park or make the
attempt to.
I wasn't clear about. There are
people that actually own those
trailers.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, yes, and many of these,
um, mobile home parks, the way
this mobile home park statue
define defines a mobile home.
It's a little bit of a misnomer
because it, they are not that
mobile as a matter of fact,
manufactured housing and mobile
homes are defined as not having
wheels, that falls into a
different section of the code,
so these are houses that are
built, um, and attached to the
ground.
Right, thank you, uh, because it
wasn't completely clear, so I
appreciate you doing the
research. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady
lady from Berlin Torrens,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, the gentle lady
from Burnleyo County, please
yield.
I yield which speaker dealing
bear, uh, bear with me as this
is the first time I'm hearing
this bill. We heard a lot of
mobile home bills that came
through, but not this one
specifically.
So I'm gonna ask you some really
basic questions. So the land is
not owned. I understand that
part. The person who owns the
land decides they want to sell
it.
So what you're saying is when
they decide to put this up for
sale.
They have to notify everybody in
writing.
And it's posted on somewhere in
the park.
That this is now going up for
sale. Is that what I'm
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
wait, can you hold on one
second.
Sorry, Mr. Big deal. I know they
were interrupting you, so I just
want to I didn't know if you
could hear. So, so it goes up
for sale. They all get
notifications and then what
happens after that? So everybody
gets notified that this land is
now for sale. Is that correct?
Is that what I'm understanding,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Submissioning generally from the
great questions from the, your
previous speaker was that 51% of
the people have to partake. What
happens to the other people, the
49% who say I'm not interested
in buying do they stay there? Do
they get removed? Do they rent?
What happened to them, Mr.
Speaker and Joe lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
that's a great question, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, what
would normally happen and what,
what has happened um in over 22
states across the country, um,
and in New Hampshire where this
law has been in place for almost
40 years, uh, what, what
happened is the, the mobile
home, um, households would meet
together generally. This is what
happens. They would form an
entity and then um that entity
would then proceed.
with the transaction the same
way any other, uh, third party,
for instance would and so what
would happen then is is what we
see in other communities is that
90 to 100% of folks then join
on. um, that 51% is meant to be
a threshold and in other states
it's much lower, it's 25%. We
believe that we need to have a
majority of folks that say they
want to purchase this, not a,
you know, a, a few folks who
want to do this and um Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, what
would then happen?
to the other 49% in the case
that they didn't want to
participate in it is they would
then become um leases so the
same way that they are, they
would just stay in the same way
that they are currently, um,
just they would be managed by um
you know, their fellow, uh,
their fellow household members,
um, their fellow mobile home.
Homeowners and um they would uh
essentially work with them or
attend meetings that in the same
way that they would if a
property management company was
managing them and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, what we've seen
in other homes that are owned by
the residents is that they
usually will hire a property
manager to do the management of
the property, uh, uh, uh, a
point person, a coordinator, and
um proceed just as any other uh
entity that owns them.
OK, Mr. Speaker, thank you. uh,
uh, generally, I appreciate that
because I was trying to figure
that out in my head so then they
would become a lease. So Mr.
Speaker Delady, so who
So is it a nonprofit that now
owns the property and who would
then be on that board to make
decisions about that nonprofit,
Mr. Speaker Delaney. That's a
great question, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and of course, um,
our um our statute is not as
specific in that manner, um, but
what we do say is that um.
Essentially then they may be
able they may, they can assign
their opportunity to purchase to
a nonprofit if they wanted to
work with that nonprofit, but
they may also make their own
entity, um, usually a
cooperative that would then own
um that would own the land
together so that the they would
elect the board generally um is
in this case is is what happens.
OK, so Mr. Selley, that was the
other question I was gonna ask
you because I think right now
that people could if they wanted
to just go ahead and form their
own co op. What happens, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, in, in
let's say a buyout, uh, let's
say someone was in this and they
decide they want to go, how do
they sell their percentage that
they have that they've invested
into this whole thing of buying
this property, Mr. Speaker
Johnny.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would you be able to rephrase
your question?
Simm down later, let's say these
people all get together, let's
say it's 100% to make it easy.
100% of people, they go ahead
and they're gonna get this loan.
Is that correct for speed
they're getting they're
qualifying for loans is that
what I'm understand by speaking
generally, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes. OK, so Mister
gentle lady, that makes them all
obligated to that loan, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady? Who or who would be
obligated for that loan if it
went into default. Mr. Speaker,
and generally, yes, it is the,
that entity.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, so
someone is invested, let's say
they all come up with a number
to buy this, they need some
money to pitch in, then they
decide they wanna sell it. How
do they sell their percentage to
get their investment back out of
that land ownership, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, thank you for
clarifying that question. Now,
generally, uh, what, what, uh,
as was clarified in another
committee, um, you know this is
not that the folks who are in
these homes are going around and
passing the bucket around and
everybody
he's putting in a little bit of
money in order to purchase this,
you know, these parks are
selling for millions of dollars,
so this is not really an option.
What they are doing is they're
forming that entity and then um
applying for a loan through, for
instance, the CDFI, a community,
um, development finance
institution, um, ROC USA
Capital, um Raku State Capital
will apply to even credit unions
in our, in our state, um, it
could also be the MFA, so
generally people aren't putting
in their own money for equity.
in the um in the co op or the
LLC.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so if it was, so it is 100%
financed then, Mr. Speaker
Delaney, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, in the, in my experience
and from what I've read from
other communities that are doing
this, yes.
So Mr. Speaker, gen lady, so if
they're in this co op.
The co op is listed as an
entity.
With all the people that are in
that park being listed if 100%
of them all decided, so are they
all listed that is technically
owners of that land, Mr. Speaker
and gen lady. Uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, it would be
the co op that has the title.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, De lady, so
when they, if they were to
decide, I'm gonna guess then,
explain to me what happened if
they decide they want to move
and take their trailer. What
happens to that spot, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
well, you know, that would
definitely require a lot of
capital upfront, um, and for
many of uh as I mentioned
earlier, these parks are mostly
homes that are um built and
attached into the ground, so
that would cost 5000 to 10,000
if it's a double wide 15.
800 $0 so that person would
really not have to like that
community to leave, and if that
were the case, um, that, uh,
when they sold their home it
would operate in the same way
that homeowner would be able to
join the cooperative if they
wanted. OK, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so when, so I'm
gonna assume then when this if
somebody said they were gonna,
if they're gonna move and now
there's a vacant lot, I'm gonna
assume then if somebody else
wanted to move there, are they
gonna get an option to.
Buy in? Are they going to get
the option to be uh a lease or,
or how is that gonna work for
this new person, Mr. Speaker,
and dental lady, yes, they
would, um, if they sold their
home and if they sold their
home, the buyer would get a
lease in the park from the co op
entity just like the seller of
that home had and then the new
owner of the home would have the
option to join the entity.
And Mr. Speaker and Delaney, uh,
when we were talking because I
learned a lot about mobile home
parks this year because it was,
there was like 4 bills, I think
that came through. So let's say
if um if they're owning the
property that means they're
responsible for anything like um
if the gas line or some line
needed to be upgraded, the sewer
line, any other expenses that
had to do with the land, they
would then be responsible for
that. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, um, so
explain to me, so when I'm gonna
go back on the bill, so explain
this to me, um, on page 2
residents with the opportunity
to purchase, um, and then we
have 90 days after execution of
the purchase and sale agreement
that is 90 days on the or the
entity of people buying it? Is
that what that is, Mr. Speaker,
gen lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, that is the financing
portion, um, that is pretty
standard for the industry.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, if
If let's say the owner says, I'm
gonna sell this property, it's
worth a million but I, I'll just
pull a number. It's worth a
million, but then somebody comes
in at 1.2, are they allowed to
then go into a bidding war with
the other entity that's a
private in your business to go
up in price as well to be
competitive with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlelady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
if, um, that there's definitely
a scenario that could happen,
you know, a third party says I,
I want to pay a million dollars,
um, the owner intends to accept
that offer and then um 20 days
into this process, uh, a new
offer comes through $1.2
million. We don't want to, um,
say, you know, the landlord
can't get the best deal that um
she or he can for their property
and so this process would um.
Start again and the if you know
the homeowners could not match
that $1.2 million
and you know the terms and
conditions then uh they would
then this process would fall
through.
The landlord could accept that.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, when we're going through,
I know there's a bunch of
different time periods on here,
75 days, some other days to get
financing during that time,
could another person come in
while they're in the middle of
this and, you know, they have
all these days to get all this
stuff together. Could another
company come in check say, hey,
I got 1.2 million cash. I'll buy
it right now and that would void
the this they wouldn't, is the
owner stuck with this once this
process starts, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
if I'm understanding your
question correctly, yes, if
someone came in with a $1.2
million cash offer that would
restart the clock, uh, so then
the, um, the owners would then
have to try to see if they could
come up with the additional
200K, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady in the experience of um
other organizations that help,
uh, purchase these properties
that you know that's if you're
already getting a million
dollars loan, that extra
$200,000 you know, CDFI should
be able to cover that, uh, but.
Speaker and gentle lady, you
know, if it is $1.2 million.
In, in, um, in cash that is part
of the provision of what the
landlord, uh, wants and that the
in this the way that the statute
is written it is that if the
landlord does not consider that
to be substantially equivalent
in in price or terms, you know,
the, the $1.2 million as a loan
then, uh, yeah, the landlord
could accept that $1.2 million
in cash. OK, Mr. Speaker ladies,
uh, as I start to wrap this up,
does that, does that mean?
If somebody owns the land,
they're selling it. They have it
listed for a million. They, the
people who live there say, you
know, we really want to buy
this. Does the landlord then
have the right to say I don't
want to agree to this with you
guys at all because I got
someone who's gonna pay a
million dollars cash right now
and not go through this process,
or does it force this process to
go through on this time frame,
Mr. Speaker, gen lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yes,
this adds, um, this certainly
adds um the.
The
The boundaries for how something
could be sold that's a process,
so to speak, um, to the way that
this would be sold. So, um, if
someone came with a million
dollars cash and the residents
could not um could not match
that, then yes, the landlord
would have the right to sell.
Mrs. Filady, it still goes
through this time frame, the 75
days and etc. to get the funding
together so that person even
though somebody came with a
million dollars and they had to
wait to get their financing once
they said yes we want to
purchase, we're getting all our
ducks in a row that seller
cannot sell to the person for $1
million 1.2 million dollars
cash. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
they haven't, um, fulfilled this
uh process, no.
OK, so
Respectily, I understand what
you're, what you're saying.
You're trying to say, you're
trying to get the people the
right.
And I understand that because
it's very hard and and very
difficult to move these but now
I'm in this quandary of now
they're kind of
Stuck in, I'm trying to figure
out the fairness in this, right?
Because I understand what you're
saying and I agree, but I'm also
trying to figure out the
fairness of somebody who wants
to sell the property really
quickly and get out. They can
they can't manage it. They're
getting elderly. They, they just
acquired it, uh, in, in a, in a
probate and they want to sell it
quickly now I'm, I'm trying to
see how that would help them
trying to look at both sides,
they're now locked into this, so
we're speaking to Delina, I'll,
I'll wait for some more
questions if they're, yeah,
there are, OK, so thank you,
thank you all I have. Thank you.
Thank you. There is further
debate.
The gentle lady from Dona Anna.
And know that Representative
Silva.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
just a gentle lady yield?
I yield to my friend from Donana
Notero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, thank you for
introducing this piece of
legislation, um, we're also
office meets and so we got to
talk at length about um this
bill and I'm really excited to
be a co-sponsor and wanted for
the body to understand some of
the more details of the
legislation so that uh that can
help the body make this decision
is, is that OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes.
Excellent. So, um, and, and some
of this, um, might have been
also answered by the, the gentle
lady from um Bernalillo and um
and
Sandoval, um, so, um, but I
might be asking these in a
different way. So one if a park
owner has a good third party
offer that they want to secure.
They do have to wait the 75 days
while the current residents are
given notice to lock in a deal,
um, am I getting that right or
no, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
no, so the, the landlord, if he
gets a good third party offer
deal and, um, you know, the
third party and that landlord
agree that the landlord will
comply with this section. He
will give notice. He will, um,
see if the residents can get
financing, um, he is or she or
they.
They are allowed to sign that um
purchase agreement.
Excellent, thank you Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies so
they've got some, they've got
space to be still an autonomous
owner of a park and make
decisions, um, based on the
offers that come their way. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, um, we
definitely want to, uh, ensure
that the landlord gets the best
price deal that he possibly can
on the market, um, which is why
this only initiates when
actually the the owner believes
that there is, um, uh, um,
You know, he intends to accept
an offer and um you know this
provision was added as part of
some of the conversations that
we had in commerce, um, and in
judiciary and talking directly
with owners of Mobile Home
parks, um, with, uh, the real
estate folks and you know this,
this provision is one that
exists in other states that
ability to, so to speak, seal
the deal and um it is a
provision that um Rock USA, uh,
an
organization that helps, uh,
these these communities purchase
their.
Parks it is something that is
used very often actually in the
states that have this.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and um one of the reasons
that I signed on as a co-sponsor
to this bill is there's a number
of mobile home parks, uh, in
House District 53, um, and, and
in the county in both counties
that uh that I represent and so
making sure that people have the
opportunity to, uh, maintain the
community that they're a part
of, um, I, I grew up in the
mobile home park for a portion
of my childhood and I just
remember.
Those being some of the tightest
knit communities in in our
counties and so I wanna make
sure those folks have um some
decision making power and so
this bill instructs the owner
and residents to deal in good
faith. Can you tell us what a
good faith negotiation is.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the way that this is defined,
um, you know, in other states
but also just in our, our
general practice of law is just
to ensure that um the residents
have the same information that a
third party offer would have
that they are really truly
considering it, and I think what
is uh no of note here is in this
section specifically about good
faith is that you know it.
It only begins if the owner
believes the owner, the person
who's selling if they believe
that the terms and the price is
not substantially equivalent,
then, um, then they, you know,
make the consideration and see
what um the park owner, the
homeowners might be able to, um,
you know, make up for in the
purchase agreement.
Oh, OK, I see. um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies, so the good
faith, um, negotiation is to
ensure that the mobile home park
owner is getting the best
negotiation from the residents
but also any other offers that
may be coming, uh, their way, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, we want the, um, we want
the owner to be able to get uh a
good market value for uh the for
their park.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and does the owner lose
out by selling to residents, um,
and how can we make sure that
they're getting a fair deal.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, you
know, we don't, they, they, this
section does not force them in
any way to accept a bad offer of
their tenants if the if the
park.
Has been listed for sale for $5
million and somebody comes in
with $5 million.01 dollars and
the residents, um, you know, can
only come up with uh $3 million
in financing the owner has their
full rights to um to not sell to
them, um, you know that that
kind of negotiation would be
something that, you know, no, no
court of law would say, well,
you, you didn't negotiate in
good faith that you're the
owners are offering $2 million
and you were getting 5 million
on the market, um, you know,
the, the, the owner should be
able to get that $5 million if
that is available to sale. All
this does is um to put in a
little bit of time frame for the
folks who live on the property,
um, who have their homes there,
who have their communities there
who um have lived on that park
sometimes for 25 years who have
invested so much money into
their mobile homes, um, if
you go and you see some of these
communities, you'll see gardens
planted and you'll see, um, you
know, wrap around porches and
folks do a lot of things with
their manufactured homes and
this is just in ensuring that we
have something in law that
allows them to to to compete for
that offer and to match it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I appreciate that. I
think it also um an option like
this if it were to exist in New
Mexico law would also help
deepen everyone's investment in
those communities if people
could see themselves as
potential owners of not just
their parcel but the whole park,
um, I think it would reinvest
money into um all the amenities
that those sorts of mobile home
parks might provide um I've had
a number of emails.
to me since the beginning of the
session there's this is the one
bill, the, the mobile home park
bills um that have gained so
much traction and probably the
one issue that I've gotten most
emails about, um, are, are these
sets of bills and it's because
people care not just about their
home and their parcel but the
community that they've created
and when um big like private
equity or out of state
corporations buy up those mobile
home parks they see some of
those.
amenities getting eroded so the
the community pool isn't being
taken care of anymore or fencing
or roads or sidewalks aren't
being maintained and so, um,
people are seeing, you know, the
good ownership versus a more
negligent home ownership and or
um mobile home park ownership
and they, they also know that
they can probably do just a good
job at some of the best uh
owners that mobile home park
owners that that are around and
so.
Can you tell me, um, are there
exceptions to this bill? Are
there any circumstances where an
owner would not need to provide
notice to the residents and an
opportunity for them to
purchase, madam, uh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, so these are, are some of
the things that we added after
discussion with Commerce
Committee and again really
grateful for these to have been
brought up, um, you know, there
are some times where the mobile
home park owner will not have to
give notice and we took these,
um, we took these exceptions
from the New Hampshire law,
which has been around for 40
years, so we know it's tested
and has gone through a lot, but,
uh, you know, if it's a.
foreclosure, for instance, if
you've purchased the park at a
foreclosure. You don't need to
give notice, um, if you are
selling or transferring to a
family member or to the owner of
a trust, uh, the beneficiaries
of which are family members also
if the sale or transfer is by
partnership to one or more
business partners, um, if you
have a conveyance of interest in
the mobile home, uh, park that's
incidental to the financing, the
sale or transfers between joint
so there are, there are
multiple exceptions, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and we want to
provide flexibility in this law
that you know we are um being
fair to the folks who own their
homes on the property, but that
we are also ensuring that there
are also there are many other
ways that a landlord might need
to dispose of their property,
uh, and to not have to create
unnecessary limitations for
that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlelii, um, and I know, um,
it is a very hard to move a
mobile home, uh, it's very
expensive and I know that we
also have laws in New Mexico
that if a mobile home is past a
certain age they can't be
resold, um, and so when we think
about mobile home parks, I, I
want us to, I want this body to
think about the people who live
in these in these mobile home
parks who uh might own their
mobile homes but cannot.
pay, as you said, the 23, 5000
or more to move it and on top of
that, not even sure if that
mobile home is even movable
anymore, given its age, um, but
that's their home, that's their
retirement, that's where they
plan to live out the rest of
their years. And so, uh, making
sure that we can secure
affordable, consistent housing,
but also affordable and
consistent community for people,
um, is really, really important,
um, and so, um, so.
I, I have a few more questions,
but I really want to urge the
body to think about the people
who live in our mobile home
communities, um, they're young
families, um, that might often
just sell the trailer, um, so
that it stays in that lot and
then we'll move but won't take
that mobile home with them, um,
but they see it as a jumping off
point, um, but also our elderly
community who like I said, this
is their retirement home and
this these are their communities
and neighbors that they rely on
to
And to help them live a good
long life and so, um, do you,
uh, sorry, I have a couple more
questions. Do you feel that this
proposal provides flexibility to
the owner and takes into account
the practicalities of owning and
selling a mobile home park, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, certainly, uh, we, we've
definitely taken feedback from
mobile home park owners and um
other stakeholders and of
course, um, you know, mobile
home park owners and and
realtors, uh, you know, they're,
they're not gonna, um, love
everything because.
A lot of this, uh, mechanism
which you'll learn about in
mobile Home Park University if
you take their $300 course is,
you know, this is an excellent
profit generating um asset to
have because people cannot move
their homes and that's
explicitly laid out in the um in
the why to purchase a mobile
home park, but we have made
some, um, you know, some changes
to it to make it more, uh, to
make it more of something that
uh would be more fair and you
know.
We continue to listen to those
conversations and to understand
how the process works, how we
had it originally is that um.
Initially it was actually 90
days for the mobile home park
owners to organize and uh for at
least 51% of the mobile home.
Owners to organize and then to
approve the purchase and get the
uh get the purchase and sale
agreement together, um, you
know, in other states it's even
longer in um in other states
it's up to 120 days, but we
think that is pretty long and um
one day it's 365 days to get the
financing, so that's a whole
year. And so what we feel we
have here is we reduced the
first document.
ation that is required for the
51% to 75 days, so that gives
them still time to form the LLC
or cooperative to assign that
right to a nonprofit that's
gonna help them, uh, to do as
they need in those 75 days and
still hire a lawyer and still
put together the purchase
agreement that's supposed to
happen all in the 1st 75 days
and then um.
The second part is the 90 days
that we left as is, that's an
industry standard, uh, mobile
home Park University, as I
mentioned before, they say that
that's a standard 60 and 30, um,
and as we've learned that's part
of the due diligence which due
diligence on a park, that means
examining the infrastructure
that means, um, examining the
kinds of loans that you can get.
I mean, the list here, uh, for
due diligence that's required or
suggested in um
Mobile Home Park University is
uh is 53 bullets, so there are
quite many things that need to
happen in those 90 days, um, and
it, it's an industry standard
for a third party to go through
that, so we kept that 90 day
period and then on the third
part we used to say that there
was another 90 days for
residents to close on the park
and what we've said is, um, you
know, we'll eliminate those.
Final 90 days, um, and instead
we inserted commercially
reasonable time period, so you
know that's that is as it will
be defined in the proposed
purchase and sale agreement.
The same way that would happen
in a commercial real estate
transaction.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and um.
I, I know that there are also a
lot of groups in New Mexico that
are ready to help mobile home
park residents with all of that
process so it's not just like
jumping into the deep end, um,
can you name a couple of
institutions or organizations
that might be ready to help
through that whole process that
you just explained, Mr. Speaker,
General. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, yeah, I think you've
brought up a really good point,
which is that this is the
longest period possible, um,
that you could go through.
for one of these transactions,
but certainly, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, there are
already parks, you know, this
legislation came from the parks.
It came from folks who are
living this reality day in and
day out. It came from our elders
from AARP, for instance, who is
interested in helping folks from
um Center on Law and poverty
who's interested in helping
folks and really, um, this
legislation I think that the,
the folks who um are closest.
To the suffering should be part
of the solution, uh, to what
that suffering alleviation is
and, and this certainly has been
put together with uh working in
tandem with the folks who are in
those properties and so if this
law were to go into effect, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
those folks would be ready uh to
move if their park was going to
be sold.
That's excellent, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you and my
last question just as you think
about um
How vulnerable mobile home
residents are to rent hikes. Can
you, many of us may not know the
vulnerability of rent hikes and
specifically for mobile home
park residents. Can you speak to
that a little bit, please, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady,
certainly I think um one of the,
you know, organizations that's
uh also prepared to help folks
in this purchase is Rock USA
resident owned communities, um,
they're nonprofit social venture
and they're, you know, their
mission is.
help resident ownership become
viable nationwide and um Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady what
they one of their studies has
shown that um is that.
Resident owned communities, they
raise monthly site fees at lower
rates because this is not for
profit. They're not operating
this park for profit. They're
operating this park because that
is their home that's where they
live and so any of those
proceeds that are raised go
directly back into the park into
improvements into anything else.
They don't go to any other third
party or a pocket lined in
Florida or New York or Texas
this goes directly back into the
community so the it it turns
out.
No, you don't need to raise the
rents that much to cover just
the cost, right? There's other
reasons why folks raise rents
and um of course totally natural
that uh a person who has own who
owns um the uh.
A mobile home park wants to
create profit off of their
asset, but that does mean that
um rents increase and that's
actually one of the things that
mobile um mobile home university
will teach you is that if you
raise the rents, folks tend to
not be able to leave, so it is a
really great mechanism for
generating um profit and you
don't actually have that many
expenses because you're not
having to maintain an apartment,
um, fix holes in a in an
apartment or, um, you know,
work.
on all the things that and a
physical real estate needs
because the folks on their homes
and manage their homes, all you
need to do is manage the land
and the utilities. So for
instance, one thing that they
say here is.
Um, one of their, their studies
is that the the monthly site
fees on average for the mobile
homes that the mobile home
communities that are owned by
the residents is that over the
course of 30 years, so this is
in New Hampshire, the rents, the
monthly rent fees for in, in
resident owned communities only
goes up 0.9% every year.
0.9%.
And for um communities that are
owned not by the residents, but
um by profit generating uh
mechanisms the industry average
is 5.9% annually, so, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, you
know, I, it, the, the reason why
we are bringing this legislation
and one of the main pieces that
really drives this is, is the
cost of the rent, and if the
homeowners can own the park
where they live.
where they walk, where they
work, they play, then they will
be taking care of the land there
and be raising what just what
they need to manage the park
rather than more that they need
to um finance.
Someone else in another state.
Thank you for that, uh,
response, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady and what I
appreciate about that answer is
one, what it does is it shifts
the, the intent, so rather than
collecting rent for
profit-driven purposes, uh,
where that profit might, uh,
very well go out of state.
Might very well go to
shareholders or partners also
who may not live in New Mexico.
What you're saying is the
revenue that's generated from
people paying rent on their
spaces gets stays in New Mexico
and gets reinvested back into
that community directly. So it's
local investment, um, and so I
just wanna drive that point a
little more home for folks is
that this is not only keeping
rents low for our most low
income residents and senior.
residents, um, it's helping
them, uh, own some property
beyond just their parcel or
their trailer and beyond that,
it helps recirculate local
dollars into their community
rather than sending it out in
New Mexico and this is one thing
that many people in this body
talk about about how do we keep
local dollars in New Mexico and,
and I just want to name like
that's the one way that we can
do that and be really proactive
about maintaining affordable
housing.
In New Mexico, so right now
we're um we're behind the eight
ball on on some of our
affordable housing, um,
proposals and ideas, but this is
a really proactive way of
sustaining affordable housing in
the state and um for that reason
I would ask this body to
support, uh, House Bill 426.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
Janaledi.
Thank you, Mr.
the gentleman from Chavez
Representative Murphy.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Speaker
of the gentle lady from Bernal
Leo Yield.
I yield to my friend from
commerce.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, we
had, uh, quite a discussion on
this bill and commerce, and
there were some really good
ideas or may even be one novel
good idea that I hope the body
will consider, but before, and I
don't mean to rehash all of that
debate, but I would like to
perhaps summarize it a little
bit.
I think there was a general
feeling throughout the
throughout the committee that
affordable housing and
maintaining affordable housing
and expanding and affordable
housing is a very important
thing in this state. Um, we
obviously, uh, all know the
poverty rates. We know that many
of our most vulnerable or
at-risk elders, um, reside in
these communities and uh so I am
fully supportive of, of that
concept. And as I, as I voiced
in.
Committee, I do have.
Some concerns and um starting at
say the 35,000 ft level.
Affordable housing in New Mexico
is a state problem. It's a
policy problem, uh, and there's,
it's something that, um, this
body, our neighbors across the
hall, uh, and the governor that
we all need to address.
Um, and it's a big problem, um,
but now I'll take
Just this part of it. I feel
like this bill shifts the
responsibility to solve that
problem from us as a body and
from us as a society to
individual private property
owners and it basically creates
a disincentive. It creates a, a,
uh, an imbalance, I think in how
private property is dealt with.
And so the first thing that's
been mentioned is the, uh, first
writer refusal are also known in
my business as a preferential
right to purchase where two
parties negotiate, they come up
with a deal and then a third
party gets to decide whether
they want to buy that or not.
Um, in my experience, um, this
type of preferential right to
purchase generally deflates the
value of the, of the private
property immensely, um, anywhere
from 10 to perhaps 20 or 30%.
Because it puts the owner of the
property in a very difficult
position of basically having to
sit back and let time frames
run.
And I, I can, I can give you one
specific example.
Um, many times when you're
dealing with real estate
transactions like this.
A
Potential buyer may have just
sold an office building or some
other piece of property
somewhere else.
And they will want to do what's
called a 1031 exchange.
Now, these are fairly common in,
in the real estate, not not only
residential, but certainly in
commercial enterprises and, and
what that does is that if I'm
able to sell my office building
and the proceeds from that
building go into a trust
account.
And then if I'm able to come and
negotiate with you, gentle lady
for Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady
for, for this um trailer, uh,
excuse me for mobile Home Park.
I only have 180 days, if I
recall to close that. I think
it's 45 days to identify and
maybe 100, whatever the balance
is 135 or whatever that balance
is to close.
by my count, the time frames in
here could, could outstrip that.
You've got 75 days, which I
basically call so in the
negotiation and contracting
phase, I think that's probably
fair, Mr. Speaker. You've got 90
days for the, uh, potential
resident purchasers to, to get
financing. And then you've got
what I think has been referred
to and I'm not, I'm not taking
issue with it, but from a
practical standpoint, sort of a
reasonable period in which to
close. That can be as short as
I've seen in some transactions
30 days, but something in
like this with a lot of due
diligence and a lot of
requirements that could easily
be 60 days, so we've now run 225
days. And so that 10:31 exchange
with that potential purchasers,
there's no way it could happen.
So I think that's a, that's a
real disincentive. Um, the
other, the, the other thing that
that I think we talked about in
committee a little bit is sort
of the carrot versus the stick
approach.
And this is, I think, the stick
approach that basically, we're
saying that if you don't go, you
can go sell your, your, your
private property, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. But if you, if
you don't go through this
process, you're either gonna get
fined $100,000. Are you going to
get taxed 20% of the value.
And so it's, it's a huge step.
And so, um, I have a little bit
different approach, um, I hope
that, uh, the, uh, Mr. Speaker,
the general lady will consider
it a friendly amendment, but I'd
like to circulate an amendment
and I'd like to call for a roll
call vote if I could.
You have a roll call.
Gentlemen, if we could get a
copy up here.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's being uh
brought, brought over.
Gentlemen, will you kindly read
the number on the bottom left.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's
232-031.1.
Alright, let us get this passed
out and post it online and then
we'll have you.
Explain the amendment.
Alright gentlemen, I believe the
amendments been passed out and
it is posted online, the
gentleman to explain the
amendment Mr. Speaker. I'll
start with the new title because
it explains a lot of it and I
think I'll, I'll go into it. It,
it'll, it'll change the title
say allow owners to provide
notice to residents before the
sale of a mobile home park.
Allowing owners to provide an
opportunity to purchase the
mobile home park, allowing for a
deduction of 100% of the
taxpayer's net capital gain
income from the sale of mobile
home park if the mobile home
park is sold to the residents.
So in essence, uh, Mr. Speaker
and, and gentle lady from Bernal
Leo.
Um, where the previous approach
Um, is a penalty if you don't go
through this process, um, the,
this might, uh, amendment or my
substitute with will amend the
bill to provide an incentive.
For the owner of the park to
sell to the residents.
And if that owner does not do
that, nothing changes, but they
get a substantial, uh, tax
credit if they do. And so the
idea would be, uh, I'm happy to,
to walk through the individual
changes, but the idea is, is
that
The park owner gives notice to
the residents and then begins to
enter into the same sort of
negotiated time frames, uh, that
are, are largely in, in here and
uh then if that sale is
consummated and the residents
buy it, then, um, the taxpayer
may claim a deduction amount
equal to 100% of the taxpayers'
net capital gain income from the
sale of the mobile home park.
So it's a, it's a, it's an
incentive program.
Right, let's go to the bill
sponsor. Is this a friendly
amendment.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I also love the idea of a tax
incentive, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle.
Man
Apologize, um, this is not a
friendly amendment.
No, yeah, yes, I said it's not a
friendly amendment.
No, it is a is not a friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen. All right, we have an
unfriendly amendment. Is there a
debate? The gentleman from
Chavez Eri and Otero
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker to the
gentleman from Chavez Hi. I
gladly yield to my friend from
uh Chavis City in Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really
appreciate what you're trying to
do here, um, because it kind of
rather than.
Waiting for all those those.
An offer to come in. We're
actually setting those time
frames right away, right? So,
meaning the second if I'm the
property owner, I decide I'm
going to sell this property
rather than waiting for an offer
to come in, that timeline sets
almost right away to where if
folks want to purchase it, we're
not excluding them from it. They
just don't, they don't, there's,
there's not, they're not waiting
for a, uh offer. Is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that is correct, and, and the
other thing that it does is, is
that it incentivizes the owner
of the property to even extend
those time frames. If, if the,
the residents need it. It, it
provides not only the incentive
to be to initiate the
negotiations with them, but also
to work carefully with them
because it's in their financial
interest to do so.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
you know, I think the 10:31 was
something that everybody should
really listen to because that is
something that quite often,
especially on commercial type
properties, which I assume a
trailer park, we would probably
consider that a commercial
property. Is that correct, Mr.
uh, uh, gentleman?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, I would certainly consider
that a commercial, uh, size uh
transaction. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when we're doing
those 10:31, you're absolutely
correct. those time frames
become really, really important.
Uh, you know, and, and I think
we're always trying to find a
magical formula with different.
Time frames. So we've got the 75
days, we've got the 90 days. A
lot of times those won't work
within that contract because on
the purchase agreement, uh, if
you're a real estate agent,
you've already got a lot of time
frames that you're trying to
meet, um, so I do, I do think
this is a great amendment. I
think it starts the process
right away to where if that
community wanted to purchase it,
uh, you're not excluding them.
It just makes them move a little
faster than maybe waiting for
the offer to come in if it's a
10:31, those those.
timeframes are not going to
work.
That's correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, thank you.
Thank you, Mr.
Speaker from Santa Fe and
Sandoval representative McQueen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this is
gentleman yield.
I do yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, uh,
this is an interesting
amendment, um, a couple of
questions, uh, do you have any
sense of the fiscal impact of
this amendment?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I do
not, um, this was something
that, uh, um, was, uh, discussed
last night as a follow-up to
commerce, but I would say this
is that, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, while these
transactions seem not to be
uncommon. I don't think they're,
uh, you know, they're they're
done in in in in large numbers.
So I would anticipate a fairly
modest impact to, uh, uh, to the
budget.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, when
you're deducting 100% of tax
shareers' net capital gain
income.
Do you have any idea how much
that would be?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I do not, um,
and I, I believe, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, the
intent is it's not necessarily
the income, but it's the
percentage of the capital gains
that's subject to the income,
are subject to the tax, excuse
me.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
You know, I, I, I appreciate,
uh, the gentle lady's bill, um,
what you're proposing, um,
It could create a financial
incentive where
You would have an owner that
would prefer to sell to the
residents.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that's a really
interesting idea that difficulty
comes in doing this on the
floor, you know, like we haven't
had a chance to look at this. We
haven't had a chance to vet
this. We haven't had a chance
to, you know, figure out how
this would work, how it fits
into the bill, um.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
appreciate this. It's an
interesting idea. Um, maybe we
could revisit this, uh, at a
later date. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
Grant Hidalgo and Catherine,
Representative Terazas, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the gentlemen,
please yield. I will yield to my
friend from Katherine Grant
Hidalgo. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So I was listening
and I was thinking about the
fiscal impact and all that and
and it's usually 25% of the sale
on what you gained.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
in the gains that you made,
right? You gotta recapture all
your uh depreciation and so
forth, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the, the, the thing
about this is that that um could
be done the way you're putting
it.
I like it because what would
happen, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
you could carry the note.
And not take all of that all at
once. There's, there's a lot of
ways that you could work around
this, right? You could carry the
note rather than going out
unless you just want to be
funded out and be done, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is that
something you think could work
on this?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
had not thought about that, but
that is exactly correct. There,
there would be a further
incentive for the owner to
maybe, yeah, help, uh, help with
the financing.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
reason I say that is because we,
we've been hearing on the floor
that they can't afford $5000 to
move the trailer.
Yeah, how are they gonna come up
with 30% of uh of the down
payment on a commercial loan.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think given the nature of the
circumstances, it's going to be
very, very difficult for them to
do that. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the reason I'm
bringing that up is because as
we talk about this timeline,
what the 10:31 exchange is maybe
some maybe all the people in the
body don't, you know, really
don't have the knowledge of what
that really means, but what that
is is is if another person.
Let's just say I want to
purchase a mobile home park.
And I sell my business.
And I take my, my, the money
that I sold I gotta use every
single dollar. I can't take only
my, my, my, uh, uh, capital
gains I have to invest every
dollar that I got. So if I saw
from, I don't know whatever
business I have for a million
dollars, I have to literally
invest a million dollars into
that. I have a timeline in order
to avoid capital gains, and this
is what I, I want the body to
understand in order to avoid the
capital gains you have to move
that money your sale.
And your new
Closing date of your new
business because it's gonna be a
business you can't just go and
buy a house has to be within 180
days. Does that sound correct to
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
That's my understanding, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
So what I like about this, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, there's
several things. First of all,
you're gonna have those we're
we're those on those 1031
exchange if I, if, if the mobile
home group was able to come up
with a 30% down of this park,
OK, and I've heard figures of $5
million and all that, so you're
talking about $1.5 million. I
don't know how many residents
that is, but, uh, uh, Lei that
is, but they come up with that
and they get funded out.
That person who sold the, the,
the park would sometimes it
doesn't mean they have to
sometimes have.
A way to abate their taxes by
investing in a new business.
And so, um, that, that, that's
one of the ways they can do it
but with your amendment what I
like because one of my questions
was gonna be, why do we have to
legislate, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
That this a first right of
refusal.
Because this can happen right
now.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we don't
have to have legislation for the
all the park owners to or DCs to
get together and say, hey guys,
let's all get together. Let's
get together and let's purchase
this park together. Let's get, I
don't know 100 residents let's
get 51 of us to get together and
that's or or 30 of them or they
see by us legislating this, it
puts parameters.
Puts parameters, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on how many people
have to have to commence a sale.
How many days they have when
they can just organize
themselves. What I what I like
about the legislation, I'll be
honest with you.
Is it encourages a conversation.
A conversation out there that
people can understand if they're
hearing this. I'm sure there's a
lot of them listening in today,
but it encourages those this is
more important than I don't know
what's going on right now, Wheel
of Fortune or something, I don't
know, but anyway, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen
what I'm telling you is if
they're watching today, they can
understand that they don't need
parameters. They can get
together and say, hey, let's all
get together. Let's make an
offer instead of waiting for the
it to what.
first the chicken or the egg, it
turns around and you say, hey,
let's go and approach, uh, Mrs.
so and so or Mr. so and so if
they would be interested in
selling the park and let's all
get together and put this offer
together.
This, what you're doing here
encourages that.
Because it it creates it creates
uh a movement in the in the
sense that people are saying,
oh, you know what? I can, uh, I
can, I can avoid my, my abate my
um my uh uh capital gains and at
the same time people will start
talking and I would like for,
you know, just this whole thing
whatever happens with it for
people to know Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that they can do this
on their own. They don't have to
be legislated into it, but I, I,
I like it because it gives a lot
of leverage.
A lot of movement for the owner
himself to say, you know what? I
can take a 1031 exchange if
they're able to get the note or
I can carry the note and and do
that. So anyway, I'll, I'll
debate the bill when it comes
up. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker,
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. We'll,
uh, my, uh, floor mate, uh,
yield. I'll gladly yield to my
friend from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, I've, uh, I've
owned a few mobile home parks in
my life and uh done several 10
31s and um I sold my last one in
December and so I just wanted to
know if you could make this
retroactive to 2024.
You know, um, if, if we could
get this in a friendly
amendment, I think we could
probably accomplish just about
anything, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you. You know, we legislate
things to death in this body,
um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna go out
and make a run on toilet paper.
I just want everybody in the
body to know I'm gonna make a
run on toilet paper. I'm gonna
buy semi loads of it and then
next year I'm gonna come back
with a bill that says we have to
buy this certain brand of toilet
paper that I'm gonna run the
bill on. It makes about that
much sense. One of the hardest
things that, um, and I've, I've
done, I've gone through the
mobile home school. Um, one of
the hard
Things and I've asked my tenants
at one time I asked them if they
wanted to buy it, and, and I
went door to door and knocked on
every one of the doors and, and
every one of them said, no, I
don't want to buy it. I don't
want to put up with you, what
you put up with.
Um, but the financial restraints
on most people who live in a
mobile home park.
would make this really, really
tough to do and, and as I did,
uh, as I done did the research
on this, that's the number one
factor with, with all of these
that, uh, they just cannot come
up with the money. They don't
want to commit to come up with
the money. And that's a tough
thing because when you have skin
in the game.
It's yours.
You own it, you pay for it, and
every one of these has to
regardless who buys it, the
rent's gonna go up.
If you buy it as uh as has been
mentioned, the rent goes up
significantly just to be able to
afford the payment.
So I'm all in favor of this. I
think it's a great deal. I, I
think it'd be wonderful for them
to buy it, but I wondered if,
uh, you know, you rethink that.
2024 for me. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker.
There, there is further debate.
The lady from earlier said on
you or no.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Chavez and my
friend in commerce yield.
Absolutely yielded the gentle
lady.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, um, so looking
over your amendment here, um, so
the first page of your
amendment, item 2, section B. I
noticed the change you made here
says you changed she to May, the
owner of a mobile home park may
notify each resident. Can you
tell me a little bit about why
you made that particular verb
change.
Yes, because um this is uh sort
of
How do I put this? This is sort
of the, the, the, what I think
of is the financially positive
way to do it because, uh, at, at
the, you'll note towards the end
of the amendment, it puts in
the, the tax provisions. So what
it is saying is, as owner, I may
offer this.
And if I do by jumping to the,
to the end of the bill, I will
get this tax advantage. I'll,
I'll have this financial
incentive.
So it's, it's encouraging but
not requiring, um, the, the
owners of the property to offer
it to the residents and if they
do, and they end up selling to
the residents and they get the,
they tax advantage.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Representative. We talked
about that a little bit in
committee when we heard the
spill about um.
You know, the tax incentive.
Um, carrot versus stick, but my
concern here then is if we make
it a may rather than a shell,
does that still require the
mobile home park owner to notify
residents of a pending sale or
an intent to sell the park.
Not necessarily requires, excuse
me, Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady, um,
Not necessarily requires the,
the pre the, the, the original
bill requires, and if you don't
do it, you're penalized. This
bill says you may do it and if
you do do it, you'll be
rewarded.
Does that answer your question?
It does, it does. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, I just.
And I understand that answer,
and I understand.
kind of your intent behind the
amendment. My concern, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, is
that.
Changing this intent so much
really undermines the entire
purpose of why we're bringing
this bill forward of not giving
residents notice of their park
owners intend to sell, not
giving them any opportunity to,
you know, advocate for
themselves, come up with an
opportunity to buy the park
themselves and so for that
reason, Mr. Speaker
Representative, I think this
amendment goes too far by
changing that made a shell by
making it entirely optional on
the part of the mobile home park
owner, I think really
undermines the entire purpose of
the bill and so unfortunately we
won't be able to support your
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I
could respond to that. See, I, I
see it exactly opposite. I, I
see the original legislation,
um, Mr. Speaker, and, and, um,
respectfully, um, my friend.
A gentle lady, I see the
original bill, um, encouraging
the owner to get through those
time frames as rapidly as
possible so they've met their
requirements. And that then,
well, this bill actually
encourages the property owner to
extend and work with the
residents because he's gonna, he
or she is going to have a
distinct financial reward if
they do. And so it incentivizes
them even beyond sort of the,
the, the same time frames that
were
Talking about, but it puts a
direct financial incentive for
them to really try to get the
deal done with the residents.
There is for the debate, gentle
lady from Donana Sierra Socorro,
Representative Dao.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen, and I think I, I
really appreciate the amendment.
Um, because
It, there, there seems to be a
difference in philosophical
perspective.
That's, that's what I keep
hearing kind of resonating
throughout this entire session,
and I keep hearing us say carrot
versus stick. And I, I, in the
world of early childhood, you
know, we talk about is the goal
when you're correcting someone
to punish them or to change
their behavior.
And when you think about a young
child, you think about
redirecting them. Some people
like, they need to be in
trouble. They need to go to time
out and you're like, no, no, we
want to change behavior. And so
the intent, I, I, I thought the
intent of this bill is to make
sure that the people who own the
homes, but not the land and
mobile home park become owners.
Shared owners of the land
instead of the mobile home park.
But it sounds like this is not a
friendly amendment because the
purpose of the bill is to create
notifications allow people to
throw a fit and have a protest
and say it say and hopefully
they get the money, but you've
created a carrot that makes
sense to nearly every person who
would be selling a mobile home
part. Mr. Chairman and
Representative, when are people
usually selling a mobile home
park?
You know, um, I would guess
that, uh, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentle lady, um, I would think
that um these are probably very
marketable, um, during good
economic times, um, I'd also
think that they're very
marketable, I mean, the business
model that I understand from a
mobile home park is typically
you see these put in on the edge
of on the edge of town, correct?
Usually in um what was former uh
agricultural land and then as,
you know, over
time, of course, the city, the
town grows around it and the
property value increases. And so
then I'm sure at that point,
there's probably quite a bit of
competition, um, for it because
now all of a sudden you have
agricultural land and I'm just
gonna pick a number that was
bought 10 years ago at $1000 an
acre. That's now worth $10,000
an acre because of all the
activity and the development
around it. And the only way that
I think that you can allow those
res.
to stay there is that I think
it's probably correct. They're
gonna have to have a sense of
community and they're going to
want to
Make sure that they do all they
can to to purchase that land and
this bill, this amendment
really, uh, gives them that
opportunity. I hope that answers
your question. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you,
gentlemen. Like, I, I think it's
so interesting because you're in
one of the most economically
prosperous counties in the
state, and I'm in one of the
poorest counties in the state.
And so your perspective of when
people sell a mobile home, and
my perspective is different
because we have these biases
based on our personal
experiences. So I'm sure what
you're saying is true, but also
true in my
In my communities of where the
average age is 57. I, I, someone
said, oh, I bet that's the
average age in my district. Look
at the average age in your
district. It's probably in the
30s and 40s unless you're in a
community like mine, and it's
58, it's a retirement community
and there's lots of mobile home
parks. In fact, my county,
Sierra County is over 75% mobile
homes, lots of mobile home
parks, and it's people, elderly
people who have been owning and
operating them, you know,
they've been getting rent their
whole lives and now older in
their lives.
they are selling them. Sometimes
they're selling them, but they
are, they are still quite
expensive, but for them to be
able to sell or to give to their
children or to put into a trust
or whatever they might do, this
really creates the incentive.
For the buyer and the buyer, I
mean, the seller to make this
deal. I mean, the way that
you've written this amendment
makes this the most and most
advantageous option. So you,
your your carrot created a
solution for the, the family
that's going to maybe sell this
and and maybe move into assisted
living. That's what it looks
like in my community, or they
want to leave some sort of
inheritance to their children.
You've created the incentive
that makes this the, the first
and most
Advantageous option. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is that how
you see it?
And Mr. Speaker, and, and
generally, yes, that's how I see
it. The other thing too, I think
that we see with any type of
property or business, many times
it's sold when um it's passed to
the next generation. Mom and dad
die, the siblings inherit it
many times.
In my experience, there is a
rush to liquidate. And so what I
also fear is in circumstances
like that, under the original
legislation, what would happen
is the sibling or, excuse me,
the children just may say, you
know what? I know we're gonna
get hit with $100,000 or we're
gonna get hit with 20% off the
top, but we want the money now.
So let's just, you know, let's
just sell it and take the hit.
where my bill would actually
encourage them to, to, to take a
reasonable period of time and,
and, and try to sell it.
the residents. Well, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and thank you
gentlemen. And some of the stuff
I heard during the testimony was
this assumption that large out
of state corporations are going
to be the ones that are buying
it. And, um, that that the
seller can sell it at the
highest offer they get, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, in the
original bill, is that the case?
So this uh we talked about the
mangers, like, you know,
yesterday it was oil and gas
corporations. These greedy
corporations, can they make a
better offer and wait out the 90
days or whatever the term is to
get the price they want.
Under the original bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, under the
original bill. I think under the
original bill they could, and
although I heard from testimony
today, um, that anytime a new
offer comes rolling in it
basically restarts the clock,
which I think is also a further
disincentive, um, for, for, uh,
for sale to the residents. And
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
this, um, if the corporation, if
they were able to, to um
outprice the greedy corporation.
Did you hear in committee what
type of interest rates these
nonprofits are. I, I don't
really understand the terms of
who these, there's these
national organizations,
nonprofits that are going to
finance it for the communities.
Like, I don't understand how
they're getting away from a
traditional interest rate.
Um
Mr. Speaker, um, uh, and, uh,
gentle lady, I'm not sure
either. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, you know, the number
of million dollars was thrown
around quite a bit. So if the
interest, the interest alone
would be pretty significant.
They would have to raise the
rates.
I did, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle did a little bit of
research on that and, and we
found that in many cases, that's
exactly what happened is that
they had to they had to raise
the rates, but, but as I would,
I would point out is, is that
this really creates a a
cooperative and, and, and
complementary relationship
between the residents and the
property owner in my opinion,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
totally agree with you, but when
I was thinking about the
interest rate, on top of that,
they're going to have to take
care of maintenance, where that
was the property owner's.
responsibility. They're going to
have to take care of
infrastructure, um, I don't
know, pest control. I'm trying
to think about things that are
usually done, um, you know, the
property management, the
security, um, and that would all
become the responsibility of
these folks who generally, from
my experience, you, you might
have a different one. These are
also elderly people on fixed
incomes or disabled people on
fixed incomes, um, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I was
trying to do the math in my
head, and it seemed to me.
That the cost to the residents
would go up.
And then it was suggested that
they would hire a property
manager, which generally, uh, if
it's like my town, the current
owner is usually the property
manager. So now there's that
also the cost of an employee to
manage it.
It seems it's, I hear that it's
working, but it must be working
with a near zero interest
percentage or some sort of long
term loan, whereas Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I'm thinking
again about my community where
people bought these trailer, the
trailer, some of the trailers
are, they're from the 60s and
70s.
There's not a lot that are newer
than the 90s.
These trailers are very old and
most of the properties are paid
for and so the people who own it
now, um, the, the at least in my
case, the, the mortgages of the
monthly rent is pretty low. So,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, were
you able to see some of those
figures in committee that would
show that these folks were going
to have the same rate or a lower
rate or
I just want to make sure we're
back on the amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
your amendment creates an
opportunity for these folks
who've owned the property, their
mobile home long enough that
they probably have no debt.
And one of the most interesting
things to me is the owner
finance. Can you talk about
that?
Sure, um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I think, um, a couple
of things. I think, uh, the
gentle lady from Bernna Lea, the
sponsor, has got, um, a
reasonable point that she makes
regarding that the residents
will try to do all they can to
keep the cost down because
they're just trying to live
there as opposed to, um, being a
for-profit corporation. So I
think there is that. And I
think, and I think that's a
reasonable expectation, um, how
they're how they're financed, I
don't know if there's federal
grants.
And other things that, uh, to
your point, if you were to go
out and seek, uh, commercial
real estate loan for this. It's
gonna be at least in the, in, in
the, in the mid single digits of
not the the upper single digits,
6 to 9% would be, would be a
minimum, and it could easily go
into the double digits because
of the risk and, and, uh, um,
the underlying assets and so
forth, but it's, it's, it's not
gonna be cheap money, I don't
think. And Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, aren't the terms
usually shorter than a
traditional single resident?
home.
You know, uh, Mr. Speaker and,
uh, lady, I'm, I'm not sure the,
the, of the, uh, of the, uh,
time frames the notes are
usually written for, but I would
suspect 20 to 30 years. So, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I just
want to make sure that I'm
understanding. So you've created
an opportunity where the, the
person who owns the mobile home
lot has now been incentivized to
seek a collaborative agreement
and to prioritize the current
owners of the mobile homes to
become the new owners of the
land.
That's correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and you, I think
you asked me another question
regarding
Um
The uh
The note, I guess, um, uh,
self-financing where the
landowner, uh, would actually
provide, um, the financing to
the residents and and I can see
where they would be incentivized
to do that because this
individual, you know, may only,
may not want all of, all of the
proceeds at once. They only want
a portion which actually makes
it easier on the resonances to,
to come up with that. So I, uh,
once again, I think, I think
creating a collaborative
relationship and incentivizing
it is the way to go. So.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so I,
in, in the, in a scenario where
the value is a million dollars,
but the landowner purchased it
decades ago for 300,000. They've
gotten lots of rent off of it.
Their current rent per month is
200.
Let's say it's 200 utilities
included, maybe it's 300
utilities included, and they
only want to, um, they, they're
fine. They want to go to the,
the folks who own the homes and
say, let's figure out how after
you purchased this from me, I
want you to be able to keep the
current rate or maybe just a 10
or 2 or 3%, and I think she said
2% is what it usually goes up.
So I, that means you would
figure out what it would sell
for and someone would have the,
the capital.
tax deduction on the difference.
Explain how that would work if
they wanted to work with these
folks on a fixed income to own
the land to collaboratively and
how would the capital gains
work?
Um, so in rough numbers, let's
just say that, uh, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, let's
say that the, you bought it, uh,
5 years ago and you paid
$500,000 for it. You're going to
sell it either to the residents
or to somebody else.
And um
You sell it for a million
dollars, so you're taxable
income would be 500,000 and
capital gains, I think it's
currently around 20% if I
recall. And so that would then
be $100,000 that you would not
have to pay in taxes if you, if
you sell it to the residents.
Where if you went to a, um, a
third party non non-residents,
you would have to pay that. So
that's, that's a pretty good
incentive. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but also the
residents would be seeing the
benefit because they would be
getting it at a, at a lower cost
or.
They would, they would be
getting it, no, they'd be
getting it the same price, but
they would, they would have a,
a, an owner that's going through
that process that really wants
them to buy it because he's
being financially rewarded if he
sells it to him. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
for your amendment. I wish it
was friendly. There is further
debate on the amendment. Did you
leave from Bernalillo,
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
well, the gentleman from Chavez,
I think, um, Travis County
yield.
I will gladly yield to the
gentle lady from Bern Leo.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
uh gentlemen.
Um, I appreciate your optimism,
um, gentlemen, um, that the, the
homeowners could actually of of
this this of their mobile home
lots could actually buy um the
properties, but I want to give
you a real life scenario that
happened and I was involved with
in Albuquerque.
Um, and I'm surprised actually
that nobody has mentioned it.
It's the Del Rey Mobile Home
Park, which was located over on
Louisiana was a 58 acre lot.
Of uh mobile homes which was
affected. Are you familiar with
that mobile home park, um,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, I'm familiar
with the area. I'm not sure if
I'm familiar with that
particular part.
Well, um,
About I guess maybe gosh time
flies 20 years ago almost, um,
there were approximately 30
families living in this mobile
home park, uh, located in the
northeast Heights. There are
about 400 individuals that were
affected by this mobile home
park, removal and um basically
what happened is the um owner of
the property decided
that they wanted to build a
condominium town home, um,
Development and move the mobile
home uh owners out and in fact
the um.
Notified the mobile home park
owners that they that they had 6
months to leave their
properties, um, and to relocate.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, as you mentioned earlier,
some of you folks mentioned many
of these individuals were
elderly, handicapped, um, people
who had been living there for
I don't know, maybe 30 years or
so, um, would you imagine that
that probably hit those mobile
home park owners, uh, by
surprise.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I, I
have no doubt it hit them by
surprise and had this bill been
in place, that probably wouldn't
have happened or certainly had a
lot less chance of happening
because it would have
incentivized those property
owners to sell to the residents.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, I, I
truly think that this bill is
really a groundbreaking bill
because it does require a
notification and it does require
certain things, certain guard
rails as we mentioned.
Um, that, you know, help.
Some of these people along in
terms of relocating their homes.
The problem is that when you
have 30 year old, um, 25 year
old.
20 year old, 15 year old even
mobile homes that now you have
to move oftentimes those mobile
homes are in disrepair and the
um the acquisition of those
homes is not easy because
they're, you know, unfortunately
they're old and they're very,
very difficult to move, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Um, so
what ended up happening is that
because they did.
Give them 6 months to move,
which is kind of like your
amendments, what your amendment
is stating is that it would be 6
months. Is that what I'm
understanding, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen? Uh, Mr. Speaker and
generally, know the, I'm
basically following this, the
same sorts of time frames if I
recall, um, it, it just, um, so
the time frames the same, it's
just whether it's, um, it's
required or incentivized is, is
really the, the, the key
difference.
Well, I guess.
And that's why I probably can't
support your amendment because
really they gave them 6 months,
um, and you're in your
amendments, you're, you're
talking about 6 months, so
really, um, the carrot is really
not a carrot.
In my mind
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
actually I'm not giving him 6
months to move out. It's, it's
the, um, it, it, it tracks the
the same bill. It just, it just,
uh, incentivize incentivizes
them to enter into negotiations
with the residents.
So Mister Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, those individuals were
actually because they could not
move their own mobile homes,
many of them, they were offered
between 5000 and 6.6 uh 60,500.
That was what the developer
basically gave them for their
mobile homes and the developer
moved many of those mobile homes
out, um, in this particular
situation because the appraisal
of those mobile homes would have
come in at a very low, probably
not even at 65 or $6000. So, um,
When I think about your
amendment, uh, you know, and I,
and I.
I really think that it would be
wonderful if these individuals
could organize and they could
actually buy a mobile home park,
but the reality is, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that these
individuals probably don't have
the means to do that. So, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, for
that reason, I have very, I, I,
it's just not a realistic
amendment in the fact that.
You know
These individuals were kind of
hit from uh left field and not
only that, their age, uh,
oftentimes their ability to go
and purchase a, you know,
Um,
Take out a loan that would allow
them to buy in, and in this case
it was a 58 acre.
Parcel
Um, was just not realistic. In
fact, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, some of these, um,
Some of the city of Albuquerque
was involved in this because we
became aware of it at that time
I was working for the city and
we came to find that um
Many of these families there was
an affordable um component to
this new development that they
were proposing, but
This the financing fell through
and they were not able to take
advan advantage of those.
New affordable housing units, so
many of these individuals had to
scramble to find new housing and
new, a new situation, so for
that reason Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it, it would be very
difficult for me to to support
this because I do not think it
is realistic.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I yield my, my
time. Thank you. There is
further debate from Chavez,
Eddie and Lee.
Representative, Mr. Speaker, I
respond
Representative, Mr. Speaker,
usually not, um, so we'll go to
the next debater.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, with
the gentleman from Chavis County
Ye, I will certainly yield, uh,
to my friend from uh Chavis City
and Lee.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, I too stood
up in support of this, uh,
amendment.
I have a different, as you do a
different outlook and.
Then, uh, the
The original
Drafters of this legislation had
but.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, wouldn't you
say that the original one?
Gives all the incentives.
To the
Trailer park owners and mandates
all the.
all the
I don't know quite how to put it
mandates to the, it's a mandate
against my private property
rights is what I take it as the
original bill.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I would agree with that.
Thank you, uh, represent Mr.
Speaker, uh, if I may.
To address one thing that the
lady, gentle lady said a while
ago about the 6 months.
Uh,
I was reading in there for our
current law says that if I have
a mobile home park, uh, that is
all I have to do is give 6
months' notice.
If I'm gonna to change from a
mobile home park to anything
else. And is that true,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's my understanding. Mm.
So actually
Uh, the residents of these
parks, when they moved their
trailer in what
What is the process of getting a
Uh, a space in a mobile home
park, you know, represented Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, it's been a long time
since I've done that, but I
remember, um, kind of in my
early twenties maybe, um, late
teens, early twenties, uh, many
times when I was working in the
oil field I was living in in uh
mobile home parks and trailers
and that sort of thing. And so
when I recall is you simply go
in and negotiate a lease
agreement with the property
owner, sets out the monthly.
Grant and he's paying for
utilities and much like you
would, uh, uh, renting an
apartment or, or a home, um,
sometimes they will have a
mobile home there that is
included as part of it. Other
times you rent the, the ground
lease and then you bring your
own home in, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, thank you, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker. That's exactly how
I understand it also. So these
residents
No,
when I
For their trailer in or buy a
trailer and set it there. They
know that they.
Our only renting.
Our leasing a place to put it.
They have no
Property rights to that piece of
land. Is that true, Mr. Speaker?
That's my understanding, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Uh, gentlemen, that's what I
like about your bill. It gives
the residents to be proactive if
they
In negotiating a deal with the
property owner.
And gives him an incentive to
sell to them and that what your
And gives him an incentive to
sell to them and that what you
intends to do, representative,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's exactly what, what it's
trying to do.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So
instead of putting all the
burden of, of this transaction
on the, the property owner, it
is moving the responsibility.
To bring this forward to the
residence of the trailer mobile
home park. Is that true?
Uh, that's true, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, and it also
is one of the reasons that I
approached it the way I
approached it is, is that this
approach will probably will in
all likelihood survive judicial
challenge. The original
legislation and it's impairment
on property rights from
discussions with people that
know a lot more about property
rights than I do, some, some
pretty top-notch lawyers say the
other approach probably won't.
It's the takings.
Thank you
and thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
that's my understanding also.
It, uh, as we said in committee
to start with, my main objection
to this was
All the mandates they put on
people that actually own the
property.
When uh winners of that have
signed an agreement, agreeing to
the terms of their lease or
rental agreement. With that uh
uh yield the floor.
where the lady from Santa Fe Los
Alamo Sandobarresentative
Chandler on the amendment.
Thank you thank you very much,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentleman
from Chavez County yield
will yield to the gentle lady.
Uh thank you. Um, one to pull
the thread a little bit on the
tax issue and, and, and, um,
allowing the seller of the
mobile home park if it's to the
residents to receive a what
could you explain that again? A
full, um, waiver or deduction
for the capital gains, is that
right? um, exemption?
or deduction, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
that so the seller, the, the
property owner, um, whatever
they're, uh, taxable income is
being basically the profit from
what they paid to what they sell
it for, um, last he allowed the
expenses of deductions and that
sort of thing. Um, I, I, I'm,
I'm a little unsure on the
current capital gains rate it's
either 18 or 20%, so 20% makes
it easier.
So whatever that capital gains
rate is would be used as a
credit against your state taxes
and it'd be a credit, not a
deduction.
OK, so it's basically a direct
payment, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, gentleman from Chavez. Um
I, I, I, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentle lady in a sense, I, I
guess, um, I would look at it
this way if I have a $10,000 tax
bill, and I've got a $5000 tax
credit, then I would be writing
a check to tax and rear for
5000, not 10 and then getting 5
back. Exactly. So that's, um, an
important distinction, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. So, um,
I, I didn't catch your answer,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in terms
of what the fiscal impact, what,
what fiscal analysis have you
done, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and general
lay, I don't have any fiscal
impact, um, so it's, it's a
little hard to estimate, but you
don't see these transactions
happening, um, a lot, at least
I'm not reading about them. Um,
so I would think that it would
be, um, a relatively minor um
budget impact in, I think given
that we currently are running
surpluses or $2 to $3 billion a
year, the, the state should be,
uh, should be fine. OK well
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. You know,
I just wanted to point out it is
there will be a fiscal impact.
We shouldn't be passing
legislation on a tax-based, um,
proposal without a fiscal
impact, and I would point out,
um, also, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that although this
might be an interesting
approach, it's not necessarily
the only approach both could
apply, meaning the bill as
presented by the gentle lady
from Berna Leo, which I think
has great merit, could could.
pass and should pass, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and next
year when we have a, you have a
better handle and we have a
better handle, Mr. Speaker, on
what the fiscal impact is and so
on. One is not necessarily
exclusive of the other and with
that I end and it is not a
question there, Mr. Speaker.
All right, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House floor Amendment number 1
to House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House 426. We are on a
motion to table House floor
amendment number 1 to House
commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for our 426, a vote of yes in
the amendment is tabled a vote
of no, we're back in the
amendment 32nd book clock. The
vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
The borders are closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 23 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 1 to House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 426 has been
tabled.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I've
been told by one of my
colleagues that there's been
less than 100.
Uh, mobile home parks sold in
the United States. So the fact
that it would, uh, perhaps have
a large budget increase or
budget impact on New Mexico. I,
I don't think is, is logical or
correct. Um, I'd also note that,
um, that the circumstances that
were described in the regarding
the Albuquerque um uh park.
Those circumstances wouldn't
have been changed, um, by, uh,
um,
Uh, this bill, um, or, or, or
even, or even the amendment if
people are of the opinion that
the residents will be in no
position at all, um, to secure
the financing through the owner
or through some other
traditional source. And if
that's the case, then, um,
neither one of these approaches
will really, uh, work, but at
least mine, um, with the, uh,
collaborative approach, I think
has a better chance of working.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker.
Right, there is further debate.
The gentleman from Katherine
Grant Hidalgo represent
representante rasas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady please yield.
I yield to my friend from
Katherine Grant in Hidalgo.
I thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
You know, so I was listening to
the debate and um you know,
we're friends, so I'm gonna send
it as friendly as I can, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um.
I, I, and I don't know if you
heard, I'm sure you heard me
when I said, I just, I'm not
comfortable with.
With us coming around and saying
this is taking away your
property rights, the rights that
you have on how you sell things,
and I, I, I struggle with that
because what I was trying to say
earlier.
Is they can do that right now. I
mean, nothing stops him from
purchasing it now, would you
agree with that, general, uh,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, gentle
man, yes, uh they can definitely
purchase currently, however,
that is generally not really
offered as an option.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, this would, this would be an
option because you're making
this a first right of refusal,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, but
that's what we would be
legislating if this passed with
the timeline and so forth, but
currently right now if the
The, the residents or the
leasees, the, the renters got
together and said, hey guys,
let's get together. Let's talk
to Mrs. Smith and see if she'll
sell the the park to us. It
could happen right now, right,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
um, however, I think as we've
heard from some other folks in
this body, um, who have gone and
and tried to do that, folks
generally don't say they want to
do that. Oftentimes because they
don't know, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I think Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, it seems
like quite a big feat to come up
with $2 million or $5 million
even for a park, but what this
allows is for those folks to be
able to obtain CF.
funding from CDFIs from banks,
um, to form an entity, Mr.
Speaker, and, uh, gentlemen.
But again, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, as responsible as I can
say it, um, that's what I was
saying earlier is chicken or the
egg what comes first and so do I
uh my force as a as a owner of a
mobile home park to.
be forced to ask them or can and
or what would you just the same,
I mean, it wouldn't change
anything else if they, if the,
the lease or the renters said,
hey, let's get together, let's
get it now there's there if this
legislation didn't pass.
10 people could get together or
20 people could get to the other
or or I'll make it in
percentages, 10%, 20%, 30%, it
wouldn't have to be 51%. It
would just be they could just
all get together and, and take
that option. Would that be the
case, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
gentlemen, um, yes, that could
definitely happen. Uh, however,
I don't really see a lot of that
happening in our community, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, do you
know why?
No, go ahead and tell me, Mr.
Speaker, gently.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think it's because we don't have
these type of laws and in New
Hampshire, for instance, where
they've had them for 40 years,
um, 30% of the communities in in
that state are resident owned,
so Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
gentlemen, uh, really what, what
we have here is a piece of
legislation that still allows
the property owner to get the
best deal that they can on the
market, um, but does require
them to provide notice, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, General, lady, the,
the reason I thought you were
gonna say the reason it's not
happening is because they can't
afford it.
Um, because this is a big
undertaking, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, in order for them to, and
I'm not trying to beat it up.
I'm gonna be honest with you,
I'm not trying to be a jerk. I'm
not trying to be
uh it's not just your friend,
you're a good person this this
people wanna help people look at
the end of the day, Mr. Speaker,
we're trying to deal with the
housing crisis.
I get that
I think that's a good thing that
we're trying to talk how, how
can we're having good
conversations. This is a good
conversation piece to understand
how do we address.
Housing issues.
The problem is, is that they to
put together a corporation if
you wanna call it a corporation,
a subchapter is if it's less
than 35 people or LLC or you
want to say it's a nonprofit the
end of the day you still have to
write all those uh articles of
incorporation or whatever
partnership you're gonna create
and it's a lot more complicated
and and because of the biggest
problem that I have with this is
if I'm, if I'm trying to sell
it, let's just say I'm 85 years
old and I'm
Done. I want to get out, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
And I just want out and I, and
then all of a sudden they have
this obstacle that I have to go
to the my my to my residence.
Who
Maybe just as nice and
everything but they have to come
up with 30% because that's
normally what you do when you
get a commercial note you have
to have 30% down and depending
on what they are, I have a
friend that just bought one
actually bought 2 of them and
they were going for about a
million, 6 each one, so let's
just take the means of the the
middle of that. We'll we'll just
keep it simple. We'll make it a
million dollars. They have to
come up with $300,000.
To get that to get that loan.
That's a lot of money and I
think I'm, I'm trying to
remember the number of spaces,
uh, I, I wanna say there was
something like 50 spaces,
something like that could be
wrong, but it's just what I
thought so 50 people would have
to come up with $300,000. It's a
lot of money, right?
And so
and at the end of the day, even
if they come up with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
They technically don't own the
land per se where they're on.
They're actually just partners
in a corporation or a nonprofit
and I'm gonna talk about
nonprofits here in a minute, but
they're basically just a partner
in there or a uh or a right a
shareholder.
And when you have a you're just
a shareholder, guess what? Does
that does that, does your rent
go away, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, if you were to, to, um,
If you took the option, let's
just say everything you said
went through.
Does your rent go away, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, no, your
rent does not go away because
you are still under the
operation of a of the nonprofit
or the LLC or whoever, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, the
communities that are resident
owned are not trying to generate
any kinds of profit. They're
simply putting their rents
towards the maintenance of their
utility lines or anything else
that they may need to maintain
in their community and so that's
why in resident owned
communities.
have much lower rates of rent
that increase in one study, um,
increasing by 0.9% annually
versus the market, which is
increasing at 5.9% annually.
I was gonna look up something
but I don't have enough time
because I was gonna do an
amortization. I'm not gonna get
it that deep, but.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, I think
what I'm trying to say is by the
time they come up with a 30%
down and the timeline.
And, and all that.
The biggest obstacle to this is
if you're the 85 year old person
trying to retire and you have a
per person or an entity, whoever
it is that is going to.
purchase it from you.
Already in your hand you've
negotiated this which is is not
that easy, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because they have to see
all your financials, your cash
flow, they have to see if the uh
loan to value will be there. In
other words, they have to either
have a lot of cash in their
hands or they have to go to a
bank that it's gonna and an
appraiser to see that the the
the uh appraisal amount is due
is is valid and, and, and
coincides with the the amount
negotiated. There's a lot of
things that go.
on into purchasing uh a uh
commercial piece of property.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker, General?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, uh,
there is a huge list, um, and
especially in terms of due
diligence for the lender, even
for those banks to be able to
investigate, make sure that that
property is worth investing in.
And so that's what I mean by the
time you go through all that.
The timeline that you're giving,
although it's appreciated, it's,
and you were talking about
changing and all that. The
problem is it takes longer than
that plus to put together your
articles of incorporation or
create um a nonprofit or
whatever to put all those
together it takes time and it's
just.
It takes more sometimes more
time than that. Sometimes things
move up real fast. Sometimes
there's hang ups and then you
have to have everybody on board,
everybody has to sign, everybody
has to have their funding ready
and put in an escrow account.
OK, they have to have all their
money in the escrow account in
order for this sale to commence.
And so that's, that's where I'm
saying it's difficult. I don't
know that if they purchased it
necessarily.
That the rent would go down.
Um, there's no way for me to
tell you that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, without me having a
real example of it, right?
Because I, I don't know what
their current rent is because
you're talking about space rent.
You're not talking about rental
of their of their of their
mobile home it's just the space
so let me give you an example.
My son
Purchase one, he, he, he, he, he
owns a double white on on one of
these parks.
And so you made me think when,
when I did this, but then I
said, this doesn't make I can't,
I can't see how I can make it
work around his his space rental
is 22,200 bucks. I think it's
$200.
OK.
And so if you're buying a park
for.
$12 million.
And you're putting all this down
payment.
Plus you still have to make your
payment because you still have
to service the loan.
Um, I don't know that it would
go down. That's just, that's why
I don't, it's hard for me to say
because I don't know how many
spaces there are. I don't know
how many tenants there are. I
don't know how much the sale is,
so without all those parameters,
this is kind of like a uh an
equation that can't be solved
because there's just too many,
too many, um, uh, variables.
The biggest problem that I see
is for that 85 I'm gonna go back
to the 85 year old person, they
lose their sale.
That is the biggest issue that I
see one of the biggest issues
that I see with that.
Um
And then the other question you
were asked is what happens to
the other 49%.
And what was your answer to
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
other 49%, as we've seen in
other communities, they often
join the co op to be 90 to 100%
of folks who are involved in the
maintenance and making decisions
about the park, um, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, they
don't have that, that's just the
minimum bare minimum that we
need 51%.
So Mr. Speaker, just for
conversation purposes if 51% of
the people came together and
decided that they're gonna take
let's just make it 100, there's
a 100 people, we'll just for
simple numbers and 51 say, yeah,
you know what we can come up
with a down payment and we'll
own the park.
What in your bill protects
The other 49%.
From the 50 51% that just bought
it to say hey you know what 49.
You didn't put any down payment.
You have no skin in the game.
I'm gonna raise the rent on the
49% and I'm going to lower our
rent because we own, we own this
place. What in your bill helps
uh uh that from happening.
Mr. Speaker, and uh gentlemen, I
agree with you that rents will
likely not go down, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, because we do
have inflation and the cost to
repair there that increases and
so as I mentioned for resident
owned communities it's the rent
is still increasing by 0.9%
annually, um, but that is just
very different from the 5 5.9%
annually, that increases for the
sale, uh, when they are
privately owned, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
At the moment, we would, we
would hope that that 49% would
join the 51% and making those
decisions about how the the the
home is managed that park is
managed, and that would be their
incentive to join. Speaker,
gentle lady, and, and we would
hope that they would be able to,
but if they can't afford the 30%
down.
And they're not part of the
group, right?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the way that it works is that
there's a co op or some legal
entity formed and that entity is
applying for the loan, and so,
um, again, the, the whole group
owns that is is responsible for
the loan but it's the entity. So
anyone could join at any point.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, at
any point and that and so.
Try not to make it as
difficult for you as possible,
but what I'm trying to say
without getting real deep into
finance and all that stuff, the
gentle lady is great at finance,
I can assure you I've debated
with her a few times on tax and
she beats me up every time, so I
love that dig deep if you need
to.
So, OK, I like that. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Go for it, go for
it. I love that. So, uh, so 51%
of the people got together then.
What in your bill because you
didn't really answer it. What
prevents them from saying to the
other 49, we own this park.
You pay the rent.
We're going to collect.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
different states have different
protections, um, ours doesn't in
the uh in the, um, spirit of
simplicity that would certainly
be a friendly amendment if you
wanted to make it, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and in one state
in particular actually you uh
are allowed to discriminate if
you're a member of the co op or
not a co op, and that
incentivize the folks to join
the co op, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, the, the, I think
you mentioned earlier the, the
30% and I, I just.
got some information from my
expert that um the, the loan is
actually financed 110%, so they
don't have to come up with the
30%. It's already completely
financed through the CDFIs or
any other loan development.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, where
do you get 110% for a for a uh
this is property that you're
purchasing that's even developed
a little bit, but where is there
a loan that you can get 110%
financing. I've never heard of
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I also have never heard of that,
but what is really great is that
that is how they're able to
purchase the communities is
because these loans are
available for for community
finance development institutions
do provide this type of loan,
um, Rock USA Capital, um, so
there are many different
options.
and that is precisely how they
have been able to purchase these
parks in other states because in
some cases the deal that is
being offered on this end is
even better than the deal that
you are getting on the market.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
need the name of that place
because I'm gonna start buying
up all kinds of stuff if I have
100 if I can take out 110% of
value I have never seen it.
So I'm not sure where you got
that information, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think there may
be some grants or this or that
that mean but there's no that I
have ever seen.
A place that's going to do
commercial, this is commercial.
Um, even the VA will do 100% of
if you're buying a home for
yourself, but, but I have never
seen myself.
Now
I would bet that if I read that,
it would depend on the on the
loan to value it would depend on
the on the uh um on the
appraisal value, I'm sure
there's limits to what that loan
is. I don't see Mr. Speaker,
generally I've never seen where
they're gonna lend you, you,
you're gonna buy a park for $2
million and they're gonna lend
you 220 200 and 2,2002 million
$200,000. It just, I don't.
I've never seen that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
what I'm hearing from my expert
is this is quite common for
affordable housing. So yeah, in
a, in a perhaps you, you know,
we haven't seen that in our in
commercial dealings, um, but in
the interest of preserving this
kind of housing, it is
available, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and happy to sit with
um some of my experts on that.
I, it, it's not a personal that
we're we're we're getting
confused this is, this is not.
A personal loan. This is a
commercial loan and that falls
into a whole different category
where generally those terms and
conditions are made on a 5 year
call. Do you know what can you
explain that to me, Miss? Do you
know what a 5 year call, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
feel free to explain Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what
happens is, is generally they
don't lend um in commercial
generally in commercial it's not
Ly like a normal like when
you're gonna buy a house for
yourself, it's, it's negotiated.
And you can negotiate it.
But in it and it doesn't have to
be a 5 year call sometimes
depending on the on the market,
how it's how it's fluctuating.
It can be a 2 year call. It can
be a 3 year call. I can, I
usually don't see them go
further than 5, so what that
means is in 5 years they stop,
they call the loan meaning
you've got to pay it up or
renegotiate and refinance it
again.
Don't necessarily have to pull
the money out. You just have to
renegotiate your rate again.
So it's not flat, it's not a
flat 30, and that's what you
know I, I'm gonna borrow this
for 30 years, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I'm gonna borrow a
million dollars, whatever, 30%
down with 5 year call and after
about after 5 years then it's
renegotiated right now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, commercial
loans are going about 9%.
That's, that's that's what
they're going rate is.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we're
about to get a little bit
technical here, but nonprofit
CDFIs, so those are the
community development finance
institutions. Their mission is
to provide capital to credit
worthy borrowers, so the, the
bank provides a first mortgage
and the CDFI a second mortgage
that is subordinate to the first
mortgage and if there is a
default, the second mortgage
holder is only repaid after the
first mortgage is repaid.
Who puts a down payment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is
the, it is the banks.
So Mr. Speaker, generally,
that's what I'm saying is, is
their second it's your hunter
that's called um piggybacking.
They're piggybacking bank, you
know, piggyback alone, one on
top of the other, um.
So they can get that done
through a nonprofit where I
would say.
Most likely, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
That that person that's taking
the 2nd position.
Has probably.
Rights to take over the loan in
the first.
There's no way an entity is
gonna come in and say I'm gonna
let you borrow and I'm gonna,
I'm gonna put.
$300,000 or whatever on the on
the table without having some
sort of security or they'd be
out of business, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would say if I
read that likelihood of me
reading it.
The first position would be
taking the 2nd person and 2nd
position has rights to take over
the entire park.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
certainly, you know, defaults
like any other loan commercial
loan is a possibility. However,
what we've seen in the rest of
the country of the 300 parks
plus that have been bought is
very few have defaulted now
refinancing, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, yes, that is
certainly a thing. There was a
case, um, that, uh, our
lobbyists, um, for the mobile
home park folks, um, kindly
provided that showed.
One of those instances, um, in
the past, um, for, for commerce
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
what that showed is that those
uh folks in Massachusetts,
Massachusetts has rent control
for mobile home parks and so
they actually had to apply for a
rent increase in order to
refinance that loan and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
would be just the same way that
any corporate entity would, what
we're trying to guarantee here
is that the owners, the owners
of the homes will have the
need to be able to manage their
park in the way that they see
fit collectively.
And, and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think that that I think
what I'm trying to say is they
are they being 51% if they
purchase it or even if 100%
purchase it they have to come up
with that if they go the routes
that they're going, they either
come up with 3 30% down, go
conventional or conventional
loan which means they just go to
a uh a commercial bank borrow
the money, pay the loan, or
number 2 they go to the
situation where they don't have
the money and a second entity
comes in.
And they then say I'll assume
the second part, the 2nd, I'll
assume that 30%. Let me explain.
So I said you go if
My neighbor here, Mr. Pettigrew
says he's, he's, uh, he's, he's
he's gonna he's gonna cover the
30% and we all here are the, the
renters and we say OK we'll
take, we're gonna write on this
note that we're going to write
that we accept this note. He
says, I'll come in.
I don't wanna make him a bad
guy, but he comes in and says,
I'll assume that 30% position.
With the understanding that if
you default.
I own this park.
That's what I think that is, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the, the
second thing is there's no
guarantee in the bill that if
you that the 51% or 55% won't
raise the rate, the, the rent on
everyone or on the other we'll
say if you keep it up to the
1551 to 49 think that's a
problem.
I love what you're trying to do.
I really do, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I think that's my biggest
issue with it, um, and then
knowing the commercial, the
commercial world and how this
works.
I think if I turn around or any
of us together got together and
said, hey, we're just gonna
create a nonprofit and I'm gonna
explain what a nonprofit is the
difference, OK?
If we all came together and said
we're just gonna create a
nonprofit today and go get a $2
million loan.
It'll be very difficult for
someone to have because there's
no track record of that entity
that's why you're seeing that
second entity come into that
position because they're the
track record and they're the
ones that would probably take uh
um ownership of the park if
there's a default, right, the
last thing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, is people to
understand what a non the
nonprofit situation is.
is all the differences from a
from a corporation to a
nonprofit is they can't do
distributions of money.
So they can't distribute that
those the the the doesn't mean
they can't make any money.
They just can't let it go
outside of of the money that
they've so they have to
accumulate it and hold it for
the intention of what it was
for.
But it doesn't mean that they
can't raise it just means that
they, it can't go out now
doesn't mean that you can't
raise the um.
Um, employees.
rate of pay. So if you're the
president of that place, you can
get higher pay, some, some have
a net zero because of that.
Other ways that you can.
Distribute the money is to have.
Um, another business that's a
regular for-profit business,
let's just say in this park is a
is is the maintenance company.
And you basically as a nonprofit
fund them.
And then you can then take the
money out and distribute it, but
you can't distribute it directly
to the the the the owners so
it's just understanding that how
it's it's situated. I, I think,
I think I, I commend you for
what you're doing. I, I'm sorry
I can't support it just because
it's there's a lot of issues.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I just
have one question for you. Well,
will the gentle lady yield?
I yield to my friend from tax.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, have there been
any um problems with 103rd
exchanges that your expert can
speak to.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
allow me to pull that up
quickly.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
though, first if you can, um, if
you can explain the 10:31, how
many um properties total can you
list for that exchange?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
can, uh, identify 3 properties,
and there's a maximum amount of
money that you can, that you can
go to as well. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, are those 1031
exchanges very common, um, here,
have you or anyone that you know
done one?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I've done several.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
was it difficult or uh I've read
on mobile home um park
university blog posts that
10:31s are difficult for mobile
home park exchanges, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I mean,
if you've had this experience, I
would love to hear it.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
no, they're not that difficult.
You identify your property and
then um within that 40 day frame
period and then you have 180
days to close and typically what
most, uh, I, I would bet that
what most, uh, um, buyers and or
sellers depending on, uh, you
know, if you're not gonna,
you're not, you, you could
either be the buyer or you could
be the seller of the park and
then go put it somewhere else to
use that money to use as well,
so we identify before that uh.
are closing most of the time,
so but my question is if I'm, if
I'm getting ready to buy this
property and so I, I go ahead
and at the same time the owner
is getting ready to sell the
other property and so he takes
an offer from me, but he has to
offer it at the same time to the
park residents, so I identify
this property and identify two
more just in case one of them
gets sold and then another one
doesn't and then the residents
this part go beyond the 180
days.
Has there been any problems with
1031 exchanges and that's what
I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, from at least
from this particular
organization with ROC USA
Capital um they.
They often ask the residents for
an extension for the for the the
contract, um, so that they can
have more time or or they can
use it in the next tax year. So,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
think you know they are able to
move quickly if there is a 10:31
exchange if that stipulated in
the other buyer's contract, the
third party buyer's contract,
um, I wouldn't that they would
be able to move quickly to be
able to finance that Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, because the iris
isn't too lenient on that.
You go beyond that 180, 1, 181
days, you owe.
And so the lawsuit that's gonna
happen because
I'm wondering on this with, with
the residents, uh, at this time
with the owner of that and so
that's my concern with this bill
that and the fact that I think
it takes um as a private owner,
I have every right to do what I
want with that property. And
this bill tries to take that
from me. I asked the residents
of of mine if they wanted to buy
it.
Everybody said the same thing.
I can't come up $300,000 400,000
dollars, whatever that magic
number was so
for that reason, I cannot
support this bill. Good luck.
Thank you.
There's for the debate, gentle
lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Well, the gentle
lady from Berne Leo, you.
I yield to my friend from Santa
Fe. Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally, it, it's been a very
um
Interesting debate, um, and I
just wanna ask a few questions
because
You're my hometown, which is
Santa Fe. We've had some issues
and so I wanna thank you first
of all for, um, coming forward
with this piece of legislation,
um, here in Santa Fe are um.
A real estate
Um, is, I would say valued
higher than in most places in
our state and we've had some
issues. Are you aware of those,
some of those issues that we've
had here, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, certainly in Albuquerque
we've had, I'd love for you to
talk about the ones in Santa Fe.
You, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
well, there is just, there is a
a big um.
Issue regarding those that were
living in in one of these parks
and, and couldn't afford to
leave and had been there for uh.
Up to, I think close to 20 years
or something like that, and
then, you know, right from under
them, they lost.
There
Their homes, um, and I just have
known that this, this, this is
going on, um, all over, but I
just like to say like here in
Santa Fe, we have a really big
issue with that because of the
value of our properties. Is that
one of the factors in why this
piece of legislation came
forward, not specifically to
Santa Fe, but in general, Mr.
Speaker, General, lady Mr.
Speaker, gently, yes.
Thank you for the answer, and
I'm also learning and listening
about different kinds of loan
programs and, and maybe some
concerns around that. If
If somebody were to enter in a
type of loan that you're,
you're, that's um illustrated or
uh mentioned in your bill. Are
there 0% interest loans
available to them now or any
other types of loans that they
wouldn't have to come up with
that high amount of um down
payment, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, as
I understand with these uh with
organizations that finance, like
even the MFA has said, you know,
we're we're willing to work
with, um, these mobile home
parks to be able to develop
continue these um this
affordable housing stock. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, you
know, as I've said, the it is
not that the mobile home park
residents are passing around,
um, a bucket and everyone's
putting in a few dollars in
order to make this purchase.
It is that they are forming an
entity that is then going to
apply for um for loans in order
to be able to do this the same
way that um a private entity
might or a third party buyer
might.
Mr. Speaker, General,
thank you so much. I think that
that is that is a brilliant
solution to this issue that
we're having. And it's one of
the solutions and one of the
issues to our, our community,
um, discussions that I've that
I've had here in Santa Fe, so I
just want to say really this is
this is constructive this is
solution based and if we can, if
we can get this through, then
that gives the people, the
people, the right to to form
their own.
Um,
Like you said, entity so that
they can have, they can be
purchasers themselves, and I
think that that is, that is
powerful and I think that that
is, that is really understated.
If you will, of really um
bringing forward how we can
really solve these problems in a
holistic way and I I think that
this is, this is very
commendable. I know that this is
a background and and uh and
expertise that you do have
yourself, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so thank you for
bringing your expertise to this
piece of legislation and really
moving this this forward, and I
support you 100% and and just
that's what I wanted to say and
really understand that, you
know, through the, the different
loan programs.
As mentioned, this can already
happen, but what this does is it
gives a group together, it gives
them the buying power. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes. Thank you. I appreciate the
the work and I will be voting
for your bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, generally. Thank you,
gentlemen from Chavez, Eddie and
Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield? Yes, I
yield.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady.
Uh, like it's been said several
times we vetted this fairly
rigorously in committee, uh,
then we gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
And in that I made, I think
pretty clear my position at, uh,
do you feel that this is
mandating away my rights as a
private landowner.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
if you're speaking in the legal
sense, I don't. I think some of
these case these laws have been
challenged in other places in
the state courts and have not
been found to be part of the
takings clause, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, could you quote me one
of those where, where
I had to give up my personal
rights on a piece of property
that I had.
Can you give me the legals on
that. Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, um, so the takings clause
states that private property
shall not be taken for public
use without just compensation
and so as I understand it, this
clause only applies when the
government physically takes or
condemns um property for public
use just as you as you have
described, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but here we're not
transferring ownership of the
mobile home park to um to the
government.
Um, we're simply providing the
procedural protections to ensure
that um the residents would be
able to have the opportunity to
purchase, um, Mr. Speaker and,
and gentlemen, so, um, the owner
still would retain full owner
and control over the property
and if the price wasn't the
same, for instance, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, the owner would
um be able to say, you know, I,
I don't want um to sell to these
folks. I want my, the correct
price that I get on the market
value side.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, yes, the
eminent domain is what you're
talking about where the
government takes. But, uh, we're
talking about one private
nonprofit organization.
Mandating to one private
citizen what the rules are in
selling his personal property in
that right, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think the government has the
police power to be able to
create these um to have the
jurisdiction to create the uh as
uh someone put it earlier, the
parameters for how these uh
negotiations would happen, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, the only
way government would have that
right is this we as a
legislature mandate it to them,
is that right, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the right, um, of the property
of the homeowners.
right of the
Property owners, landowners is
who's rights. I'm trying to
defend here today.
Mr. Speaker, and um gentlemen,
um, certainly and, uh, you know,
in Massachusetts is one of the
states where they have this
exact law, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we um actually
modeled parts of this law based
off of Massachusetts and in 1996
their Supreme Court held that
this state law was um was was
not a takings under the US
Constitution and the court
actually said it's difficult to
imagine a
more appropriate and close
fitting method to further the
legitimate interest of the
Commonwealth. The statutory
right of first refusal minimally
limits an owner's freedom to
transfer property so that the
tenants and the the and so that
the tenants can purchase on
substantially equivalent terms.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. You hit on one
of my points there.
Right a 1st, 1st refusal.
That is a right that I have as a
property owner.
And you signed your lease.
If you wanted to write a first
refusal, I should have given you
that right then.
In this law were mandating the
right of first refusal on the
original property owner.
Is that right, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we're uh trying to ensure a
process here that would allow
them to have the opportunity,
the homeowners the opportunity
to purchase, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, you know, the, as
laid out in this in this um
piece of law, the owners still
need to match the price and the
substantially equivalent terms
and conditions as determined by
the owner.
Thank you gentlemen. Yeah, I
agree with that and, and parts
of it I don't mind. I'm not
trying to say that, but in uh
without this law, I as the owner
of the park.
have the right of negotiating.
Prices, so I
My person comes to me and offers
me a million.
Then I have to offer 2 years a
million. Is that true, gentle
lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, you don't have to offer it
to me as a million, um, the
homeowners have to offer the
same price and perhaps we're
seeing the same thing there, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, but I
would argue it is the burden is
on the homeowners to match that
price and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if they cannot then
the owner has a negoti the the
the um.
The then the the owner then
negotiates with them on whether
or not they can agree on other
substantially equivalent terms,
conditions, other things that
could be thrown in. Right, lady,
Mr. Speaker, but
If I put a property up for sale
generating.
I
They offer a million.
But
And
Two months or 30 days later,
somebody offers me 2 million for
the same property.
What does that do to this
transaction?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
is now a better deal, so the
clock would begin again and the
um homeowners would have the
opportunity to um then try and
match that 2 million.
Thank you, General, that's what
I, I thought so, and, in
actuality, we are mandating the
conditions on his
Selling of this property.
One more question, gentle lady,
uh, was brought up by one
somebody earlier current law.
Own property. I have it here
somewhere.
If we make it to
Hard on the mobile park owner.
Current law says,
I can change, I can say I wanna
Turn my mobile park into a farm,
say, gentle lady.
All I have to do is give 6
months' notice.
No counter offers no anything.
And in 6 months, uh, this is law
right now.
I can, whether your bill comes
into effect or not.
So are we forcing
Are we going to force them?
Owners of these properties.
To change use of the property in
order to get the best value for
their land.
Mr. Speaker and uh gentlemen,
um, I, yes, that is true, that
is current law, the 6 months to
change the zoning. However, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
argue, you know, a, a lot of
these parks are selling for
many, many hundreds of thousands
of dollars or millions of
dollars, it would make more
sense, um, from, you know, to
sell the park for the amount
that it is on the market rather
than converted to something
else, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
but certainly it does not stop
them from doing that in the
other body of law.
Thank you, gentle lady, uh.
Several years ago in California
when they were going through a
boom, I had some friends out
there.
They were selling homes.
And they were tearing them down
to build other things. Do you,
do you hear that, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
And as someone else spoke here
today, the one in Albuquerque.
They sold it to build
condominiums.
So I'm sure they sold it because
of the, the value was higher for
one than the other, that true
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
So, uh, gentle lady, we turned
down the
Amendment earlier they would
have gave incentive to the
property owner to sell it to
the, to the people in the mobile
home park and that
was voted down. Is that true,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
that one was voted down.
However, I am certainly open um
to working on a tax amendment
further.
Thank you, gentlemen. Now you
have always been open. I thank
you for that, gentle lady.
But it doesn't change that I
cannot support this bill. I am
adamant on my constitutional
rights, I feel if I own a piece
of property and I have the deed
in my pocket. I have been paying
the taxes. I've been
Doing all the jelling on this
property for 30 years.
That I should be able to do.
with that property as I see fit.
Thank you, gentle lady, with
that all in. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from Berlio Sandoval
Representative Keats.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, does
my gentle friend from
Bernalilloyd.
Thank you so much uh for
bringing this forward. We've had
a pretty robust conversation in
the last several hours, so I
just want to um be able to
review some of the issues that
we talked about, uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Um,
So do do you know how to, how,
how does one purchase a
manufactured home, a gentle
person, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Um, the manufactured home or the
man or the park, a manufactured
home. Well, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, you are a real
estate agent, so, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, you
might be able to tell me better,
but I believe um the homes are
listed.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentlemen, but as a
realtor, I will tell you a
manufactured home is not real
estate.
It is, it is just a personal
item in which you go and you put
your credit and you make
payments on, it does not become
real estate until it is on a
concrete foundation permanently
hooked up, it has to be the
tires have to be locked so it
can't be moved, and then it has
to be tagged. Were you aware of
that, uh, general person, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a dental
person, um, in some ways, yes,
in some ways no.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
thank you um dear friend. I, I
just mentioned that because we
talk about the difficulty of
moving older manufactured homes
if the lot underneath them
becomes more expensive. What I'd
like to bring to the body's
attention is that if you have a
manufactured home and you have
put it into a park with
facilities with utilities,
concrete pad, you may be making
a mortgage payment on it, all
you
have to do is move it once, and
it is no longer eligible for a
mortgage. Do, are you aware of
that, uh, general person, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, gentle
person, um, this is really great
information.
Yes, uh, gen, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and, and thank you,
dear friend. It is a very
difficult for an owner of a
manufactured home because once
they move it, they no longer
have resale value in a uh in a,
in a lender or a mortgage area,
they must be able to sell it for
cash or payments as they would
sell their car or any other, um,
thing with um that is movable
with.
And so I believe that this makes
the individuals who are uh
renting their land underneath
their manufactured homes,
especially vulnerable, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General Person, I know
that you have many
vulnerabilities in there, but do
you agree that that is a
substantial vulnerability for
these owners Mr. Speaker and and
gentle person, yes, certainly.
So thank you Mr. Speaker person.
I want to bring to the body's
attention that this is a
relationship of trust like all
business where if I put my, if
I'm lucky, my $100,000
manufactured home might be a
$250,000 manufactured home, but
my $100,000 manufactured home in
your manufactured home park and
yes, I have agreed to pay for
that rent. I may even do part
with the utilities and the trash
removal, but
I have put my investment of
$100,000 in a place that I can
then go to a bank and get it
mortgaged to pay off the high
interest payment loan from the
manufactured loan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and general person.
I just, we heard from the body
that we've learned a lot about
loans, uh, this, uh, this, uh,
debate and so I wanna make sure
that we understand how it is to
purchase this kind of um home
for yourself.
Mr. Speaker and and gentle lady,
certainly I think you're
touching on a really important
point here which is that folks
who purchase manufactured homes
invest in it the same way that
they would love and care on a
home that they owned on a piece
of land and, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I think the purpose
of of this bill is to be able to
continue to preserve those
communities. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you, I
absolutely agree. So just so the
body understands if I go to,
I'm, I'm, I'm in the central New
Mexic
area. So if I go to Central to
manufactured home place and I
buy my manufactured home at an
unbelievable discount of only
$100,000. I may be paying 12 or
15% interest because I'm making
an interest payment that is like
any other vehicle, um, Mr.
Speaker, general person, were
you aware of that?
Mr. Speaker and gentle person,
yes. So thank you. So now I'm
gonna move my manufactured home
to a piece of property and have
to have a concrete foundation, a
hook up to utilities and um and
this is called decertify it.
Take the, put the tag on it,
lock the wheels so it can't be
moved. So then I can take it to
a lender and mortgage it for
more reasonable interest rate in
a smaller long term, uh, thing.
Are you aware of that that's
the process so that you have
long term investment in your
home, Mr. Speaker, gentleperson.
Mr. Speaker and gentle person,
um, yes, certainly that the that
the the homes are as you're
explaining now are even more
difficult to to move than we had
originally thought, um, not just
in terms of the cost
prohibitiveness, but also in the
way that they're financing that,
Mr. Speaker and gentle person.
Yeah, thank you Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentle person and it's
just the lenders are just the
same reasons why we talk about
how difficult and vulnerable.
moving them can be, that is why
a lender will not mortgage them
because they don't know how well
they will be moved. It is, it is
a reasonable, um, uh requirement
from a lender, uh, Mr. Speaker.
So let me just understand
because we've heard a lot of
information about this bill, and
I just want to clarify so the
individuals who are living in
the in the scenario, the, the
bill, Mr. Speaker, the scenario,
uh, the
manufactured home residents of
the park. Do they just approach
the owner of the park, hey,
we've decided we would like to
purchase this park or is the
owner of the manufactured home
park, um, in negotiations, in
conversations with uh another
buyer and that your bill
requires them to also notify the
residents are both those true or
only one of them, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, what the bill does is it um
once uh this bill kicks in once
an offer has been made to
purchase the park, um, that the
owner intends to accept and if
they intend to accept it, then
they do need to give notice.
However, in our conversations
with the commerce Committee, we
have added a provision that
other states um use very often
um to secure the deal which is
when they are allowed to sign a
a purchase terms and agree.
um, but that it must specify
they will go through with the
process of notification.
So thank you Mr. Speaker, thank
you gentle person. So if I owned
manufactured home park and 51%
of the residents would like to
purchase. They can't force me to
sell it unless I've already been
in conversation with somebody
with an intent to sell, correct,
Mr. Speaker, Generalperson?
Mr. Speaker and gently uh
person, yes, they cannot force
you to sell it. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I'm glad we
clarified that, um, uh, really
appreciate that gentle person so
now that we have that, um, we
understand, we heard a lot of
concern today in our debate over
the residents in the
manufactured home park concerned
about their access to funds
concerned about the legitimacy
of their lender.
And they're, uh, and they're,
uh,
Interest rates, um, we've heard
about whether or not they're
able to be able to meet their
deadlines, Mr. Speaker, gentle
person, so the structure of
this, uh, this bill, it was um
it was created with social
workers or lenders, Mr. Speaker,
gentle person.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
person, do you
uh, the way that we drafted it,
Mr. Speaker, John Per the
timelines with the accesses to
the lenders there was a lot of
concern for the residents of the
manufactured homes in this body
about those individuals not
being able to meet those
deadlines that they were
unrealistic. oh and that they
were not being able to have
access to the loans in which you
speak about in the bill, where
are you finding the information
to put that in the bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle person. Mr.
Speaker, and gentle person, yes,
we have.
been in conversations with
lenders, and conversations with
um organizations that work with
folks and with the folks
themselves who are in the
properties and um including uh
lenders such as the MFA, um, and
Rock Capital USA.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and the
general person, I'd just like to
say I am um
I am very, uh,
I'm very pleased that a member
of this body has uh the ability
to create an opportunity for its
people instead of uh an uh
reasons why they cannot do, it
is very hard lift, Mr. Speaker.
You're talking about 51%
creating themselves company LLC
or nonprofit, being able to get
a land, uh, uh, are you
familiar, Mr. Speer generally,
when you want to purchase a
commercial
piece of property. Do you know
what the
I don't know, the first
communication is to the owner of
the property, Mr. Speaker,
General Person.
Mr. Speaker and gentle person,
um, please do tell.
Thank you, gentle person. It is
a letter of intent and so uh if
you were buying a residential
home, you would do a purchase
agreement or an offer, but a
letter of intent, and it may
only be one page, it may be a
30-page document, but it's a
well researched. It is a legal
document, so you, this uh group
this residents group that you
are theorizing in your bill
today they're just not.
Coming to the owner saying, I
want to purchase this. They have
to develop an answer in a legal
document which is a letter of
intent, which means they already
have had to talk to their
lender, get their 51% together
probably if either already
created the LLC or nonprofit or
at least started the paperwork
on that, would that be an
accurate, um, timeline, Mr.
Speaker person.
Mr. Speaker and gentle person,
um, yes, that would definitely
be an accurate timeline, and I
will add, um, uh, you know, some
of these purchase agreements as
as I've learned from the mobile
home park um university, uh,
which provides a template it
does say in their purchase
agreement that you know the
purchaser may cancel this
agreement for any reason at the
sole discretion of the purchaser
within 60 days of acceptance and
then an additional 30 day period
in the event the purchaser does
not obtain a loan, so Mr.
Speaker and dental lady, as I.
And, um, the way you're
describing it as the park owners
would or the homeowners would do
is the same way that uh you know
a very similar way that it it
happens in a commercial real
estate setting.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and thank you gentle person. I
hope you share that link. I'd
like to go to the mobile home
and Park University as well. I
think I could learn some things
and so thank you for sharing for
that resource with us today, um,
thank you Mr. Speaker. So when,
um,
So I will say that.
Are you aware of other business
contracts for real property that
occur.
That let's say 30 days into the
contract, you haven't closed it,
but you're in contract.
That the seller is able to go
back to the buyer and say, oh, I
found another buyer for a
million dollars more and then
there's an adjustment made, Mr.
Speaker, uh, general person.
Mr. Speaker and gentle person,
I'm not sure. I think it would
depend if it's an option
contract and whether there was
good consideration.
Oh yeah somebody's in law
school, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
so much. I think that that is
probably the more accurate
answer, Mr. Speaker, General
Per. And so yeah, I think that
this bill is very generous with
the seller as well because it
gives all those different, so
Mr. Speaker, General Person, is
part of the, what this reminds
me of in other cities that may
have.
rent control in a large
buildings and apartment
complexes, when a new owner to
that building comes and rents
are skyrocketed. They have the
ability to purchase the building
and turn into a co op. Mr.
Speaker Generalerson, it's very
similar only a different type of
land, but I find this to be a
really unique approach, Mr.
Speaker, General Person. We, did
you look into how buildings
become
opps in larger cities, Mr.
Speaker, generally, yes, I've
heard of this.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. General
person, I just wanted to clarify
for the body because we heard a
lot of different information out
there. I wanted to make sure
that we understood where we're
going and thank you very much,
very much, and thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you. There's further
debate, gentlemen from Montero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
I guess it's the luck of the
Irish that I get to debate my
good friend here on Saint
Patrick's Day. So with the
gentle lady please yield. Yes,
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
neighbor from Otero. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I
actually
First of all, I, I researched
this mobile home university, and
I found this Associated Press
article about it.
And it was actually kind of not
very flattering about it, so.
Have you read that?
Mr. Speaker, and um gentlemen,
yes, I think some of the tactics
that mobile home, the mobile
home university uses um are, are
not, uh,
That nice, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So yeah, I do think
they have had some negative
press, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, this is um where a
lot of people go to get
information on how to actually
invest in a mobile home park,
how to make this part of an
investment portfolio and etc.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I think that is.
Good that they have some
information, but some of it
like, I believe one part was
they urged people to raise rents
relentlessly, taking advantage
of the fact that mobile home
residents can't afford to move
their home. It also says
something about openly
discussing how raising rent by
$50 in a 100 or 100 space park
can yield up to $60,000 extra
annually, things like that such
as uh after buying a park they
recommend removing amenities
like pools, playgrounds.
laundry rooms and venting
vending machines to cut costs,
despite these services being
essential. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I just would
certainly hazard anybody to
check out Mobile Home
University. There's also a
competing one called Mobile Home
Park Academy, apparently, so I,
I think this fake university
thing is getting out of hand
when it comes to this, but it's,
it's very interesting. Anyway,
I'm gonna stick to your bill
now, uh, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I did have some questions
because I was wondering one big
question that I did have.
Was about the individual's
finding a backer to help back
their cause, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm wondering if
there's a concern for a
potential nefarious group of
actors to frontload this money
to these residents, and they
could potentially be like cartel
members, for example, and some
of those, some of those trailer
parks, trailers could be used as
like stash houses and stuff. Uh,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
there any
parameters to ensure that these
nefarious actors are not
anywhere near the process of
buying these parts.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
that is certainly a very
creative scenario that could
happen, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, you know that those
kind of nefarious financing
mechanisms, um, you know, lone
folks who are loaning still have
to complete due diligence on the
property. They still need to
ensure that um they, you know,
go through the whole 90 days,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so we
would also expect that the um
the the.
The person who is selling the
park would, you know, say, hey,
you know, these terms and
conditions are sort of strange
or no, I, I don't know this, so
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think there's time built in
there for the owner to be able
to tell um to understand better
who they're selling to.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I know that
when it comes to a nonprofit,
for example, we don't really
have any financial documents
other than a 990, and if it's a
brand new C3, for example, or
something, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I'm wondering how
that individual would be able to
vet that company if it was
created in such a way that it
was exempt from taxes, so there
was nothing that they could see
when it came to the source of
the income.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so it's not nonprofits and, and
I should have clarified this,
it's, it's not the nonprofits
who are lending, um, it's, it's
like Rock USA for instance, is a
nonprofit, but they have Rock
USA Capital, which is a
different organization that um
can pull from many different
sources to bring a loan together
and to execute these
transactions. Um, so Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, there would be
information on that, um, at
least RoC USA Capital has
invested over $400 million.
to these um into parks around
the country and that our
resident owned communities, um,
that's what ROC stands for
resident owned communities and
really uh their mission as the
nonprofit side is to really
ensure that residents are able
to continue to control their
destiny, um, on the asset that
they've bought based on the land
underneath them.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I also read uh
I believe there were minutes
from a meeting regarding the,
the Massachusetts.
One and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that one had essentially
the bank strong arming the park
to raise rent by $450 a month
just to cover the payments to
the bank. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, are there any
provisions in here that would
Keep these banks from doing that
midstream once we've, they've
already made the purchase and
then later on these people, a
lot of them are living on Social
Security, how would they be able
to
Be protected from something like
that after the, the completion
of the sale.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
do know which case you're
referring to, um, and in those
minutes from that meeting, that
was at the Massachusetts rent
Control Board and um as I
mentioned earlier, Massachusetts
has rent control and so they had
to petition to raise their rents
in order to cover and refinance
their um their mortgage.
however, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I will report
that that community is a ROC USA
capital community and um that
they were helping with the
financing of that and that.
Um, yes, we're not saying that
in these communities um once
they're owned that the rents
will not go up. However, what
we're saying is that when the
residents get to control their
destiny, their rents go up much
less, so 0.9% compared to the
normal 5.9% or in some cases
here in Albuquerque, 27% over
the course of one year or in
some cases in Santa Fe 90% over
one year.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I do
not contest those facts because
the rent is too darn high. I
don't want to curse on the
floor, but the rain is too dang
high. Maybe let's go with that
one.
Yeah, it's a good word, Mr.
Speaker. Yeah, it's good. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
it comes to the actual rent,
renters getting to that 51%. How
do we measure that threshold and
then what if they've hit 51% and
then somebody reneges on.
The deal who's an owner of one
of these trailers, and they
don't want to be part of the,
the buyout anymore. How does
that work in your bill?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
this says is exactly as you've
laid it out, 51% have to consent
that they want to purchase the
part and then the entity is
formed. However, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, what the, the way
that they would then
Go through with the purchase is
that they would form an entity
that would then be able to apply
for the loans and work with the
different organizations, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
imagine it's the exact same way
if someone doesn't want to be
part of a cooperative anymore
they don't have to, um, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, what
we've seen in the real world is
that 90% to 100% of folks join
these cooperatives.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so.
But if they hit that threshold,
they create the entity and maybe
an LLC, some kind of any kind of
tax status then.
They lose one person who made
that 51%, would they still be
able to complete the purchase
sands that person, or would they
have to find another person to
take their place after they have
made that determination that
they have the amount of people
necessary to hit 51.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the 51% has to be provided in
documentation, so there has to
be something written in other
communities around the country.
This is usually a petition of a
of a sort they hold a large
meeting and gathering to
purchase it and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I just wanna back
up for a second because what
we're talking about here is
folks just as uh another
representative said today, these
are folks who own their homes
and had their skin in the game
is their home. It is.
All the dollars, hundreds of
thousands of dollars they've put
into owning the home into making
it look nice and painting it
into putting furniture and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, when,
uh, communities have been
offered this opportunity, um,
in, in some cases if you go door
to door and ask, you know, hey,
do you, would you like to, I'd
like to sell my, my um park to.
A lot of folks don't think they
can come up with that sort of
funding and so we really, that's
why in this bill part of the
notification is to the mortgage
finance Authority.
Um, to the director so that they
can notify other organizations
like Sanman Poverty or ROC USA
or um any other any other
organizations that I wanna to
help organize the tenants into
purchasing their home.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So, so, OK, so MFA
would have like this magical
formula where they create all
these parameters. Would that be
through a rulemaking process.
How would they get all those
details.
Mr. Speaker, and um and
gentlemen, um, I do have one of
my co-sponsors was, uh, is, is,
um, one of my co-sponsors, I
would yield to her right now,
but um she has really been, I, I
really got to hand it to her.
She has really been in
conversations with the mortgage
finance Authority to really
understand how the mechanism of
this would work, um, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, as I
understand it now, um, you know
that those that sort of loan
financing already exists within
the mortgage Finance Authority,
um, it would just be now a.
applied to this form of
affordable housing.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and generally, and do
we have a specific definition
then of what a mobile home park
is because I could see the
potential for a mobile home park
owner to subdivide or to sell
off piecemeal, the property to
avoid this, this, uh.
Situation, so Mr. Speaker,
General lady, would that be
protected in any way in the
bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe in mobile home park law,
you cannot subdivide. There's a
certain number of times that you
can only that you can subdivide
so Mr. Speaker, I'm, uh, and,
and gentlemen, I'm, I'm not
exactly sure, but what I do know
is that a mobile home park is
defined as a parcel of land used
for the continuous accommodation
of 12 or more occupied mobile
homes and operated for the
pecuniary benefit of the owner
of the parcel of land his.
Lucy's or assignees. It does not
include mobile home subdivisions
or property zoned for
manufactured home subdivisions.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm not sure that subdivisions
would necessarily be included in
this um part.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I, I was
seeing that as a potential maybe
they would do that like chop
them up per house. And so no,
it's no longer a park if there's
only one house on the, on the
lot, so I don't know if that's
protected in any way, but there
may be some kind of case law,
I'm sure.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
as it's defined in the
definition of the of the mobile
home park, um, you know, I think
the folks who own these parks,
it makes most fiscal financial
sense to sell the whole park,
um, rather than parceling out
each individual individual
piece, um, and this law would
not apply to that parceling this
law applies when the mobile home
park is being sold.
All right, thank you Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so then
when it comes to the actual
park, what if the person is
filing bankruptcy and the park
is something that they are
filing bankruptcy on personally
or through an LLC or something,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
would that affect this new
process that we're creating?
Mr. Speaker and um gentlemen,
thanks for bringing that up. Um,
we have added several.
Uh, exceptions to the bill and
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if,
if someone did, um, you know, go
into bankruptcy or and the park
had to sell on foreclosure.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
um, that then they would not
have to give notice, uh, because
that is part of the exception.
So if you purchase your park in
a foreclosure sale, it doesn't
apply.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Then next year I'm
wondering, are there protections
against unscrupulous resident
leaders coercing people into
helping them hit that 51%.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, I haven't really heard of
that in other communities, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, of
course, uh, when we're talking
about laws there always fringe.
Fringe cases, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but I think that
would then apply to a different
body of law, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, under a different
statue on coercion and and
criminal statutes involving
that.
All right, and then Mr. Speaker,
and gentle lady, I'm next
wondering about the actual
process.
So
Mr. Speaker, I don't wanna
interrupt. No, you're fine. I
just want to be able to have to
not repeat it.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what about um
I lost my question. Uh, no, uh,
could park owners claim hardship
or sue the state if residents
repeatedly delay or contest the
sale. So let's just say they got
a new offer and then they they
can test it because they have
what, a few, they've, it resets
the clock and then they get
another offer for
$2000 more that would reset the
clock again. Is there any
protection from this continually
delaying the process. Let's just
say it takes a year if they keep
on getting different offers that
go higher and then the park
residents continue to reset the
clock and try to get in there
and buy the park on their own,
right?
Mr. Speaker, and um, gentlemen.
This bill lays out the process
for the what they would need to
go through in order to sell the
park and um Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, actually the clock
reset, we wanted to put that in
case uh mobile home park owner
did get a better deal, like $2
million and it was previously
selling for $1 million. So, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentlemen, you
know, we have some protections
in here for um the owner, for
instance, if the owner the the
essentially.
the substantially equivalent in
price or in terms and conditions
of the of the residents that has
to be determined by the
landlord, the park owner needs
to is the one who gets to say,
you know, hey, I don't think you
know you're trying to sell me a
parka or you're trying to buy my
park at a million dollars and
this guy is offering a million
dollars, $500 that is not
substantially equivalent and,
um, Mr. Speaker and um and
represent a gentleman, I think.
think that, you know, if that
something like that were to go
to a court of law, um, the, you
know, a judge wouldn't say,
well, you couldn't, you, you are
offering a, a very much lower
price than what the um what the
property owner could get on the
market and, and, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that's why we
wanted to ensure that it is the
owner who defines a substantial
equivalent in price.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
if they go to court because they
feel like they are being treated
unfairly, and the judge does
rule in the.
park owner's favor would the
residents then be liable for the
legal fees and the time lost on
that individual who's trying to
sell the property. Maybe
they're, maybe they're trying to
close out somebody's estate, and
it keeps on continuing the
process.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
would certainly be for the court
to determine.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Sounds like an, it
depends, uh, answer, so you are
definitely going to be a great
lawyer, I'm sure.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
I believe next I have a question
about the affidavit requirement,
and I'm wondering if that in any
way violates the privacy for
owners or exposes them to
harassment potentially.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
great question. The affidavit
piece is something that we've
seen in other statutes and what
I um what essentially what we
want to ensure here is that
there is um evidence that the
owner has followed the process
and Mr. Speaker and um
gentlemen, you know, in, in a
court, um, if that affidavit
isn't it when that affidavit is
filed that is then be able to be
used as um.
evidence in that court and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, one of
the reasons why um we've said in
the beginning that the first
class mail is has to be
certified with tracking and the
return receipt requested is
because Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, what I've seen in
um in eviction court is that you
know the landlord will say I
delivered the notice for
eviction and the resident may,
you know, it may have blown off
the door or perhaps the resident
just can't find it.
anymore and so there's no real
evidence to say that yeah, the
landlord actually did give you
notice of eviction and that's
why, um, although it's a bit
onerous, you know, we've
required that it's first class
mail and that, you know, we're
not requiring that the
affidavit, it used to say that
the affidavit shall be required,
um, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, after conversations
with our mobile home.
Um, some mobile home park
owners, you know, affidavits can
cost thousands of dollars,
especially if you're filing so
many, um, individual receipts,
so we made that a a may actually
and change that based on our
conversations with them.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and I,
I also just had some more
questions about
You know, the actual owner,
let's let's just say they die
with an air.
do the residents have a right to
acquire and I'm just wondering
that because I know it, it can
be difficult when it comes to
closing out somebody's estate,
you know, uh, you need a lot of
luck, you know, like four leaf
clover or something, but you,
you need to make sure that the
individual owner is.
If they're alive, then you can
talk to them and try to
negotiate. If they're passed
away, have no heirs, how do the
owners of those trailers in the
trailer park, how do they have
any kinds of protections.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, so if someone were
someone owns a mobile home park
and they were to tragically pass
away, um, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen, um,
As I read in the exception
section, you know, a a transfer
to a family member, the owner of
a trust, the beneficiaries or
which are family members, um,
it, you know, that would, there
would be no required notice of
sale because there is no sale.
It's only a tre it's, you know,
the air is there the error is
receiving their, their, um,
inheritance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I have like so many more
questions and I think maybe
that's, that's why I usually
vote no on bills if I have like
too many questions, more than
answers. And so I know we're
running out of time, so I will,
I will stop there, Mr. Speaker,
but I do appreciate the debate
and uh thank you so much for the
answers from Santa Fe Mr.
Speaker, this matter having been
under consideration for 3 hours,
I moved to close debate. We are
on a motion to close the debate.
All those in favor say aye.
I'll suppose me.
The I have it debate is now
closed, gentle lady from Berlio
to close.
New Mexico's already in the
midst of a housing crisis and
mobile home park residents are
especially vulnerable because
their land can be sold right out
from under them with this bill
we are making sure that New
Mexicans get a fair shot at
coming together to purchase that
property themselves and I know
it is hard to imagine that these
folks would be able to come
together and purchase their
property, but Mr. Speaker, our
duty here is to imagine 30% of
communities in New Hampshire are
resident owned. Let's imagine
more for our
I now move that House commerce
Economic Development Committee
sub for 426 do now pass. We are
on final passage of Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for hours before 26.
The vote is now open.
Well, it's about clothes.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative House commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 426 as
duly Paz's house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
concurrence.
The gentle lady from Berna Leo
Socorro Valencia McKinley, San
Juan, Cibola representative
Abeta.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
that the House concur with the
Senate amendments to House Bill
5.
The gentle lady to explain the
amendments.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. So while
this is not the bill that left
the house, this legislation will
make a critical difference for
our children. There were a total
of 5 different amendments which
changed the composition of the
child advocate selection
Committee. They do modify a few
things from the subpoena power,
but um, it does add that New
Mexico, the New Mexico attorney
general shall develop and
implement procedures to prevent
conflicts of interest.
Additionally, Speaker, the
amendments.
The amendments remove language
that would have allowed the
office of the child advocate to
disclose personal identifying
information if it was already
known to the public. Um,
additionally, there is a
clarification that the advocate
shall be appointed as soon as
practical with the initial term,
um, ending December 31st,
202031. Additionally, uh, there
is a removal of the governor's
authority to remove the child
advocate and places this
authority with the Attorney
general and removes the section.
of the bill that would have
allowed the child advocate to
decide whether to refer a
complaint to another agency or
investigate, uh, finally there
were a few other changes to the
bill that clarify and streamline
language and fix minor
grammatical errors.
Alright, thank you gentle lady.
We have a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to House Bill
5. All those in favor of the
motion to concur signified by
saying a.
All the supposed name.
The eyes have it, the house has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 5.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I will go to that
order of business. 3rd reading
of legislation.
Young lady from Berlin.
Are you ready on item?
Number 37.
Mr. Speaker, the gentleman from
Bernalio.
If you would please get me to
that point. Isn't that what I
said.
I don't think so, Mr. Speaker.
The gentle lady
gentle person from er you. All
right, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
We're, let the record reflect
that we're on final passage of
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 19 as
amended.
And it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 19 requires 10 hours of
training for the Board of
Regents, um, candidates, so with
that, Mr. Speaker, I'll stand up
for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
the Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 19 as
amended do now pass. We're final
passage of Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 19 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 2 in
the negative. Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 19 as amended as duly pass
this House.
It's a gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Nicole
Chavez ready on item number 55.
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point action necessary for
places in Senate Bill 17 is 3
times amended on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Senate Bill 17 follows the
trends of other states and
professional recommendations of
advisory bodies to modernize
aspects of the New Mexico Adult
Parole Board.
This bill does 4 important
things. It introduces the
removal process for board
members with standard guardrails
to protect the political
independence Board.
It modernizes the removal
process for board members with
Standard guard rails to protect
political independence of the
board. It clarifies the process
for cost reimbursement for the
volunteer service for our board
members that they receive and it
introduces uh considered
scheduling practices by ensuring
the hearings will not be
scheduled on the birth or death
date of a homicide victim. I'm
proud for the work that I've
done because the parole
scheduling
will not be scheduled on the
anniversary date of death for
our loved ones.
And with that I stand for
questions.
There is debate. The gentleman
from Otero, Representative
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would my
friend the gentle lady from
Bernalio, please yield.
I really don't want to, but I
yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is this your first
bill?
Yes, this is my first bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess it's gonna have to be a 3
hour debate then. No, I'm just
kidding. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I really appreciate the
changes that we're making to
this parole board, I think you
used the word modernizing.
I usually do not like
modernizing the anything really,
honestly, unless it's like
updating language from 1907 or
something, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I am inclined to
support this bill because I
think that these changes are
good, especially when it comes
to the birth or death date that
we're trying to not do that. I
think re-victimizing these
people by continually bringing
it up on that day is something
very important and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I actually
do in in all seriousness, I
think this is a
very good change to the
legislation. I think it's
something we need, and I
appreciate you for bringing it
forward, and I, I look forward
to the rest of the very lengthy
debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
for debate, the gentleman from
Sandowa, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm I'm
trying to narrow down my
questions so we're not here till
midnight.
Let, let me, let me get to page
6.
Madam Speaker,
I mean, Mr. Speaker.
Nice
Mr. Speaker, kind lady from
Burnley, how, what exact changes
were made to the parole board?
There were no specific exact
changes to the parole board.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, the title is parole and
parole board changes.
So
Um
I'm not sure then what.
What was the purpose of the
bill?
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, are
you asking me a question?
Mr. Speaker.
Lady from Bernnalio.
Here is the question.
We introduced Senate Bill 17,
there were no changes to the
parole board.
What was the reason for the
bill?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from all
those counties it.
Sandoval County. It introduces
practices in discretionary
parole process. It modernizes
the removal process for board
members with standard guard
rails to to protect the
political independence of the
board. It clarifies the process
for cost reimbursement for the
volunteer service of our board
members, which is probably the
biggest part and it introduces
considered scheduling practices
to ensure that the hearings will
not be scheduled on the birth or
death date of a loved one that
was lost to homicide.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady from Bern
Leo, how many board members are
there?
15, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, 15.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and they
all serve staggered terms.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman,
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady. Those will be
the end of my questions.
There is for the debate, you
know from Berlin of de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does a general lady from Berlio
yield.
I yelled one question, is this a
get out a free card?
Get out of jail free card, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, absolutely not, or my
name would not be on it. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Seeing no further debate, that
you need to close.
Speaker.
Good
Oh, I know I did.
Mr. Speaker, I move that Senate
Bill 17 thrice amended do now
pass Senate Bill 17
as trace amended the vote is now
open.
red, put red for now. Put red
for now.
Oh, OK.
I don't want.
I
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Bill 17 is
thrice amended has duly passed
his house.
Congratulations.
The gentle lady to sing or rap.
I remember that song from
earlier.
Just waking up in the morning,
got to thank God. I don't know
what today's seems kind of odd.
No barking from the dog, no smog
and mama cooked the breakfast
with no hug. I got my grub on,
but
out finally got a call from a
bill I wanna vote out, hooked it
up for later as I hit the door
thinking, Will I love another 60
days.
I had to say today was a good
day.
Gentle lady, but did the Lakers
beat the Supersonics? That's
what I wanna know.
the size.
You could see the shifting
generations.
Getting elected to the
legislature with the choice of
songs.
Just this session alone, very
cool.
Let's go next to the gentle lady
from Catherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia, Representative
Armstrong on item number.
28.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to the point director
reflect that all actually
necessary replace Senate Bill 8
as amended our final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. Did you need to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The purpose of this
legislation seeks to enact the
veterinarian medical loan
repayment program and with that
I stand for questions.
Mr. Speaker, I now move that
Senate Bill 8 do now pass final
passage of Senate Bill 8 as
amended. The vote is now open.
Well
What's about to close.
Uh, those two
Mm.
It was terror.
I was getting
present
But I haven't even met my
I
It passed
Your knees.
But it's not closed by 64 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senate Bill 8 as amended as duly
pass this house.
Gentlemen from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia, are you
ready on item 38 to the
PowerPoint reflected election
has served place in Senate Bill
47 and final passenger has been
taken. It is not subject to
debate, amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill Santa Cruz de
la Canna land grant, which
covers the entire 2-mile Valley.
You're seeking to join his 26
sister land grants in chapter
49, Article 1, while our state
statutes.
Classifying it as a bona fide
unit of government, subdivision.
Senate Bill 47 Estima Speaker
Carto finds that fact.
Estiar speaker Santa Cruz de la
Cannada is one of our older land
grants established in 1695 with
66 settlers and their families.
The majority being Indians, and
with that I
It's time for questions.
There is debate, gentle lady
from Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Albuquerque,
Berlio I most graciously your
dear lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
about time.
So you know for the debate,
gentlemen, close.
47 be passed.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 47, the vote is not
open.
Both in
And it's almost over.
What's about to close?
It's kind of weird because this
60 day one.
felt for me personally, a little
faster than the 1st 60 I did.
The water's not closed, but one
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 and
the negative. Senate Bill 47 has
duly passed this house.
Coming from Sandoval, Santa
Martinez, are you ready on item
46?
No
Well why'd you tell me to go
over here?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point?
Presenter.
We go to the other one or you
want to do?
I can do it real quick. The
direct reflect that election is
replacing House Bill 159 as
amended our final passage has
been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 159 requires developers or
owners of renewable energy or
other projects to notify the
chair of the military base.
Planning commission and with
that I stand for questions.
Mr. Speaker, I
Now move that House Bill 159
twice amended do now pass.
Stand by.
Technical technical issue.
I think he got the wrong just
move it on. The votes.
is now
All right
All right, Ms
What song Open.
egg to.
Um
Oh, the 5th dimension. You can
hear it, can't you? I'm singing.
Yeah.
Well, it's about to close, Mr.
Speaker.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Bill 159 is
twice amended as Julia's house.
And lady from Curry Chavez
Roosevelt, Representative Reed,
are you ready in item number 7.
I am Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point for placing
House Bill 102 on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Oh, it's my high school photo.
All right, Megan.
I have nothing to do with that.
I have no idea. Isn't that
beautiful? My high school
portrait 1989.
All right.
um OK, sorry, you got me off
base a little here, um, Mr.
Speaker, um,
The House Bill 102. This bill
fixes an inconsistency in
sentencing laws that I believe
was an oversight by the
legislature from a change in the
DWI law in 2016 by ensuring DW
homicide and reckless driving
homicide or classified
appropriately under the er
notorious Deductions Act, as
pointed out by the New Mexico
Supreme Court without a stand
for questions.
There is a great gentleman from
San Juan, Representative
Montoya.
See no debate General close.
Mr. Speaker, I asked that House
Bill 102 do now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 102. The vote is now open.
Whoop de whoop
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 60 in the affirmative, 04 in
the negative.
60 in the affirmative, 4 in the
negative. House Bill 102 has
duly passed this House.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
Message from the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the House that the Senate
has passed Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 254.
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 278
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 305 as amended and
requests the concurrence of the
house, respectfully submitted
Sherry De Mohan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Senate tax
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 481 as amended and request
the concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted Sherry De
I think
Mm.
So
Um
like
You
Yeah
clerk to read.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I go to if we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation to.
Senate Bill 66, introduced by
Senator Doig, an act relating to
employment, providing that the
criminal offender Employment Act
does not apply to certain
agencies, requiring exempt
agencies to promulgate rules
related to criminal history
screening, declaring an
emergency. Senate Bill 66.
Center Bill 66 haven't been read
twice by title, is referred to
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate tax, business and
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
as amended, an act relating to
municipalities, providing for
the issuance of flood recovery
revenue bonds for rebuilding,
repairing, replacing, and
hardening of municipal property
damaged by a flood.
Creating a municipal flood
recovery gross receipts tax for
the payment of flood recovery
revenue bonds, declaring an
emergency. Senate tax, business,
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
as amended. Senate Tax Business,
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
as amended, having been read to
us by title, is referred to the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
Senate Bill 375, introduced by
Senator Maestas, an act relating
to probation, removing the
payment of the cost of parole
services, allowing a minimum
risk defendant to be released
from probation in certain
circumstances, clarifying
projected release dates for
meritorious deductions upon
admission to a correctional
facility. Senate Bill 375.
Senate Bill 375 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 78, introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to nursing, providing for an
independent role for certified
registered nurse anesthetists.
Senate Bill 78.
Centerville 78 haven't been read
twice by title.
I ordered
I referred to.
The House Health and Human
Services Committee.
Senate Bill 226, introduced by
Senator Munoz, an act relating
to motor vehicles, establishing
a maximum speed limit for truck
tractors, providing a penalty.
Senate Bill 226.
Senate Bill 226 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 411 as amended,
introduced by Senator Brandt, an
act relating to higher
education, enacting the
physician loan repayment Act,
providing powers and duties,
establishing selection criteria
and eligibility requirements,
providing for contracts between
recipients and the higher
education department, providing
for release from contract or
recoupment, creating a fund,
prescribing a penalty, making an
appropriation, Senate Bill 411
as amended.
Senate Bill 411 as amended,
having been read twice by title
is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 120 as amended, an act
relating to health amending
sections of the Healthcare
Purchasing Act and New Mexico
Insurance Code to permanently
eliminate behavioral health
services cost sharing.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 120 as amended.
Senator Bill 120 as amended
haven't been read twice my title
is referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee.
Senate Bill 127 as amended,
introduced by Senator Trujillo,
an act relating to occupations,
providing an exemption to the
barbers and cosmetologists act
for makeup artists and hair
stylists employed in motion
picture productions. Senate Bill
127 as amended. Senate Bill 127
as amended, haven't been twice
by title is referred to the
House Labor, Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 259 as amended,
introduced by Senator Doha, an
act relating to charities,
amending the charitable
solicitations Act to strengthen
requirements for professional
fundraisers and third-party
solicitors. Senate Bill 259 as
amended.
Senate bill 259 as amended have
been read twice by title is
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Bennett
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535,
an act relating to the public
peace, health, safety, and
welfare, increasing fees to fund
the workers' compensation
administration, increasing the
telecommunications relay service
surcharge and transferring the
money from the increase to a new
988 Lifeline fund, allowing the
state budget division of the
Department of Finance and
Administration to approve the
expenditure of up to 100% of the
telecommunications access fund
for
expenses incurred by the
commission for deaf and hard of
hearing persons in administering
the telecommunications Access
Act, making an appropriation.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 535 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate, Senate Bill 456 as
amended, introduced by Senator
Cervantes, an act relating to
the legislature, creating a
permanent joint interim courts
and Justice Committee, providing
powers and duties, providing for
committee staff. Senate Bill 456
as amended as amended have been
read twice by title is referred
to the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Memorial 62, introduced by
Representative Gonzalez, a
memorial recognizing the impact
of the
A memorial recognizing the
impact of the Hermit's peak Calf
Canyon fire on the residents and
communities of northeastern New
Mexico. House Memorial 62.
Memorial 62 haven't been.
Read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House of Rural Development land
grounds and Cultural Affairs
Committee.
And
I
Hi Art, how are you? Did you
like that photo?
89
He lives
My mic is live.
Things like
It is
He's
OK.
We can't retain
might.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business
Members, you may have noticed
that we did not get to two other
bills. It is because we rolled
them at the request of the
sponsors. That is why we didn't
do two other bills, um,
announcements from the floor.
Announcements
Gentle lady from Sandoval, Santa
Fe Los Alamos representative
Chandler. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Your House Judiciary
Committee will meet in 15
minutes in room 309 and there is
dinner available for members.
Members take note.
Gentlemen from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet in room 307
at 6:45.
Members take note, gentlemen
from Sandoval, Santa Fe
representative McQueen.
Mr. Speaker, the House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee will not
meet tomorrow morning. Mm.
B.
Gentle lady from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house commerce will meet 15
minutes after the session. The 4
session and there will be dinner
tonight.
Gentle lady from Taos, Mr.
Speaker, your house agricultural
sector is and natural resources,
water resources committee rather
also not meeting no burritos, no
dinner, nada, nothing.
No bills, nada.
I have a couple of
announcements.
Listen up. Howsville 594 generic
bill.
The number on the on the bottom
of the bill, 231-925.2 sponsored
by Representative Armstrong.
Again, House Bill 594.
231-925.2.
He
is removed from the house rules
in order of business committee
and referred to the House
Judiciary Committee. Again,
that's House Bill 594.
231-925.2.
Sponsored by Representative
Armstrong. It is ordered,
removed from the house rules and
order of Business Committee and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Also, listen up. This is an
important one. House Bill 450,
that is the capital outlay bill.
That is generally usually always
referred to.
House taxation and revenue
Committee.
And I made a mistake and I
referred it also to the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, which is unnecessary,
so with you all's permission,
I'd like to drop that referral
and send it only to the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee
so that we can get that bill on
the floor, voted on, passed,
otherwise our capital outlay
projects would not be funded,
and that would be a bad thing.
See an objection. It is so
ordered.
Any other announcements?
Gentle lady from.
Santa Fe
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
The House will send in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
Mr. Speaker,
Oh
Well, we're gonna have to have
two jokes tomorrow, gentlemen.
Mine was for this day only.
Hello.
Go for it.
Mr. Speaker, why do leprechauns
hate amusement parks.
Why, gentlemen? Well, they're
too short for the rides.
I am part Irish American and I
Speaker.
We're not really in session, but
go ahead and speak to the mic, I
guess.
Mr. Speaker, I, I just wanted to
talk about Saint Patrick.
Who was the 5th century
Romano-British Christian
missionary and bishop in Ireland
known as the Apostle of Ireland.
Primarily patron saint of
Ireland. I just wanted to
recognize him today because we
all have green on.
Members take unofficial note
because we are no longer in
session. Good night.
