Roll calls closed. We have a
quorum. Please rise for today's
invocation.
Presented by the gentleman from
San Juan, Representative Hall
the 2nd.
Everyone bow their heads.
Heavenly Father, we are so
blessed to be here today.
We may have our
Differences of opinion.
With God we know you're in
control.
We know you're here with
everything we do. We lift our
thoughts.
Our emotions up to you, God.
And as we move forward,
Be with us. Watch over us as a
body.
Watch over our great state. May
we do what's right by you, our
Heavenly Father. In your son's
name we pray. Amen.
Well the gentle lady from Berlio
And will the gentlemen from.
Chavez No% of Henry leaders in
the pledge to the New Mexico
flag.
Le
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Gentle lady from Los Alamos,
Santa Fe, and Sandoval,
Chandler.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask
unanimous consent that House
Memorial 111 be removed from the
speaker's table and made the
next order of business, no
objection, it is ordered.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
will try to be relatively brief
election replacing House
Memorial 11 on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or substitution
generally to explain the
memorial.
Mr. Speaker, for 60 years, the
New Mexico YMCA youth and
government program has
cultivated and empowered the
next generation of engaged and
informed citizens and public
servants.
Youth and government provides
students across the across New
Mexico when an experiential
learning opportunity to
understand the processes of
state government.
This program models the
legislature judicial and
executive branches as well as
training students and news media
work and lobbying all
culminating in a 3 day
conference event held right here
at the Roundhouse.
In this program, middle school
and high school students learn
the importance of civic
engagement of voting and of
active participation by the
electorate in our democratic
processes. The program also
helps young people build
confidence in important civic
skills such as public speaking,
learning public policy issues
developing positions on public
matters and advocating those
positions and discussing civic
issues, um, with their peers,
teachers, and
community.
8 of these, um, the New Mexico
YMCA youth and government
program is nonpartisan and this
year counts more than 300
students participating from many
parts of the state, 8 of those
300 students are here with me
today and they will be spending
time with their representative
and senators today, and I will
like to add, Mr. Speaker, I did
visit with a few of the students
this morning and they were so
enthusiastic about the program
and shared a lot of insights
and, and they all want to get
into public.
service, go to law school,
become a doctor, you know, all
of these things that we really
want to, um, embolden our young
people with so thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker. Fantastic. Is
there a debate on how Memorial
11.
The gentle lady from Torrance in
San Miguel, Representative
Gonzalez. um, thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker. Do you yield?
I gladly yield to the lady from
San Miguel.
Thank you so much, um, uh, I too
have the pleasure of visiting
with these young students today
and in particular, um, I do want
to highlight 3 students from
Moriarity High School within my
district that are here today,
um, Mr. Andrew Ritter, he is a
senior at Moriarty High School,
Ms. McKenna Hatton, who was a
junior, and Mr. Daniel Gonzalez
also a senior at Moriarity High
School. Um, these are your
upcoming young leaders. Um, I
actually got to meet some of
them at a school board meeting a
few months ago, um, and just
really offer my support.
for this memorial, um, and also
just want to celebrate all the
achievements of these young
leaders. Thank you so much.
Thank you gentle lady. Welcome
to the house. Any more debate on
how memorial 11, Mr. Speaker, is
this an appropriate time for me
to introduce my 8 students and
some of the adults that are here
or is that they're a different
time? Absolutely. This is as
good a time as ever. All right,
thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Well, we have um, Bella
Blair, who is a senior at Los
Alamos High School.
Liam Perea, senior at East
Mountain High School and the
current YMCA youth governor.
Maya Ramon, a senior at
Albuquerque.
And the Institute for Math and
Science in the current youth
Chief Justice.
Alejandro Flores, senior at
Albuquerque Institute for Math
and Science and a current, uh,
attorney general.
Daniel Gonzalez, senior at
Moriarty High. Oh we already
introduced Andrew Ritter, um,
Miller
Maya, a junior at East Mountain
High School.
And Tanner.
Oh
Also
dobo. Did I get that wrong? I
probably did. I apologize. And
just a few adults that I would
like to, um, who are here with
the students we have the
executive director of the YMCA
program, Hannah Wood, the CEO of
YMCA Central New Mexico, Roberto
Aguilar, CEO of Family YMCA in
Los Alamos, Chris Daniels, the
executive director.
Of the McLeod YMCA in
Albuquerque, Mark Lewis.
And our old friend Bob
Ineo, who I think many of us
know from other things who was
on the board of the YMCA of
Central New Mexico. Um, thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Is there
further debate?
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative of Lujan.
Uh, not on this topic, Mr.
Chair, I mean, Mr. Speaker,
thank you. I was just raising my
hand for the next subject, but
do you support our YMCAs? Thank
you. Understood. Any other
debate? See none generally
close. Oh.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, um.
I move that house Memorial 11 do
now pass.
Uh, oh, and that unanimous
consent of the House that the
records show that the role has
been called and all members
present voted in the
affirmative. members of the
House President and voting in
the affirmative, see no
objection. It is ordered. We're
on final passage of how Memorial
11. The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. Howsmo 11 has duly
passed this house.
Congratulations.
Are there any YMCAs in the
gallery.
If so, please rise to be
recognized. Welcome to the
house.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Donana Sierra and Socorro
Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
ask unanimous consent that House
Memorial 22 be removed from the
speaker's table and made the
next order of business.
See no objection is so ordered
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Memorial 11 on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate. Amendment
or substitution.
How's Memorial 22.
Has been taken, it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the memorial. Yes, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and today I am
presenting a memorial at the
request of Ann Day, who is my
guest today. Um, Anne is.
Ann is an advocate for
strengthening families and as an
adoptive mother of a child from
China, actually. And so, um,
this is just a memorial to
recognize families and the value
and the role that families play
in strengthening New Mexico and
I'd like to ask that the clerk
please read the memorial.
Or 3.
House Memorial 22 introduced by
Representative Dow.
A memorial declaring February
12, 2025, Family Day in the
House of Representatives,
whereas the family is a
cornerstone of a healthy,
vibrant society, providing
essential emotional support,
nurturance, and stability.
And whereas families come in
many forms and are shaped by
diverse cultural traditions,
values and practices across New
Mexico, including the unique
contributions of Native
American, Hispanic, Anglo,
African American and immigrant
communities.
And whereas New Mexico's rich
cultural heritage and traditions
honor family as a central
element of life from extended
family structures to community
networks that support and
strengthen individuals.
And whereas studies have
consistent consistently shown
that stable family environments
lead to greater emotional
stability for individuals,
particularly children, but
fostering feelings of safety,
love, and support, which are
critical for healthy development
and well-being.
And whereas families provide the
foundation for personal growth,
economic stability, and the
overall resilience of
communities and deserve
recognition for their enduring
contributions to the fabric of
New Mexico society.
And whereas designating February
12, 2025 as Family Day serves as
an opportunity to recognize,
celebrate, and strengthen the
bonds of family across the
state. While honoring the
diverse ways in which families
come together to support one
another, and whereas family day
provides a dedicated time to
reflect on the importance of
family, promote family-friendly
policies and encourage actions
that support family well-being,
including access to quality
healthcare, education, and
housing. Now, therefore,
Be it resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico that February 12,
2025 be declared family day in
the House of Representatives,
and be it further resolved that
this designation recognized the
importance of family in all of
its forms, including the
diversity of family structures
and cultural practices that
contribute to the vibrancies
vibrancy of New Mexico.
And be it further resolved that
on family day the people of New
Mexico be encouraged to
celebrate the central role that
families play in shaping
individuals' emotional and
psychological well-being
promoting strong communities and
fostering personnel and
collective growth. And be it
further resolved that the House
of Representatives support
initiatives that that promote
family stability, including
programs that strengthen
families, promote mental health,
and enhance economic security
for all families in the state
and be
it further resolved that copies
of this memorial be transmitted
to the governor of New Mexico,
the Secretary of Children, Youth
and Families, the Secretary of
Health, the Secretary of
Healthcare Authority and the
secretary of Early Childhood
Education and care.
Is there a debate on the
memorial?
Gentlemen from Valencia
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
General really yield.
Yes, I yield to to my colleague.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady. I rise in support
of this memorial, um.
In my life I've had many
opportunities. I've had many
things that have carried many
titles like you as far as
honorable and representative,
but the, the title that I cares
and cherish most is of dad and a
family, so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when we talk about family
and I think we as a legislative
body.
We should be making investments
into activities into areas of
our communities that bring our
families together.
Mr. Speaker, generally I feel
that
When families spend time
together when we have
Community or activities for them
out in the community whether it
be at a sporting event, whether
it be at a uh performance as far
as the school or in college.
Those are those provide
opportunities for us to not only
share important time together.
But really
Remind us of what's important in
our lives.
You know, the most important
things that we have are not
things, it's each other. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I rise to
support. I thank you for
bringing this forward, and I
think that we as a body, we need
to recognize and support our
families and our communities
around the state. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. There is further
debate. The gentleman from
Katherine Hidalgo and Grant,
representative Terasas. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady, my friend, please
yield.
I yield to my friend and former
office mate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you know.
Thank you for bringing this,
this, uh, memorial of family La
Familia.
Such a beautiful thing is, is
there's nothing more beautiful
than family and you know, um,
you think about the God-given
right that we have to procreate
and have your own family, bring
your family together. I think
it's such a beautiful thing.
Uh, you know, when, when other
people ask me, Luis, you got 5
kids. I said, buddy.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, you don't know
how beautiful it is, how much
you're in love, and what a
miracle it is to you have till
you see your baby being born.
It's the most beautiful, most
loving, exciting, beautiful
thing that I think will bring
tears to the toughest guy to see
his own his own child, but you
know, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, we come together as
family all the time when we're
in trouble.
When we, when we need support.
So there's a death in the
family, what do you do when
there's a uh a monumental thing
in your family like a wedding or
a birthday or a new baby being
born.
Or you, or you have a breakup
and you, where do you go? You
always go back to your family
and so thank you for bringing
this. I agree with uh uh my, my
neighbor here representative
Baca and, and the need for us as
a body to continue to do our
work in supporting anything we
can to to work on the family
unit and support family thank
you so much. God bless. There is
for the debate, the gentle lady
from leaded I should know that
that's an easy one. The lady
from Lee representative.
Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, does the gentle
lady yield, uh, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentle lady from
Lee County. Mr. Speaker, I stand
in full support of House
Memorial 2020 or 22. Before I, I
give my full support, I feel
like you need to hear a little
bit about my background on why
family day is so important to
me. You see, I was the kid who
grew up in a family, uh, family
of 5 in a 2-bedroom home.
I was the kid whose dreams were
so much bigger than my family's
income and just to describe the
neighborhood I I grew up in. I
went to the highest risk school
in my city. I grew up in the
southern part where gangs were
prevalent at that time. I was
the kid.
Who had a prostitute live across
the street from her and
conducted her business out by
the hour, and if that risk
factor wasn't enough. We had
gang members on the opposite
side of the street where there
were gangs and brawls and police
and detectives all of the time.
And if that wasn't a risk factor
big enough, the people behind me
were always drunk fighting their
roosters and their pit bulls.
And as you can see, I had very
many risk factors against me.
You know, the people in my
neighborhood, they were, they
became teen moms, they became
addicted to drugs, um, many of
them were killed in gang
affiliated wars, but I had a
strong family that spoke life in
me and they would always say,
Elaine, you're going to leave
your mark on this world and
you're gonna go to college even
though we can't afford to pay
your way. And I remember being
in the first grade going, wow,
I'm on my own, I'm gonna have to
figure this out, but I had a
strong family.
And even though I had 5 or 6
risk factors against me. You
see, I could have been a
statistic. I should have been a
statistic, but because I had a
strong family that was rooted in
God that spoke life on me.
I wasn't a statistic.
I was able to do something
different in my life and I stand
before you today as a doctor in
my field and as a state
representative, not because I
grew up with a silver spoon in
my mouth, but because my life is
the product of choice, and it
doesn't matter where you grew up
or where you come from, you get
to choose the life that you want
by the choices that you make in
my family taught me that.
And let me just finish with
this, Mr. Speaker. Strong
families build strong
communities and in essence
strong families build strong
counties and in essence, strong
families, build strong states.
So I stand in full support of
House Memorial 22 for family day
because I am a product of a
strong family that is rooted in
God and is
in speaking life regardless of
your background or socioeconomic
status. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Is there further debate
on How's Memorial 22.
The gentle lady from Bern Leoi
McKinley, San Juan Socorro, and
Valencia Representative Abeta
Thank you speaker. Does the
gentle lady from my neighboring
county.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my new
friend from a neighboring
county. Thank you. I'd like to
speak in support of family day,
um, as you know I'm a member of
the Navajo Nation and as a
member of the Navajo Nation, our
culture is rooted in our
clanship and if you look at your
hands, each of your 5 fingers
represents someone who is
related to you, you have your
maternal clan, your paternal
clan, your maternal grandfather,
your paternal grandfather, and
then yourself and you're all
Connected in your five-fingered
human being and so in our
culture, family is everything
clan ship connects us beyond
just blood. It connects us to
different geographical locations
and it binds us together. I'd
also like to speak that I have 4
children, 2 of my own and 2 that
are kinship, foster care, and
there are just no boundaries to
our love and breaking cycles,
and I'd also like to say thank
you to the sponsor for having
Family Day.
Because so many of us have
different backgrounds and are
here, we've made it here and
we're representing all of that
and our ancestors who've helped
us be here today and I'd like to
give a special recognition to my
grandmother who saved me and my
brothers because our parents
were not able to raise us and
bring us up in a safe loving
environment so thank you for
introducing Family Day and
welcome to your visitor. Thank
you, Speaker. Thank yous
representative. Thank you gentle
lady. There's further debate.
The gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Hall the 2nd.
Mr. Speaker, thank you as a
gentle lady yield.
Representative Hall the 2nd.
It's gonna haunt me forever.
I rise in
I, I rise in support of this. I
am Willie May Hall the 2nd.
There's, believe it or not, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady,
there's a Willie May Hall, the
3rd.
Um, yeah, we're not very
innovative there, but um,
Mr. Speaker, in 34 years of law
enforcement,
One thing I saw at a local and
state level and a federal level,
wherever I was.
Sent
Um, families are critical.
85%.
Of all men incarcerated in the
federal penitentiary system and
there are penal system.
Come from broken or fatherless
homes, Mr. Speaker.
And
It is crucial.
Not only just to honor this
house memorial, but for all, all
of us to remember how important
the family structure is. I hear
and the one thing you'll notice,
Mr. Speaker, when we all get
together, we don't even have to
like each other. We don't even
have to know each other. First
thing you do is, hey, you got
any kids?
Grandparents in here?
OK, I'm a pretty new grandpa.
I'm really, really, really proud
if you want to see pictures, I
got them.
I'm just saying, this is so
important to recognize both in
the house today.
And as we go about and do our
business, so I rise in full
support of this gentle lady, and
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, just as
on that point, I, I have a
cousin who is Harry Dewey Snead
the 4th expecting his 2nd child
if it's a son who will be Harry
Deweyne the 5th.
Wow.
Harry, Harry's back, it's back
in vogue again. So it's a good
name him spit his water out back
there.
lady from Valencia
Representative Mirabal Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
will the gentle lady yield? Yes,
Speaker, I yelled to the gentle
lady from Valencia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I
too want to rise um in support
of Family Day, um, I, I often
will tell people that uh my
parents uh both gave me little
pieces of themselves that that I
can take uh take with me
everywhere my mom taught me not
to put up with anyone's crap.
Uh, and, uh,
And my dad taught me the value
of family. Um, he, he, they
come, um, we come from a long
line of huge families, um, and,
um, and, and that's just it.
The, the fact that I knew that I
had.
Sometimes hundreds of people
behind me, no matter what I was
gonna, gonna be doing because
like I said, we have a huge
family that empowered me to be
able to go out there and do
whatever I needed to do because
I knew that there was nothing
that I could do to, to lose
their love for me.
Um, and, and my biggest thing,
my, my, my, my heartache is that
there's way too many um of my
students that don't have that
family system behind them and as
an educator, I can definitely
tell you.
Um, the difference, and, and you
have, you have some that will
still and, and, and that's just
uh it's some something that's in
them, but me as an educator,
those that I that I see that
don't have that family behind
them, um, as, as much as I
possibly can to be that one
person that could be the family
in the classroom that will be
able to tell them that they can
achieve everything that they put
their mind to because sometimes
it's just that simple. It's,
it's just that simple someone
believing in you and as a, as a,
and
And that is something that
families may look different, you
know, mine is a is a blended
family and, and my, my older
two,
Definitely, um, they, they,
their, their dad is, is my
husband, my current husband
Jason, that's that and they
will, they will argue with
anyone in the world, but that's
the person that is behind them
when they fall flat on their
face. That's the man that comes
and picks them up. So, uh, so I
definitely rise, and I, and I
think each and each one of us
can do that if we see that
someone doesn't have that system
that we were blessed to be with
that that family behind them to
be that family for other people.
Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. There's
further debate. The gentleman
from Eddie.
Chavez and Otero of Henry. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does this
gentle like to leave?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I just
wanted to stand in support of
family day, uh, you know, we've,
you've heard I've had quite a
few different titles over my
life, uh, but there's no title
that I would take more pride in
than dad.
Um, that's something we've taken
very, very serious, um, uh, you
know, every time I get to talk
to both my kids who, who are
lucky enough to have gotten in
college, uh, it's with great
pride to see.
That hopefully from what my
parents left to me and taught me
and what I have taught my
children uh that they'll
continue to just achieve things
that we never thought were
possible, so, um, you know,
family is the most crucial thing
in our world, um, there's
nothing.
Nothing that will ever come in
front of my family, um, as
probably many of y'all, uh,
you're just, you're not gonna be
able to touch it, so, uh.
I've got a lot of other things
but I think I'm gonna stay there
because it'll get a little
emotional and I don't like
emotions, so, uh, thank you very
much, sir. I stand in support.
Thank you gentlemen. There's
further debate, gentlemen from
Colfax Harding Qua, San Miguel
and Union representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Mr. Speaker, I, I believe in
family. My wife and I have 5
kids, hers, mine, and ours, and
they are all more successful
than me.
And that, of that I am very
proud, uh, my grandmother lived
to be 102, 101.5 of those years
she lived in a, in a home that
she and my grandfather built.
And uh my dad checked on her
every day, made sure she had
what she needed. That's extended
family. So we have a blended
extended family, and, uh,
family's always good. We have
friends that are like family,
and, uh, they're always there,
they're a support, uh, mechanism
of safety net and, and we love
them just like our family, so.
So, hats off to family day.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There's
the debate, gentlemen, from
Chavez, Eddie and Leeenator
Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Madam.
Yes, I will.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
want to stand in support of
Family Day. Family is a big part
of
All of our lives
And uh, you know, as John said,
you know, we're proud of our
kids.
I always told my kids that I
love them always. I may not
always like you, but I always
love you.
And we need to take into
consideration that we have
several families here on this
earth.
We have our physical families by
blood. We have our family with
our God. We have a family in
this legislature. This is our
family.
Bless them all. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen, seeing no
further debate.
The gentleman from Lever Santa
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield. I yield to
the representative from Lee
County.
Thank you very much.
You know, I listened to the
stories, and this is the beauty
of a
Our memorials, it's just tearing
little bits and pieces about
people's lives.
Mr. Speaker, I grew up on a
large farm and ranch in the
southeast part of the state and
uh as the youngest kid, I got
the dirtiest water.
So, that's the way it works. And
if we ever wanted to make a
phone call, Mr. Speaker, we had
to wait until 3 people got
finished talking so we could get
through to the operator on the
party line.
So, you know, back, those, those
days, Mr. Speaker, there are so
many things we can say about
family. I think I wanna touch on
one thing.
As a, as a young man, I was
taught my job is to be the
protector.
To be the hunter to provide.
Mr. Speaker.
The most important glue in the
family.
This is the ma
Mr. Speaker, my, my.
My point today is to understand.
That our mothers are the only
person in our lives.
That did everything.
For you
Not ever thinking about herself.
And so with that, Mr. Speaker,
to the moms.
They help us
Keep our families together.
I lift them up in prayer and uh.
I add that to celebrating family
day.
Thank you.
There's debate, gentlemen from
Lincoln and Alterdo Senator
Vincent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
This is a gentle lady yield
yield.
Gentle lady, I rise in support
of your family day.
And
Mr. Speaker, family is one of
the most fundamental aspects.
In life
And Mr. Speaker, I've heard a
couple of the representatives
talk about the biggest title
they ever received was being a
dad.
Mr. Speaker, mine is being a big
papa.
So, I'm a big pop and I thought
I loved my children. I really
did until my grandkids came
along and it's a whole different
kind of love, Mr. Speaker.
And today I would like to
recognize all the mothers.
And the fathers
And the foster parents and the
adoptive parents, because it
takes us all, they tell, they
say it's a village. It, it truly
takes a village, Mr. Speaker,
and I just rise in support of
your memorial today, and thank
you for bringing it forward.
Seeing no further debate, gentle
later close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, thank you guys for
your comments on family day and,
um, you know, we all have our
stories of growing up, um, maybe
not with a silver spoon in her
mouth, as you said it. I grew up
in 1/5 wheel for the 1st 5 years
of my life and uh when we
weren't on the oil field, my dad
was an inspector. He inspected
pipelines and tanks in the oil
field, lots of state parks. I, I
never knew that I had anything
different than anybody else. I
just thought I was on a
permanent vacation.
And when I was home, we were at
my grandma's ranch, we parked
that RV at my grandma's ranch,
uh, that 5th wheel, and, um,
we'd snip green beans from her
garden and can and play in the
creek and play in the pond and I
had extended family all around
me and I never felt poor. I
never felt disadvantaged, um,
because I felt just really rich
with love and, um,
I get to be the mom of two
beautiful children, and I, I,
that I got to birth and then
claimed to as my own just by
choice that didn't have families
to raise them and I know so many
people in this body have taken
on and chosen uh families either
formally or informally to to
bring on other families that
children that didn't have that.
And so I just get to be really
blessed. And I think about the
stuff that we do in this body
that costs tens of thousands of
dollars per child and one of the
simplest things that we do that
everybody in here supports
bipartisan as a little program
called Imagination.
Library in uh CYFD and it, it
costs $25 a child to send one
book a month to every child's
home from the time they're born
until they're 5, and if those
parents read just 15 minutes a
day or whoever that guardian is
to those kids, then they've got
every protective factor, the
social emotional, they've got an
advantage with language,
cognitive development, critical
thinking and solving skills, 25
bucks, it's a book, but it's the
time on the lap and it's someone
investing love, answering
questions.
when they ask him pointing out
pictures, it's 25 bucks, but
family matters. It's the
indicator. You could be in the
worst performing school district
in the state, your child can be
the Victorian, the class
Victorian because they have
engaged family. You could be in
the best school and be last in
the class.
When you don't have a supportive
family, that broad definition of
family, and thank you, Mr.
Speaker, for letting us take
time today to celebrate our
families, and I'm, I'm so proud
my, my dad passed away, but my
mom just an amazing woman.
Who went back to college at 63,
got an associate's in early
childhood, went into home
visiting, worked in child
protective services and finished
her bachelor's degree. I mean,
Having examples like that breaks
generational poverty break
cycles and, and, and so many of
us in here are benefiting
because of that. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Would you like to move? I move
unanimous. Where's the form
because I haven't done, um, I,
some of
Alright, the gen lady moves it
to pass and ask unanimous
consent to the House that the
record showed that the role has
been called and all members
present have voted in the
affirmative.
See, no objection is ordered.
We're on final passage of Howe
Memorial 22. The vote is now
open.
The vote's now closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's Memorial, 22
US do we pass this house.
Congratulations.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to announce that New Mexico
voters first has catered lunch
for us from Cowgirl.
It's in the hallway by the
lounge every all members are
welcome to please, uh, go and
get some lunch and once again
thank you to the New Mexico
voters first for their
generosity. Thank you. Very
cool. Thank you very much, New
Mexico voters first, gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Mrs.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports ordered. Clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
276 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Art De la Cruz,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
276. All those in favor 5 but
say I.
All the supports need. The
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
314 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Art de la Cruz,
chair. Mr. Speaker, adoption,
please favorable committee
report in House Bill 314. All
those in favor and I say I.
I would say no.
I suppose nay.
Yes, a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, rural development
land grants and cultural Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 226 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation revenue Committee.
Respectfully submitted Linda
Soroto chair.
Mr. Speaker,
move adoption favorable report
in House Bill 226 of those in
favor sitting I say no.
I suppose, yes, how it can be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs Committee.
To whom has been referred House
Bill 227 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted Linda
Sarato chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are on adoption of
a favorable committee reporting
House Bill 227. All those in
favor by saying aye.
Of the Bosna
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, rural Development,
land grants and cultural Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 228 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Lindosrato chair. Mr.
Speaker, adoption report on
House Bill 228. All those in
favor if I say no.
Yes, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
and water resources Committee to
has been referred House Bill 137
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but the
House agriculture, the se and
water resources Committee
substitute for hospitals 137 do
pass and thence referred to the
energy, environment, and Natural
Resources Committee respectfully
submitted Christina Ortez,
chair.
Committee for adoptions.
adoption of the
Please move for adoption.
Right, that's that'll work.
We're on adoption of an
unfavorable community report in
the house with 137, but a
favorable committee report in
house agriculture, a secas water
resources be substitute for
House Bill 137, all those in
February 75 saying a.
Honey
All those in probably saying
aye.
Boney.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick, he has a water resources
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 206 has
added under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Christina Ortez,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, please be adoption
of a favorable committee report
in House Bill 206, all those in
favor, signified by sin, I.
I suppose nay.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick. He has some water
resources committee to him has
been referred House Bill 229 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Cristina
Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
229. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
Although supposed nay.
We have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 111
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari,
chair. Mr. Speaker, I move
adoption favorable community
report on House Bill 111, all
those in favor of 5 and 9.
I suppose, yes have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 153
has had it under consideration
and reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and hence referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari, chair. Mr. Speaker,
I move adoption committee report
in House Bill 153. All those in
favor 5 but say a.
Opona
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 154
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrari, chair. Mr. Speaker, I
move adoption favorable
committee report in House Bill
154. All those in favor 75 but
I.
supposena, the I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 169 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joan J. Ferrari chair. Mr.
Speaker, I move adoption
favorable committee report in
House Bill 169. All those in
favor 75 are saying a.
Balzpos.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee, to whom has been
referred House Bill 245 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero. Mr. Speaker, I move
adoption of the committee
report. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 245. All those in
favor signified by saying aye.
I'll suppose nay. Yes, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee, to whom has been
referred House Bill 249 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and that's referred to
the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Patricia
Royal Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 249. All those in
favor signify but say 9.
I suppose, yeah, I have it.
Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 251 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
education committee respectfully
submitted Patricia Royal
Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report favorable
report in House Bill 251. All
those in favor of 5 I.
Also supposena, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 254 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended and he
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Patricia
Roel Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 254. All those in
favor 7589.
I suppose, yes have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
Revenue Committee to me has been
referred House Bill 198 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
submitted Derek Day, the chair.
Mr. Speaker, moved to adoption
of a favorable committee report
on House Bill 198. All those in
favor sitting 5 say no.
Oppose the SAV committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 155 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and he referred to the
commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted to Wanda
Johnson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
For an adoption of favor
committee report in House Bill
155. All those in favor of
seeing I would say a.
I suppose a. Yes, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 180 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoptionavorable committee
report in House Bill 180. All
those in favor, say probably say
9.
On Bona, the community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 238.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andres Soro chair. Mr.
Speaker, I move adoption of the
committee report adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 238. All those in
favors if I but say 9.
I suppose, yes have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Joint Resolution 12.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andrasomero chair. Speaker, I
move adoption of the committee
report favorable committee
report on how joint resolution
12. All those in favor, sitting
5 by saying a.
All the supposed nay, the eyes
have a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling in
a grossing committee team has
been referred House Memorial 5,
House Memorial 16, House
Memorial 17 has had them under
consideration reports the same
have been duly enrolled in
engross preparatory designing by
the officers of the house,
respectfully submitted Anita
Gonzalez, chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Move
adoption.
For adoption in favor of reports
we're on adoption of favorable
committee reports on House
Memorials 5, 16, and 17. All
those in favor I would say a.
I suppose,
the committee reports are
adopted.
That the direct reflected the
duly enrolled in engross copies
of House Memorials 5, 16 and 17
were signed by the officers of
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
on announcements we are gonna go
to the general leader from Lee
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
I'd like to recognize my
esteemed guest on the floor, Mr.
Speaker, that is Shawna Reed.
Would you please stand?
And I'd like to share a little
bit about Shawna Reed, Mr.
Speaker. Shawna Reed is a Texas
Tech University graduate. She's
a board certified family and
acute care nurse practitioner
with 16 years of experience in
hospitalist oncology, surgery,
and nephrology. Mr. Speaker, she
currently provides hemodialysis
care in southeastern New Mexico,
my hometown. Mr. Speaker, Shawna
Reid is passionate about
nursing. She serves as
president-elect.
of New Mexico nurse practitioner
counsel, secretary of the Lee
County nurse practitioner Group.
Mr. Speaker, Shawna is enrolled
in the Doctor of Nursing
Practice program at New Mexico
State University, and this is
where her doctoral project aims
to improve access to care in New
Mexico through the Be Well
program.
In New Mexico, insurance
exchange and hopes to add a PPO
option for better access for New
Mexico. Mr. Speaker, and the
rest of the legislative body,
would you please give Shawna
Reid a big round of applause.
Welcome to the house.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
That's a lady from Santa Fe
presented Lujan.
Thank you, Speaker, um, I did
have my guests here from the
Boys and Girls Club, uh, they
had to go.
Um, sorry, we didn't get to get
to them until until now, um,
but, um.
Uh, the Boys and Girls Club from
across New Mexico, um,
Do whatever it takes to provide
over 20,000 kids and teens with
essential skills in a safe and
supportive environment during
out of school time, empowering
them to achieve successful
futures while also supporting
parents' ability to work,
preventing crime and supporting
community safety. New Mexico
Boys and Girls Clubs operate in
22 locations, including 4 sites
on military bases and and for
our native lands prioritizing
services to you who otherwise
would be without out of school
time support.
The programs provided by Boys
and Girls Club support youths,
academic and work workforce
readiness skills, health,
wellness, and life skills while
building strong character
developing leadership,
encouraging community
involvement in preventing risky
behaviors and are essential to
thousands of youth in New
Mexico, Mr. Chair.
We have our boys and girls club
here in Santa Fe, and I had my
students here, um, they're not
here, but I'm gonna read their
names anyway because they're out
advocating for uh some of the
budget that they that would
affect them in our programs and
out of school programs and
networks for all of our
communities. Um, today we had
Anthony Wald, Jude Romero,
Daniel Cojo, Finly LaRouche
Pena.
Your dear Martinezeric Marquez,
Jude Block Adriana
Por.
Pro viva Latina Kate and they're
all advocating so if they're
coming around to your offices or
meetings in the halls, please
welcome them and listen to their
requests from all of us today
because we
Had a meeting today with them
and
They, they, they're the
leadership coming to us and
saying and advocating and
learning their role in our
communities and their voices
that matter for the the
legislation and policies that
we're passing today. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you. Next we have the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
Sandoval and Santa Fe
Representative Chandler. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Just a
reminder that your House
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting at 1:30 or 15 minutes
after the conclusion of the
floor session, of course, we are
meeting on Friday and we do plan
to meet on Saturday at 11:30 in
our usual spot. Thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker.
Thanks to the gentle lady from
Bernard Leo, uh, Representative
Thompson, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, um, for.
Health and Human Services
unfortunately we are going to
start meeting at 8 a.m. instead
of 8:30 starting on Monday. So
if you have bills in there and
if you're on the committee,
please take note and just
another reminder for Pink out on
Friday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
and son of all Representative
Cates. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
um, agricultural water inseki
will be meeting tomorrow in our
usual spot at 9 a.m. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh, next
we have the gentleman from
Katherine Grant and the County
Representative Terazas. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I, I have an
announcement, uh, we have with
us, uh, the New Mexico Athletic
Trainers Association and so we
want to recognize uh them today
across New Mexico for their
vital role as health care
professionals they specialize in
injury prevention, emergency
care clinical diagnosis, and
rehabilitation for physic
physically.
Uh, active, uh, individuals.
Including those participating in
the annual legislative hoops for
hope basketball game on March
6th.
We all remember, Mr. Speaker,
how we feel after the game.
Sore and uh so forth and so we
wanna to recognize and thank
those people you will have you,
you should have found on your
desk, uh, every member should
have gotten a little triangle,
uh, cardboard flyer that tells
you a little bit about them on
the QR code if you'll look at
that, it'll tell you their next
event if you see them be nice to
them because they're the ones
that are gonna help you after
you get off the court. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Oh, by the
way, Mr. Speaker, can you,
before I close, can you please
read the certificate?
to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
5-seventh legislature, first
session 2025, recognizes
February 12, 2025, New Mexico
Athletic Trainer Day.
Whereas athletic trainers have a
long history of providing
quality health care services for
athletes and those engaged in
physical activity. And whereas
athletic trainers are educated
through a nationally regulated
educational process to provide
comprehensive healthcare in 6
domains of clinical practice and
whereas the six domains of
clinical practice of athletic
training include illness and
injury prevention and wellness
promotion, clinical evaluation,
assessment and diagnosis,
immediate and emergency.
emergency care, therapeutic
interventions and healthcare
administration and professional
responsibility.
And whereas athletic trainers
must pass a national board
certification examination and
are licensed in 48 states
including New Mexico, and
whereas.
The National Athletic Trainers
Association represents and
supports 38,000 members of the
athletic training profession,
including 198 athletic trainers
in New Mexico.
And whereas, athletic trainers
are employed in a variety of
settings, including professional
sports organizations, colleges
and universities, high schools,
clinics and hospitals,
performing arts centers,
corporate and industrial
settings, and all branches of
the United States military and
whereas leading organizations
concerned athletic training and
healthcare have united in a
common commitment to raise
public awareness of the
importance of the profession of
athletic training and the role
of athletic trainers in the
vision of quality healthcare
services, and whereas the
National Athletic Trainers
Association sponsors national
athletic training Month every
March, and whereas it is the
desire of the House of
Representatives to promote
improved healthcare for athletes
and all of those who engage in
physical activity.
Including those who
participating in annual
legislative baseball, basketball
game on March 6, 2025. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February 12, 2025 be proclaimed
New Mexico athletic trainer Day
in the House of Representatives,
signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe.
tough one.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and last I
have some guests in the gallery
if you please recognize them
please.
Yes, gentlemen, we'll go ahead
and do that. Uh, I'd like to.
Welcome and uh we'll introduce
and welcome members of the folks
in the gallery. We're honored to
have the athletic trainers with
us today in the gallery
representing communities from
gas and DA to apartmenting and
everywhere in between they
served diverse healthcare
settings, including high
schools, colleges, private
clinics.
Uh, hospitals, physicians'
offices, and all branches of the
United States military ensuring
the safety and the well-being of
athletes and active individuals
across our state.
Welcome to the house if we can
have a round of applause please.
Mr. Speaker.
Uh, next we have the gentleman.
From Le Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
today,
We have, we are honored with the
presence of the conquistador
Council of Scouting America,
specifically down in the Lee and
Eddie and Chavis area. Mr.
Speaker, I would like to have
the
clerk if possible, read the
certificate and then I'd like to
announce to announce the people
on the rostrum.
Clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025. Congratulates the
conquistador Council of Scouting
America for 100 years of serving
the youth and families of
southeastern New Mexico.
Whereas on January 1st, 1925,
several small Boy Scouts of
America troops in southeastern
New Mexico, united to form the
eastern New Mexico Council,
which was renamed the
Conquistador Council in 1953.
And whereas a conquistador
council was chartered by the Boy
Scouts of America, now known as
Scouting America, which was
founded on February 8, 1910, and
received a congressional charter
signed by President Woodrow
Wilson on June 5, 1916 to teach
patriotism, courage,
self-reliance, and other
virtues. And whereas the first
troops in southeastern New
Mexico were formed as early as
1913 and in 1916, the council's
longest continually operating
troop.
Troop 2 of Roswell was
established and continues to
serve youth today.
And whereas the conquistador
council now serves both boys and
girls, reflecting the inclusive
membership of Scouting America
and whereas the conquistador
council administers 4 scouting
programs, Cub Scouts, Scouts
BSA, venturing and exploring
that support youth from
kindergarten through age 21.
And whereas the conquistador
council helps youth develop
skills and leadership,
citizenship, conservatory,
conservation, community service,
outdoor survival, and career
development.
And whereas scouting America has
more than 1 million members and
650,000 volunteers across the
United States and its
territories, making it the
country's foremost youth program
for character development and
values-based leadership
training.
And whereas the conquistador
council is headquartered in
Roswell and serves youth and
families in the seven
southeastern counties of Chavez,
Curry, Debaca, Eddie, Lee,
Lincoln, and Roosevelt.
And whereas the conquistador
council has proudly matriculated
1,757 Eagle Scouts over the past
century and has been recognized
for its local, for its
contributions to youth
development and partnerships
with local organizations,
including Rotary clubs, lions
clubs, and the veterans of
Foreign Affairs. The American
Legion, faith Institutions, and
schools, and whereas the mission
and values of Scouting America
and the Conquistador Council are
embodied in the.
Scout oath and scout law which
remain unchanged since their
inception.
And whereas the scout oath
states, on my honor, I will do
my best to do my duty to God and
my country and to obey the Scout
law to help other people at all
times to keep myself physically
strong, mentally awake, and
morally straight, and whereas
the scout law states a scout is
trustworthy, loyal, helpful,
friendly, courteous, kind,
obedient, cheerful, thrifty,
brave, clean, and reverent.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico.
That congratulations be extended
to the conquistador Council for
100 years of serving youth and
families in southeastern New
Mexico and be it for the
resolved that the members and
volunteers of the Conquistador
Council be commended and thanked
for their dedicated service to
the youth and communities of
Southeastern New Mexico signed
and sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, and with your
permission, I would start
announcing the people on the
rostrum. First, we have Hagan
Crockett. Please stand.
Hagan
My Frank scouts, BSA troop 228
from Artesia in the 12th grade.
Thank you for being here in your
house today, Hayden.
Mr. Speaker, next we have Darren
Hernandez, Tenderfoot scouts.
Please stand.
from 22A N Artesia.
8th grade
Mr. Speaker, next we have
Natalie Wilhelm.
Thank you, Natalie, for being
here today. Cub Scouts bear pack
270 Artesia, 4th grade.
Mr. Speaker, next we have
Bronson Watson. Bronson, please
stand.
As Erns Scott rank troop 3274
Hobbs VFW 6th grade.
Mr. Speaker, next we have
Michaela Kern.
scouts BSA has earned Life Scout
troop 228 Artesia, 12th grade.
Mr. Speaker, next we have Hunter
Kern.
Thank you, Hunter.
Scouts PSA has earned star rank
troop 228 Artesia, 10th grade.
Mr. Speaker, next we have Sly
Espinoza.
Thank you for being here today,
Sly.
Mr. Speaker, before I continue,
Mr. Speaker, do you know what we
blows stand for?
No gentlemen, please let me
know.
We be loyal scouts.
The beginning phase, one of the
beginning phases, so Mr.
Speaker, uh, Sly is we blows
level pack 89 Lovington 5th
grade.
Mr. Speaker, next we have Jack
Lovao.
Scouts BSA has earned first
rank, first class ranked 228
Artesia, 9th grade.
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss
if I don't talk about.
The leaderships that, that help
make these things happy.
Further to your left, Mr.
Speaker, we have Ms. Jenna
Wilhelm from Artesia.
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Wilham is a
committee member for PAC 270 and
228.
And next to her, uh, we have
Miss Katie Espinoza Newton.
Council commissioner.
Um, and, uh, I will tell you,
Mr. Speaker, this all came
together at the very last
minute, you know, when we leave
the Senate up to scheduling
things, you just never know how
quickly you have to put it
together on the side of, of the,
of the house that gets things
done. And with that, Mr.
Speaker, I do have two
co-sponsors on this, um, both of
them, uh, represent members up
there.
And some people on the rock up
in the gallery that I would ask
you to, uh, recognize a little
bit later, but Mr. Speaker, if
you wouldn't mind recognizing
the two other members on the
certificate.
Thank you gentlemen, the gentle
lady, uh, from.
Lee, uh, Representative Senna
Cortez, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. I stand in support with
my dear friend from Lee County
and I want to start it and just
uh re-honor the fearless leaders
Jenna and Katie, thank you so
much for your dedication to our
young people who are our future
leaders, and now I wanna talk,
Mr. Speaker, to the scouts from
the conquistador Council. I know
that your journey has been a
rigorous one. You reminded me
when you told me that you were
Up at 4 a.m. this morning and I
said same because I was up
studying bills, but
nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, it
has been a tough journey, one
that has required dedication and
resilience and a commitment to
excellence in your civic
engagement, and Mr. Speaker, I
just want to reiterate these
scouts from the conquistador
Council. These are our
generation's next leaders. I
believe we have in here future
doctors and
Lawyers and representatives and
senators and maybe even the
president of the United States.
Mr. Speaker, I stand today to
honor the scouts from the
Conquistador Council would
everyone join me in giving them
and their fearless leaders a big
round of applause.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
we'll go to the gentleman from
Uh, Chavez, Eddie, and Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There's
a gentleman yield?
Or do you need to yield.
You don't need to yield. I'm.
I too stand in.
Proud support of our.
Boy Scouts can cease to do
council, you know, it's a great
program.
But what they say, a million
kids in the United States
involved in this.
Uh, you know, we welcome you
here today.
And they're just true examples
of.
What these kids can do.
With good leadership.
prepare our youth as it says in
their deal for.
The lives of purpose and.
An impact
And they all stand true.
To the scout motto of being
prepared. Thank you all for
being here today.
Thank you gentlemen and uh any
anything else, gentlemen before
I recognize the oh.
The gentleman from Chavez, Eddy
and Otero Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
would like to stand in support,
um, what a great group, uh, and
as we've heard so many times as
our future leaders, um, that
represent our cities and our
counties and our state, um, a
few things that I would love to
say, as you heard, many of them
are from Artisia, um, I happen
to know something about Artesia,
uh, I'm proud to be from there.
I'm proud to be the mayor, but
more so I'm proud of the young
men and women that that
represent Artesia. Uh, there's
so many projects that they
take care of on so many
different occasions. One of them
that comes to mind that that.
Every time I go to our senior
center to go walk around to see
what's going on, uh, the seniors
take me out to where there's a
garden.
And the garden was actually
constructed by one of the
scouts, um, as one of their
projects. I believe he's in the
in the gallery, um.
During the COVID and that that
simple project has brought so
much joy to so many of our
seniors in our, our, our little
town, um, and they want to show
me all the great things that
they grow all the time. And so
all the contributions that you
make to our city and to our
state, uh, are much appreciated,
um, I wanna make sure y'all know
that how they take care of the
American flag on all of our
events, um, and all the things
that y'all do, so I stand in
support and I thank you all so
very much.
Thank you gentlemen.
Is there
Further comment or debate.
Mr. Speaker, uh, no, I, I
appreciate the time today. I
appreciate y'all allowing us to
do this at the very last minute
and putting this into the
schedule, Mr. Speaker, before we
close, I would like for you to
recognize the folks in the
gallery.
Yes, gentlemen, absolutely. I'd
like to recognize the
conquistador Council of Scouting
America, if you could please
stand to be recognized.
Welcome to the house.
Uh, thank you gentlemen. Next we
have the gentleman from Donana
Representative Small.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:30 p.m.
in room 307.
Thank you gentlemen, please take
note, uh, gentleman from Otero,
you've been standing there
patiently.
Representative. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I rise for a point of
personal privilege, please.
To your point. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I just want to bring
the member's attention to last
night's consumer and Public
Affairs Committee meeting.
Last night, unfortunately, rules
were broken.
And individuals were
disrespected in that committee.
Mr. Speaker, we, we use the
rules, we, we tried to get the
committee back in order, but Mr.
Speaker, what happened was the
minorities bills that were
sponsored and, and listed in
order were pushed around on the
agenda to last.
And so Mr. Speaker, according to
our house rules, uh, 9-11.
It clearly states that our
committees must hear these bills
in order unless with express
consent of the sponsor, Mr.
Speaker, that that rule was not
upheld in that committee, and
unfortunately, that happened
last night as well, Mr. Speaker,
members of the minority, myself
and the gentle lady from
Torrance and Bernalillo were not
allowed to ask questions on
certain bills, and we were cut
off after 10 minutes, Mr.
Speaker, which goes against the
rules of this House regarding
equality of members on page.
43 of Masons, Rule 49, it goes
against the right not to be
interrupted. Rule 7-10 of the
New Mexico House rules.
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it
goes against other rules
pertaining to the ability to
debate in Mason's, it says on
page 47, row 56 1 through 4.
It's necessary to understand the
subject of which we're making
decisions, we must have the
opportunity to debate, Mr.
Speaker, the general, the gentle
lady.
The chair of that committee did
not use these rules correctly.
Unfortunately in this chamber, I
ran for this position, Mr.
Speaker, because I care about
this state. Ever since I was a
little kid, I actually had
reverence, a lot of reverence
for this chamber. I used to be a
A little
page here in the in the
legislature. I used to sit right
there where those folks are
sitting.
When I was a young kid and I
wanted to be a legislator.
And to come here, Mister
Speaker, after those years and
working in the committees for
years as well to see the
disrespect of certain members of
the majority party.
They are not representative of
the values of our state.
Yesterday in your speech, Mr.
Speaker, you said that you're
the speaker of all members,
whether they're in the majority
or the minority. And so I want
to bring this attention to the
house. We just ask for equality
in these in the members to be
able to ask questions. We ask
for people to show respect and
to not shut people down just
because they're in the minority
party and they wanna thoroughly
better a bill that they want to
make sure that they understand
before voting, and I think
that's something that this body
needs to take into
consideration.
And it's something that we need
to show, especially today as
we're, as we're showing the
future leaders of our state.
They deserve better. This house
deserves better and the
constituents that we all
represent, each one of us with
26,000 constituents. We deserve
for our members.
to represent those folks with
honor.
dignity and within the rules
that this House has adopted.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Young lady from Berlin Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
appreciate your recognition. I
wanted to honor my guests in the
gallery, um, Johnny Hooper, who
is the son of our late uh
esteemed Secretary of State
Shirley Hooper.
And also no gentle lady, I'm
gonna, I'm gonna honor them and
I do have your text here.
Apologies I didn't get to it
earlier, but I wanna, uh,
acknowledge guests over
representative Boregos Johnny
Hooper, son of late Secretary of
State Shirley Hooper and Norm
game. I'm sorry if I
mispronouncing the name Gamma
both representing the hearing
and deaf alliance. Welcome to
the house.
Mr. Speaker.
general lady. Um, it's the
hearing loss association of
America and the National
Association for the Deaf. Thank
you.
Thank you gentle lady, gentlemen
from Bernalillo Lord was before
me,
so if you could recognize her
first lady from Torrance.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
you for that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for
acknowledge I've been standing
here for a while, um, Mr.
Speaker, point is personal
privilege, please.
I want a re reiterate what
representative block has said.
It's been very frustrating in
the committee where we're
already in the minority, we're
just trying to do what our rep
our
Our constituents want us to do
and ask questions and not be
silenced and not be marginalized
and not be beaten down. We're
already in the minority. We
don't need any more beating down
in the committee. We're just
trying to do what we need to do,
and I hope that you, Mr.
Speaker, being a fair man, we'll
take this serious and help
mediate in this situation. Thank
you.
Gentlemen from Bernalio
Representative Garcia.
Mr. Speaker, uh, ladies and
gentlemen of the house.
Every session, uh we are given
food items.
Both, uh, perishable and
non-perishable.
And uh if you do not avail
yourself of such food items.
Uh, you are welcome to donate
the items to our food pantry.
At Holy Family Catholic Church.
Uh, as the speaker, we have 2
food distributions.
For a week
On Tuesdays we have a perishable
food distribution on Thursdays
we have a non-perishable food
distribution and Mr. Speaker,
the distributions are run by our
Knights of Columbus chapter
there at the church.
Yo, we average 480 families.
Or 480 persons per week.
From the 87105 and 87121 zip
codes.
Which includes the Arisco Valley
and the far South Valley.
In the Southwest Mesa and of
Albuquerque and the Holy Rosary
community.
Between Central Avenue and I 40.
The speaker, um,
And ladies and gentlemen, if you
have, if you leave the the items
here on my table, you can leave
the items here on my table, on
the floor or I can have my
secretary.
Uh, pick up the items at your
office. Everything is
appreciated as the male speaker.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen
in the house. Mao, thank you for
that announcement, gentlemen
from San Juan represented
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, I am in need of some,
uh, legal counseling.
If I drive my electric vehicle.
And I hit somebody. Well, I'd be
charged with battery.
I, I believe, I believe that
deserves a round of applause.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Any other announcements?
I can't tell if you're standing
up or if you want to make an
announcement, gentlemen from
Sandoval San Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I would like uh the members of
the body to join me in welcoming
Lisa Laving to the House floor.
Lisa has a master's degree in
nursing with a focus on health
policy and a doctorate in
nursing practice and educational
leadership along with a degree
from the Albuquerque Technical
Vocational Institute.
Her experience and practice
consists of correctional
nursing, emergency and trauma
nursing.
She also she's also a professor
of nursing and dedicated
advocate for patients and
nursing profession. Please join
me in welcoming Lisa Lady.
Welcome to the house. The
gentleman from San Juan
representative.
Hernandez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I too
rise, uh, this morning, uh, to,
uh, also acknowledge the
significance of the uh Boys and
Girls Club of New Mexico. Mr.
Speaker, I'm a former employee
of a, uh, boys and girls club in
Shiprock and uh I worked there
during my senior year in high
school as a uh youth wrestling
coach and I, and I got to really
understand a lot about the Boys
and Girls Club, uh, networks
and, and, and I really
uh built me on, on the gentleman
that I am today. So I just want
to acknowledge the Boys and
Girls Club of Farmington, New
Mexico. Boys and Girls Club of
Shiprock, New Mexico. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen. Other
announcements.
Before I go to intro, the
gentleman from Chavez Eddy and
Lee Representative Mason. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. I rise in the
point of order. Did your point.
I
Mr. Speaker, I was presenting a
bill in the committee where
representative Lord and
where
Addressing earlier, and I too
feel
That I as a presenter in that
committee did not get to finish
my presentation.
The debate was
Stopped in the middle.
And moved the table.
And I never got to give any
closing statements. I have 2.
Witnesses there with me.
And I was merely
And they, they too, I don't
think deserved what they saw in
that committee last night. Thank
you.
Thank you gentlemen
Gentle lady from Bernalillo
resentative Hochman Vihill.
Mr. Speaker, I now move to go to
the next order of business,
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
House Bill 5 introduced by
representatives of Beta, Javier
Martinez, and Hoffman V. Hill,
an act relating to families
enacting the Office of Child
Advocate Act, providing for the
state child advocate, creating
the Office of Child Advocate and
establishing the powers and
duties of that office, providing
for the establishment of the
state Child Advocate selection
Committee, amending and enacting
sections of the NMSA 1978. House
Bill 5
ti tle is or the printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 9 introduced by
Representatives Eleanor Chavez
and Chandler, an act relating to
public safety, enacting the
immigrant Safety Act prohibiting
public bodies from entering into
agreements used to detain
individuals for federal civil
immigration violations and
requiring the termination of any
such existing agreements
prohibiting public bodies from
otherwise using public property
to facilitate detaining
individuals for under
For federal civil immigration
violations. House Bill 9.
Is Bill 9 have been read twice
by title is ordered, printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 17 introduced by
representatives Little, Silver,
and Zupansky, an act relating to
consumer rights, creating the
commission on reduction of
grocery costs, requiring a study
of the cost of groceries,
requiring a report with findings
and recommendations by November
15, 2025, making an
appropriation, declaring an
emergency. House Bill 1717 have
been re by titles or reprinted
and referred to the house
consumerublic Affairs Committee,
then the House of.
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 390 introduced by
Representative Zamora, an act
making an appropriation to the
Department of Environment to
plan, design, construct,
replace, and improve water lines
in Curry County. House Bill 390.
I was built 390 Do you have mid
red twice by title is or printed
and referred to the house,
energy, environment, and Natural
Resources Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 391 introduced for
Representatives Jones and
Armstrong, an act relating to
families enacting the office of
Child Abu Act, providing for the
state childombu, creating the
office of Child Abu and
establishing the powers and
duties of that office, providing
for the establishment of the
state child ombud selection
committee, amending an in action
sections of the NMSA 1978,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 3913.
1 have been read twice by titles
or the printed referred to the
house. Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Houseville 392 introduced for
Representatives Lujan and Andrea
Romero, an act relating to the
environment, enacting the
single-use plastic bag act
prohibiting retail
establishments from making or
delivering goods using
single-use plastic bags,
creating exceptions, providing
penalties. House Bill 392.
Is 392 haven't been rich twice
by tilers or printed and
referred to the House Energy
environment and natural
Resources Committee, thence the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 393 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
making an appropriation to the
Department of Health for the New
Mexico Health Services Corps to
support the recruitment and
retention of healthcare
providers who treat rural or
underserved populations or
patients of federally qualified
health centers. House Bill 393.
I was with 393 haven't been to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee then
then the House Appropriations
and finance committee.
House Bill 394 introduced for
Representatives Lujan and
Borego, an act relating to
energy, creating the clean
energy and natural resources
advisory board prescribing
duties, making an appropriation.
House Bill 394394 haven't been
to us by titles or reprinted and
referred to the house, energy,
environment and natural
resources committee.
Then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 395 introduced by
Representatives Gonzalez,
Thompson, Anaya, and Lundstrom.
An act relating to taxation,
creating the healthcare
preceptor income tax credit.
House Bill 395.
Houses 395 have been written to
by title.
His order printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
House Bill 396 introduced by
Representatives Ferrari, Lara,
and Silva and act relating to
regional spaceport districts,
changing board composition,
limiting the issuance of bonds
under the Spaceport Development
Act that are secured with the
revenue from a county regional
spaceport gross receipts tax,
providing that a county regional
spaceport gross receipts tax be
imposed only until the bonds
issued are fully discharged or
otherwise provided for in full,
requiring that all revenue
from a county regional spaceport
gross receipts tax be dedicated
to the payment of the principal
of an interest on bonds issued
under the Spaceport Development
Act. House Bill 396 36 have been
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, then the house
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
House Bill 397 introduced by
Representatives Ferrari, Torres
Velasquez, Abeta and Luhan, an
act making an appropriation to
the higher education department
to provide stipends to
undergraduate and graduate
behavioral health students that
are completing training,
supervision, or experiential
requirements necessary to obtain
professional licensure. House
Bill 397 37 have been read to us
by titles that are printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance.
House Bill 398 introduced for
representatives Duncan
Armstrong, and Dow, an act
relating to insurance, amending
the health maintenance
Organization law to modify the
timeline for examinations of
health maintenance organizations
and contract providers. House
Bill 398 398 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House Health
and Human Services Committee.
House Bill 399 introduced for
representatives Duncan, Dow, and
Armstrong, an act making an
appropriation to the healthcare
authority to increase the
Medicaid reimbursement rates for
nursing homes. House Bill 3999
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 400 introduced by
representatives Duncan, Dow, and
Armstrong, an act relating to
Medicaid requiring the
healthcare authority to conduct
cost studies for each type of
healthcare provider that is
reimbursed by Medicaid. House
Bill 400.
House Bill 400 haven't been read
twice by title is or reprinted
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 401 introduced for
Representative Serato, an act
relating to artificial
intelligence, enacting the
artificial intelligence
synthetic content accountability
Act, providing for civil and
criminal enforcement for
improper use of synthetic
content created by artificial
intelligence, providing
penalties. House Bill 401.
Is 401 have been read to us by
titles or reprinted and referred
to the House commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 402 introduced by
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
an act relating to insurance
requiring the superintendent of
insurance to promulgate rules
establishing a time frame for
health health insurance carriers
to load information on approved
providers into their provider
payment systems,
providing
requiring health insurance
carriers to reimburse approved
providers if the health
insurance carriers fail to load
that information within 30 days
of receiving
a complete credentialing
application. House Bill 402.
As well 402 have been read to us
by tilers or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 403 introduced by
representatives Murphy, Dixon,
Montoya, Sinna Cortez, and
Henry, an act relating to the
oil and gas reclamation fund,
increasing the amount of the tax
imposed pursuant to the oil and
gas conservation Tax Act
distributed to the fund,
amending how money in the fund
can be used. House Bill 403.
House 403 have been read twice
by tilis or reprinted and
referred to the house energy
environment and natural
resources Committee, the the
house taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 404 introduced with
Representative de la Cruz, an
act relating to social services,
creating the monetary stipend
project as a 3-year pilot
project to provide monthly
assistance payments to
demonstrate that a monetary
stipend for basic cost of living
expenses improves educational,
employment and healthcare
outcomes for adults who are
former, foster, or delinquent
children, providing for program
eligibility, program terms and
reporting
requirements, making an
appropriation. House Bill 404.
404 haven't been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 405 introduced by
representatives Gonzalez, de la
Cruz, Sanchez, Joseph Hernandez,
and Abeda, an act relating to
emergency responders, enacting
the volunteer firefighter
service and training job
retention Act requiring
employers to provide leaves of
absence to employees who are
volunteer firefighters for time
in service and training in
certain circumstances. House
Bill 405405.
twice by titles or reprinted and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 406 introduced for
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to crime, providing for
a victim's recovery when the
victim is incarcerated at the
time of the crime. House Bill
406.
As will 406 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 407 introduced by
Representatives Thompson, Abeda,
Gurola, Sarana, and Gonzalez, an
act making an appropriation to
the Department of Health to
provide training and education
to prevent shaken baby syndrome.
House Bill 40747 haven't been
read to us by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 408 introduced for
representatives Nicole Chavez,
Dixon, and Eleanor Chavez, an
act relating to children
requiring the children, youth
and families department to
conduct a study every 5 years to
study the costs and
reimbursement rates for
providing community-based foster
care placements and treatments,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 408. House Bill 408 haven't
been read twice by titles or
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the.
appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 409 introduced by
Representative Ortez, an act
relating to energy, enacting the
efficiency and mercury standards
for products and lighting
fixtures Act, providing
penalties. House Bill 409.
Is 409 have been read to us by
title is order printed and
referred to the house, health,
I'm just kidding. It's referred
to the House Energy, Natural
Resources Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 410 introduced with
Representative Serato, an act
relating to data enacting the
consumer information and data
Protection Act, providing
processes for the collection and
protection of data, providing
exceptions, providing
investigative authority,
providing civil penalties. House
Bill 410.
House Bill 410 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 411 introduced by
representatives Doo and
Armstrong, an act relating to
state symbols, declaring a state
mineral.
House Bill 411.
House 411 have been read to us
by title is order printed and
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs Committee.
Then the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 412 introduced by
Representatives Armstrong,
Vincent, and Jones, an act
relating to intergovernmental
agreements enacting the
emergency medical services
personnel licensure Interstate
Compact, House Bill 412412 have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 413 introduced by
representatives Armstrong,
Vincent, and Jones, an act
relating to intergovernmental
agreements enacting the
physicians assistant licensure
Interstate Compact, House Bill
413. How's 413 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 414 introduced for
representatives Herrera, Doo,
Duncan, Brown, and Joseph
Hernandez, an act relating to
counties providing for a
reimbursement to county sheriffs
for transporting certain people.
House Bill 414.
I was 414 haven't been read to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 415 introduced by
Representative Duncan, an act
relating to employment,
providing that when the use of
earned six leave is not
foreseeable, an employee shall
notify the employer orally or in
writing pursuant to the written
policy of the employer. House
Bill 415.
House Bill 4:15 have been read
to us by title is or printed and
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 416 introduced by
Representative Borego, an act
relating to public employee
pensions, clarifying provisions
relating to disability pensions
and survivor pensions, removing
inconsistencies relating to
survivor pensions, providing an
exemption to the procurement
code for the collection of
overpayments, clarifying the
amount of pension earned by
certain public regulation
commission commissioners,
allowing the public employees
retirement association to
certain information with the
educational retirement Board
regarding certain reciprocity
retirees, clarifying certain
provisions relating to gifts,
certifying, clarifying the
requirements for a retired
member who files an exemption
from membership under the
magistrate Retirement Act,
making technical changes. House
Bill 416.
House Bill 416 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 417 introduced for
representatives Kadena and
Parajon.
An act relating to taxation,
amending the distributions of
the liquor excise tax, amending
definitions in the liquor excise
Tax Act, imposing a liquor
excise surtax on retailers,
distributing the revenue from
the surtax to a new tribal
alcohol harms alleviation fund,
changing the local DWI grant
Program Act to the local alcohol
harms alleviation Program Act
and making amendments to the
Act, creating the tribal alcohol
harms.
Alleviation Program Act,
excluding the taxes imposed by
the liquor excise tax from the
definition of gross receipts in
the gro gross receipts and
compensating tax Act requiring
certain legislative committees
to review the rates of the
local, the liquor excise tax and
liquor excise surtax and the
distributions from those taxes,
making appropriations. House
Bill 417. 17 have been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house, Health
and Human Services.
Commit then to house taxation
and revenue Committee.
House Bill 418 introduced for
Representative Parajon.
And an act relating to mobile
homes prohibiting initial rental
agreements shorter than 24
months, clarifying notice
requirements, increasing the
period in which a writ of
restitution may be served after
judgment, prohibiting landlords
from unreasonably restricting
the sale of a mobile home,
illuminating a party's option to
terminate a dispute resolution
process requiring landlords to
disclose a mailing address in a
termination action, increasing
the notice period.
For non-payment of rent,
prohibiting landlords from
increasing rent during land use
change notice periods, requiring
landlords to provide notice of
land use change hearings,
revising civil remedies,
increasing the amount a tenant
may recover, prescribing civil
penalties. House Bill 418. House
Bill 418 have been read twice by
title is or reprinted and
referred to the House Consumer
and Public Affairs Committee
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 419 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
making an appropriation to the
local government division of the
Department of Finance and
Administration for the North
Central New Mexico Economic
Development District for a
correctional reentry workforce
development program. House Bill
419. House Bill 419 haven't been
read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
house r development, land grants
and cultural Affairs Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 420 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
making an appropriation to the
healthcare authority to address
housing support needs and
administer a housing
stabilization program, House
Bill 420.
for
How's 4:20 have been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Memorial 23, introduced by
representatives Joshua Hernandez
and Colin, a memorial declaring
February 20th, 2025. Excellence
in Rio Rancho Day in the House
of Representatives. House
Memorial 23.
House Memorial 23 haven't been
read to us by title disorder,
not printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
House Joint Memorial 5.
Intro introduced for
representatives Gonzalez and
Senator Stefaniks.
A joint memorial requesting the
New Mexico state legislature to
support federal administrative
action and permanent protections
for the upper Pecos watershed to
safeguard critical water
resources. The local economy and
the environment and cultural
heritage.
How Stewart Memorial 5.
How's joint Memorial 5 haven't
been read twice by title is
ordered printed.
And referred to the house
agricultural gas and water
resources Committee.
House Joint Memorial 6
introduced by representatives
Anyaarnu, Senator Doig,
Representative Gurola, Duncan,
and Anaya, a joint memorial
supporting strengthening
relations between Taiwan and the
United States and between Taiwan
and New Mexico in trade,
education, exchange of visits by
officials and Taiwan's
participant
participation in international
organizations. House joint
Memorial 6.
How's John Memorial 6 haven't
been read twice by title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements, gentlemen from
Katherine Grant, and Hidalgo
representative Terazas just a
quick announcement, Mr. Speaker,
uh, we have the rosary caucus
meeting tomorrow, uh, Thursday
mornings at 7:30 in the morning
at in room 326.
Members take note.
Any other announcements? I've
got a couple of announcements
members.
Um
House Bill 65.
I thought I had done this. I
swear I did this, but no one
remembers me doing it.
So I'm gonna do it again. House
Bill 65?
We need to change the committee
referral from House government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee, the House Education
Committee.
2
How's education committee then
has government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
I don't see an objection.
disordered
The second thing I have to
announce, we need to expunge
committee report from House
taxation and revenue Committee.
It was read out as a due pass
but should have been read out as
they do pass on how taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 47.
See no objection. It is so
ordered.
Members, we have joint session.
On Friday with the Senate, um,
for African American Day.
And then joint session on Monday
to hear from Roma to or to
United States senators as well
as uh one of our congress
persons.
Um, we do have, um, we do plan
on doing some 3rd, uh, 3rd
reading on the floor, uh, we're
still looking at the calendar.
It could be as soon as Friday
evening, maybe Saturday, uh, we
will keep you posted. We'll keep
both, um, uh, leadership
caucuses posted so that folks
can plan accordingly.
Um
Any other announcements before
we leave for the day.
OK, gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
See no objection. The House will
send in recess until 10:30
tomorrow morning.
