Senator Griggs Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business our
reports please.
Committee reports on targets in
addition it is so ordered.
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill twenty nine.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
of do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Nathan
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to has
been referred house
transportation public works and
capital and improvements
committee substitute for house
committee report on house
replication public works a
couple improvements Committee
substitute for house bill one
forty one all those embarrassing
if I was in line.
Yes have a good report up to.
amended respectfully submitted
and small chair Mr speaker move
adoption for adoption of federal
committee report on house bill
one seventy five of us have ever
seen focusing on.
respectfully submitted need as
much more Mr speaker move
adoption when adoption of
federal committed for renewable
two twenty six of those are
members of this and I.
amended respect those needs as
much chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
not optional Federal reporters
with three sixty five of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Was me is it going to point out.
under consideration for state
with recommendation that it to
pass in this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair Mr speaker move adoption
adoption of federal committed
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the that we move to the next
order of business messages in
addition is ordered to read
message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
Senate bill one forty five
Senate bill one seventy eight
Senate bill two oh six Senate
bill three thirty two as amended
message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill one thirty
six as amended Senate bill two
forty two Senate Judiciary
sure do the on Senate chief
clerk this is to be entered.
Gentleman from the you know.
their vests that are underneath
their coats.
As well.
And that permission is granted
can see no objection it is so
ordered.
Thank you Mr chair would get me
to that point that the record
reflect that election is server
please now the one fifty one of
final passage as we take it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the ability to
simply of a bill that to relates
to higher education extending
eligibility for unemployment
benefits to non tenure.
Tracked activity at colleges and
universities.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from.
Have a converted from Bernalillo
county yield yes I do to the
gentleman from someone County.
We're not doing this so how much
how much what is the cost
associated with this Mr speaker
and gentle lady Mr speaker and
learning it's based on who would
be working or not working in in
between sessions so there aren't
Some speaker and a lady that
that concerns me ambiguous
meaning we don't know how much
it could cost you have any as
the Mets whatsoever you have a
and gentleman from sun fun of
based on all the analyses that
we've had the in the fiscal
implications are very minor and
so could you go through some of
those analyses.
Sure if you'll hold for just a
second.
I can give you some of the facts
that test me for earlier and
I'll tell you
Oximeter you seventy three
percent of Santa Fe community
Mexico college's faculty are
part time
approximately sixty percent of
San Juan college's faculty are
part time and approximately
fifty three percent of Clovis
This will help those non tenure
track professors and faculty try
to find some kind of of of
contract and saying that they
can come back and sometimes they
the kind of left.
In the large waiting to see if
they're going to be called back
and that that is the reason why
So Mister speaker gentle lady
you you've set a couple of times
a professors and other faculty
so we talking janitors and
It is if I confuse you some of
speaker gentle lady if we have
someone that is working
through the through just the.
that there's no work they could
potentially claim unemployment
no Mr speaker because they
potentially have a contract in
subject area that may not be
that may not be called back
because there weren't enough of
students maybe to create of
many months of unemployment
would they be available to
collect.
Mr chairman and members of the
unemployed at that time I think
it the maximum is thirty two
weeks.
So Mister speaker generate well
over half a year.
that much unemployment how many
weeks what they have to work to
be eligible to collect
seven months eight months of
bill it tells you the benefit
eligibility condition so it
can't it isn't just some random
number it's as an unemployed
individual shall be eligible to
secretary may prescribe and
number two that they've
registered for work at and there
after.
Excuse me for just a second.
made by rural waiver all to
either or both of the
requirements of this paragraph
and that you can read the rest
so the issue is.
lady choose the secretary is out
the secretary of higher
education for the secretary of
workforce solutions Mr Chairman
it is the secretary of workforce
we're just a couple years away
from but was very very dire
straits at workforce solutions
Compromised let's say and so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
are we in the position to be
able to do this right now.
this because it's not going to
be a ground swell of of non
tenured faculty of applying for
these of benefits it just
depends on the institution and
lady that's why I'm I'm nervous
because it's not quantifiable.
hi I don't have any particular
area of expertise here I it's
we pass that on to all of the
employers across the state
eventually if there has to be an
increase
and so Mister speaker and gentle
if if if we notice or not
because I've asked a couple of
times and it's very undefined
and and I I think I've asked
twice or even three times at the
times it's undetermined Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
because there is no target I
just don't see how we could do
this specially the speaker and
lady to support something that I
cannot or you can not the.
Of accurately predicts of what
what the potential impacts would
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady and very nice person good
those counties thank you Mr
speaker so we heard this and
in committee Mr speaker gentle
lady and and I think I just for
some of our kind of repeat some
speaker is only the one we were
in and committee it was made
known to us that the reason
we're passing this is because
Do you remember that being said
Mr speaker don't miss Mr speaker
and gentleman I do remember that
that debate yes so Mister
speaker gentle lady the reason
Mr speaker gentle lady with is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
some part time and summer full
time.
claims it's very normal for them
to look at your work history and
how many hours you work a full
time position on a part time
position are you
to either give a give those
benefits allow them to have
those benefits of unemployment
for if they don't
they don't meet those that
and gentleman yes that's true.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
Back to where we started
these individuals are part time
employees.
I said Mr I said listen.
I want to understand a little
bit more time I understand in
the business from what it is but
I what I had initially thought.
And and he said that I said well
how many positions Mr speaker
gentle lady though just because
and our university which is for
my district
there are hundred full time
positions and and then he has
some part time positions I asked
him okay of these adjunct or
percent of them that are open
right now so I guess what I'm
trying to see Mr speaker gentle
lady is.
People that are applying for
feel like myself so you know
what I just want to I want to I
want to teach a class on the
side of to because I just wanted
I want to do that and as a by
vast majority of those do it in
that manner.
The rest of them Mr speaker
gentle lady are people that
choose to work part time or or
most of used for work part time
because there are a lot of open
Person Mr speaker gentle lady
was.
Understanding that they're
working as a part time person
understand that they can't.
Take
have to re then remember that
the person whose claiming
unemployment benefits
miss not also must also not be
earning more than their amount
average weekly wage with a
minimum of a hundred and eight
and a maximum of five sixty it
just all depends Mr speaker and
kind of caught compensation so
that they can survive until the
next semester.
I understand that Mr speaker
gentle lady the third you know
they want to work part time and
would I qualify
for how many weeks Mr speaker
gentle lady.
the point that I'm making is is
these are part time people
trying to get full time what
full time people would get if
they if they found themselves in
something special or FIR
something and he did and so for
my university Mr speaker gentle
lady is going to cost them two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
from other universities Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker we have not received
the fires from all the owner you
other universities because as I
to be a big impact on their
universities and and to respond
to your last question on the
issue of.
FIR your university presidents
FIR is assuming that everyone
will be.
Unemployed and that's not the
case all those ads are faculty
The right Mr speaker generally
and but you know it I think
things like this as well as much
as you're trying gentlelady to
weeks and you know what I find
myself in a position where maybe
of all make it to were maybe I
can continue working get
unemployment and then to put us
or or or fax in staff.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
scenario you described is.
Yes.
They would not get benefits
anyway.
Here you that's for the state Mr
speaker donate lady you're
correct if they resign or don't
go back to work they could
probably do that it's just there
something changes it could if
they could also possibly qualify
also Mr speaker gentle lady so I
I.
Google ask questions government
going to go on and on about this
but how much do we have in the
Mr chair and thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman it depends
because the university's school
of work on a reimbursement basis
from my university and you know
it's a small university you may
be right were it doesn't maybe
that's going to.
Well as soon that years what
you're saying is correct that
half of those it's still it's
still unfunded mandate of
anywhere from you know fifty
thousand a hundred a hundred
plus thousand that it could
affect our university.
lady if maybe we just used
instead of
changing the the platform or the
budget schedule that we need to
would be helpful but but one of
the issues of concern for
bringing this forward is that
sometimes the university's break
their promises to these non
Understand that Mr speaker
generally what happens is
sometimes some of the classes
don't fill out so there part
time people so I'm not going to
and I say you know what I'm hire
couple part timers here so the
for the for the busy peak that
I'm gonna have it's gonna be
temporary but I'm gonna I'm
gonna do that and give you as
think they're going to fill out
fill fill up and they don't get
filled and they have to cancel
for the lack of of enrollment.
Then but then they're not going
understand when they're when
they're going to
when they're going to
try to get these jobs right to
to apply for these jobs they
and you have all these open
positions that are full time
that individual should probably
taking the full time position Mr
make Mr speaker gentle lady
it's hard we're trying to help
people I think it's just I think
you're trying to do a good thing
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
unfilled and I just I'm having a
hard time seeing how this is
going to encourage them to fill
those positions I would much
rather Mr speaker gentle lady of
maybe maybe those full time
positions vacant higher rate so
that they could maybe encourage
full time positions thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady I
appreciated the debate Mr
us just.
Thank you Mr utility the gentle
lady from really well Santa Fe
tell us Representative.
Yielding to Michael mother from
Rio Arriba.
Thank you Mr speaker
Committee can you tell me what
Yes Mr speaker.
Yes Mr speaker delayed about two
thousand dollars.
Mr speaker and kind lady that
and the action to professors for
kind of the the people that
really made the college run
fifty percent maybe fifty to
because isn't this true Mr
speaker and madam that that
sometimes sees people teach
three to four classes and make
benefits which is one of the
incentives for higher ed
institutions to keep a large
group of non tenured tech of
retirement they have no budget
at all at this point is that
true Mr speaker and only yes
that's true.
much that our universities would
close down if we did not have
them and yet we don't pay them a
livable wage.
hopefully giving them a raise
because at this point in time
for example at the university of
New Mexico fifty two percent of
the instructional staff is
national scam it really is it I
universities in the higher up
the food chain you go to like at
Harvard and MIT and and
really not a good system Mr
speaker and and.
And I really think.
You know when we depend on them
single community college at
every single college that we
have in the state is that true a
kind lady Mr speaker donate the
charge of enrollment at house I
understand how this works so I
would have a list of people that
I've made
women I would ask them if they
won't go and but will you be a
professor and would you give me
a book listing would you do all
these things that we have to do
would say that and they'd say
yes they teach that class then
as a recruiter for you NM task I
would go out and I tried to get
students and I try to fill up
happens you know I'd really be
pushing I'd be out recruiting
students like crazy trying to
fill up these classes right I
was that was my job there but if
of getting six dollars for a
whole semester they would go
down to two but maybe the year
before maybe this semester
before they had they did have
Mr speaker and and kind.
I made I really struggled with
this system of adjunct
professors we do not give tenure
easily is that true.
it is expensive to hire tenured
faculty.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as it
is with any faculty member it it
costs a lot of money and so if
this is been going on.
At least fifty years I I would
say before World War two to it
cheaper to do that Gen faculty
they started doing it more and
more and more and now it's just
a common practice and and I
would say universities live
is that not true Mr speaker and
gentle lady yes that's very
true.
So Mr speaker and kind lady what
we're trying to do the only
thing we're trying to do here is
if they comply for they can get
a little bit of unemployment.
We would give that to them is
that what we're trying to do
here kind lady yes Mr speaker
and gentle lady yes and this is
Bernalillo authorize in full
support of your bill I think
it's the least we can do for
faculty that keep our schools
open and teachers students and
provide the education that we
Thank you Mr chairman of the
June witty from Bernalillo.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to my
Full time non tenure position.
Frequently would work during the
Mr speaker gentle lady of.
In order to be eligible for
these unemployment benefits.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
the opposite if they have been
given reasonable assurance then
Legislation is trying to change.
If they have reasonable
assurance of being rehired
they're not eligible is that.
trying to change.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
reasonable assurances in the
form of some sort of an option
contract questions more
instruments.
expectation of going back to
work in the full.
Would you be offered a contract.
Mr speaker it could possibly be
like that.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
universities are supposed to
give you reasonable assurance
that you will be re hired
the debt dilemma is a lot of non
Translating it's not always
clear to the person is
representations are being made
to Senator contractors
It's not always clear it depends
on the number of students.
But that doesn't change the fact
Mr speaker gentleman that.
Mr speaker gentle lady school
teachers for example have the
option of taking care of
compensation.
Over a twelve month period as
Professors Mr speaker and
gentleman generally no.
So.
I think she made the way parking
their vehicles parking their
vehicles the park next to each
Okay there is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis.
After she says laughing.
Mr speaker I don't know if I
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo you'll please Mr
speaker I will yield to my
friend from is it Thomas.
Yes.
gentle lady for yielding most of
my comments are read refer to
page seven of your bill.
And I do have some problem here
that right off the bat and there
is a problem there as far as I'm
concerned it's kind of the.
There's no appropriation
Mr speaker gentle lady my first
question to you is how long did
these employees have to work
before they're eligible for
this.
the claimants earnings are from
the first four calendar quarters
of the I completed quarters
before the claimants lost their
job so if they lost their job on
That is in the stated very
clearly of the state Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
in your bill and all this
paragraph on page six continuing
on page seven there are let's
see.
B. C. D. five different.
All of the conditions that
six.
Changes.
Yes ma'am you are right it is
six I was educated here in New
The very first one that you have
on page seven under number a.
An offer of employment in the
lady I have a problem with that
can you tell me provide you
included oral or implied.
And I'm not going to go down
that rabbit hole.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
circumstances it is highly
probable that there is a job
available for the claimant.
In that case is.
is just a problem it is highly
probable that this climate will
be offered a job so right there
is is shows me.
The possibility does remain that
always assuredly having a job
there is a big difference there
my opinion would you agree with
that Mr speaker highly agree
with you.
I'm sorry I didn't quite get
Is the most assuredly.
Is Stansbury better chance than
in the bill does it define an
offer of employment is it in
this section right here.
their stating verbally for
orally that they're going to
assure that person that the
gonna have a job.
Okay so Mister speaker gentle
orally or implied I don't care
whether it's in statute already
that does lead to some gray area
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
again the goal of this
legislation is simply to ensure
that the folks that are not
these six items and and that's
the issue you stated it better
than I did.
Mr speaker that was the question
ambiguous Mr speaker and gentle
lady again the question I asked
though Hamm was who is the one
that makes this offer.
So Mister speaker could be any
one of these people that heads
up the department and let's just
take for instance the twenty
that department head would be.
The one that would be making
this offer to the claimant Mr
speaker and gentle lady if they
if that person has been given
On page seven of be the offer of
employment in the following
section the on page seven.
Is made by an individual the
actual authority to offer
Okay so one more time if I'm
understanding this right that
offer of employment made by
somebody.
By an individual with excellent
Authority.
and that's where I'm going with
this Mr speaker in my opinion we
are putting a burden on
colleges.
forward to listen to the rest of
the debate thank you very much
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I will not see you in the
parking lot.
Yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Someone.
Yes.
Mr speaker I I agree with my the
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so what let's say
that this bill passes I'm an
adjunct professor.
The course is not offered.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
unemployment insurance plays a
pace and reimburses the dreamers
The college Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Do you know why and I jumped.
would be speculative in my part.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo you'd you don't know
why a class would not be offered
for from an engine faster Mr
know you they didn't have enough
students for.
Just.
Of random.
Thing that would occur.
the adjunct professor not being
able to teach the course is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
could be high tuition it could
be that a student is having
trouble getting to the
university there are various
And so it it seems to me that
one of the reasons why is that
if there's not enough
enrollment.
Then the the economics of offer
the course don't make sense the
unemployment so what in a claim
like this what percentage of the
salary what I'm entitled to if I
filed for unemployment.
Mr speaker the claimant would
get sixty percent of their
average weekly wage with the
minimum of a hundred and eight
dollars and a maximum of five
is it common for them to have
employment outside of me magic
for professor.
If if they did Mr speaker I'm
I'm sure that would not be
The claimant must also not be
Employment outside of this that
earned them a sufficient amount
of money that would.
Make them lose those employment
benefits.
entitled to work at that other
place employment and collect
unemployment from the
university.
seven.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo but sending them they
met all the criteria.
Thank you so collect
unemployment and still have
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo fide if I signed up
to be an adjunct professor.
Is it is it
Yes yes Mr speaker gentleman.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo the the the
issue that I see with this is
offer these courses in the first
place because it doesn't make
economic sense to do so and in a
sense for punishing the
university for making them
This is not like a typical
unemployment situation where you
know I I work a nine to five job
in on laid off unexpectedly
right so that's the typical
that's an R. and flips it on its
head and so what we're doing
here is I know before I sign up
to be a faculty member that
there's a legitimate chance that
I won't be able to teach a
course and I'm still able to
file for unemployment that's not
the typical soon are we think
about unemployment so Mister
speaker for those two reasons I
I don't think I can support this
bill thank you there's a debate
Thank you Mr and kind gentle
lady.
Just a couple questions so I can
make sure I'm understanding this
this properly so Mister jelly
the title this bill and it seems
Folks who are on the tenure
track or tenured yet is that
correct Mr speaker gentleman
yes.
They must be gradually thank
you.
So.
not earn ten year and are let go
how does that work with them
right now do they receive
unemployment.
on page in the current law eight
in the current law.
I'm sorry I I said page eight.
Letter a first page under the
current law.
Again I understand your bill is
not changing the current law.
But it looks like I'm I'm I've
got section eight right here as
long as the individual meets
A week eccentricities they meet
these criteria if they were on
tenure track and in turn ten
year they would get
unemployment.
because I think if I understand
correctly.
Actually we are not terminated
they're just not granted ten
year and that's like the message
Hey you need to go somewhere
Mr speaker and gentleman if they
resign yes but in the situation
we're talking about these are
non tenured.
Track employees who have been
understand I'm I'm not speaking
directly to your bill but I'm
trying to understand the lay of
the land because it's gonna help
she my opinion of whether I
support this or not and so must
The teacher of the year by the
students at the university who
had brought in money who are
doing great research and they
don't get tenure for political
reasons.
So procedurally the reason I
bring this up is.
If we're now talking about folks
who are just add John Reid who
at John to.
At different universities you
know CNN UNM you know and and
they they essentially try to.
Work full time by getting at
tenure track professors so I
really see that as an injustice
and a prominent system.
the Mr gently I'm I'm I'm not
Mr speaker and gentleman
this simply.
Helps those non tenured faculty
didn't that's it.
Yes it was originally thank you
and I and I appreciate that I
understand you're coming from.
truckload of crutches instead of
a vaccine.
Representative really I really
think we what I would like to
see is a bill that says.
universities cannot just use at
This is just treating a symptom
of that problem and I'm not sure
this is even a good solution to
that symptom some speculate I
just want to say thank you I
know your hearts in the right
and Mr speaker speaker I do see
the writing on the sidewalk.
This will be doing from someone
present Duncan.
lady I reached out to the
president of our college and I
visited with her a little bit
about this and and on on page
Oscar how the made an offer of
employment and and she said we
always make an offer of
employment in writing I have
never been to any institutional
And so I I ask again is in as
your expert witnesses have they
ever heard of anybody making an
offer for only only.
Speaker and gentleman it
My experts are saying that it
Request to to work right but if
it's if they're not giving them
a reasonable insurance or they
give them yes they're not giving
a more reasonable assurance and
the expectation by the professor
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so Mister speaker that the
I as I talked with the the
class is canceled that is in the
contract they know that that
class may be canceled so again
my question is are we going to
Mr speaker and gentleman your
college is doing it right there.
they're doing things verbally
and sometimes they don't follow
their word that's what we have
this process in place because if
lady I I assume that I could
have the college president in
set at San Juan send an email
out to everyone of the the
pass these costs on to the kids
that are going to college those
credit hours are going to go up
and and therefore it's going to
be more expensive for the from
them and and when we have full
delayed from earlier
Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker to the kind
lady from Bernalillo would yield
know poor universities and so on
and so forth.
They are actually employers are
they do not kind lady Mr speaker
a budget do they not kind lady
Mr speaker gentle lady yes and
in that budget it is
anticipated that they would have
So Mister speaker and kind lady
it seems to me that as these
universities are being discussed
positions and just sort of
tossed them out because they're
not tenured and you know ten
year takes a long time and often
And so the the individuals that
we're discussing this evening
the I'm tenure that do not get
then they did not they do not
get unemployment is that correct
that's correct if they followed
all those guidelines okay well
employers so thank you for that
kind lady so you know for the
regimen close Mr speaker I now
move I now ask.
one the vote is now open.
Was about to close.
But those members without a
recorded vote Representative
boats yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana yes
Representative Sarinana votes
yes schools are closed over
forty in the affirmative twenty
point that the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill and one
seventy two on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
stand for questions seeing
articulated close thank you Mr
speaker I now move that house
bill seventy to do now pass.
What's about to close.
call those members of the
recorded vote Representative
Cadena.
Yes Representative is yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
one.
We can reopen those who produce
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of sixty six in the
affirmative there in the
negative.
All of the house bill seventy
two as it passes house.
Mr speaker I am ready on item
number nine Senator
Representative election as a
safer placing House Bill one
sixty five as amended has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
totally replaces our existing
uniform law being the uniforms
of unclaimed property act and
it.
Items of monetary value and you
might think about some some
things like.
A health savings account money
that's placed in a health
cards that have monetary value
on the basis of.
With that Mr speaker I move that
Mr speaker I now move that house
bill one sixty five do now pass
we are final passage of house
Close.
The critical those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative David M..
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
votes the this.
Representative Nibert no more T.
for so the queen can.
The vote is now closed are one
of six five informative one in
give me to that point that the
record reflect that election is
set for placing House Bill one
seventy seven on final passage
has been taking it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the donated
explained the bill thank you Mr
both the pharmacists a business
and the doctor's office spend a
lot of time chasing each other
down so what this bill does
Mister chair Mister speaker is
insurance companies for
militaries change all the time
you might have paid forty
dollars for your prescription
last month and you go in and
they tell you it's fourteen
does is when the physician
usually up via internet makes a
prescription that if the
pharmacist finds out that it is
way way expensive art isn't
or whoever the prescriber is has
an option to check a box that
says no substitution.
and and tries to fill the
prescription the pharmacist can
look and say well this one isn't
on your formulary but this one
that's in the same class is and
then they can switch out the
a total Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker the kind
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please deal with Mr speaker I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
lady Mr speaker and gentleman of
the pharmacists have talked
about this for a long time that
they spend a lot of their time
and we all know in New Mexico we
have a shortage of all kinds of
they could be doing something
for the patient instead.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady so.
What this a playdate cancer
drugs Mr speaker gentle lady.
in some circumstances but with
the change of cancer drugs
generally it won't.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady well I and I just found
this article from the American
established in cancer care Mr
speaker so it says there also
may be subtle indicators that
why patients may be better
candidates for one treatment
versus another and then they
speaker gentle lady although we
have no come comparative data to
suggest of efficacy is different
among these drugs which I cannot
pronounce Mr speaker gentle lady
consent Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentleman as I said before
there is a box that the
physician or prescriber can
check that says No substitution
to allow.
they the one for another ailment
that is not related to cancer Mr
speaker gentle lady but the one
for cancer does have that box
checked Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentleman my
experts at all and I'm sorry my
expert is Dale Tinker who's with
use their professional judgment
and clinical judgment to
determine and it is up to kind
of up to the the lead position
to talk with the patient and let
want to make sure these folks
are protected and I know that
chances are good I mean I I
doesn't necessarily have a vote
of confidence there Mr speaker
didn't check the box and this
patient could be harmed Mr
speaker gentle lady so I'm just
concerned within that five day
period where they they've inform
the physician Mr speaker gentle
like out of our hands we cannot
legislate for someone not being
a professional.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady so I'm
just reading a lot of success
assistance expended a lot of
research on this bill Mr speaker
gentle lady and I hear I have
heard from the National Alliance
between individuals and their
health care providers Mr speaker
gentle lady do you think this
and undermines the care of the
provider not being consulted Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
Well I just I don't I think that
checking a box really concerns
me Mr speaker gentle lady
because these this could be life
or death especially with these
cancer drugs like the ones I
Mr speaker gentle lady but I
think we've we've we've gone
through that and I appreciate
your answer Mr speaker gentle
lady I'm gonna go on to the cost
twice in order to get the proper
medication Mr speaker gentle
lady are you concerned about the
health care costs potentially
have a negative effect and do
not toward the purpose of this
because if they can't afford
them they don't work.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady why I agree with you
I think that they should
definitely be able to afford it
however Mister speaker gentle
lady of this medication could
speaker gentleman Jim gentle
lady.
Drowsiness is with one drug
class they may have to try
several different drug classes
speaker gentle lady however I
think this this bill certainly
does not.
The protections especially to
these very.
but we certainly don't want
anybody and I mean anybody find
through the cracks Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman as I said in committee
is wrong but if we have to count
on the professionalism of the
prescribers to get it right it's
not it's not up to us to protect
gentle lady I don't think it
should be anyone's decision
other than that physician to
ensure that that patient gets
that particular drug Mr speaker
gentle lady regardless of drug
Jennison Representative Mason.
Mr speaker.
The gentle lady yield Mister
speaker I yield.
To ask you to bring the this
forward that Mr speaker New
Mexico pharmacists and
would I'm not a hundred percent
certain but I might guess that
big pharma who's trying to make
the most money that they cared
and pharmacy benefits managers
Thank you delight in Mr speaker
on the
She that I've got here in front
of me the opponents are some of
those which she spoke but also
The head of the New Mexico
cancer center there was line
listed on there for own the
The analysis that were against
They do need substitutes and
then I would argue that
sometimes the doctors are not.
As I don't know how to put it
the.
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the the nurse
practitioners have stated to my
experts that they did not stand
the analysis given to me.
By our analysts for the bill
thank you there's a gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Martinez.
Thank you I'm sorry Mr speaker I
yield.
Mr speaker kind lady
twenty twenty council on medical
services opposes this practice
were you aware of that Mr
speaker madam Mr speaker and
Mr speaker phone.
Kind lady I
I don't think that I was
privileged to sit on any of the
I I just have a quick question
on page two.
Starting on line eighteen.
After treating the.
Looking at.
Whatever issues I might be
facing.
She has spent time with me.
to then substitute the
medication that my doctor
prescribed Mr speaker and
gentleman as I said before if
you can't afford a prescription
Maybe you.
Maybe I don't ask my question
very clearly.
Mr speaker kind lady is my
our our substituted a different
medication for this one.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
said.
multiple times if your physician
or nurse practitioner or
physician's assistant feels like
you can not use any other
Is that a long way of saying
that the pharmacist has the
final decision.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
not state the pharmacist has the
doctor doesn't check the box
David the pharmacist has the
final say in what medication I
get is that correct kind lady.
changed if the person wants to
pay whatever it's worth but the
attempt of this bill is to make
sure that people can afford
their medications and
Mr speaker kind lady.
I I understand that but my
doctor knows me better.
So what I'm asking is.
If I move.
different pharmacy.
First time I ever walked in I
took in a prescription written
by my doctor who had been my
doctor for twenty years.
To override my doctor's decision
and say this medication would be
better Mr speaker and gentleman
it's not about better medication
it's about more affordable
tell me about what your other
what other conditions you might
have it's not like they just
**** nilly pull out of the air
and say all you do better on
this end by their clinical
they play telephone tag but
physicians and pharmacists are
professionals who are trained in
how to do this.
Mr speaker kind lady I have no
that question in my mind.
If I go to a retail pharmacist I
don't want to stand in front of
Can you.
Assure me.
That the the medication that my
doctor kind lady.
before never treated me has just
made the decision.
That this medication would be
better kind lady Mr speaker and
gentleman as I've said many
times it's not about whether
some of your other points for
the pharmacists have
consultation rooms and the
patient always has the right to
say I don't want the
Cost goes into some of these
decisions but that decision
should be between me and my
doctor who over time we have
built a relationship with I walk
into a pharmacist that.
Knowing that my doctor has
prescribed a medication for me
I'd like to take it to a
pharmacy and have a field
without the fear that the
and as I've said many times the
position on a written
prescription also has a box to
check that says No substitution
and the pharmacist will say I'm
it's in no way you
Disparaging pharmacists but I
don't know what medication I
I'm sure that that relationship
with my doctor my doctor would
know.
This is the best medication for
questioning.
I just think Mr Mr speaker kind
lady that my doctor.
myself in consultation can make
repeatedly the doctor and the
patient both have the right to
say no.
Mr speaker kind lady
their prescription pad that says
no substitution so if your
doctor forgets to do it that's
that is not a good thing but if
you go to the pharmacist and the
you can say no.
Lady Mr speaker I appreciate
that you I truly do.
curiosity is satisfied on.
I understand finally that you've
answered these questions over
and over again you've been
With all things even.
Does that pharmacist have the
ability to override the decision
of my doctor made on the
could he or she can override the
decision on the front end if
they don't do that the patient
can override the procedure at
answers that you say you
repeated over and over again.
My fear is that that the
pharmacist who has never treated
me does not have a relationship
with me.
react to medication is that is
able to make those decisions Mr
speaker kind lady.
No his professional but I just
I'm just not comfortable with
that pharmacists making
decisions.
That my doctor has made for
overriding the decision on
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen there's further debate
the gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
to rise to with with a couple
concerns regarding this Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Is it true that the
Madison.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
true.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Sometimes those therapeutic
differently than another person
would that be true Mr speaker
and gentleman that is true but
as I have said that if the
physician knows that that
prescriber I should say knows
if if the doctor fails to to
note that is there any portion
of the process by which the
pharmacist is required to
consult with the patient and
that were to occur.
How would the pharmacists know
of the particular conditions of
patients that they don't have
time and also I I I will say I'm
on the board of something called
synchronous which is the in
on the electronic medical
pharmacist has any concerns they
will they can call the doctor as
I said it may take a while I
think everyone in here knows
an inkling of a concern they
will consult the electronic
medical record they will consult
the prescriber.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
right is not part of the bill
but you brought up malpractice
insurance and.
We are certainly
you know subjecting doctors of
listening to my experts let me
tell you what he said that by
Medicaid and Medicare standards
pharmacies have to have a one
million three million dollar
My own prescriptions can I never
observe the box in fact I'm not
sure that I even see pieces of
paper and in court I I just you
I'm being prescribed acts and I
go to the pharmacy thank you
why.
I'm probably going to take that
and I'm not sure that I've ever
That has happened twice in in my
life with with a couple
prescriptions stand.
They seem to work fine with me
but I do know that there are
Different compounds affected him
greatly different even though
they were apparently the same
trying to treat the same
Substitution that are going to
react badly and I would hope
there would be more than just a
check the box type situation
Thank you very much Mr speaker
does of the most gentlemen
Torren yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the most
pharmacist Mr speaker gentle
lady they are Farm dis I don't
know what courses they take I
know they take a lot of courses
and they know medication better
than any other medical
professionals.
and I have to go to an emergency
room.
that doctor might prescribe me
the medication and not be aware
gentleman yet gentle lady gentle
lady that is correct it but the
United States is really getting
trying to develop a robust
electronic medical records so
person from Bernalillo so it
would be
the emergency doctors duty to
enter communicate with me as a
information and possible drugs
I'm on correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady absolutely.
I thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentle person from
consultation with their patient
Mr speaker and gentle gentle
lady that is part of this bill
that they must consult with the
patient and as I said the
allowed to say well go back out
and please talk to my doctor or
all try to reach my doctor I'm
concerned about this medication
correct Mr speaker and gentle
pharmacists have a a one actor
hit a three million dollar
malpractice.
This liability insurance correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady
gentle person from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentle lady my
experts as about the last four
five years so for the last four
that correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady I I wouldn't like I
wouldn't speak on that because I
don't know I know what
pharmacists Kerry I mean if I as
a physical therapist I carried a
Of from Bernalillo
just one moment sorry.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle person from Bernalillo so
About.
the farm their pharmacy there
prescribes their prescriptions
in which they are educated on
all times the patient is able to
say that is not the way I want
to go correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady this.
Absolutely.
themselves which may include
their own health which.
Financially does affect your
health correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady as I said spoken to
prescription I would be thankful
for if the pharmacist offered me
I'd.
alternative that I could afford.
other drugs the patient may be
on Mr speaker and gentle lady
absolutely.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
person for rail so it's a very
pharmaceuticals correct Mr
speaker gentle lady and and that
the patient if they had any
misgivings they could say no
they could say please talk with
again you are the advocate of
the people thank you very much
gentle person there's further
debate the gentle lady from Dona
Ana identical in Representative
Jones.
I'd like to go back to maybe the
beginning of this discussion and
and clarify the difference
between generic drugs and
pharmacist to to substitute a
generic drug which is actually a
copy Drug.
What we're talking about now and
substituted Drug that's in the
state.
The same therapeutic class so
can you explain that a little
have the same effect state
they're they're not identical in
terms of what's in them but
they're and then Mr speaker and
biological product compounded
preparation a controlled
substance a narrow therapeutic
index drugs psychotropic drugs.
to the difference because what
they already have the ability to
do is substitute a copy Drug and
we do that all the time and
usually they're cheaper and that
a lot of times that's better
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's true particularly and and
like psychotropic drugs and
things like that.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
And they're not always in the
top Mr speaker gentle lady
they're not always metabolized
in the patient's body the same
So with the with the substitute
of a drug and therapeutic class
which is an entirely different
drug with the different chemical
compound there is the
possibility that the patient
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Yes that's true of any
prescription but if it's a
as I said the position has the
option to check a box that says
no substitution and that support
Ms legislation also has the
If I remember right one of the
big motivators behind this bill
is that physicians are too busy
to answer their calls from
telephone tag with each other
yes I agree with that and I've
been in the position as a nurse
many times of trying to get
these people together for my
patients benefit I totally
prescriber physician is is too
busy to answer his calls is it
possible that you might forget
to check a box Mr speaker and
physicians are highly trained if
if they forget to check the box
that is their fault that is not
the fault of this law.
it would be so easy to forget to
check a box and possibly really
injure a patient and that that
would be a real concern for me
another thing we talked about Mr
about our our own health care
and I have been visiting with
our doctors about what's good
for us and we have a good handle
on that I would.
patients the majority of
patients are able to
explain it to pharmacists the
drugs they're on and what
they're for and I possibly what
they look like and get the
mean I have a of.
Pardon my wallet that says these
are this is what I'm on I know
what they look like
unfortunately most patient or
many patients are
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady and I I I I know
that is a real problem which is
why patients need advocates
nurses therapists and so forth
pharmacists are so knowledgeable
about medications that many
times physicians will consult
them you know what is best they
know their drugs and there's no
doubt about that very
do they have the clinical record
that the physician the
prescriber would have the one
who's responsible for the
patient's treatment and
hundred percent that they do but
we are working in that
direction.
Thank you for that so we're
depending on Mr speaker gentle
drugs that is metabolized by the
kidney.
And even in a five day period
before other required by your
would check do not substitute
yes ma'am I understand that I
would hope so too it just seems
like Mr speaker gentle lady such
box to result in a patients the
money is even and the I know
that's not going to be.
The probably the norm but it is
very possible and
The and we will I I heard you
mentioned several times would
you say that this bill is cost
driven rather than patient
driven Mr speaker and gentle
lady I don't think we can
separate the two if you can't
The prescription also doesn't do
you any good if it is non
therapeutic and if it actually
hurts you so there's that side
I we talked about this in health
and I was I voted against it and
health and because I after a
long career of of administering
medications and working with
can support this bill thank you
Mr speaker there is for the
Beijing lady from Santa Fe
Representative set up thank you
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield Mister
I believe she's yielded thank
you Mr speaker the gentle lady
I'm curious if there are other
states who have done this as
well.
gentle lady and and how we does
your do you or your expert have
any information about any
complications that have arisen
from the interchange in those
states.
Helpful in cases where there are
shortages of medication Mr
speaker and gentle lady as we
saw during the pandemic that's
not not out of the realm of
medication those specific does
and we went to every pharmacy in
Santa Fe we could not find it
and I don't use the word every
lately because is one of our
kids we couldn't find we
can get instead and you know the
the individual who's going back
and forth to the doctor went
back and forth multiple times to
check on how to do this so you
know it it seems that something
you know that might be hopeful
I'm also curious
You had a legal listed here of
all the drugs they cannot be
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I would I mean I can't say that
accidents never happen but.
thing I'm curious is you know
again I know years this is a
bill is here but again like as
well as we're looking at some of
the concerns of what I keep
hearing come up is you know if
it would be possible to have an
having the opposite does that
make sense.
Mr speaker gentle lady my
experts said they tried that a
couple years ago and they
couldn't figure out how to make
the work thank you Mr speaker
something you'd be open to in
this bill Mr speaker and gentle
lady with that with consultation
with pharmacists and prescribers
Mr speaker but hearing the
concerns and some suggestions I
mitigated okay that's fair
gentle lady thank you Mr speaker
will the lower will bring it
back when at your convenience
whenever it's ready.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Sebasti ready and
now subject to debate subject to
amendment subject to
substitution.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
eight establishes a creative
questions C. ng the gentleman
from so one percent with the.
the concern I have with this
bill is
this is my first year that I've
had a chance to actually serve
on probation.
slide in that department and
agency speaker gentle lady
aware that.
Monies that are on use just for
like full time employees they
can
move it to a different section
The department is is already
working
on on this and some speaker July
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for that question you
know we posed those questions
when we initially started
working on this project and
things I want to stress is this
isn't about creating something
just for the sake of creating a
creative industry division it's
creative initiatives around the
state
and secondly this creative
industries division is going to
be overseeing programs statewide
truly staggering people have
been so excited to learn that
they have been working on their
creative endeavors maybe a small
in speaking with a lot of the
folks that work in this area
professionally
we have found that our existing
and crafts as well as some of
our modern businesses for
example tile manufactured
Silvercity or artist that would
Of the issues that came up
In debating Committee was that
that this potentially would
just helping a private company
with expenses that they would
have if they were in a different
industry Mr speaker and gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker and
about exactly how they would
approach this creative
industries division and the
initiatives outlined and how
law including the local economic
development act which allows for
direct grants to businesses so
number one is certainly Lida
incubators are actually non
profits and those are those
requests would be permissible.
Some of these requests would
apply to workforce training
actually for public
infrastructure which is.
Chance to other public bodies so
not to businesses but they could
around the the state of a number
of projects
I have been identified that are
that are sort of shovel ready so
Zuni pueblo is interested in art
create a makers market vendor
space
Aqaba Pueblo public library
business incubator
here in Santa Fe historic
organizations are very creative
particularly when they're
talking about capital
infrastructure investments in
entering into those agreements
many of these requests could
actually be done in the form of
contracts so that the state was
getting a service of equal or
greater value than
lady so that would be like a
lending program
to some degree that I'm not sure
that that I do believe the
constitution actually
specifically prohibits all
industry division for example
could put out to bid an
initiative for workforce
training.
and that would be a contract and
and in exchange the state would
Farmington I know very well
and we have.
One area qualifies as an MRA.
I am a speaker gentle lady would
also qualify F. as in our
district Senator speaker Joe
lady at the the one program that
you mentioned that Farmington
city Farmington was was maybe
where people could to to share
their crafts speaker Julie there
there is a.
There's already several.
gentle lady just seems to be
another level of bureaucracy.
When there's already several
programs that kind of fits the
bill that you were discussing so
from your bill ever so slightly
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Mr chairman.
Just looking through virtual who
this originally was proposed
I believe two million dollars of
non recurring funding isn't
accurate.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Can you offer any specifics
about the what the true million
dollars will be utilized for.
Projects that have already been
identified
around the state that are shovel
ready and ready to go
session and see what kind of
funds have been allocated to
this initiative and make
decisions about the programs
that they can invest in but I'll
different agencies carefully
for that.
While they have the main street
project and they have that means
streets and they have many other
our extremely rural areas so
I'll give you an example we have
crossroads art and ecology lab
in lab you
it is a remote business not near
practical and we think that are
a little bit of assistance for
that type of project whether
be able to get and our online
job creation so two million
dollars maybe may not seem like
a lot but for this industry and
economic development department.
Classroom.
crossroads art and ecology lab.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's a
nonprofit and for profit as
well.
Name to crossroads in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee that's correct.
Speaker gentle lady I've had
individual people.
With.
This piece of legislation.
Address have.
with the anti donation clause
this is not contemplating
individual
requests that would be out of
compliance with the anti
arts or from other programs
funded by Congress or the
federal level and you know I'll
give you an example there was it
winegrowers and so that grant
flowed through a state agency
but it was federal funds and it
was distributed based on the
was a great effective use of
that funding to help those
businesses sort of maintain
through what was kind of a
difficult period of that just
happened just a couple years ago
With the with the federal with
the state funds that are
contemplated in House Bill to
the list of projects or there's
those artists without giving
them direct grants but creating
a service in a particular
location so that artists could
many people as sort of a
nighttime or weekend artistic
endeavor could grow into
something that could actually
start to really support their
family but there's also a larger
wonderful business and has grown
significantly and they're
shipping tile all over the
country we have other larger
scale businesses like that too
Businesses and just you.
One of the mill thank.
How.
already and can you tell me what
the budget is.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
we do have examples from
that you asked Mr speaker and
gentleman about the difference
between and three of a bakery
businesses have different needs
so for example we have many
native American artists in New
Mexico and they make their
living through this spring and
summer native arts markets
remote for on tribal lands that
that kind of location
they're not on a main street
they don't necessarily have a
support and in this particular
example native artist to make
their make a living that will
last the entire year when
they're making all of their
entire years living or they're
expected revenue from just that
one endeavor that they're doing
in one weekend and so how can we
them grow that into a
sustainable income that is going
to support their families.
In your district.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee it's not specified although
we do specify in house bill
that state take a yes fifty
percent of the funds shall be
awarded to projects or programs
in rural or underserved
Mr speaker gentle lady with the
answer to my question the.
Half of the.
Mr speaker and gentleman no I
don't I really truly don't
believe so
communities around the state
even though I love my my home in
my hometown there many many
communities that have don't have
The term.
More support for this piece of
legislation.
That is.
happy with my answer.
we had we did an amendment in
the house commerce and economic
gentlelady that's the answer
that I was hoping for thank you
Mr.
As for the debate delay from
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
I will gladly yield to my friend
from Chavez.
Mr speaker thank you I was
intrigued when I first saw the
title of your bill like a
treatment read it like three or
Bill does pass code that fall
under creative industries.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What is it that.
Will be duplicated with the
creation of the.
Creative industry division.
referred to also removed tourism
so tourism is not and activity
that would be funded through
this initiative although
certainly there's lots of
have more artists to display
their wares or really build
programming around those
festivals we could increase
tourism but that's not the
purpose of this.
areas and let me tell you what
there are lots of art is one of
our state artist that's what
we're talking about in this
creative.
Whatever it's called here the
We have the are good to a
performing arts center in R. T.
should we have are in the park
in our two should we have the
Christmas extravaganza and
bring those people in the yes it
does and madam Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
talking about requests for this
requests for projects or
programs and to promote the
growth of creative industries.
You're saying that fifty percent
lady who does make that
selection.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Chavis the way that this would
existing laws that govern our
use of of state funds would
apply.
now I don't feel like it's a.
Best interest of the taxpayers
of the state one of we have two
different departments one of
them.
all encompassing here whenever
you're talking about the
creative industry division.
creative industry division.
Yes Mr speaker and lady from
Chavis similar to the outdoor
for example they may
be able to utilize the local
economic development acts Lida
to do grants to businesses that
planning business licensing
working through
how what they're revenue plan
might be workforce training is
also outside of the anti
contemplated that wouldn't
necessarily be tourist
attractions but it could be
things like I shared maker space
that artists could rent that you
could come in and utilize turn
those years into something that
they could then market and and
earn that extra income and and
so that would be an example of a
a program that would be in
Of.
The person that is involved in
Mr speaker gentle lady you know.
Tattoo artists probably do
qualify as creative
Creative industries workforce
training program or a thank you
beta kind of program and that
they could.
Receive that type of service.
Okay so Mister speaker and
gentle lady when a we're talking
about.
Explain to me what you mean by
under served communities a need
an explanation there.
that target underserved and so
in this case you know some of
the businesses that I have
mentioned or the the creative
I think rural and underserved
sometimes go hand in hand but
not always so there's a
burgeoning arts community in
arts councils around the state
legislative
you know for example
You okay we can get a looking at
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
mean to burst your bubble but
that our community that has been
and Russell has been there for
artists to come in and the art
exhibits all change and
everything.
But I don't see.
Browse full as being an
underserved communities.
Mr speaker.
And gentle lady I was reading
the if I are here and I'm kind
figuring gentlelady yes I have
okay so Mister speaker gentle
lady this is a problem I have
with it down towards the bottom
of it this is conflict
if you wouldn't mind giving me
just a moment so I can finance
funding every time many pieces
of paper here.
Mr speaker and lady from Chavis
I am there.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
your regional bill as for sixty
five million dollars which was
to be appropriated from the
general fund and then two
million appropriated from the
generously of helped by the oil
and gas industry in our state is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Highest contributor to our
state's economy is agriculture.
Mr speaker as I told members of
this body many many times every
duplication companionship
relationship is states and I
will read verbatim.
House Bill Page relates to house
economies and individuals
transitioning away from fossil
fuels can you explain that to me
Mr speaker and gentle lady
eight when I read this in that
it is creating a division at the
economic development department
as does house bill one eighty
it creates and the revenues it
does by did state and of I think
most of us got here today by
either vehicle or bicycle
whatever the case may be and the
going on so there's there's your
agricultural aspect of it
because they do rely on the oil
and gas industry to make sure
The EDD.
Is not going to be your friend
Of the division that you are
trying to create to me that is
not a good use of the taxpayers
money and it is not a good shape
underserved communities of the
state because I don't think that
will actually happen whenever
the tourism industry is already
Thank you Mr speaker and
apologize up front I'm not quite
as eloquent is some of the other
people over here.
or if I if I go to the and
movements and contacts page.
Under creative industries.
Mr speaker and gentle lady can
you to provide person to me.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
The end of the bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee but I wanted to include
Individuals just because many of
created a business plan but with
some services and some coaching
and some training from a program
impressive person and she was a
great example of someone who I
think could really benefit from
that kind of support and
mentorship and training.
from Santa Fe the thank you to
the gentleman firmly.
I apologize.
The reason I asked that question
And building CTE within our
different communities.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
curious could I have a fifteen
year old and would job.
Mr speaker and Jennifer
gentleman from Lee I would not
expect individuals to be
in that that are fit in the
creative industry field for
example
at highland university there's a
media arts and software degree
attending that coding camp and
and miss you and benefiting from
from that programming.
Generally I go back to the
is if we go through the rest of
the bill that there's
opportunities Mr speaker and
gentle lady to apply for funding
and.
year over a sixteen year old
that utilizing
State equipment from from going
after this bill can you show me
somewhere inside this
He talked about
The opportunities for.
you give me to the separation
within the bill yes Mr speaker
and gentleman family if you will
awarded grants it does not
include
the the it the scenario you're
describing with that Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman if you
look at page three.
With their we're outlining
you know the training the
workforce training educational
initiatives
that if you look at specifically
like lines eleven three thirteen
Another point that I want to ask
about Mr speaker and gentle lady
I have in front of me the
January two thousand twenty
three version of the
Areas Mr speaker and gentle lady
if you can find somewhere
between one sixteen maybe page
one twenty we're.
somewhere within this.
Mr speaker and gentleman
This section of the constitution
article nine section fourteen
UP I.
Mr speaker and gentleman but I
do believe that is authorized.
it in this section of the
Ingenuity and think it is and
and look it's we do it all the
time I if you want to continue
the line of questioning we're
not gonna sit here and read
The the gentle lady brought the
topic up.
With respect to that workforce
specific line you can continue
asking questions I'm sure
experts can go through the
constitution and try to find
whatever element is that you're
looking for and I think that
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
the original bill.
We talk about for profit and for
nonprofit.
Mr speaker and only the the.
As a communities that choose to
chooses to table involved with
manta and have a a lot of our
ordinance.
House bill eight I don't see
anywhere where the.
With respect to potential grants
lady can you can you point me to
that area.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for asking about that return
on investment
that's invested five percent of
New Mexico employees work in the
creative industry five point six
billion dollars is currently
being contributed to the
lot of time over the summer
gathering this data working with
you NM to look at the at the
impact on our economy and the
least a hundred fifty percent
return on investment based on
research of our New Mexico arts
organizations.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
trying to figure out how I want
to continue on until we get to
the point where I get the
response from the experts with
respect to section nine article
infrastructure.
This this this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
There is a request for
assistance actually.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think I just lied to you ma'am
and house transportation I heard
question would wild spirit with
sanctuary be considered.
In any way eligible underneath
this bill from an art
standpoint.
I did want to return to your
previous question if I may
in that.
Workforce training would not is
you cited workforce training
would be for example Economic
Development Department putting
out an RFP to stay we would like
to provide workforce training
Thank you for.
Circling back with me on that
answer.
I.
aware the with in some of the
analysis or provided there's
actually a conflict between the
economic development department
and department of tourism and
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
the verbiage.
According to the New Mexico
would agree with that didn't say
we propose a bit it should say
we like it.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
thank you for raising that we
department is doing some
absolutely incredible things in
terms of marketing New Mexico
products
Don't that are not specific to
that because they involve
workforce training the involve
community building they involve
the development of shared
community resources for example
tourist attractions or going to
increase tourism.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for that answer so
it is Mr speaker and gentle lady
the creative industries division
because none of that occurs
within the state of New Mexico
right now underneath the purview
of any of the thirty one
Would that be an accurate
statement or would that be an
inaccurate statement.
business owners it was very
clear to us that there is no one
had has as been created in a
couple of other states and I
percent more visual artists per
capita in New Mexico than any
other state in the nation and
yet there are other states that
have a focused creative
I Mr speaker and gentleman I
guess I would return to the
simple
of the Business and lie you
their business and not not
having a home in any particular
agency right now.
Many of the if you don't mind
different departments within
Under Secretary anywhere that
could help.
Help out with the one you.
for you in this conversation
with what outdoor recreation
division has done which is you
both private philanthropic and
and in addition federal funds to
expand outdoor recreation
because of that focused effort
looking for opportunities to
expand small businesses all over
the state looking at the capitol
infrastructure that's needed
really created a massive
explosion in the industry we
have an incredible return on
investment so
in twenty twenty one
percent of the state GDP that
was an increase of four hundred
million over twenty twenty.
At the end of this what what
we're we're I'm getting to is we
actually have departments we
actually have secretaries.
The fact that those department
secretaries for.
Individual division directors
are communicating with each
other shouldn't be the issue
working on the same as the same
team towards a common goal Mr
speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate the call the
conversation that I cannot
support your bill thank you
appreciate very much the members
taking this time to hear about
the creative industry and all
that we hope it will bring to
our beautiful state I know all
would ask that I move that house
bill eight as twice amended do
now pass.
Passage of house bill latest
twice amended the vote is now
open.
yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman
revealed the hill votes yes
Representative Rubio yes.
So.
Representative Sarinana votes
no.
Is now closed privative fifty
Roosevelt Chavis ready and item
number one.
Yes Mr speaker we take me to
bill thank you Mr speaker this
bill simply is providing for
testimony for analysts on D. W.
If you don't know no better Mr
speaker I would ask that H. B.
one fifty nine do now pass for a
final passage of house bill one
One more time.
Representative.
Representative Rubio.
bill one fifty nine has duly
passed this house.
Julie familiar presented Chasey.
Now Spence committee meeting
tomorrow.
I believe there are some meeting
tomorrow check the golden rod.
We will have lunch legislative
room three zero five thank you
members take note.
Any other committees generally
three seventeen we will not hear
house bill twelve or house bill
four fifty.
Will not hear households rover
hassle for fifty we will hear
the other three bills on the
days taking the bar this week we
need to give her a big round of
applause agitations.
Amazing gentleman from
representative of all
Representative Lente thank you
Mr speaker.
What to check took the borrow
she was at the bar for two days.
is a high dollar three million
dollar plus collaborative
amounts list and that it is not
a collaborative amount that is
not comprehensive at this point
worth I think it gave some
people a snapshot of what to
expect thank was figured.
Appreciate the transparency we
appreciate the work gentlelady
from some of those.
Gentlelady from Chavis.
minerals today I'm talking about
a rock.
Mr speaker the rock I'm talking
about is my husband.
I want to wish him Happy twenty
Has been generated.
I'm sure you send them a nice
bottle of wine.
Maker's mark.
Four thirty.
Tomorrow.
House was in recess until four
thirty tomorrow afternoon thank
everybody have a great evening.
