Rick Padilla, executive director
for apologize. Can he just told
me I forgot about Rogue.
I take Ro.
Armstrong
Breo
Brown.
Ah, excuse me, do, Rebecca Doe.
Oh, I'm sorry.
That you're here.
Hernandez.
Hernandez.
Hill.
Jones.
Munster.
Romero.
Laura.
De la Cruz.
We have a quorum. Thank you.
Candy or Ellie has been a little
bit under the weather. I know
Representative Ackman Viheel has
been under the weather and so
it's going around. You need a
mask, wear a mask, guys. Thank
you.
All right, Mr. Chairman, again,
members, good morning. It's good
to see everybody again. We are
in our last two districts here
today. We're gonna present
districts 2 and 3. my name is
Rick Padil. I'm the executive
director for highway operations
here at Department of
Transportation. The District 2
headquartered is in Roswell.
Uh, they're in the southeast
part of the state, the Permian
Basin. I know Representative
Brown is, is part of that
district. So that, Mr. Chairman,
I'll turn it over to Mister
Sanchez.
Uh, good morning, Chairman
fellow committee members
Francisco Sanchez, I'm the
district to engineer, as Rick
stated, I, I oversee operations
in Southeast New Mexico.
Um, we represent 11 counties uh
uh 8 main counties which are
Chavez, Lincoln, Otero, Eddie,
Lee, Roosevelt, Curry, Debaca,
and we have small parts in
Guadalupe, Torrance and Socorro
County, uh, we are the largest
district by land mass in in the
state, uh, we have the most lane
miles of any district. We, we
maintain over 777,700 miles.
What, what a lot of people don't
recognize or know is that we
don't have interstates, but we
do have the, the most 4 lane
miles of any district.
Uh, we are represented by Gary
Toi. He's our district 2
commissioner.
Um
Our annual budget average is
around 45 million. That's the
operating budget with with
payroll and all the benefits,
you know, IT uh maintenance
budget. We do this with a total
staff of 334 members and you can
see the breakdown on our staff
is broken down and the right
hand corner.
These two, these are the House
bill.
Laws funding over the years from
2020 to current, um,
I'd like to highlight a couple
of things. One, number one,
there's a lot of complete, you
know, District 2 has, has
allocated and spent 90% of all
the funding that we received to
the House bill. So we're real
good at
receive money taking care of
business and, and, and doing
what we need to do in the roads.
I'd like to highlight, uh, from
the laws of 2021, that top
project UX 60 for 21 million.
Uh, the benefit when we do
receive general fund money is
this is a large project. It's
over $42 million. Uh, we were.
you were, you know, lucky to get
the 21 million and we were
supplement that we leverage that
with our federal funds by by
getting this 21 million, we're
able to put the project out
earlier.
Uh, if we had to try to fund it
through the district targets,
we'd probably barely be going to
construction now.
And so right now we're down to
the, you were about 3 quarters
done, we'll have this done in in
the fall. So a real benefit
there. Another one I'd like to
highlight is we received $5
million for 380. Uh, we use this
for for design and this really
helps us get the corridor ready
for construction because we
already have the plans ready and
ready to go when we do receive
funding or we can utilize our
own internal federal or state
funding.
Um
You go to page 3, it's kind of
just a representative.
Of um of where we utilize the
laws of House Bill 2, as you can
see, we've, we've spread it out
quite a bit over District 2, but
also hit our, our priorities
that we're looking for. It does
show that 380 looks like it's
completed because it's the whole
corridor, but like I stated in
the previous page, we use that 5
million to design 3 phases.
There's a total of 6 phases that
we need to do on 380, uh, right
now, phase one.
was let in January and were
ready to break ground, uh, phase
two will be let this summer and
we'll be using the STB bonds for
that. So the first phase is 25
million, the second phase will
be 45 million.
Uh, if you go to page 4, it's
kind of
Kind of an overview of our, our
projects over the the last 5
years in the future, uh.
380, like I said, we're ready to
go out with phase one and phase
2.
Uh, that is approximately 75
million.
Uh, the total 6 phases.
is 225 million. So there there
is a little gap there in our
380, that's one of our priority
projects. Our two top priority
projects in District 2 is New
Mexico 12031, that's number one
and number 2 would be US 380. So
on the 380, we have two phases
ready. We have the 3rd design
for 45 million, so we're hoping
to
received funding for that over
the next couple of years so we
can get that out there delivered
to the public on that corridor.
Right now, 128, the overall cost
for all the improvements on 31
and 128 at least for the
priorities, all the priority
sections is $350 million.
Right now, District 2 has $150
million of projects ready or
ready to go after construction.
So the gap in funding on our
priority projects, so.
128 and 31 is 200 million.
Page 5. These are just our
active construction projects
across the district, um, a
pretty good list there if you're
at up add up that column right
now active in construction, we
have over $200 million in work.
That's quite a bit of work for
our construction staff, but
we're we're managing it and
we're delivering some great
projects to to the public.
Um
last year and a half, we
delivered um I'll start with the
upcoming maintenance in the next
6 months, we're going to be
delivering $18 million worth of
maintenance projects. This is a
combination of our internal
budget.
On the first sheet we received
about 6 million for contract
maintenance. Uh, we've also
been, uh, receiving legislative
money for maintenance, and this
is a combination of both, and so
these are the upcoming projects
will be completed in the next 6
months, $18 million.
the completed projects are on
the bottom in the last year and
a half, we completed.
24 million, almost 25 million in
maintenance, uh, for the
district engineer.
Uh, one thing I do love to do, I
love to put pavement down, you
know, our roads, we haven't been
funded at the the level we need
to keep our system up and so
anytime we can get maintenance
money, it really helps us
preserve our system and over the
last few years, you know.
You know, thank the legislature
for, you know, providing um.
maintenance money, and that's
really helped us get back to the
level that we need, and
especially in our US routes and
our priority routes.
Page 6 is an overview of our
transportation project fund, of
course this goes to the local
governments, um.
Love this program, uh, there's
been a lot of great projects
and, and all the municipalities
across District 2.
Of course, it started in 2019 FY
2019, and as you go through uh
the list is pretty robust.
You can go to page 6 and 7.
And then on page.
Um
a summary of this year's
project, uh, if you were to do
all of them, it'd be a big
cluster of dots everywhere, uh.
That's one program that
We've been fortunate enough to,
to deliver or the locals have
been able to deliver all over
the district 2.
So it's, it's been a really good
program.
Um, like I said, this is just a
summary of 2025.
Page 9 is our, it's a
spreadsheet I know it's kind of
tough to read, but this is our
local government road fund.
And it just compasses uh from
2021.
You go through 9, 10, you can
see how many communities are
funded.
Levin and then.
12 is is.
Same thing as a summary map.
This is from uh 2025, so we're
we're averaging about 8 million
a year that we give away on this
this program and you can see the
various programs that we have,
uh.
The municipal, the school bus
routes, the county, the co-ops,
the schools, and the municipal
co ops, co-ops, um, the map
represents, you know, we try to
be as equitable as possible to
our communities, uh, this one's
at District discretion when they
put it into application myself
and the assistant district
engineer, local government
liaison review the projects and
And we really try to do every
year, make sure every community
is getting some of that money
based on their projects. So we,
we do a real good job of
rotating through all the
communities on the local
Uh, local government road fund.
Yeah
All right, and the last one is
just equipment and
Rick said
Move on to any questions,
Chairman Dela Cruz and committee
members.
members, do we have any
questions?
I just want to mention that the
local road fund is just so
important.
To residents.
Because the reality is that a
lot of counties and towns,
villages just simply don't have
the capital to keep their local
roads up to snuff.
And taxpayers.
That's where
Hardened the pun, the rubber
meets the road. They're on their
local road all the time.
Whether they're going from home
to the to the grocery store or
or in our case and or in
Carrizozo, we go from the house,
my, my in-laws house to the
family dollar and so when those
roads are in disrepair.
It's, it's what the taxpayer
sees.
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Thelma, good to see you this
morning, and I, I wanna start
Mr. Chair by
thinking Francisco for being so
helpful and available and um
always answering our questions.
We really appreciate all that
you do, and we know the demands
are, are strong and it's all
supply and demand and.
I know you've
I apologize.
I did want to ask um Francisco,
Mr. Chair, about.
The possibility, I hope the
probability of
And a DOT District 2 working
with Eddie.
Works
Or getting some work done,
especially on 31.
And if you could just hear.
Germany
in her brown, uh, last year
there was a proposal for a joint
powers agreement between the
District 2 or NMDOT in Eddy
County to take on some work on
New Mexico 31 of.
You know, we are a large
district, the infrastructure is
huge in the corridor of New
Mexico 31 and 28.
You're looking at, oh, you know,
over 100 miles, um.
Any kind of partnership that
would help the state
infrastructure would be
beneficial it just would have to
be specific.
To what the scope of work is in
the case of 31, uh, if Ed County
was to enter into the joint
powers agreement, it would
really work on, on a maintenance
type of contract, uh where they
could come in and do an intern
project, uh, to get us to the
bigger scope of work that we
need to do in 31, um.
Sometimes working in the the
locals is, is, is, is really
great. We, we have a great
partnership with Lady County.
We've partnered on projects, uh,
we got a great relationship and
so if it could be a targeted
project, I think there'll be a
lot of value in that type of
partnership.
Um
If we have to do the full scope
of work which is expansion to a
four-lane uh right away
utilities, uh.
We like to follow our process,
uh, because ultimately our goal
we would love to fund these
projects with state money. It
would help us expedite it, uh,
entry into the federal process
we do have to follow the rules,
uh, but if I think of the
The project was targeted on 31,
I think it would be a benefit
for uh Eddie County to be be a
partner with us.
Mr. Chairman and uh Francisco, I
carried that legislation last
year.
Um
I understand this year there
have been some discussions
about, so I appreciate.
That accommodation and you know
Eddie Kelty.
Really does want to help where
it can.
So, Mr. Chair, I, um,
Just want to ask another
question.
Yes, this one is for Francisco
as well.
What is the
deletion date expected for.
So right now,
As stated, we have about $150
million out of the 350 million.
Available and so that's a very
difficult question, um.
whoresentative Brown, uh, right
now we're breaking up in phases
and trying to deliver the
highest priority projects as
possible, the high risk, low
safety, so I can break it down
by the phases we have already,
uh, we're ready to go out
letting for the city of jail.
They'll take approximately 2
years, uh, we're about to, um,
let in the, in the, in the fall,
the STB bonds projects for 45
million, and that will encompass
Delaware Basin, Diamond,
Brennato, and expansion of
The highway there, you know,
we'll let that, you know, fall,
winter, you're looking at
another couple of years and so
it's kind of hard to give
specifics because we're doing
targeted improvements on the
corridor unless we get a major
funding packet.
So that's, that's where we're at
right now.
I do have one last question, Mr.
Chairman.
So the northern part of New
Mexico.
Really gets a lot of harsh
winter weather typically.
The southern part of the state,
perhaps fares a little better on
that. Do we have a longer
construction season in the
south, say, in District 2,
typically.
Chairman Representative Brown,
we do, and it's a great benefit
for us. We're able to have
contractors work longer, you
know, we're able to do a project
a little bit faster because of
the, the warm weather we have in
District 2 in the construction
season is a lot longer than the
northern districts. Thank you
very much.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Sanchez, um.
And everyone else from DOT, you
guys always do a great um
report.
Um, I just wondered, um, and I
saw that on the map you and
there's a couple of projects at
Riodoso.
wondered if you wanted to
comment regarding the flyers and
the impact on the roads.
And representative um yes that
was definitely a difficult time
for the community.
District 2 was involved heavily
in the fires and the flooding,
you know, during the fires, we
took on a lot of the traffic
controls, trying to keep the
public safe, work with law
enforcement for the evacuations
uh during the flooding, of
course, you know, this being a
mountainous area, you you get
the monsoon rains and the
flooding and with the scar, it
it it did damage some of the
infrastructure, the, the toll of
the infrastructure damage was
mainly the local.
They lost, you know, 5 bridges,
uh, we're assisting with that,
you know, we're actually helping
construct one of them.
Um, the
The main highways through those
areas, Yosemite, New Mexico 48.
You're in really good shape.
They didn't take much damage. We
did see some damage on the
structures on Yosemite and
we're, we're working on those
right now to get those back in
service.
Mr. Chair, just to follow up,
um, did you receive any federal
funding for um improvement,
emergency um road improvements.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
great question, um, so.
Just like, uh, Mr. Sanchez said
we didn't sustain a whole lot of
damage. Had we in the number had
got up probably to 323 million
and above, yes, we would have
absolutely 100% and um you know,
saw some FHWA or some ER funds,
um, so we were lucky in this
case. I know the locals didn't
fare that well, but um we were
lucky in our infrastructure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lunstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
had a few questions about this
district, um.
Do you have I tan.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, we
do not. We have, we have no
interstates in District 4, and
District 2.
I didn't, I didn't realize you
didn't have any interstates. I'm
not sure where I tend ends then
in New Mexico.
Mr. Cherry Representative of Ian
at least in the southern portion
is, is going through uh District
one that they maintain ITN
through District one in the
southern part of the state.
My question is, is I'm looking
at your FY 25 budget.
On the first page.
Now, remind me.
Isn't the operating budget.
case for construction.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
the operating budget does not
pay for construction. Are you
specific guys for construction
projects.
My question is, is that?
Where in your budget are the
where's the construction piece
uh for your budget.
So Mr. Chair Representative Art,
the construction piece would be
on page
4
So this is our every project
that's programmed within the.
The state transportation
improvement plan.
Of course, that's a combination
of our federal funds, some of
these are funded through state
whether the House bill and of
course our our match portion of
of through the state road fund
this is representative of how we
we allocate and pay for our
construction projects.
Mr. Chairman and
I'd always understood that the
road fund matched federal funds.
Or
maintenance of interstates, is
that?
still correct.
How, how do we do the
interstate, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, that is not
correct. So FHWA does not
participate in maintenance.
they'll participate obviously in
major construction projects and
some minor things like striping
and some other things. They have
some all our programs that we
can take care uh take advantage
of, but they do not participate
in maintenance. That is all
state funds. OK, so Mr.
Chairman, when it comes to
The work I see on I-40.
And it's under DOT contracted by
uh you guys.
How's it paid for? What part of
the budget is it coming out of?
Mr. Chairman and and
Representative that that's
coming from the state road fund
in part of what you saw in his
first page, page one in his, in
his maintenance program that
comes from there.
OK.
And make
And I guess my concern is, is I
want to make sure that District
2 isn't being shortchanged
because they don't have an
interstate.
And that's what I was trying to
get at is that if it's the only
district in the whole state that
doesn't have an interstate.
And we're putting funding into
that.
Road funding, I wanted to make
sure because they don't.
They're not consistent with the
two districts, Mr. Chairman, if
you look at the FY 25 budget for
the district that we're going to
hear next.
We don't, it's very different
for operating.
A very different number for
operating. It's a very different
number when it comes to um.
Construction, we don't have
construction in this summary
district 2.
So I, I just bring that to
Representative Brown's attention
because.
We want to make sure that this
district is also getting its
share.
Of um
road money.
Or
But you don't have any
interstates, but it's going on
to state roads and, is that
correct? Yes, ma'am, Mr.
Chairman, that's correct. So
although they don't have
interstates, the money that we
received it through hospital
funding or either formulaic um
is still distributed.
Pretty much fairly down the line
equal, so they do get their fair
share, um, I could tell you that
US 285 and US 380 almost behave
like a little interstate to them
and that's really, you know. OK,
uh, does that.
Does that go to Carlsbad or I
don't, I can't see this map well
enough. Is it going to Carl's
representative yes, US 25 goes
all the way into Carlsbad and
then on into Texas. OK.
Um
The other question I had, this
is a little historical, is that
A few years ago, we put money
into a brine well.
And um in that area.
What road was it that was
affected by Mr. Chairman,
representative, that was uh
62,180.
Uh, 285 and 62 and 8 are the
main corridors that go to
Carlsbad, they why off in the
middle of the town, and that's
where the Brian well was, we
call it all fixed up now and we
don't have any problems with
roads caving in or.
Sinkhos Mr. Chair
Representative, the the
The project was completed about
a year and a half ago, uh, it's
stabilized. They continue to
monitor it and for the most part
it's been taken care of and
there's no threat to the public
that that sinho will collapse.
OK. And finally, Mr. Chairman,
so do we have a problem with
sinkholes in that district.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, I
wouldn't necessarily say a
problem, but it is a
consideration when we're
designing the highways like 128,
uh.
285 when we've recently finished
US 285. We did, uh, there's some
cars and formations adjacent to
the highway, and so it is a
consideration that we look for
when we're designing our
highways and it'll be a
consideration on New Mexico 128,
uh, the Clothes are along the
corridors are very minor. Uh,
they're, they're able to address
during construction, uh, I can't
really speak for outside the
corridor and some of the
drilling areas, but on the
highway they are there, but
they're minor and we're able to
address them.
During our design process.
Thank you
Chairman Romero
Oh, I didn't have a question,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
We just wanted to hear you talk.
Alright, hey, I'm waiting for
the next district. Thank you,
Mr. Truman.
Thank you, Mr. Sanchez. Mr.
Chair, committee members, thank
you. uh, let's, um, let's see if
anybody has any questions
related to this particular
district before we go to the
next one.
Do we have any public comment
or?
We're good. Thank you.
Brasher.
Mr. Chairman
This is uh
The one you've been waiting for
is so to speak.
Um, I'd like to introduce Mr.
Paul Brasher, District 3
engineer. He's responsible for
the Albuquerque metro area, um.
a tenured district engineer with
us who's been around a long,
long time. We got a lot of
information for you also. I'll
turn it over to him. Thank you.
Paul Brasher on the District 3
engineer for New Mexico DOT.
Um, you have in front of you the
uh report for this district
which shows uh the configuration
of the district, how it's carved
out of the state and its general
configuration.
Uh, it encompasses Berlio
Valencia and portions of Sanval
Socorro, uh.
Counties where the district
headquarters in Albuquerque.
Responsible for maintaining
approximately 2,061 lane miles
of roadway, and we were close
closely with 8 tribal
governments and 16 local
government entities meter uh
transportation goals. Here's the
thing about District 3 is that
uh it's got the highest
concentration of population and
jobs in the state as of 2023.
were approximately 907,000
people and 403,000 jobs, which
represents um,
42% of the state's population.
And about 48% of the jobs and
about 300% of the traffic in the
state, so those 2061 miles of
roads.
Have a lot of miles on them.
You, uh, we are, uh, assisted in
carrying out policies of the DOT
by our commissioner Miss Hilma
Chinanawi, who is the District 3
commissioner for us, the inset
and my drawing on page one shows
the uh.
I like it when that happens.
The insight in the drawing, uh,
uh, on my first page shows,
shows our operating budget at
$22 million contract maintenance
at 8 million field supplies and
so forth, you can read.
Let me note though that I do
list the cons the construction
contracts. This is work under
construction right now.
At uh just under $300 million.
More on that later. I do have a
a specific listing of that. Um,
we do all this, uh.
Through the efforts of 209
positions, uh, general, uh,
administrative, uh, supports 35
positions in maintenance. We
have 81 positions in
construction, uh 62 positions
and 31, uh positions on the
injuring side, turning into the
second page. I've got this
listing.
Of the house bill monies that
the legislature in its wisdom,
uh, authorized the Department of
Transportation District 3 to
spend and you'll notice that
most of them in that
most of them are are spent or
completed or well in progress or
soon to be completed if you look
at 2021.
2020, 21, 22, 23, uh, you'll see
that they're mostly completed.
You may recognize some um
Some, uh, projects of note, uh,
particularly, uh, you know, we
got some, we've got some right
away acquisition for Triska
Visa, for example, uh, some, uh,
participation Norte.
On the west side, we've got uh.
Uh
A participation in those Luna
east-west corridor, uh, looking
at the uh.
The lower list on page 2.
Of course,
We, our priorities are always
the interstates and the US
routes and
You'll note we do have
interstate projects there and of
course some state route.
State Route projects, these are
distributed pretty well
geographically throughout the
district.
The next sheet shows a map where
uh we've sketched out.
Uh, where most of those, uh,
where those house build projects
have gone.
Where they are have mostly been
completed or where they are
under construction by year uh
color coded uh with the links
shown on this map, uh, I think
what you get from this is that
the projects are have been
distributed.
Pretty evenly geographically
throughout the district.
district is 3,107 square miles
and uh we managed to get the
projects pretty much everywhere.
Uh, turning the page, this is
the, this is the uh.
Listening of projects under
construction I was bragging
about here for $296 million and
there are 6 of them, as you can
see in the map shows
geographically, uh,
More or less where they are, but
you'll, you probably all are
pretty much aware that our
flagship project right now is
the I-25, uh, Montgomery
Comanche, uh design build uh
currently under construction and
uh and doing well there a couple
of photos in this of that uh.
photographs that in my report
here at any rate, um, this shows
where those uh this gives us an
idea of where those projects are
like a project number 2, it
happens to be a roundabout, it's
the reconstruction of uh New
Mexico, uh 5:36 at New Mexico
14, but the intersection of
Frost Road.
Uh, used to be a triangle there
and now we've converted into
we're in the process of
converting to a roundabout it's
forging ahead here.
Um
As you are aware, in 2019 in the
legislature's wisdom, it created
the transportation project fund.
Uh, then in 2020.
Uh, um, added the tribal
governments as for as eligible
partners in the transportation
project fund and
And then, um,
The next year, 2021, that would
be by uh by Senate bill, the
fund of about $40 million was
made recurring at any rate, this
is a transportation project
fund. Now little dots show
generally where these projects
are.
And as you can see, just a
little over $8 million and
they're.
geographically distributed
throughout the district.
Uh, turning the sheet of our
local government funding.
And uh this list of course by
the categories of the county co
op, municipal co op, school
district co-ops and so forth.
About $4.5 million at the very
bottom happens to be a uh
Recently completed construction
project in Mexico 337's a
photograph I took, uh, back in
August or so just to just to
brag on a uh a particularly uh
good project. At any rate, the
local government road fund
follows on the sheet 7 looks a
little out of sequence but just
so the maps mapping would fit
here. So this is the local
government road funding project
here again by uh category and
then you can see that.
They are pretty well
geographically distributed.
Uh, throughout the area of the
district we forge ahead onto the
8th page here versus the
transportation project funding
history that we've had 23, 24,
where, where it went.
And then uh 24, and then I went
on to show the completed
maintenance projects, the
projects we've completed, uh.
Uh, and quite a few of them,
total of about $30 million
right? And the uh Mexico 536,
the uh Sandy Crest Road, for
example.
Uh, 337, the map by the
photograph I showed just to.
Preceding page
And
A lot of I-40 New Mexico 3113
down south end of the district.
In 556 uh on tramway and uh.
Uh, some our I-40 and I-25
different.
Categories of maintenance then.
This is the if you turn the
sheet to the 9th sheet right
there and you turn it, uh, turn
it 90 degrees.
So
This is the listing of our
projects in design, uh.
And uh the first couple of them,
uh, I showed the letting for
these also and uh and for the
when the funding will will come
about, but I've got, uh, you'll
notice that the Martin tramway
has just launched.
Uh, was bid to start paving and
uh New Mexico 116 and Mill Road.
Uh, has let the uh and then uh
we've got a couple of timber
bridges that we're going to be
replacing.
won't step through all of them,
but you'll notice that we do
have on our list of things to do
in New Mexico Gibson, uh, inter
interchange reconstruction, so
our, our flagship project right
now is I-25, I-40, I mean I25
Comanche and Montgomery.
But, uh, coming up after that is
our Gibson interchange.
Uh, before that takes off
though, we will have Rio Bravo,
the reconstruction of real
Bravo, which we will be uh
letting probably in September.
Um, you take care of the rear
Bravo Bridge?
Uh, over the Rio Grande, at any
rate, this listing shows are the
projects that we have, uh, in
design and then underneath uh
that listing is the.
The show the funding of future
projects that aren't funded, but
other priorities you may recall,
uh,
If you were here and you were
watching the news a couple of
years ago, we had a serious
catastrophic failure of the
concrete trapezoidal channel,
uh, between the east west lanes
of I-40, uh.
Uh, in the, on the east end of
Albuquerque right there.
It's a that we actually we uh
did a band-aid fix that we're
sort of living under now. We're
gonna have to launch the um
The full blown study and and the
construction to replace that. Of
course, our interstates are our
priorities here, so you'll see
the next one on the list is, is
uh some work on I-40, um.
Uh, between, uh, well, it'll
it'll get from Wyoming, uh,
maybe up to Eubank or so.
Of course, it gives an
interchanges on here and several
others.
Forging ahead to our next sheet
is I did have a listing of the
uh.
Equipment, not necessarily going
to uh in detail, but the
photographs you'll notice are
uh.
We have uh named some of the
snow plows, OK.
And uh
These are more creative names, I
would say amongst all the uh
districts that we have Darth
later and Better Call Sault, and
so these are actual uh.
We've uh
Anthropomorphize we personalized
uh.
plowing. How's that sound?
Go to the, if you go to the next
page of and this is, this is
really where it gets interesting
here the uh uh this is the
placement of girders, uh,
Comanche at the Comanche
interchange, and this photo was
taken, uh Friday before last,
the placing the uh placing new
girders at night. You go to the
next page and.
And uh the the one on top shows
interchange.
I'm sorry, call out the page
number, OK?
I'm sorry.
I've moved on page 12. I'm
sorry, I apologize.
I'm showing the Comanche
Interchange a photograph I took
uh
About 5 days ago.
And the Montgomery Interchange
below that.
about 5 days ago, so we're
showing the bridge placement on
Comanche and then the uh.
In the substructure uh getting
ready for placement.
Moving on to page 13.
This is the roundabout.
Um, that I was talking about a
minute ago and uh New Mexico 14
at Frost Road in New Mexico,
536.
Well, it snowed a few days ago,
uh, and so I.
I was lucky enough to get a
couple of photographs of what
the road conditions looked like
on I-40. This is not the most
severe snow we've had, but, uh,
we had, we had.
trucks
Racing up and down the
interstate, keeping it clean
here. It's on 40 and this would
be just east of the Rio Grande,
uh, the Route 66 casino.
And
You can see the visibility is
not great as you look off in the
uh off into the horizon, forging
ahead to the page 14.
Uh
We did uh successfully complete
a couple of projects in the
south end of the district here
one is uh New Mexico 314.
Uh, a nice repaving job together
with the New Mexico uh South New
Mexico 45, which is basically
far south extension of Coors.
This summer aerial photographs
that I took just that.
Help illustrate the uh the
setting and the uh.
Sharp outlook of the uh nicely
striped pavement. The final
sheet was sheet 15.
Is uh we uh.
Did reconstruction or repaving
on Mexico 536. This is the road
that takes you from the uh
Mexico 14 up to the crest is the
winding road that goes up the
crest.
Below it is uh I uh Interstate
25.
Uh, having just been, uh, uh,
mill and inlaid, and this is uh
just on the north side of
Albuquerque.
So, uh, with that, Mister Chair,
I would, uh,
Be pleased to answer any
questions you might have.
Thank you.
Representative chairman of a.
Thank you, Mrs. Chan. It's your
opportunity to hear my voice.
All right, thank you all. Um, I
appreciate the presentation. Um,
I had a question, Mr. Brasher,
um, you just mentioned the Rio
Bravo Bridge repairs and the
Gibson interchange. So we've had
um reports before this committee
for a number of years now that
um
The structural integrity of the
Gibson interchange is
that.
It's really bad. Um, and so I
was wondering,
How, cause I'm, I'm, I'm caught
a little bit because both of my
constituents. So Rio Bravo and
And the Gibson Interchange and
so when we um had funded as a
legislature, the Rio Bravo
interchange.
Um, it was at the expense of
Gibson and now those folks are
upset about um
You know, having heard for years
about their interchange. So I
was wondering how that decision
to do the Rio Bravo Bridge as
opposed to the Gibson
Interchange and what the what
the thought process and that
was.
Well, uh, Mr. Chair, uh
representative at the time, I
think that the uh the most
obvious choice for the
Ready to proceed with was the
real Bravo Bridge. It is a
And I wanna use a simple, but it
is a more straightforward
replacement of bridges.
Uh, that have some uh uh
structural uh deficiencies.
Uh, to them, and what that means
is when you walk under the
bridge, you, you wade through
the water and look up at the
beams. You'll see there's
concrete spall off and some of
the rebars showing and so forth.
Nothing, no collapse imminent.
It's just that they need to be
worked on, but it's a, it's
very, it's a more
straightforward, um.
repair to reproach approach in
the case of Gibson Gibson is an
is an entire uh.
uh configuration.
And reconstruction, it has the
same issue with the.
bridges.
Um, when you, when you go under
the bridges there you see some
of the concrete is fall off.
There have been some repairs
have been made by the way, the
uh to.
Temporarily remediate.
The condition of the bridges,
it's just that the bridges.
The bridges will will last long
enough for us to reconfigure the
interchange.
Ah, do something completely
different. So it's not a
straightforward as Bravo, uh,
but, uh.
It's, it's on its way as well.
And so and they're both bridges
are probably in similar
condition.
It's just that uh Rero was a
little more straightforward to
get to.
Then they because the whole
Gibson is reconfiguration.
And Mr. Chairman and Mr. Russia,
I appreciate that answer. So,
um, you'd mentioned that the
Gibson interchange had some
remediation done. Is that
something that
That is continually monitored.
Oh yes
Yeah, bridge conditions
throughout the district are
monitored all the time.
Yes, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Romero, we spent
over the last 3 years, probably
over 1.5 million at each
location, just keeping it in a
in a condition of good repair
until we can get to these major
investment projects. So just for
your information, we are, we're
much further along, obviously on
Rio Bravo than we are.
Um
On Gibson, so that's kind of how
what you know how it floated to
the top versus the other.
Mr. Chair, uh, it was a point of
clarification. I may have
misspoke earlier, uh.
I'm not quite sure what I said,
but the Rio Bravo will be
letting in in April.
We go to construction in April
that would be.
to be bid in April.
I may have said September it's
April.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Brecher, thank
you. um.
I mean, certainly anything, um,
well, I guess what is the
timeline for Gibson then?
Uh, Gibson, we have a um
We've got a uh
We're thinking that it is uh.
at an estimated cost of $165
million right now what we're
working on is the uh
A study of the utility
relocations, uh, the right of
way needs.
Uh, the environmental
considerations.
And we'll have that report out
in the summer of 25.
So it is uh it is still a number
of years down the road.
Before a final configuration is
settled on.
it goes to construction.
Miss Turin and Mr. Brasher, I
mean, obviously, that's
something that I would like to
see done as soon as possible
because it's been a number of
years since me and
representative Pau Colbert would
continually talk about um Gibson
and the Interchange and how long
it's been discovered that there
is a problem.
With the interchange in the
bridge there, um, and my
understanding is that the real
Bravo, if it has a similar
insin, I understand that it's,
that it's also um very needed
there, but that was also like a
more recent discovery if I'm
understanding since the original
interchange was done, so, um, I
appreciate those those
explanations because it helps me
talk to my constituents about
um.
The differences between the two
interchanges. Um, I did have one
other question, Mr. Mr.
Chairman, um, because it just
piqued my interest about an
upcoming study on page 9, on Rio
Bravo and Dennis Chavez
Boulevard, um, could you give a
little bit of details on what
this
Assessment management plan might
entail.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, would you
repeat repeat the question,
please. Yeah, so on page 9 there
is on the upcoming studies
column, there is Rio Bravo, Rio
Bravo, Dennis Chavez phase one,
access management plan, and I
was wondering if you could
provide a little bit of detail.
tail on
That
Yes, it's a um
Uh, uh, this study will, um,
Look at the uh
Uh, look at the quarter of uh
several miles.
And um
Determine
Uh
How access uh with with the with
the width of the roadway needs
to be lane wise and the um.
Situation of uh access to it
like uh where signalization
where signal should be.
Where uh driveways should be and
so forth.
It's a uh
get access under control before
it gets out of control any
further as the area develops to
get left turns, particularly
under control, left turns in and
out.
And that's what the that's what
the study is aimed at.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, if I may just to
respond to Representative
Romero's um comments just to
committee.
As we reported out every single
year we operate with a $1.2
billion budget, 500 million of
which comes from our federal
apportionment for
your roadway construction.
And if you look at the sum.
Of Gibson, Montgomery Comanche.
Rio Bravo, the sum, the cost of
those three projects alone is
$480 million.
estimated now at 60% design. And
so I think
It's kind of the ongoing
discussions we have with you all
about much needed capacity.
To do some of these priority
projects. So I just wanted to
put that in perspective.
Thank you, secretary, and it is
important that you kind of lean
into that mic a little bit.
Representative from
Oh, I am unless you want me.
There's a, there's a, you have a
lovely voice. Oh, OK. Next, we
have Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for your presentation.
I, um, is it uh broken out on
here where the federal state,
federal money is where the state
money is and where the local
money is on any of these
projects? or is it just a total?
Uh, this is, uh,
Mr. Chair, representative, this
is just the total shown.
There's federal in uh.
Most of them, but not
necessarily all of them.
Summer state funded.
So, Mr. Chairman, um, Mr.
Brasher, so this is just the
state dollars.
shown
No, no, this is, this is total,
total of all federal, state, and
local. OK, thank you for that. I
appreciate that. Um, as I've
said before, I represent uh
District 13, and 6.
Which makes it really difficult
for me because I know 3 is the
smallest district with the.
Last amount of population, as
you stated in your presentation,
um, I see on.
Uh, page 2.
Uh, under house Bill 2, section
9.
Done in 2021, that very first
project on that list.
the I-25 in New Mexico 47,
that's an exit, a new exit.
And I, uh, I'm really happy that
it's on there. Uh, I know
there's a lot of
State, local, and federal money.
But then I'm really
disappointed, uh, Mr. Chairman,
to not see it on page 9.
And can you explain why it's not
on page 9.
And
The, the ultimate question for
me is, you know, with all the
economic uh activity.
And the lossliness area why this
wouldn't be on.
Like a really high priority
list.
This, uh, representative, it's a
local project. It is the
Los Lunas corridor here.
That uh
Recently was advertised for bid,
but it's uh local lead being at
managed by the Viloslonis.
So it's not, it doesn't show on
the.
duty list of uh.
Projects to eventually complete.
Uh, in December.
And the
The bids came in, uh.
Of asking by two bidders asking
for a little bit more money than
the
Project had
From all of its sources
And so, um
It eventually will be uh
The responsibility to the
village.
To
Come up with the rest of the
money to uh.
Uh
Make up the shortfall.
When and if it gets uh rebid.
So
It's not a, it's not a DOT uh
project.
I just, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Brasher. I just want to make
sure that it is a top priority.
Or somebody other than the
residents of Los Lunas?
Um
That I, I know Los Lunas is on
top of it, and I know that they
are, are working hard to to try
to find the rest of the money.
But I also know that uh
You know, if we don't get this
project off the ground.
We're gonna lose some federal
dollars.
And so uh I know that there's
several people.
Asking all of us are asking for
projects in our counties and in
our across the city.
But my concern is that, you
know.
We don't want to be uh.
The the stepchild, the
red-headed stepchild of New
Mexico when we incorporate
Albuquerque into that district,
you know, that district, like I
said, is huge.
Uh, 300% of the traffic you said
is in, is in this district.
Um
So I just need a commitment.
That you all have it as a
priority as well.
As Laun is having it as a
priority.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I,
I think commitments are
important, but kind of action
behind those are, are even
better.
Um, I think the total bid price
for the project was 160 million.
Do you remember what it was,
Paul? 10
160 million DOT is already
committed 100 million, about 100
million is what staff's
reporting now of state funds for
that local project.
The remaining of which is coming
from federal grants and um and
then of course to be determined
is the shoring up of about 30,
um, to get the project done. So
We're managing the federal grant
where 100 million cash in on a
local project and behind you and
others on closing that gap to
salvage uh those federal funds.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Mr. Secretary and,
and Mr. Brasher and everyone
because uh.
You know, like I said, we all
want our projects done and and I
appreciate the commitment.
Uh, to that, and we will keep
working with uh everyone to try
to try to get that done, um.
I also know that um I hope you
are, you all know that I
understand that you have a
difficult job.
And but infrastructure across
the state of New Mexico is one
more thing I'll talk about
transportation fund.
For these contractors have the
ability to say, I'm going to
invest.
In this crusher. I'm gonna
invest in this laydown machine.
I'm gonna invest.
And a hot mix plant in the
middle of Albuquerque, because
there's a transportation fund
that I know every year there's
gonna be work.
So it's those contractors that
make that commitment.
It's you all that make the
commitment.
And, and it doesn't go unnoticed
and I want to say thank you for
that, but I also want to say,
We need to make a commitment as
a state.
To the contractors of New Mexico
to say we will support you.
There will be work.
And, um, and until we do that,
These prices
Are probably gonna keep coming
in higher and higher.
Because they are investing in
all of those machines, trying to
figure out how am I gonna pay
for this?
So thank you so much and thank
you again for what you all do.
Thank you, Representative, you
know, people often forget that.
road construction is like an
integral part of economic
development.
Uh, Next we have Representative
Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters, and this might be a
question for the secretary.
It's, it's a, it's a newbie to
the committee question. I, I
love the photos and I'm looking
at the um, the shoulders and the
Egress, I guess, yeah, I'm
seeing weeds in some of them. It
just made me think like what do
you, I know what you do on
landscape projects in
communities, a certain
percentage of that. How do you
handle your
How do you handle the, do you
intentionally seed, what do you
do for erosion control?
Why is it weeds? Like what,
explain to me what happens
there.
Sure, so, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dao so with every
construction project and even a
lot of maintenance projects will
disturb a lot of, of, of.
You know, Earth, um, we will
come back and remediate. We'll
have the contractor come back in
and see and ensure that we get
we get a proper.
Um, you know, uh, germination
during the springtime. Um, so we
do invest in a lot of
revegetation, um, erosion
control management, of course,
with any kind of um, you know,
rocking Badman or any kind of
wire enclosed rip wrap, whatever
the case may be or require of
the project. We'll definitely
put in and we'll definitely do
any kind of remediation we we
need to do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that. Is that the
responsibility of the
contractor. Uh, a couple of
ways, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dao, if it's a
construction project, then it is
responsibility of the
contractor. If it's a large
scale maintenance project, we
have a statewide price agreement
that we utilize for seating and
they'll come in and see it on
behalf because we don't know how
to have the equipment or
expertise.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And how do
you decide what you see?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Dao, so we have uh landscape
architect within the Department
of Transportation. He provides
the seed mix and the designs for
those projects.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I'm just, I'm thinking
especially about rural routes
where.
I mean, I'm probably not wanting
to promote at all being close to
the road, but you see a lot of
weeds and I'm like, well, that
could be it, it doesn't look
native. It doesn't look, but I
mean, but you've, you've got a
whole plan on that.
Do you work with like the so
water conservation districts in
those regions ever Mr. Chairman
Representative Tao, we do not,
they have their own program, but
we do have our own vegetation
management program where we go
out and we address any kind of
noxious weeds, um.
It's a pretty robust program,
especially in Southern New
Mexico where um they like having
it more than I would say folks
in the north, so it's very
we're, we're very, um, we're not
the, the biggest fans up north,
but down south where people
understand ag and so forth, um,
we're much more popular down
there, so we have a better
program. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Next we have a representative
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you, Mr. Brasher. Another
clear presentation from DOT, um,
so as you all know, I um, I
represent the West side of
Albuquerque and um I started
with del Norte when I was a city
councilor, and I haven't stopped
actually still wanting to see
that connection between arisco
Vistadoolan,
and I saw it on your list, but I
didn't hear any.
um,
status report as to where those
roads are. So I'd like to kind
of know where, um, you know
what?
I, I think you're still an
acquisition, but I'm not sure,
so.
That would be my first question.
This is your, uh,
representative, uh.
When it comes to uh basila Khan.
are um
We are
Launching the uh.
Construction of the
the.
Completion of the
Of Priscilla the between um.
Gimmick and rainbow.
Going to be taking care of that,
ultimately, Palo Van I'm sorry
Norte Pace devoca
will eventually uh.
Will eventually be um.
Uh, constructed, uh, right of
way has is about 95% acquired.
Uh, for the Vulcan ha as you
all.
Probably realize it's gonna be
the connection between 550 and
uh Interstate 40.
And so we have um.
So, together with the county, we
have a projects to uh
Uh, take care of the right we
acquisition and uh the basic
studies and we've done that with
uh
With Pan, it is going to be uh.
We have um
We have, uh, right acquired for
uh
Or purce of aha.
And uh we've got uh
We've uh selected a, uh, get the
right way worked out, we get
title.
We got uh acquisitions, we got
mapping.
And we have um
Some
some design for a
Across the ultimate cross
section of Pace of Vulcan.
And the inner
Uh
Construction where we're gonna
build basically one side of it,
two lanes.
One side with the intersections.
We have uh
The design to uh
Take it from uh
Basically my mile 0 to 14.
Uh, we have, um,
We have, uh, about uh
Almost $2 million to take it
from 14 Mapos 14 was 21.
And um
We will have uh ultimately the
Norte and uh will be.
Will, uh, intersect, but uh.
It's not there yet. It's uh we
don't have a complete design for
that right now.
be another uh couple of years
before they, uh, for the
connection like it's made, but
we're extending Pacilla Norte.
And uh getting closer to being
that we would just be on
rainbow.
Thank you.
Channelize it.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, this is a
really important connection on
the west side and um.
It's, it's been in the making
for a while, um, I, I know that
they're gonna need more money
because as.
Um
Uh, leader, um, Armstrong
mentioned the costs are rising
just, you know.
Daily, pretty much. Um, so it's
something that we need to
consider.
As a priority when we're working
in this area, especially since
the saloon connects to Rio
Rancho, and they're looking
forward as well to that whole
connection, um, and, um, I just
wanna thank DOT also and and Mr.
Braucher for improvements that
you all made on um.
Um
Paseo del Norte with the city, I
think in in conjunction with the
city, um, they're almost
complete between uh Coors and um
golf course and the landscaping
and the expansion of the roadway
there because that's an
important step in this whole
connection of uh Pio devocon, so
I just wanted to think EOT for
that connection. I also I'm
working, Mr. Chair, on a little
uh strip.
of on the east side of Cotwood
Mall to make some landscape
improvements and I had asked
Jerry or maybe uh, and I don't
know if you guys have like a
cost like a canned cost for
landscape improvements, but if
you do, if somebody could send
that over to me, I'd appreciate
it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Nick, we have a
representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll, I'll
be quick, um, and again, thank
you for the presentation. I too
am am new to this committee, but
I, I do want to let, uh, the,
uh, uh, Mr. Brecher, no, uh,
that, uh, I have, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I have constituents
who attend a tribal college.
On state high that's actually
yeah, state highway 448 and uh
it parallel, it has, there's an
intersection there, you know,
assail down del Norte, um.
Even when when Mr. Treman, when
I was a student over there, uh,
the, the, the traffic safety was
a huge concern. Um, and, and my,
my question again, again, uh,
um, uh, I don't know if, if
it's, if it's being looked at,
Mr. Chairman, but is
I understand that that there's
there's, there's some work
being, being planned for that
intersection. Oh, is there any
consideration for, uh, the, the,
the pedestrian safety of the
increase of traffic that is
coming through that
intersection. Mr. Chairman,
there's a uh daycare center.
There's a, uh, a large apartment
complex, uh, and, and, and of
course the the tribal college uh
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
More representative, this is uh
you you're talking about is the
excess route to the
Southwest Indian Polytechnic
Institute, that one right there.
And there's a sort of fur Road
Coors Boulevard that runs a
little north to Pace Norte and
then turns east along the hill.
Uh, duty happens to be the owner
of.
That road or or a good part of
the road, not all of it, and we
have recently looked at uh
Uh, the condition of the road,
for one thing, and uh based on
some inquiries we've gotten,
we've looked at uh
The uh potential for some
signage, possibly some striping
to uh.
To enhance the safety and the
accessibility and the direction
finding for pedestrians on that
road.
Right there, so
We're, we're aware of that
condition.
Right there that road very road
you're talking about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Next we have a
representative Hoffman Vhell.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and I'll, I'll keep my
comments, uh, brief, you spare
everybody, um.
Exposed more exposure to
whatever is going around clearly
to all of this, um, just a
moment to thank you, Mr. Brasher
and your staff and DOT, um, the
Comanche project project is
looking great. Um, it is not
often in my tenure as a public
servant that I have received so
much positive feedback on a
project, especially a road
related project, but um, I do
get many text messages and, and,
um, comments and.
When I'm at village meetings and
such as people are very
impressed with the work that is
going on, it's very clear that
you working, you are working at
a, a fast clip. Things are
changing daily and they can
already start to understand and
visualize just how much better
this is going to be for uh
traffic.
Um, in our area, so I just
wanted to give you guys that
feedback and let you know that
um your your work is being
noticed and thank you very much,
um, the people of New Mexico
appreciate it. I appreciate it
and keep on doing what you're
doing. It's looking great.
Sure, thank you.
Thank you, ranking member bro.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
just wondering if we could ask
about the vacancy rates and
these two districts.
And uh share what might be the
hardest jobs.
More representative, the vacancy
rate district, uh,
3 is 18.7%.
vacancies are distributed, uh,
if you look on the inset of my
uh first sheet right here where
I show the uh
Support maintenance
construction, engineering.
Uh, most of them are in the uh
Uh, made inside, but there.
They're distributed pretty
evenly throughout the district
in all the categories, 1818
points.
0.7% vacancies.
Um, you know, we're in
Albuquerque, we're, we're.
We got a lot of competition for
employers.
Uh, as you can imagine with
other governmental entities and
local consulting and local
contracting firms and so forth.
And uh
You know, if you look at the
photographs that I put in this,
uh, I put in this report here,
you've got to ask yourself who
doesn't want to work for DOT,
right? Who doesn't come you
couldn't have more important
work right for more, for more
people, you couldn't work with
nicer people.
And uh like when you come to
work for DOT who even wants to
take a vacation, right? It's
it's a great place to work, so
I, I don't get the, uh, it's
just the competition, I think
that we have a particular in
Albuquerque making it, making it
tough, Mr. Chairresentative
Brown overall District 2 is
11.42.
that is the overall rate of
vacancy. Of course, we are
still, I I wouldn't say
struggling, we're doing a lot
better, our patrols and our
project offices in Ed and Lee
County, uh, probably they do
have a a little higher
percentage than the 11.42%.
Uh, we do have programs in place
for recruitment. We have a
temporary uh 15% uh for those
areas and that seems to be
attracting potential candidates
and we're continuously seeing
the vacancy rate in those two
counties go down. I, I would say
those are closer to 18% of those
two counties, but overall
District 2 is at 11.42.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
guess if I could do my life over
again, I.
Work for DOT if I could get
hired, so thank you.
Thank you. I, I think they have
great lapel pins.
I have a couple of things I want
to inquire about.
Just to be clear,
Rio Bravo
Comes Dennis Chavez. It is still
a state road, right?
This, uh
Not along its entire length, but
yes, the uh ownership is uh
slightly discontinuous here.
Duty observed the bridge.
And uh certain length on the
approach on either side of it.
Thank you. Also, I have a quick
question related to
Contractors. Now we've had a
contractor doing work in the
South Valley on a road that's
Bridge Street, Dolores Huerta, I
think it changes names.
That project members has been
going on for almost.
It's less than that. I don't
think it's even a quarter of a
mile.
They did the entire rebuilding
of Notre Dame in 5 years. We
have not completed this project
in 3 years. My concern.
Is how do we vet contractors.
So that we avoid contractors
that might not be quite up to
snuff.
And are creating such a
difficulty for the public. How
do we do that and make sure that
they're OK. Is there a ranking
grading system.
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman, that's a
great question and uh just to,
to put it in perspective, that
project is a County lead project
that is not our project, but um
they do utilize some of our
contractors. They do utilize
some of our specifications. So
for NMDOT projects, we have
what's called pre-al and our
pre-qualification program does
just that. We've met the
contractors make sure that they
are a solid um
Contractor that has the
resources to be able to come in
and and complete an NMDOT
project of basically any size.
So we utilize what's called
pre-qualification and through
that process, we look at a lot
of things including um any kind
of claims or, or um, you know,
Issues with the project, um, the
completeness of a project
finishing on time, any kind of
anything outside of uh like,
like the contractor not paying
their subs and things like that.
So it'll go into a formula
formula, it'll spill out what's
called a pre-qualification
factor and for every bid, it is
applied to the to that.
And um depending on the pre
qualification score of each
contractor, the bids could
change the, the overall from,
you know, getting a a contract
and not getting a contract. So
that's how we basically handle,
um, you know, good.
Participating qualifying
contractors for DOT. Thank you.
Can you briefly describe a
zipper merge and what you're
doing to educate the public
related to a zipper merge.
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chairman.
It's one of those, those new
terms that we have, um, so
basically what is Zipper merge
is supposed to do is everybody
is supposed to basically move up
and you'll see the signs use
both lanes until you get to the
merch. So we want to make sure
that we, we fill both lanes all
the way up to the merge and then
at that point we will then start
taking turns into the single
lane of closure. That's what
it's supposed to do. That's what
it's supposed to mean, um.
Mexico I think is struggling a
little bit at that. Oh, I'm
gonna put this spy websites we
put out there, but we are
pushing the program. It, it
does.
to work in other states to move
traffic along and through work
zones.
Thank you. I think it's
important to educate the the
public because it's kind of like
the wild west on the zipper the
wild west.
Representative Harman Hill. On
that point, Mr. Chairman, so
please, members of the public,
when you are.
Coming into that single line and
someone is ahead of you in that
line that is getting ready to
close. Do not get angry at them.
They are doing what they're
supposed to be doing. Everybody
should be getting into the top
of that lane. Every, you're not
doing anything wrong by saying
back you are actually increasing
the amount of time that
everybody else has to wait, so
please, your neighbor next to
you and that line that is
closing is your friend, not your
enemy. Please do not flip them
off.
To not get angry at them. This
is actually the rule. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Um, I have a, a request on
actually, I would say on behalf
of the committee because uh
recently the US DOT issued a
statement regarding allocation
of federal funding based on
state statistics, giving
preference to states with
marriage and birth rates higher
than the national average.
I, uh, the members, the
secretary texted me, end of last
week, letting me know that there
was a hold on federal dollars
coming down to to to states.
The criteria is not clear. Uh, I
know we're gonna have a couple
of bills this coming Thursday,
but if time allows, Secretary, I
would like you to be prepared to
discuss this. What does it mean
to New Mexico impacts.
Hold ups, anything that might be
germane to this topic.
Absolutely, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and that was a question I think
that uh vice chair um asked and
we.
We have that number right now,
the uh the biggest
Hold up is related to federal
grants awarded in the sum of
that now on hold is about $340
million and that's the execution
of grant agreements to um to
essentially move the projects
awarded forward and, and so we
can expand on that if needed.
Thank you, I would like that. I
was briefly reading through some
of the US Department of
Transportation criteria that's
it's it's a little, it's a
little gray, so I think we need
to spend a little time. What
does it mean in New Mexico?
Do we have anybody in the uh
public that wishes to.
Speak or ask questions.
Representative Lustrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had
shared a incident with the uh
secretary yesterday.
I'd found out on uh Saturday
evening that I-40 West was
closed for 11 hours.
I had a constituent who I uh.
Ran into at church on a Sunday
morning.
And she says, you wouldn't
believe it. I would have been
stuck on I-40 for 11 hours.
And that's in a car with her
kids.
And her mother
So I just as I've been harping
for many years about this. It's
a major issue.
And I guess it's gonna take some
kind of major
ity before we get serious about
I-40.
But I can tell you that um.
Wouldn't have just been.
People living in Gala, traveling
west, it's everybody going
through the state.
You know what message that sends
to the state.
Uh, surrounding us and travelers
and truckers and everybody else.
That interstate was closed for
11 hours on Saturday night.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Origo.
Sure.
I just thought
And on a
Note, um, I just want to thank
uh District 3 and District 5, I
think, um, for 285.
I travel that
On a regular basis.
Um
And the improvements that you
made at La Bajada are
significant and um I just wanna
thank every, you know, I know
that was a a long process and a
long project, a lot of
construction, went into that a
lot of money, but the result,
Mr. Chair and members has been,
you know, really a great
improvement to New Mexico and
um.
I think that most New Mexicans
are very thankful for that
project, so thank you.
Thank you, appreciate that, Mr.
Chairman. If I could just real
quick, Mr. Chairman, and kind of
respond to's comment about the
I-40 closure. That was not as a
result of any kind of NMDOT
work. I understand that there
was an active shooter, um, and
that's who they were looking for
that whole.
That whole time we were not
notified. We would
have obviously put that on our
variable message boards to at
least inform the public, um, you
know, maybe to, to stop in
Albuquerque or on the other side
somewhere in Gallop, um, just to
wait out the time, but that was
not.
Thank you, Representative
Lustrom.
true, Mr. Chairman, but the
problem is, is that there's no
ins implementing of your zipper,
whatever.
process which could have helped
a lot if we could have had one
lane, um.
As you guys do during
construction. There's at least
one lane always open.
No communication with this
department.
So just put yourself in the
mindset of those people that are
sitting in those cars and
there's no communication, so
nobody knows what's really going
on because the overhead signs
that they have along the
interstate.
Are
