Roll call
closed. We have a quorum. Please
rise for today's invocation led
by the gentleman.
From Colfax, Mora Riva Riva, San
Miguel and Taos representative
Sanchez.
Lord, we ask that you help all
the decision makers in this, uh,
building, uh, guide them to make
the best decisions for our state
to help improve the state and uh
to keep their family safe and uh
just keep everyone safe. Uh, we
ask this in your name. Amen.
Gentlemen from Sandoval Martinez
leaders in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
And the gentle lady from uh
Santa Fe Lujan with a pledge to
New Mexico flag.
Gentle lady from Berlio send how
may be here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business is so
ordered.
Good morning members.
Good morning, members.
We have a very special day, lots
of incredible celebrations on
the floor. We're gonna do things
a little differently today. We
are going to start with the
musical performance.
Uh, these folks are.
students at Harrison Middle
School in the heart of
Albuquerque South Valley.
This is the middle school jazz
band and before you guys kick it
away, your lady from Berlio,
would you kindly introduce these
young scholar musicians.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my
pleasure to do so.
Mr. Speaker, you know, nearly
500,000 people in our area have
been empowered and inspired to
the New Mexico jazz workshop.
They believe music is a critical
agent for change. They, they're
progressive work with
empowerment through music works
with preventative and
intervention methods. They use
music to equip youth with skills
to successfully navigate the
future. It is my pleasure to
introduce to you the members of
that band.
They are Esteban Sanchez, a 6th
grader.
Step forward when I call your
name or wave, uh, Luke Lee
Barris, an 8th grade student.
Patrick, the Zulu, who was an
8th grade student.
April Dominguez a 7th grade
student.
Leon Troupe.
He's in the 8th grade. Brandon
Avila in the 8th grade.
Ashley E.
And we also have Sakara Delgado,
but Mr. Speaker, none of these
children would be came here
alone. They do have adult
chaperones. They have Nehemiaz,
who is the New Mexico, uh, jazz
workshop ED. She's over here on
the corner. Arthur Meadows.
Elise Taylor, Isaac Hildaggo is
the band's instructor and Jesse
Culbertson is the instructor at
Harrison Middle School and we
also have Charla, Avila, and
Harrison Community School. She
is one of the coordinators and
finally, Mr. Speaker, it is my
pleasure, my honor to introduce
the Harrison Middle School rock
band as they play an original
piece of music, Mr. Speaker.
It's called purple Nightmare, so
let's get ready.
Today
so much
I
I
Harrison Middle School.
Thank you. Welcome to the house.
over there. Awesome job,
everybody
see school rock, that's what
that reminded me of. Very cool.
Harrison Middle School in the
heart of South Valley.
I believe uh district.
12.
Gentlemen,
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am
incredibly proud of this group
of young people, not only I'm
sure the great students, but
they are also wonderful
musicians and I, I think it's a
super treat for our house to
have them here performing for
us. Thank you, Speaker, and look
forward to visiting with the
students and the school later.
Fantastic. Thank you, gentlemen.
Uh, next we are gonna go uh very
slowly as these young people
break their equipment down to
the gentle, gentle lady from
McKinley, but before you go,
young lady.
I believe and uh folks, I'm
gonna, I'm gonna ask you guys to
keep it down here. The young
scholar musicians keep keep it
down because we are doing
business right now so breakdown
as quietly as you possibly can.
thank you, uh, chamber, today we
are celebrating a birthday, uh,
a little birdie told me over on
this side of uh of of the
rostrum. And I believe that um
this is an appropriate time
before you introduce a memorial
to sing.
Happy birthday, gentle lady from
Santa Fe represents the pansy to
sing.
Mr. Speaker, I'm so happy to
celebrate the birthday of the
gentle lady from McKinley.
123.
Happy birthday
to
Yeah
Happy birthday.
Happy birthday.
gentle lady from McKinley.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you for the birthday song this
morning, um, Mr. Speaker, I rise
to make motion.
Make your motion. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I move house Memorial 5
be removed from the speaker's
table and be made the next order
of business is ordered that the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing How's
Memorial 5 on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the memorial. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, uh, today, if
you didn't all know today is
Gall McKinley County Day at the
New Mexico House.
Mr. Speaker, we have a whole
bunch of people from McKinley
County and Gallup, uh, all over
the Capitol and I'd like to ask
Mr. Speaker, if the clerk could
please read the memorial. Clerk
Reed.
House Memorial 5, introduced by
Representative Lundstrom, a
memorial proclaiming February 6,
2025, Gallup McKinley County Day
in the House of Representatives,
whereas the city of Gallup and
McKinley County are the
northwestern gateway to New
Mexico, and whereas the city of
Gallup and McKinley County
reflect their rich cultural
recreational and economic
diversity of New Mexico and.
Whereas McKinley County has the
greatest number of Native
American residents of any New
Mexico county is the home of
members of the Navajo Nation and
the Pueblo of Zuni and is the
site of one of the largest
annual gatherings of Native
Americans, the intertribal
Indian ceremonial and whereas
last year Gallup hosted the
1002nd annual intertribal Indian
ceremonial and whereas McKinley
County incorporates the
continental divide which
separates the watersheds of the
Pacific and Atlantic Ocean.
and whereas the city of Gallup
has a historic downtown and is
recognized as both a New Mexico
Main Street and an arts and
cultural district and.
Whereas in 2011, the legislature
declared the city of Gallo to be
the adventure capital of New
Mexico and whereas McKinley
County boasts world renowned
adventure venues and trails,
including the Zuni Mountain
Trail system, the jewel of the
Southwest, and whereas
The city of Gallup is recognized
as the most patriotic small town
in America and is home to a
state national veterans
cemetery, and whereas the city
of Gallup is a center of
commerce, and since the 19th
century has been recognized by
the BNSF Railway has a heritage
community for its importance
along its transcontinental rail
line and whereas McKinley County
is home to Gallup Energy and
Logistics Park, one of only a
handful of BNSF certified sites
for economic development located
in an
Internal Revenue Service
designated opportunity zone.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
February 6, 2025 be designated
Gallup McKinley County Day in
the House of Representatives to
honor and showcase the many
facets of the city of Gallup and
McKinley County, and be it
further resolved, the copies of
this memorial shall be
transmitted to the mayor and
city council of the city of
Gallup and the Board of County
commissioners of McKinley
County.
Fantastic. Is there a debate on
the memorial, the gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan,
Representative Johnson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
general lady yield.
Yes, I yield, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady and happy
birthday.
Uh, uh, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, members of the house, I
would just like to share with.
All of us and the guests in the
gallery that I am privileged in
honor to honor to serve McKinley
County.
I am blessed to have both
experiences. I live in the city
of Gallup.
And I also uh live in uh
McKinley County, um, northeast
of Gallup on the Navajo
reservation with my folks
part-time.
I would like to thank all of our
guests in the gallery, uh, the
entities organizations and
community members of Gallup
McKinley County.
Because we work together to
create a healthy, safe, and
vibrant community for our
community members, our families,
and I look forward to our
continued work together.
We are a tight-knit community
who aspire to foster an
economically and vibrant and
safe county that embraces and
respects cultural diversity and
as you heard our veterans. So
thank you, madam, uh,
representative for um
introducing House Memorial 5.
Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. Is there
further debate on the memorial
that gene lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and well the
gentle lady yield.
Be happy to yield, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
McKinley County was my home
growing up. I'm, I'm a Crown
Point I along with um my sister
Representative Johnson and
product of Gallup McKinley
County Schools.
I will always think of Crown
Point as home and Gallup was
where we went for restaurants,
the swimming pool.
And the movie theater 60 miles
away where the closest for any
of those, so thank you for doing
this. Thank you, Gallant
McKinley County for being
wonderful.
Thank you gentle lady. The
gentleman from Bernalio Rosa de
la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to
stand up and also support the
representative for the wonderful
work she does here in the house
for her constituents. Well, I
got to tell you frankly, Mr.
Speaker, every year I look
forward to this because I
currently own 4 pins silver
pins, so thank you so much
representative and
congratulations today.
Don't look up the value of those
pins on eBay, you might be
tempted to
Sell 1 or 2. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
For the debate on the memorial.
And lady from Santa Fe of Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand
in and and rise in support of
the memorial and happy birthday
to the gentle lady from
Uh, McKinley County and for all
that she has done and, and
continues to do for our state,
um, and the beautiful gift she
gives us, um, every year, and I
just like to say in a, in a,
there's a tradition of giving a
gift when it's your birthday. It
makes it even more special, so
thank you for that and blessings
to you and to the county and to
all those who are here today to
celebrate um with us.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you.
For the debate on the memorial
generated from Bernard Leo,
Representative Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I rise
in support of uh Representative
Lundstrom's, um, memorial and um
Representative Johnson, who I've
gotten to know a little bit
also. I, um,
Being a small business owner and
actually been been in the
business of jewelry. I really
appreciate the pins that you
give me and I will never sell
them. I promise you that, but I
might buy um Mr. Representative
de la Cruz and resell on I'm not
sure yet. Happy birthday
Representative Luster. I hope
you have a wonderful day.
Thank you gentle lady. Further
debate on the memorial, the
gentleman from Valencia,
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does it
generate a yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I, I do rise
in support of this. My very
first interim committee was
actually in Gallup.
And I will tell you that the,
the people that are hospitality
was so much appreciated for
somebody that was new to the
legislature. So Mr. Speaker,
generally, I also, I, I
appreciate your Main Street
projects as you guys are working
so hard to kind of bring to life
some of those, you know,
buildings and Mr. Speaker, if
you guys haven't been there the
way that you've honored your
veterans, is that walk with that
is something that I think that
we all should take note of, so I
want to thank you for the many.
is a service for this body. I
want to thank your communities
for all the support, uh, that
they've done for us and for its
people. So thank you gentle
lady, thank you Mr. Speaker
further debate on the memorial,
the gentleman from Kara and
Hidalgo and from
Grantresentative Terrazas, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. The gentle
lady please skill. I yield, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Thank you for the pen.
They're always different.
They're beautiful. Thank you so
much, Feliz Cumpiano. Happy
birthday and again, you know
what, what a, what a hard
working representative for a
rural New Mexico for your for
your district uh for those of
you who are here, um, she, she's
always thinking of you guys
she's always crafting something
a bill to to leverage and help
her her district and community.
I appreciate your work you're
someone to look up to, uh, and,
and you know again the memorial
is very, very nice.
It was competing with our
veterans cemetery out there in
Silver City, New Mexico, but.
We appreciate you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Seeing no further debate
generally to close. Oh, I'm
sorry, there is further debate
lady from Le Representative Roal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield? Yes, I'll
I'll yield.
Thank you very much. First of
all, I wanna wish you a very
happy birthday.
And I'd like to um always stand
in support of your memorial and
thank you for the gift that you
always give us. I have they're
beautiful. I'm wearing mine and
as you know and are aware, we've
had many years together. We've
crossed paths, um, since 2001 I
think it was when when we first
met and um I just wanna say that
I do appreciate um your.
valuable knowledge, skills, and
um.
Wish you
The very best, uh, of this year
and many more years to come.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate on the
memorial, gentlemen from Colfax,
Curry Harding Qua, San Miguel
and Union representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Does the gentle lady yield?
I yield, Mr. Speaker.
Happy birthday.
Thank you. You know, Mr.
Speaker, the problem I've had
with these pins is my wife
confiscates them.
We love the pins. That's one
thing, the one gift that we get
in here that you don't want to
get close to somebody else's
because I promise you we love
them, and I thank you for giving
them, and I also thank you for
the many years of helping me
understand the budget because
you had to have a lot of
patience. I promised you to
work, work to help me understand
that budget and, and I'm not
saying I'm there yet, but I, I
do appreciate your patience with
me, Mr. Speaker, I, I just wish
you a happy birthday and.
I hope you have a good day
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Seeing no further debate
generally to close. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I'd like to thank
everyone for their kind comments
almost feels like I'm not gonna
be back, but I will be. I'm not
going anywhere, Mr. Speaker, and
did want to make a couple of
other comments before I make the
motion for um a due pass on your
desk, you also have a gallop
brick. At one time, uh, Gallup
used to make bricks and they
were, they were sent all over
the United States.
These were done by Maya Mera
students, you might recall
Hershey Meyermira was our
congressional Medal of Honor
winner and the school is named
after him, so this is done with
3D printing. This is the way of
the future when it comes to
manufacturing, so these are very
nice, of course the beautiful
pins that our community provides
to you. I, I, I need to let you
know that this is a big deal for
our community they they
appreciate coming up here and
with that Mr. Speaker, I move
that House Memorial DuP.
and I'd like to ask for uh
unanimous consent that everybody
votes in the affirmative.
to show all members of the House
President and voting in the
affirmative see no objection. It
is ordered. We are on final
passage of how Memorial 5. The
vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Memorial 5
Haulli Pass this house.
Congratulations.
And gentle lady, you have some
guests on the rostrum to
introduce. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I
do. I have a, um, if I may, Mr.
Speaker, recognize a very
special guest of mine today on
the rostrum who's been, uh, uh,
nominated by our community and
that has been Welch, Mr.
Speaker, Ben Welch is um
employed by the city of Gallup.
He's currently the Gallup
Community Services coordinator.
He's held many city positions
including code enforcement
officer.
Building inspector city planner,
city ombudsman, zoning
administrator, Parks and
recreation director, including
the over oversight of two senior
centers, Red Rock Park and the
Harold Reynolds Athletic Center
in Gallup Aquatic Center.
He's been named employee of the
Year. He's held com uh numerous
community and volunteer
positions including the launch
director for the Red Rock
Balloon rally coordinator for
Run for the Wall, wreaths Across
America, and logistics director,
uh, for the inner tribal Indian
ceremonial.
He's been an active ser uh he's
been active particularly helping
our veterans, um, in our housing
programs we've been, uh, Mr.
Speaker is just a wonderful
human being. He's a gift from
God for our community and so is
his wife Janice. I need to say
that also. Janice is a very good
friend of mine, but if we could
please let's, uh, give a big
hand to Ben Welch. Welcome to
the house.
lady from Achilles San Juan, I
believe you also have some
guests on the rostrum.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, I do have
some guests. I have um.
With us today, uh, esteemed
Gallup McKinley County School
board members and they are
Priscilla Benali, school board
member.
Kevin Mitchell
School board member.
Michael Shaw, school board
member.
And Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud
of our school board members.
They're dedicated advocates and
they work hard to support our
STEM programs, explorer programs
and college career and civic
readiness programs and produce
college-bound students. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady, fantastic. Welcome
to the house and folks, I know
there are a lot of folks up in
the gallery who traveled all the
way from Gallup, McKinley
County, from that area, please.
rise so that we can recognize
every single one of you. Thank
you for making the trip up here.
Welcome to the house.
lady from Aquili San Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have an
additional guest on the rostrum,
our county commissioner Danielle
Nota, who represents District
one.
And I also have 2 more guests on
the rostrum and certificates to
present.
I have a wonderful guest
Marjorie Lantana.
Who has done amazing, wonderful
lifelong work in our community.
And if
At this time, I could have the
clerk to read her certificate.
Clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session 2025 recognizes Marjorie
Lantana, whereas Marjorie
Lantana has been a tireless
advocate for the Navajo Nation
and for the support of
self-sustaining agriculture
industries in the McKinley
County area.
And whereas Marjorie started out
as a 4H parent working with the
local county extension service,
the 4H Junior Livestock
Committee and the Office of D
Youth in support of 4H teaching
young people how to care for
livestock and the land, and
whereas
Marjorie has been an active
member of the New Mexico Cattle
Growers Association since 1990,
serving on the board of
directors and as chair of the
Cross Cultural Committee to
Engage Ranchers and Farmers in
the McKinley County area and to
represent their interests in the
state legislature and whereas
Marjorie served on the New
Mexico Beef Council from 2019
through 2024, and whereas
Marjorie has served for many
years as a voice for the Navajo
Nation in agriculture and was
elected vice president of the
Vicente chapter.
in 2020 serving from January
2021 through December 2024, and
whereas as a leader in the
Navajo Nation, Marjorie served
multiple roles in the community
between 1977 and her retirement
in 2014, including community
involvement specialist, contract
analyst, and service planner,
and she was instrumental in
securing successful programs for
affordable housing, veterans
services, and elder services as
well as well as securing and
developing infrastructure for
water and electricity, that was
essential.
for the development of the
community and whereas Marjorie
has also served on the advisory
Committee for the Tribal
Extension of the New Mexico
State University cooperative
Extension Service since January
2018, and whereas Marjorie has
also served as a member of the
Eastern Navajo Fair Board of
Directors since November 2017
and whereas Marjorie is also an
advisor to Navajo Technical
University's KCZY Radio and the
Veterinary Teaching clinics
Institutional Animal care.
Committee and whereas Marjorie
is a 4th generation sheep and
cattle rancher, raising quality
sheep and Black Angus cattle on
more than 5000 acres near the
Chaco cultural Natural National
Historic Park. And whereas
Marjorie is taking care of her
family, elders, and the
community.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to
Marjorie Lantana for her many
years of outstanding service to
McKinley County and the Navajo
Nation, signed and sealed at the
Capitol in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, Marjorie Latana.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from McKinley, San
Juan, you still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have
one more certificate and a
special guest Tamaris Montano in
the rostrum. Her and her husband
T Montano, own a local business
in Gallup and they believe in
giving back to their community
in a big way and with that I'd
like to ask the clerk to read
their certificate. Thank you.
start to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico, 57th
legislature, first session, 2025
recognizes Shay and Tamaris
Montagno,
whereas Shay and Tomas Montagno
own and operate the State Farm
Insurance Agency in Gallup, and
whereas Chei and Timar are
exceptionally dedicated to
community service in the
Gallup-McKinley County area and
whereas Chay served on the board
of directors for Big Brothers
Big Sisters Mountain Region for
8 years and now serves on the
executive board and where
Tamara served on the board of
directors for the Gallup
Community Pantry for 4 years,
and whereas Che and Tamari
brought back the shop with a cop
program, now known as Shop with
a Hero, in which a local youth
referred by the Children, Youth
and Families Department is
paired with a local law
enforcement officer or emergency
medical services responder for a
day of shopping and group
activities intended to show
youth that law enforcement and
emergency personnel are helpers
and supporters. And whereas Chei
and Tamara raised funds in the
community to support.
stop with a hero and also donate
their own funds and whereas Che
and Tamara also started the
mushball Battle of the Badge, a
day of food, fun, and prizes for
local first responders and their
families as a way to thank first
responders for their service,
and whereas Shay and Tamara also
started the Secret Santa Food
box Drive, an annual holiday
event that coordinates and
distributes toys and boxes of
groceries to approximately 160
needy families and whereas Che
and Tamara have provided food.
support and mentorship to
hundreds of youths and their
families, improved and
strengthened the relationship
among law enforcement officers,
first responders, and youth
provided support and resources
to local law enforcement and
first responders and help
numerous local nonprofit
organizations to grow and better
serve the community. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to Shea
and Tomari Montano for their
many years of service to the
Gallup-McKinley County
community, signed and sealed at
the.
capital in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you for all your work and
welcome to the house.
Right, we're all gonna be on
Instagram over here a little
camera, very cool.
Just can't be TikTok because.
I don't know if it's back yet. I
don't do TikTok, so I don't, I
would not know, um, dear lady
from Bernillo, are you ready for
Autism Day.
Mr. Speaker, I am.
Um
I moved that you don't have to
move anything we just
recognizing, uh, and uh, uh,
announcing that today is autism
Day here at the Capitol. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. So, um,
Today is Autism Day.
I was involved in the very first
autism day in this.
Roundhouse in 1995.
And we've come a long way, but
we have a long way to go, so
just a few stats, um, 1 in 36
children or almost 15,000 New
Mexican children are diagnosed
with autism spectrum disorder.
Autism is a lifelong neu
neurodevelopmental disability
that can impact social skills,
communication skills, and
behavior.
Uh, elevate the spectrum is
committed to elevating
individuals on the autism
spectrum and their families
through inclusion advocacy and
friendship. There were pins.
There was actually a whole
package with several pins in it
for Autism Day and I will tell
you, Mr. Speaker and body that
when my son was diagnosed in
1994, the incident was one in
1,666 and today it's 1 in 36.
In 20 years.
No, more than 20. I, I don't
want to date myself, so Mr.
Speaker, I do have some guests
on the rostrum and let me pull
up there.
Speaker, I have Christina
Martinez, president of Elevate
the Spectrum.
Although I don't think they're
in here.
There you are. Welcome to the
house.
Terra Maine treasure of Elevate
the spectrum to the house.
I mean self-advocate Rio Rancho
high student.
Welcome to the house and then
Joel Davis, who is the um
elevate the spec the vice
president of Elevate the
Spectrum and chair of the New
Mexico Development.
Disabilities council and Mr.
Speaker, just, just a quick
thing when we did our first
autism day, a group of moms and
therapists got together for
several days in a row we made
puzzle ribbon cookies we
decorated them, we delivered
them to every office in the
building and the num even back
then the number of people who
would say, oh, you know, can I
talk to you, my grandson has
autism or my son was just
diagnosed and now it's
everywhere and we also spent two
weekends doing a fact.
of
making the ribbon pins, the old
ones that used to have the
ribbon and then the puzzle piece
we made thousands and thousands
in a very much um Henry Ford's
style we had all the stations
and we made pins and so I just
want folks to please know that
autism, if you don't have
someone in your family, you
will, and if you don't know
someone with autism, you
probably do, you just don't know
that they have autism and it's a
spectrum disorder, everything
from people.
get PhDs and become
international experts in their
field, Temple Grandin, who is an
expert in animal husbandry all
the way down to people who are
who are 100% dependent. My son
is 33. He lives in a group home
and for the first time ever a
few months ago, he sat down next
to me and said, Mama, I'm happy.
The work that you all do is
incredibly incredibly important
and the awareness that you've
raised over the years, certainly
in my last 10 years here, um,
in, in the capital. I, I see the
advocacy, you could feel it,
it's palpable, it's effective,
it's impactful, and I'm grateful
for the work that you all do.
uh, thank you, gentle lady for
and I believe you have a
certificate too that you'll
present to these folks here a
little later today. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Welcome to the house,
folks. Thank you.
The lady from uh Valencia, but
before, before I go to you, you
know, I, I, uh, I
I'm a fan of making
chicharrones.
Um, and I, I.
I do that quite a bit actually
probably I shouldn't.
Disclose too much of that, um,
but I, I love, I just love going
to Nelson's Meat Market, um,
from South Valley and just
hooking it up. Sometimes it's
just me, um, but then I go
around the neighborhood and
share with my neighbors. It is
one of my favorite things to
cook and make it such a process.
It's such a rich cultural
tradition, um, so this morning I
got here extra early and I said,
you know, I'm not gonna get to
eat when the rest of y'all get
to eat.
So I'm just gonna go hang out
with those guys and eat as a
cook.
Which is like the rule that's
actually how you're supposed to
do it, uh, and I munched on
chicharrons Carnedovada hung out
with the good folks from Valensi
County, uh, seeing your food get
made, and I tell you, it was
delicious. It was very good, so
young lady from Valencia, you
have a guest and a certificate
to honor the good people of All
Lindsay County.
Yes, I do, uh, Mr. Speaker,
thank you so much and I'm so
glad that you got to hang out
with him because I have been
stuck in committee all morning
and I haven't got to really hang
out with any of them. So at
least you got to, so that's
good, uh, but that's probably
one of my favorite traditions
when you're doing, when anyone
that's having a matanza, my
family has had one for 52 years,
and, um, and, and, and it's
something that I cherish, but
that, that camaraderie that,
that communion that we basically
will have a uh around uh the
cooking and just, and just
that tradition is something that
Valencia County definitely makes
sure that we are not gonna let
die in this state, um, we just
had our huge uh uh um world's
largest Matanza just, uh, what
was it 2 weeks ago I believe,
and we had a great turnout, so
that was amazing. Uh, but
Valencia County is actually a
county that is made up of many
different cities and villages
and um but we're all still a
tight-knit community. We are
grounded in
Mexico history and tradition and
we are, we are, it's very
important to hold those
traditions uh true to and and
and carry them on and pass them
on to the next generations and
that is something that uh anyone
in Valencia County, if you talk
to him, we have a certain pride
and, and, and I've, I've also
realized that many people that I
talked to across the state,
everyone has a relative in
Valencia County. I'm just
telling you right now, you have
at least one in Valencia County.
So, um,
So, and, and wherever I go, it
doesn't matter where I go, but
um we do have, uh, before I
introduce my guests, I would
love for the clerk to read our
certificate please.
Before I go to the clerk, I
believe we are all primos here
in the states, so I, I have a
primo from At Lanza County. I
don't know if he's my real
primo, but might as well be.
Clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025 declares February
6, 2025, Valencia County Day.
Whereas Valencia County is part
of the historic Rio Bajo region
and whereas in 1739, the king of
Spain granted the famous town of
Tomay Landgrant Merced to 30
families, establishing a
foundational community in what
is now Valencia County and
whereas the village of Los Lunas
was formed by Spaniards in the
18th century and has grown to
become New Mexico's 2nd fastest
growing community experiencing
expansive population growth and
whereas Bolen, officially known
as N Nest.
Senora de Bele was a strategic
point along the Camino Real,
also known as the Royal Road,
which carved a trade route
through south into Mexico, and
whereas Belen later became known
as the hub City due to the Belen
cutoff of the Atchinson, Topeka
and Santa Fe Railway, now known
as the BNSF Railway Company and
whereas Belin is home to the
BNSF railway fuel station, which
plays a critical role in
supporting the transportation of
goods across the country, re
Forcing the city's importance as
a major hub for logistics and
commerce, and whereas Peralta
was the site of a minor
engagement during the American
Civil War and whereas Bosquey
Farms became a destination for
relocated dust Bowl refugees and
continues to embrace its
identity as a sparsely populated
agricultural community and
whereas
Real communities is home to
Valencia County's only golf
course, Tierra del Sol, and
continues to serve as a
recreational and residential
destination and whereas
agriculture remains a part, a
vital part of Valencia County's
identity and economy, and
whereas the original pre-1937,
United States Route 66 runs
through the heart of Valencia
County, linking it to a rich
history of trade,
transportation, and cultural
exchange and whereas Valencia
County.
home to the Decalog stone which
contains an inscription
interpreted to be an abridged
version of the 10 Commandments
in Paleo-Hebrew, adding to its
historical significance.
And whereas
Valencia County
Houses two prominent museums,
the Belen Harvey House Museum
and the Los Lunas Museum of
Heritage and Arts, which
preserve the history and
cultural heritage of the region
and whereas Valencia County is
home to parts of the Cibola
National Forest and the Manzano
Mountain wilderness, providing
scenic beauty and opportunities
for outdoor recreation, and
whereas Valencia County is the
home of the largest matanza in
the world, a symbol of the rich
Spanish heritage of the Rio
Grande Valley hosted annually by
the Hispano.
chamber of Valencia County to
preserve traditions, promote
local business, and raise funds
for scholarships, and whereas
The greater Valencia County
Chamber of Commerce has played a
pivotal role in driving business
growth and expansion in the
region by fostering
collaboration among local
businesses, providing valuable
resources and supporting
initiatives that enhance
economic development and
community prosperity and whereas
the village of Los Lunas has
emerged as a catalyst for
industrial manufacturing,
technological advancement and
economic development in New
Mexico and whereas Valencia
County is now a growing hub for
manufacturing and and logistics.
With major employers such as
Meta, Amazon, and Arcosa,
driving job creation and
economic prosperity and whereas
Valencia County's central
location, transportation
infrastructure and business
friendly environment position,
it is a strong contender to
become the new home of the New
Mexico State Fair, providing
economic benefits to the state
and enhancing the region's
tourism and community engagement
opportunities and whereas
Caitlin Maria of Belen, Valencia
County, Rodeo Queen.
It was crowned the 2025 New
Mexico State Fair Queen
showcasing the talent and
dedication of Valencia County
residents on a statewide stage
and whereas Los Lunas and
Greater Valencia County
continued to be a center of
economic growth in New Mexico
with an expanding population
thriving industries, and
innovative development projects
contributing to New Mexico's
competitiveness on a national
and global scale. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February.
6, 2025 be proclaimed Valencia
County Day in the House of
Representatives signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Welcome Valensi County to your
House of Representatives.
Gentle lady, did you just
announce in a certificate that
the state fair is moving to
Valena County.
No, I said, we're good
contenders, Mr. Speaker. We are,
we are one of the top
contenders, so we're, it's a
hopeful it's, it's, it's a
little plug a shameless plug.
All right, all right, no
pressure, no pressure. Um, there
are folks in the gallery from
Valencia County that are here
for this special day and I'd
like to have you rise to be
recognized. We've got
representatives from Canon
Christian Academy, the city of
Berlin, as the fibers, small
business development center,
Valencia County, Valencia
community Action Network
Valencia County news bulletin in
Valencia County United Way, as
well as the village of Los
Lunas. Welcome to the house.
back to you. Thank you Mr.
Speaker. So um as from our, our
wonderful uh certificate, you
can, you can see that Valencia
County not only is holding true
to our roots and our traditions
and our history, but we are also
a huge economic drivers in, in
our, in our county, um, also,
while we're still making sure
that we take care of our
farmers, which is part of that
history too, so and that's, and
that's uh definitely something
that we hold true. So my guess,
I will start that.
on the rostrum and then I think
they're all over around here.
Uh, we'll start with the county
commissioners, Gerard Seis,
Dante Berry, and Joseph Pazel.
down.
And then we have Valencia County
manager Jonathan Aragon.
Welcome to the house.
We have City of Berlin
counselors, Steve Holderman and
uh Rudy Espinoza. Welcome to the
house.
And Rudy uh right next to him
has his beautiful wife Rona
Espinoza, who is the executive
director for the greater um
Valencia County Chamber of
Commerce.
She also brought with her um
Andrew Spears, uh, president of
Greater Valencia County Chamber
of Commerce.
Um, let's see, where are we at?
OK, I have all kinds of people
in here. OK, so we'll go with uh
City of uh real communities. I
have uh 3 counselors. I have
counselors Matthew, uh, Marquez,
uh, Lawrence Gordon, and Thomas
Nelson.
And then I have village of
Bosque Farms, uh, counselor
Erika De Smith.
I also have Joshua Ramsel who is
the mayor of, of City of Real
Communities.
And then um let me see, we have
Bob Lucero, president of
Hispano, uh, Chamber of Valencia
County.
And then Doctor Sam uh Dusumu,
who is the Chancellor of the UNM
Valencia campus.
And then last but certainly not
least because she is the
catalyst that uh that actually
um planned most of this because
um I don't have that brain
capacity to do it all myself, so
I definitely have to announce
uh, miss, um, Victoria, um,
sorry.
Victoria Archuleta, who is a
senior economic developer for
the village village of Lana.
Welcome to the house.
So I hope everyone, Mr. Speaker,
that you, uh, you do have your
food on the table. Enjoy, enjoy,
um, I've, I've been smelling it
outside my window the few times
that I got to to be in my office
and so I am definitely starving
and ready to eat. Um, I do
believe that my fellow uh
Valencia County uh
representative has uh some
explanation on some gifts that
we gave you too. Very cool.
Well, if anyone is not going to
eat the chicharrons, drop them
off.
At the clerk's office.
Gentlemen from Valencia, thank
you Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Does
a gentle lady yield?
Doesn't need to yield. You're
recognized by me.
Speaker, thank you. You know,
actually, even though she's my
little sister, I start to
respond, uh, you know, I'm very
responsible to her. She tells me
what to do, so she gets to do
all the official stuff and I get
to do all the good stuff, you
know, in, do some family and
friends.
So before I go and talk to you
about the bags that you have
before, I do have a couple of
guests that are behind me.
They're actually the new and
probably will be the improved uh
representatives for District 8
at some point in time. I have,
uh, Ariana Saz and Mr. Aaron
Brela behind me.
And up in the gallery I do have
some dear friends, you know,
there's always a couple of
dynamic duels throughout
history. You have wide open and
Doc Holo.
You have Starsky and Hutch.
You have Maverick and Goose, and
it sometimes Beavis and
Buttheads, so I do wanna.
So I do want to introduce uh
dear colleague and friend of
mine actually his first time
he's been to the house to see
us. Andrew Cys and his wife
Natalie.
All right, if you're in the
gallery, rise to be recognized.
So Mr. Speaker, first I want to
thank our cooks, our communities
that went out there, we had
both, uh, cooks from the county
from the village from the
surrounding communities, and
also lost in the schools, uh,
the, the gift bags we have
before us kind of represent our
our business and our industry
and as for many of us, as we
talked about in Vilens County,
it centers around food.
So we want to thank all of our,
our, our folks who donated and
this, these gift bags, uh, come
to you, uh, from, uh, myself,
Tanya.
Representative Armstrong and
also Senator Sanchez.
We have the coffee, which will
start your day guaranteed to
help you create policy and pass
laws if you drink it. We have
our for lunch we have.
One of the only working flour
mills in the state. It's
actually, it's so, it's actually
dummy proof, so we have the
soappa and the honey to
accompany your chicharons in
Carno Nevada.
For your afternoon snack we have
some uh get hooked jerky that'll
help you with your snack and for
dessert.
We have some pecans from the 44
sisters and Terry's sweet
garden. So we want to just
highlight this we on behalf of
70,000 residents of Valencia
County.
We invite you down to our county
so that you can get a taste and
experience.
Not only the hospitality but our
hardworking.
Uh, business people and uh our
our communities that has grown
so much in our local businesses,
so I want to thank everyone
who's had a part of this. I want
to thank all of the donors.
You know, that have provided
this and as we said before, this
is just a little sampling of
what you'll get if you come down
to Valencia County, just drop a
name drop Tanya's name and uh
Tony Mirba Moya, you get all
doors open to you. So, Mr.
Speaker, thank you. All right,
I'm gonna try that. I'm gonna
try that this weekend.
But I get put in jail if I do
that.
Generally from Katherine Socorro
Valencia Sierra Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Just real quick, I want
to thank my colleagues here that
I work with for carrying the
load of getting all of this
organized and and uh in my new
job I've been a little busy and
so I, I think, uh, uh,
Representative Tanya Mediba Moya
and, and Representative Baca for
their help. Um, I just want to
stand in solidarity with
Valencia County. Uh, we're
moving and shaking down in
Valencia County and
have a lot to talk about. We
have a new exit coming that
we're needing some funding for
and uh then we have a new
hospital being built down in
Valencia County. And so we are
uh there's homes going up like
crazy. Uh, we have county
managers, uh, county
commissions, city councilors,
uh, small little communities all
across through Valencia County.
My husband and I own two
businesses in Valencia County
where we employ lots of people
that we actually love and care
about.
Tremendously where, where are
they, their families, where
they're going home at night,
what they're doing during the
day and how they love their jobs
and so I just support Valencia
County, of course, uh, I, I
represent rural New Mexico, so I
don't have a lot of people in
Valencia County have real
communities. I have uh close to
the exit, uh, but I took, I lost
Bolin, darn it, darn it.
But, uh, I love Valy County and
promote it and support it and um
you know they prayed for us
before we came.
And uh it's a lot.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Speaker thank you gentle lady.
Welcome Valencia County.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise
to uh give a special recognition
to um to a, to my guest that's
on the rostrum. Before I do
that, Mr. Speaker, I want the
legislative body to understand
how important the relationship
is in San Juan County that we're
all working together and that's
something that I'm continuing to
to push forward. What I'd like
to say, Mr. Speaker is move the
needle forward and last night,
Mr. Speaker, in, in our
appropriations committee, I
this as well, the, the, the
priority that we have for our
public safety and behavioral
health, Mr. Speaker, my, my
guest that's on the rostrum, he,
he represents uh a major uh
hospital. My guess is Mr. Jason
Ros, President CEO of San Juan
Regional Medical Center, if you
could rise, stand. Thank you.
Uh, this is a hospital that
provides 191 beds of private
independent level 3, a level 3
trauma center serving.
The Four Corners region for 115
years, uh, they have 1800
employees, 300 physicians and
that in advanced practice
providers and, and, uh, we had a
really good conversation about,
uh, you know, what we can do as
a community, Mr. Speaker, to,
uh, you know, grow our own, you
know.
In that field and just uh uh
again, the conversations I had
in committee last night, um.
Our health care providers are
are important partners to, to
our public safety to to
behavioral health and, and Mr.
Speaker, I wanna acknowledge the
leadership that uh Mr. Rounds is
doing by stepping up and working
with the county, working with
the city, working with uh the
Navajo Nation and uh they have
an initiative seeking $7 million
to build a, a triage center to
help the behavioral health
issues in San Juan County and I
want to acknowledge.
Uh, the leadership at San San
Juan Regional Hospital, and I am
really blessed that he's here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome
to the house.
The lady from San Miguel and
Torre is Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I am actually introducing my
guests on behalf of
Representative Cates who did
need to step out for some
training, but um she has a
shadow that will be with her um
throughout the day today. Um,
I'd like to introduce George
Welch, um, George Welch is a
13-year-old 7th grader at Desert
Ridge Middle School in
Albuquerque. Um, he actually was
born in Turkey and he lived
there while his dad served in
the United States Air Force
before moving home to America.
He is an active and energetic
person. He enjoys playing sports
and.
participates in cross country
and track, which challenges his
endurance and helps to keep him
fit. Um, he comes from a lively
household with 2 brothers and 2
dogs. He loves the outdoors,
whether it's camping, hiking, or
simply exploring nature, um,
George is currently on his Boy
Scout journey to achieving the
prestigious rank of Eagle Scout
in his free time, he enjoys
traveling to new places and
playing games with his friends.
Um, he is actually here with his
scout troop today, um, and this
is actually part, um, a, a step
in one of his badges that he is
earning on.
Citizenship in the nation, so
everybody please welcome George
to to the house, George.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I also
wanted to rise to introduce some
of my guests sitting over here
on the rostrum on the left
bench, I guess, um, Sarah
Salazar Baca, uh, Amos Waca and
Preston Baca, they are members
of Elevate the Spectrum, uh,
welcome to the house.
Sarah, uh, when I first got
elected, reached out um and got
me involved with Elevate the
Spectrum, and I am so glad she
did. So thank you and welcome.
Fantastic. Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Bernelio
Representative Nicole Chavez.
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that Memorial
16 be removed from the speaker's
table and be made the next order
of business, no objection. It is
so ordered. Let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
Memorial 16 on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment, or
substitution. The gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, so it's
nice to hear that there are so
many people prioritizing public
safety and behavioral health as
this morning we are gathering to
honor homicide victims, some of
them are in front of me and some
of them are in the gallery, but
as we gather in remembrance, in
love and in unity to honor the
lives that were stolen by
violence.
Um, I want to lift up the
memories of those lost and
remind the world of their names,
their stories and their spirits
that will never be forgotten.
To the families that are here
today.
Your pain is immeasurable.
Your resilience is undeniable.
Each of you carries a love.
That endures beyond tragedy and
a love no act can ever erase.
Today we dedicate this memorial
to ensure that our loved ones on
their legacies will always be
remembered.
So to those we have loved,
They're not forgotten.
And to those that we have left
behind, we will continue to
fight in your honor.
So my fellow representatives, we
cannot undo the past.
But we can shape the future. We
can strengthen our laws. We can
invest in our communities and
work together to stop this cycle
of violence before another life
is taken.
So let this memorial stand as a
beacon of remembrance, love, and
my unwavering commitment that we
will always remember and their
lives will never be lost in
vain.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that the
memorial be read to read.
House Memorial 16, introduced by
Representative Nicole Chavez and
others. A memorial recognizing
victims of violent crime and
their families and honoring
their losses, whereas lives lost
to senseless acts of violence
deserve to be honored and
remembered and whereas each life
lost represents a story, a
family, and a dream left
unfulfilled and whereas victims
of violent crime would like to
educate the public and
policymakers about the impact of
murder and other violent crime.
on families and communities and
whereas the diverse
contributions of the survivors
movement should be recognized
and whereas New Mexico stands in
solidarity with the families and
loved ones who carry the weight
of unimaginable loss and whose
strength in the face of grief is
a testament to the enduring
power of love and remembrance.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico, the
victims of violent crime be
recognized, honored, and
remembered by ensuring that
their lives will never be
forgotten, and their legacies
will inspire change and by
fostering communities of peace,
support, and justice, and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this mem memorial be transmitted
to the chair of the crime
Victims Reparation Commission.
Is a debate on the memorial.
And lady from Chavez Curry and
Roosevelt Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, will the
gentle lady yield.
Uh, I just wanted to stand in
strong, strong, strong support
of this memorial, um, well, as I
stated this morning, I could
never imagine Mr. Speaker being
in the shoes of somebody like
y'all and your and losing a
loved one in your family. I, I
have walked with members who
have had this happen to him
through my 28 years, um, in the
prosecution system and these are
the most resilient people.
They're strong. They go through
years and years of never ending
pain.
every year. There's a reminder
of something on Facebook or an
appeal or something that comes
up that it's just, it never ends
ends. It never ends, especially
if there's an appeal process, so
my heart goes out to them and um
we're gonna do our best for you
to fight for crime and to fight
to make strong laws that ensures
that this does not happen to
anybody else again, um, as best
as we can do, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and so I just wanted to say I'm
a strong support of this
memorial.
I understand the process you're
going through, um, and I, my, my
heart goes out to you for, for
everything you're enduring from
the loss of your family members.
So, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. There's
further debate, gentle lady from
Torrance and San Miguel,
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, me, the gentle lady yield.
Are you, um, I just want to
stand in recognition of this
memorial and also out of respect
to my colleague, um, I also had,
um, the experience to go down to
the rotunda for a little while
this morning and here's some of
your stories. So I want to thank
you for being here with us
today, and I just want to
recognize that we stand with you
in memory and in honor of your
loved ones and that's it. Thank
you.
Thank you, gentle lady. There's
for the debate, the gentle lady
from
Sukoro, Donana and Sierra
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Does the gentle
lady yield?
Are you
I want to thank you for being a
continual voice.
And congratulate you on the hard
fight to get to that seat. Now
you get a voice, you get a vote
and a voice. I wanna tell you
how sorry I am for your losses.
What's predictable is
preventable.
And we're here
To fix
Things that are wrong. I'm gonna
name someone from each of the
counties in my district.
They're all under the age of 5,
they've all lost their lives.
Ricky Renova from Socorro, the
first wrongful death lawsuit
that CYFD is facing after the
passing of the CARE Act. The
CARE Act had good intentions,
rules and rigs need to change.
Shaquille Ferguson Junior from
Sierra County.
I attended that funeral, should
not have had to.
19 separate reports to CYFD and
law enforcement.
Never removed
From this dangerous place.
And most recently a child from
Las Cruces who lost their life
last week who still remains
unnamed.
Thank you for your work.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate, gentle
lady from Britta Alio
Representative Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady yield? Are you?
Thank you for bringing this
forward, um, I stand in strong
support, um, I cannot imagine.
What, what, what the feeling is
like to lose a loved one,
especially a child like that
through the act of violence, um,
when I served on the MAFCA
board, which was the flood
control board and uh as a city
councilor, um, in conjunction
with the city council, we built
a memorial, um, which I hope
that some of these folks will
these victims' parents and
families can visit.
And that was really my, my
intent when we built the
memorial. It's called Agua de
Los Ninos, which means
Tears of the children.
And the memorial is built at.
Unser and Black Arroyo for
people that would like to visit
it, um.
The reason at the time that I,
that I wanted to build this
small memorial, um, was because
of people, children like Omari
and Victoria Martin who
Actually lived just down the
street from me.
Um, and Mr. Speaker and
Representative, I would like to
just really briefly read what
the what the plaque at the
memorial says.
It says in memory of the lost
innocents.
Their absence is a silent grief.
The young wives, a beautiful
memory.
So, thank you for bringing this
forward. I very much support it.
Seeing no further debate, you
later to close.
There is for the debate, lady
from Valencia Mirabel Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, uh,
well, the gentle lady yield are
you?
Um, I, I rise to in, um,
In prayer for all of you, all
you family members.
Um, you have my heartfelt, uh,
love and, and, and I know that
no words will ever truly comfort
you.
But you also, I wanted, I wanted
to stand here and say that there
are many people in this house
that will pledge to you that we
will continue to fight that this
stuff does not continue to
happen.
Um, no matter what walls come
against us, we will continue to
fight. Valencia County just
recently had a tragedy and I
will be going to a funeral
tomorrow, um, uh, the former,
um, city council, city
councilor's son that was
sentence Lee, his life was taken
in front of his children.
Who are my students and, and,
and my heart breaks for them,
so.
I, I just rise for you today.
lady from Eddie and Lee, Senator
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady please yield. Uh
yeah.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so I.
I just want to stand up also in
support of this memorial, um, it
is hard and it takes courage.
For you to do this.
Someone once said that grief is
love.
With nowhere to go and so I just
want you to know.
Our hearts go out to all of you
who've lost a loved one, a
friend, family member, and I
pray that God.
Will comfort those of you who
have gone through this.
And bring you peace. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker,
from Santa Fe, Blujan.
Thank you, mister, um, speaker
just wanted to stand and support
in.
Hm
It affects us all and we're all
here to do that work together.
Thank you.
He's for the debate, gentlemen
from Katherine Hidalgo, Grant,
representative Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
gentle ladies please yield.
I
Thank you Mr. Speaker, again,
you know, I, I appreciate you
bringing this memorial, uh, to
bring.
All of us to recognize.
How this affects all of us, not
just in our state but in our own
families.
Uh in our communities.
As a funeral director I've over
the 37 years I've seen this
many, many times.
Too many times is a better word.
And um to console those families
there's never words uh you know,
even you, even if you've done
this as many times as I have,
there's never words to console a
family you can only ask the Lord
to give them consolation.
And so may God bless you and all
the families that have have
struggled with something like
you have and God bless you.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Gentle lady, I just, I wanna
remind the body that you're a
victim as well.
And you've gone through this
too, and I can't even imagine
what that would possibly feel
like.
And for the courage that it took
you, and I thank you for letting
me sign on to your memorial.
Because I got to meet your
guest.
And they're just as real.
People is any of us.
And if it can happen to you, it
can happen to us. So we have to
stand strong and we have to make
sure that we're passing good
crime packages for the folks in
New Mexico.
So that it doesn't happen again.
And it takes a lot of courage
for you guys to come. I
appreciate that. And
Just looking on your shirts and
honoring your, your kiddos.
That takes a lot as well, so
it's never
A goodbye. It's always to see
you later.
So we'll see him again.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
You know for the debate and to
close.
Mr. Speaker, can I just let
everybody know I have guests on
the rostrum, but I also have
survivors in the gallery as well
and we, we'll introduce the
folks on the rostrum and I'll
introduce the folks in the
gallery. Thank you so much.
Mr. Speaker, and thank you to
all of my fellow colleagues and
representatives, um, this means
more to me than I can ever
explain, um.
Every day we wake up and.
Sometimes your chest is so heavy
with the loss and sometimes you
can breeze through the day and I
always tell my fellow survivors
that grief is like ocean waves.
You're fine one day and the next
minute it can knock you on your
butt.
And I am so proud of every
single one of you here today.
Because you continue to honor
your loved ones and you continue
to fight and thank you speaker
for letting me honor the loved
ones that we have lost.
Right.
Do you like to make your motion?
I ask unanimous consent of the
House that the records show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in
affirmative. There's been a
motion to show all members of
the House present and voting in
the affirmative, seeing no
objection, it is ordered. We are
on final passage of House
Memorial 16. The vote is now
open.
The border is now closed by a
vote of 69 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative. House Memorial
16 has duly passed this house.
gentle lady, um, would you
kindly introduce your guest on
the rostrum, please.
Yes, thank you, um, Mr. Speaker,
um, first I'm gonna introduce my
daughter who's gonna make me a
Mimi soon, Kennedy Chavez
Silver.
She's a survivor by losing her
brother, Jaden Chavez Silver to
senseless drive-by shooting.
Next, I want to introduce
Allan and Veronica Garcia.
They are the parents of baby
Lily, who was killed in a road
rage.
In
By a repeat offender.
Next, I want to introduce Raoul
and Sam Bhill.
Sam lost his wife Jackie, um.
We had somebody that shouldn't
have been in our country or in
our state that was trying to
carjack his beautiful wife early
in the morning on the way to the
gym.
And unfortunately shot her in
the head and um.
They had to clean that up
themselves, so I, I in I have to
say in a um victims bill of
rights we're building into that
that the crimes reparation has
representatives from a company
that can come do that, so
families don't have to worry
about that on top of the loss
and tragedy that they face.
Next we have Angel who lost her
son Devin to a repeat offender
who had a GPS monitor on.
Um, at the time that he killed
her son.
And last but not least in the
rostrum, we have Alicia and Leo
Otero who lost Elias Otero.
Um, they're one of their sons
out of the 3 had been um
Taken by some violent repeat
offenders and kidnapped him. He
called his older brother, Elias,
who was a corrections officer at
the time, um, who went and tried
to save him, and he ended up
losing his life. So thank you
all for being here and I also
have victims in the gallery as
well, excuse me, folks, if
you're in the gallery as part of
this memorial, please rise so
that we can recognize you
properly. Thank you for being
here. Thank you for your
courage. Thank you for fighting
for your loved ones.
And gentle lady, if I may also
take Chair's prerogative. I, I
had a guest who was supposed to
be here today, who lost his son.
To senseless gun violence and at
the last minute he canceled. He
is afraid because he is an
undocumented person, but he's
also a victim of violent gun
crime, so if he's watching,
we're thinking about you and we
celebrate your courage along all
of these amazing leaders that
are here today. Thank you for
bringing the memorial forward.
Thank you. Gentlemen from
Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I have a special guest today. I
have a shadow that's with me,
uh, Mr. Nico Salzar is in the
6th grade and he attends uh
Pinon Elementary here in Santa
Fe.
Niko not only excels in school
but also in sports.
He's a point guard for the Pino
Eagles, and he leads his team in
scoring and overall effort both
on and off the court. He plans
on attending Saint Michael's
Junior high and high school.
Where he helps to lead the
horsemen to state championship
every year he plays for them.
He hopes he will lead the team
to an extraordinary he hopes
that this will lead him to an
extraordinary college basketball
career at UNM before he selected
in the draft to play for the
Phoenix Suns.
Otherwise his fallback plan is
to attend UNM and UNM Law School
where he plans on learning how
to defend our state and nation's
constituents, Mr. Speaker,
please, uh, uh, on a round of
applause for Mr. Nico Salazar.
All right, all good choices.
Good job buddy.
And, and I know today as
McKinley County, Gallup McKinley
County D and and we've got that
beautiful pin, but you got a
pretty cool pin yourself, buddy.
Can you show, uh.
There we go. That's a pretty pin
right there.
Can you have the gentleman from
Donana just read what it says on
there.
I'm I'm gonna try. I need my, my
bifocals here.
Speaker of the House Javier
Martinez.
Good choice, buddy.
Generated from retinalillo
representative Gurola.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um, I'm
also want to introduce my shadow
today.
um, Sohombres Gabri Alexis
Montoya Felix is me and Cinco
he goes to Albuquerque Aviation
Academy likes to uh draw.
Seeing
And he runs at Mesa High School,
so I found out he's also my
constituent.
So please help me to uh welcome
to the house um Gabriel.
Go Mustangs. Welcome to the
house.
gentlemen from Bernalio de la
Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my
pleasure to introduce my shadow
today. It's particularly my
pleasure because my shadows uh.
Grandfather is my classmate and
dear friend.
And so I'm.
would like you to recognize the
House to recognize that my
shadow is a wonderful young man
that is a student at UNM
graduate of Bosque High School
and his interests are business.
And if he's anything like his
grandfather he's gonna be a
wheeler dealer.
So
he also played, he's a great
golf player. You, you got an 80
recently on golf, so Mr.
Speaker, if you would help me
welcome Dylan Romolo Montoya to
the house. Welcome Dylan Montoya
to the house.
lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, Mr.
Speaker, I also have a guest
with me today. Um, her name is
Doctor Jamie Nunez. She's up on
the rostrum with you. Um, she is
the chair of our political
science department at UNM. Uh,
she's also my neighbor and my
constituent, but I am showing
her around today, uh, because
Paula C doesn't always match
with politics that I am getting,
I'm giving her the uh back scoop
of what goes on here at the
legislature, um.
This year, Mr. Speaker, she is
advocating for a pipeline
program for students and
political science, um, to be
trained to shadow us and
hopefully ultimately uh to work
in places like our state
capital. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Otero
representative Black.
Good good afternoon, Mr.
Speaker. Good to, good to see
you here. It's one o'clock and
it's time for some
announcements. So Mr. Speaker,
first of all, I have a shadow as
well, and her name, Mr. Speaker,
is, is Jain Fellows, and she's
14 years old and lives with her
folks, her 5 younger siblings as
well, Mister Speaker, and fun
fact, I learned this this
morning, Mr. Speaker. Her name
is actually a biblical name. It
comes from the Bible as one of
the pillars of Solomon's temple.
Which is super cool, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, so she's
homeschooled and enrolled in
classical conversations. Her
favorite subjects in school are
debate and physical science,
maybe we'll see her up in the
legislature someday. We like to
debate here, Mr. Speaker,
especially around this area of
the chamber, Mr. Speaker. Don't
take any notes from her, OK?
You, you're doing just fine. I'm
trying to radicalize her, Mr.
Speaker. No just kidding.
So she enjoys serving, uh,
serving on her local church, Mr.
Speaker, and uh
Play soccer, traveling, and
reading. I also learned that she
likes to do swimming.
Wrestling volleyball and
basketball. I don't know where
she finds the time, Mr. Speaker,
but she's very talented. Her
favorite thing about growing up
in New Mexico is the hot air
balloons and of course the green
chili on everything and she's on
the right team. I'm team Green
as well sometimes Christmas
mostly green, but uh, when she
grows up, she would like to be a
neonatal flight respiratory
therapist, which I think is
probably the coolest part of
that bio. So please welcome Jain
Fellows, Mr. Speaker. Welcome
Jake in the house.
Also, Mr. Speaker, we have some
amazing guests on the rostrum
that I'd love to introduce.
First, I'd love to introduce our
chair of our county commission,
commissioner, uh, Vicky
Marcourt. She is amazing.
And then her sister, I don't
know if you could tell that
they're sisters, but they're,
they're good looking folks. This
is Laurie Black. She is the
executive director of the
Flickinger Center for Performing
Arts and Art City.
Welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, I believe we have a
couple of guests in the gallery
for you and let me introduce
you. If you're here, please
rise. We've got Spike and Kelly
Goss.
Welcome to the house and all my
great guests are here, Mr.
Speaker, because today is the
beginning of Otero County days.
Otero County, we have to be very
special. We get 2 days in the
legislature today and tomorrow
and so we have a certificate and
I would love that to be read if
it's in front of the, the clerk,
Mr. Speaker. 2 days and you get,
what, 3, maybe 4 reps, maybe 5.
We're very cool, Mr. Speaker.
We're very blessed. You've got
that, you've got that big
pistachio, right? That's the
largest in the world, Mr.
Speaker, I've seen it actually,
um, where was I?
clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
5-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025, declares February
6th and 7th, 2025, Otero County
Days, whereas Otero County was
established in 1899 and is named
after Miguel Antonio Otero, a
prominent political figure in
New Mexico's territorial days
and whereas Otero County is home
to White Sands National Park, an
awe-inspiring natural wonder of
glistening white gypsum sand
dunes covering 275.
square miles, drawing visitors
from around the world and
whereas Holloman Air Force Base
located in Otero County serves
as a critical hub for national
defense, hosting the forty-ninth
wing and playing a pivotal role
in military aviation research
and innovation.
And whereas the Alameda Park
Zoo, founded in Alamogordo in
1898, is the oldest zoo in the
southwest providing conservation
and educational opportunities
for visitors of all ages and
whereas the New Mexico Museum of
Space History in Alamogordo
celebrates New Mexico's
contributions to space
exploration and houses the
International Space Hall of Fame
honoring pioneers such as Doctor
Robert H. Goddard, the father of
modern rocketry and whereas the
Tularosa Basin Museum.
of his of history preserves the
diverse cultural and historical
heritage of the region,
showcasing artifacts and
exhibits from early N Native
American civilizations, Spanish
settlers, and the railroad era
that shaped Otero County's
development and whereas Otero
County has been home to many
notable individuals.
Including Oliver Lee, a
legendary martial, rancher, and
gunfighter known for his role in
the early settlement of the
Tularosa Basin. Allan Hale, an
astronomer and co-discoverer of
the Hale Bob Comet, United
States Senator Albert Fall, a
key political figure of the
early 20th century, Governor
Edwin L. Meacham, who served 4
terms as New Mexico's chief
executive, physicist Edward
Condon, a major contributor to
quantum mechanics and national
defense research, and Kim
Stanley.
A distinguished actress known
for her work on stage and
screen, and whereas the county
offers a wealth of recreational
opportunities, including hiking
in the Lincoln National Forest,
exploring the historic village
of Cloudcroft, enjoying Oliver
Lee Memorial State Park and
experiencing the cultural
heritage of the Mescalero Apache
tribe and whereas Otara County
continues to contribute to the
economic, scientific and
cultural prosperity of New
Mexico through its industries,
military presence, and
historical significance.
Now therefore, be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that in
recognition of Oterra County's
extraordinary contributions to
the state. February 6th and 7th,
2025 be proclaimed Otero County
Days in the House of
Representatives, signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Congratulations Otero County on
your two days of celebration,
very cool.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
and thank you for reading that.
I hoped it was very informative
for you guys. Please come visit
Otero County. I love Otero
County, especially the hiking,
by the way, because if you'll
see my Facebook posts, which are
a little too many probably. I'm
always hiking all the time and
in Otero County because we are
just one of the beautifulest
places in the entire world, and
I just want to showcase that.
And also on your desks, Mr.
Speaker and members, you'll see
an awesome little box here that
includes either an F-117 IHAWK.
AF 4 phantom or an F-22 Raptor
in remembrance of our great
Holloman Air Force Base, and
these were made by Derek Bash
who's in Almogordo, him and his
wife, they both run the
children's theater and they do a
great job at the Flickinger
Center. So please uh put this
wherever you like to put this. I
like to put mine right on my
desk here as I always have, but
we're very happy to have that as
well. Uh tonight we have a
reception at Eve Wine Bar that's
on San Francisco Street, that's
at 6 p.m. February 7th.
which is tomorrow, we've got
breakfast with the legislators,
that's at El Dorado Hotel, and
then the next or the night of,
we have a closing reception at
El Dorado Hotel, and that's at 6
p.m. and so please join us. We
would love to talk about our
giant pistachio, our great
fighter jets and all the other
cool things that we have to
offer, Mr. Speaker. So thank
you. Very cool. Be there or be
squared.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and
Oteroa Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
rise to a very honored that I
get to share a space, uh, with
my neighbor here in, in taking
care of Otero County, and we're
really proud of our Otero County
leadership.
And our ranchers that show up
and they fight hard every day.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, I hope
everybody shows up for Otero
County Day. Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen.
Further not debate
announcements.
Gentle lady from Torresentative
Lord Amber Leo as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes,
Burnley and Torrance County, and
I have a special guest today
with me. His name is Xander
Peace, 11 years old. You wanna
stand at Sanders so everybody
can see you, um, he's in the Boy
Scouts. He plays chess. He
attended charter school in
Albuquerque. He's a really super
cool kid with a great handshake
and I am proud to have him
shadowing here me here today.
Please welcome Xander Peace.
Welcome to the house.
Generating from.
I'm gonna get this eventually.
Sorry, uh, gentle lady from
Donana Sierrascoto,
Representative Doll. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Um, I have two
things. If you've got this
awesome free green chili
cheeseburger, coupon on your
desk, that is a big shout out
and thank you to Robin Stamos.
She is part of the Merritt
family, and they have owned and
operated Sonics in New Mexico
for over 50 years. She grew up
here in New Mexico, born and
raised and has been part of the
family business her whole life,
and
they are not only building new
franchises, but they are
revitalizing the ones that exist
in the communities that we all
grew up. I don't know what you,
we used to cruise at the Sonic,
um, and so they'll be renovating
those, uh, but this is just to
celebrate the first committee
passage of red and green chili
Month, and there's more of this
to come. I hope I get to cast
out more goodies, and I also
have a guest today, a shout out
to introduce if, if I may, this
is Katie Zumhati and she is a
sophomore in high school.
school. She enjoys debate and
mock trials. She's employed
part-time as a server at Saint
James Tea Room. I really like
the chai tea there, so that's
great. And she volunteers with
her homeschool. She doesn't
workshop called uh Around debate
and the homeschool group is
called
Did I write it down, standing
tall, united, the acronym is
stuff. She wants to go to law
school or
Ariel school. So thank you so
much for being here today.
Welcome to the house. Thank you
for being here.
from Sandoval Martinez.
Mr. Speaker, I'd like my
colleagues in the house to join
me in welcoming Austin Wilson.
Austin is in 8th grade, enjoys
government and political studies
and maybe we could introduce him
to the professor from UNM.
Some of his hobbies are playing
guitar, riding his bike, walking
his dogs, two Great Danes.
Austin stand up so they could
see how.
Big you are, and you can handle
two Great Danes.
Uh, he, he's very excited about
participating in this church
youth group. He's one of 4
children, 2nd oldest.
2 boys, 2 girls.
Um, he started homeschooling in
the 2023, 2024 school year after
attending two small Christian
private schools, but he does
appreciate the opportunity to
come and serve as a shadow today
to learn about the legislative
session and process.
He's thinking about possibly,
and I'm encouraging him to go to
the Air Force Academy and
graduate there as an officer and
go on to a great career. Please
join me in welcoming Austin
Wilson.
Welcome Austin to the house.
The gentle lady from Los Alamos
in Santa Fe Representative
Chandler. Oh thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Is this an appropriate
time for uh for committee
announcements. OK, very good.
So, um, committee members and
members of the House, Mr.
Speaker, we will, your House
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting tomorrow at 1:30 or 15
minutes after the end of the
floor session we will be meeting
Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, and
I'd like to change the time to
11:30 start time given the fact.
But there are also two other
committee meeting, um,
committees meeting at 9 or 9:30
and then the same time. Lunch
will be brought in, Mr. Speaker,
on Saturday. So thank you then.
Thank you. Me saying no.
The lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, uh, House
Appropriations finance will be
meeting at 1:30 to members of or
as soon as we're done on the
floor and Mr. Speaker, if I may
take a.
Another moment to just recognize
autism Day as a as a parent
mother of a child with autism. I
just want to say thank you to
elevate the spectrum and all of
the other um advocates and
families that are here today to
elevate the spectrum. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you from Bernalillo. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. How's Health
and Human Services Committee
will meet starting at 8:30.
Am in room 307, please be there
as normal.
we have a very full agenda.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker lady from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker House
labor veterans and military
affairs Committee is meeting at
1:30.
Normally our standing rule is or
15 minutes after the session.
However, I would like us to get
there, um, as soon as possible
after the session because our
guests have arrived and Mr.
Speaker, today I'm proud to
announce that we will be hosting
Brigadier General retired
Secretary Jason Herrera of the
Department of Veteran Services.
And adjunct General Miguel
Aguilar of the Department of
Military Affairs both of whom
will give the state of the
state, uh, for both their
divisions and departments today
so thank you Mr. Speaker. 1:30
or as soon as possible after the
session today and everyone's
invited to um the be visit the
website for these reports the
state of the state, uh, or if
you'd like to join us, you're
welcome thank you.
Thank you gentle lady members
take note, gentle lady from
Berley represented Borego.
Mr. Speaker, uh, thank you for
the recognition. I just wanted
to mention that I heard through
a little bird that there may be
after the session is over a
Matanza and Duranes.
With.
Members do not take note.
Maybe there will be. It depends
on how you guys behave in the
next 6 weeks.
Gentle lady from.
Towels. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I just wanted to remind the
members of the House
Agricultural SICA and Water
Resources Committee that we have
a dinner tonight at Restaurant
Martin. I don't think there are
chihuans on the menu, so I will
not invite you, Mr. Speaker.
Will there be eggs on the menu?
Mr. Speaker, there are, uh,
probably some products some
items that have eggs in them on
the menu, and that is why this
dinner is so expensive. So we
thank our sponsors.
Members take note.
Gentlemen from Berna Leo
Representative.
G Andres Romero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
House Education Committee will
meet at 8:30 in room 309
tomorrow morning. See you then.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Members take note. Any other
announcements we're gonna do a
little bit of intro and some
committee reports.
And we will be done for the day.
Gentle lady from Brillo.
Representative Hochman Bilal.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
moving on to the next order of
business, uh, committee reports.
See no objection and is ordered.
Gerg Reed.
Mr. Speaker.
Your government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 98 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, we adoption
of a favorable committee report
in House Bill 98. All those in
favor.
Suppose the I have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 108 has had it under
consideration reports in with
the recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted, D Wana Johnson chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
Or an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
108. All those in favors if I
say 9.
I supposed name. The committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 113 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass as amended and hence
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Do you
wantna Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
113. All those in favor, 85A9.
I suppose,
the committee report adopted.
Oh
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 157 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended and thence
referred to the government,
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee.
Respectfully submitted G Andre
Soro chair speaker, I move
adoption of the community report
adoption of a committee report
in House Bill 157. All those in
favor in say 9.
Is Bona,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 193 has had
it under consideration in Port
Sam with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G Andres from Mr.
Speaker, I move adoption of the
committee report, adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 193. All those in
favor if I say 9.
I suppose, yes have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 201 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted Jeandre Romero chair,
I adoption of the committee
report. We're an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 201. All those in
favor if I say a.
I suppose, yes it can be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 12 has headed under
consideration reports, same with
the recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report in House Bill 12. All
those in favor, Xeno say aye.
I suppose na, the eyes have it.
community report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 147.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee,
respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption in House
Bill 147. All those in favors by
say a.
I suppose
the committee reported update.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 209 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption report on
House Bill 209, all those in
favor and if I say 9.
All the supposed name, the eyes
have it can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to me has been
referred House Bill 216 has had
it under consideration in report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
report in House Bill 216. All
those in favor signified by
saying I.
All the supposed name. The eyes
have a committed report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 179 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
taxation and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Dorene
White Gallego's chair. Move it
to option.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
179, all those in favor say
gobble gobble.
I suppose nay.
Gobble gobbles have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
215 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Dorian Waigallo's
chair. We adoption.
For an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
215. All those in favor probably
say 9.
I suppose. Yeah, that committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
220 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Wagao's chair.
We've adoption report in House
Bill 220. All those in favor see
if say I.
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 13 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen, chair.
adoption adoption of favorable
committee report in 13. All
those in favor probably saying
I.
I suppose.
Yes committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee to has been
referred House Bill 159 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then revert to the
labor, veterans and Military
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
159. All those in favor of 85 by
saying I.
I suppose nay.
Yeah I had a community report
adopted.
to help.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 15.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move move to
adopt.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 15. All those in
favor say a.
I suppose nay.
I have a committee report is
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 70
has had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair. Mr. Speaker, adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
7.0, all those in favor, sena,
I suppose I have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to me
has been referred House Bill 78
has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass as amended, and
he's referred to the judiciary
Committee, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, move adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 78. All those in
favor signified by saying no.
the supposed name, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 80
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
80. All those in favor say aye.
I suppose nay.
The IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 116 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
of finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair adoption adoption
favorable committee report on
House Bill 116. All those in
favor saying no.
I suppose nay.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 106
has had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and hence referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted,
Elizabeth Thompson, chair of
committee report in House Bill
106 as amended. All those in
favor say aye.
Oppose nay, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling
and engrossing committee team
has been referred to House
Memorial One.
House Memorial for
House Memorial 6, House Memorial
9.
House Memorial 12.
House Memorial 13.
House Memorial 14 has had them
under consideration in reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in engross preparatory
designing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Anita Gonzalez chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We had adoption of favor
committee report and House
memorials 14 69 1213 and 14, all
those in favor, if I was saying
a.
pose me, the ISAA committee
report adopted that the record
reflect that the duly enrolled
in engross copies of House
Memorials 1469 1213, and 14 were
signed by the officers of the
house in open session.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Injection is ordered.
Last call for announcements.
Gentle lady from.
Dona
Anna, representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You're a
consumer and public affairs
Committee will meet in 10
minutes.
Members take note, 10 minutes
from now.
Any announcements, members, I'd
like to remind you that tomorrow
is American Indian Day here in
your state legislature, we will
have a packed house. We are
looking forward to a wonderful
opportunity to um meet and and
chat and discuss uh with our,
um, tribal leaders from across
the state.
Um, also, we will do, uh, some
intro tomorrow, probably some
committee committee reports as
well, and then there's tons of
committee work happening both in
the morning and in the
afternoon, probably well into
the evening, um, we are getting
to that point where we are going
to start planning some evening
sessions as well, so uh floor
sessions I should say so start
planning accordingly next week.
Uh, we'll keep you all posted as
to when we decide to do that.
Seeing no other announcements,
there's one more announcement,
generally from Berlio. Sorry,
Mr. Speaker, multitasking. I'm
gonna announce that we are going
to have pink out on Valentine's
Day. So wear your pink.
And in honor of us being the
largest female majority
legislature in the country, so
don't be afraid to wear pink.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
For a minute, I thought you were
gonna say pink eye, and I said,
whoa, I am on the health
committee, Mr. Speaker.
Wash your hands, members, wash
your hands. OK, seeing no more
announcements, the gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
The house was set in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
