By Representative Garrett.
Senator Hickey so we will begin
with house bill two twenty five.
Federal offense definition
Representative Castellano in re
thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
sorry we do need to roll call
first.
Good morning Representative lot.
Representative Lord here.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson here.
By chair Rubio.
Chair Ferrari here madam chair
we do have a quorum.
Representative Rubio here in
just a minute.
Okay Representative go ahead
good morning madam chair members
the committee sitting next to me
I have Representative Rehm and
Barbaro much Secretary from the
thirteenth district house bill
twenty five at felony crimes
committed against police
officers to the list of
enumerated crimes in the
victim's crimes at.
The VCA establishes which crime
victims are protected under the
act list the specific rights
signs possibilities to the
courts district attorneys
interesting or tracking agencies
felony crimes against police
officers are not included in the
definition section of the VCA
which means that a police
officer who was a victim of
battery on a peace officer
officer assault with intent to
commit a violent felony of peace
on a peace officer has none of
the thirteen specific rights
offered to other citizens who
are victims of the same criminal
behavior there is no reasonable
explanation to justify that
absence of the crimes from the
BCA madam chair right we might
expert witness will and
Representative we will stand for
questions.
Or they want to say something
chair.
Stand for questions.
But you'll miss will somehow
questions on the nature.
We'll go to.
those who are physicians.
I.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is mark
the service on behalf of.
Yes.
Again my name is Marco Serna on
behalf of the New Mexico
district attorneys association
as well as the administrative
office of the district
attorney's we are in favor of
this bill I think once you hear
from just returning Romo in any
any questions that are answered
by this panel you will notice
that the real game the only
impact this has on the district
attorney's offices with regard
to the victim's crimes Act and
and how we interact notify and
help advocate for those victims
so I thank you.
Thank you.
It madam chair members of the
committee Tim Johnson with the
state police I'd like to first
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill and appreciate all of
you of supporting this bill
today as for the state police we
fully support this and we
appreciate the representatives
and their experts brings for
thank you.
We have in support.
Okay.
Did you want to have any other
closing remarks.
No major okay I'm not closing
that to the committee okay
committee yes Representative
black madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Representative is rather
bringing this forward so can you
just tell me why this has not
been and law.
Services like something very
important.
But
the Madam chair representative
blot thank you for the question
I think as Representative
Castellano has just indicated
there's really no good
explanation as to why the only
thing I can surmise is when the
victims of Rights Act was passed
following the constitutional
amendment the the crimes against
police officers are in a
separate section so that's the
only that's the only reason that
I I can imagine I do know that
in the past there has been.
Have been raised in the past
well two main concerns first of
all the fiscal impact which is
really negligible because they
would be able to apply for CVR
C. for reparations but I I know
from speaking to the director Mr
CBS that they already if police
officers are harmed in the do
they already do provide
um services but also it's
important thing to keep in mind
that CVR C. only pays out
crimes.
Victims out of pocket expenses
and the reason that's
particularly relevant in this
case is because police officers.
Were harmed in the line of duty
obviously they would be eligible
for workman's comp so really any
fiscal impact is minimal any
other thing that I have heard
at.
Opposition before.
Say that police officers should
not get special treatment.
And my response to that is that
police officers are not asking
for special treatment you're
only asking for equal treatment
number one I mean it's crazy to
think that.
Chief deputy chief or chief
Johnson
if you took off his uniforms.
And he was in plain clothes and
he went outside and someone shot
if you would have all the rights
and victims of crime act.
But if he's on duty and he's
he's doing his duties and the
shut he doesn't get the same
rights
and also I would point out like
I mentioned before this
committee I think our system our
society or our citizens through
this legislative body have
already recognized for public
safety reasons that police
officers who are harmed well
they're in the process of trying
to protect us do special or
higher treatment in terms of
crimes carrying higher penalties
before the death penalty was
eradicated or eliminated
Yield sorry proper worried at
this we're a police officer was
new was a death penalty crime
and even though we don't have
the death penalty it is one of
the few murders that
carries a life without the
possibility of parole so I I
don't know I wasn't I wasn't
around at the time you know is a
lie but I not that yet but I
wasn't here when the debate for
victims rights act for but I
just you know if you look at the
intent of the bill to you know
one of the main intense of the
bill is to make sure that the
courts the the full impact of
the the crime is brought before
the courts and when police
officers don't have the right to
come before the court and
explain and talk about the
impact that this the harm has
done to them and their family
then the courts are not really
being are not considering the
full impact of the crime.
And I know that was a long
winded thank you that was answer
madam chair and Representative
block but I am an attorney so I
tended that sorry your thank you
madam district attorney
Representative so yeah this is
just.
A needed correction just to
equalize the.
And just make sure that
everybody's protecting they have
their rights thank you both for
bringing this forward thank you
madam district attorney for
being today thank you madam
chair.
You
Representative Romero thank you.
Thank.
I'm a little shaky because of so
my first Cup of coffee so
forgive me
I'm I'm really interested in
this I I don't disagree with
being able to try to find the
where with all to to have the
hearing my concern is that
police officers like other
relations special relationships
have essentially that special
duty while in in their jobs to
take on some of these cumbersome
situations potentially violent
etcetera.
what my concern is that there's
a conflict there with you know
what we what is now exempted
from being able to pursue
certain tort claims or other
problems does this allow for
that.
Now that we're.
Putting them in this definition
madam chair Madam chair
representative.
Mission you question.
Whether or not.
Individuals and still be able to
file tort claims.
Madam chair if the police
officers can do that because
they're considered victims of
crime.
Then madam chair Representative
Romero I don't believe that that
would that sit in that situation
that that that would apply to
them because it would be
an individual citizen that would
be if you will violating the
rights
it the only the only right that.
Under the under the Civil Rights
Act victims of crime can now
file tort claims if I understand
your question correctly however
it has to be against a state
agency so madam chair let me
just clarify so police officers
have a special relationship with
the public right and so what
we're talking about them
executing their duties in a
special relationship often times
they may encounter violence
situations we we talked about
this many times in our community
that said.
Police officers because of their
special relationship for now
exempt from cleaning those
things against members of the
public because of the special
relationship right it's in the
line of duty correct so madam
chair Representative Mike and my
concern is that this doesn't
exempt those sort of line of
duty situations and now they're
considered victims of crime in
which case we allow them to move
forward under that umbrella so
it does this this doesn't exempt
the line of duty provision that
we have.
With special relationships does
that.
I I I'm sorry Representative
Romero I'm not
I'm not really understanding.
I I haven't had any caffeine
Michael he's.
look at the
okay I don't know what it is.
You madam chair Representative
Romero are you saying if a
person shot a police officer
good that police officers to
that victim Garcia that
offenders that what you're
saying.
Madam chair right and I I think
madam chair and Representative
Romero again I don't think that.
I don't think that they could
this didn't really have any
effect on on that particular
ability to sue and again
During the I guess they could.
They would be able to file into
the tort claims act because it's
not it's not a governor and
government after that would be
shooting them are harming them.
So and so so whatever exemptions
there are against that I think
that they would still be in
place I don't think that that
this would have any effect on
that.
Madam chair representative I
guess I just would love to have
clarity on that I'm supportive
of this I think it's just a
question of whether or not
there's a conflict there being
able to present certain portions
of the
You know
of the trucking about
Going through this list of what
the what what the what they
peace officer would now be able
to bring forth
there is an issue of restitution
of that criminal offense causing
the victim's loss or injury so
there there may be some
conflicts of law they're just
and my concern is that we just
need to kind of fire in the
house
I don't know if you want to do
that this committee and it since
it's a bigger broader piece of
law and I don't know enough
about the how the victims of
crime act
operates.
Yes.
I feel like we might be getting
ourselves into a little bit
different to the rest those
complex but that never the last
madam chair I think.
We can potentially market
through the process I'm just
those are my concerns chair.
If I may madam chair.
Well look at that and try to get
back to within this week okay.
Representative Lord yeah.
Thank you madam chair
unfortunately because I have got
to law enforcement officers want
to speak they didn't know that
this was coming right now and
they're very disappointed and
upset right now the game a lot
of notes but there's.
Too much for me to go through so
I Sean will be who's had a to do
you want to speak and he's upset
he didn't get a chance and a bit
of a violent crime state police
also German bond who was shot in
my district who didn't get a
chance to speak on that so I
just wanna let you know they're
kind of upset they didn't get
the opportunity to know what's
happening right now
the hence and comments on this
and I don't want to.
Trying to read what they're
saying to tax one second chair.
okay.
So from state police officer
Jeremy Committee wants you guys
to know that he was shocked
I have permission to say that
this issue should not be
partisan and should be support
our police officers I just
remind you that is very hard for
me because he's a friend and he
was very close to being killed
was very very close as artery.
And anything we can do to
protect our police officers and
so that they have some way to
not be marginalized because our
line of work they're expected to
have these kind of things happen
to them hi
I just once a week but if you
want for some out there and it's
very personal for me with this
incident that I'm glad that
you're bringing this forward
because I have quite a few law
enforcement officer friends and
this is definitely a benefit to
them so I just want to say thank
you and just remind everybody
that this is important to my
constituents and I wish that the
law enforcement officers are not
reaching out to me had an
opportunity to speak on this I
just didn't expect those three
to be rolled and they were
waiting for later so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative
Thompson.
thank you madam chair in
Representative
so.
One of our analysis is notes
that assault assault crimes
inherently exclude physical
injury as when injury results
assault transforms into battery
that's it is assumed that the
inclusion of assault crimes is
meant to address any
psychological harm that may
result rather than physical
injury.
So I'm just asking if that's
that's your take on it or.
Madam madam chair and
representative Thompson.
It would it would include any.
Every answer that as an attorney
depending on the facts of the
it's the element of one of the
listed crimes then they are
eligible for all of these rights
whether that and that that
depends a lot frankly on how
it's charged by the by the
prosecutor but once once a crime
is charged then all of those
rights come into play so and
then as far as restitution
If they apply to CBRC that is
not something I well let me let
me say this they do CBRC will.
Will provide for counseling
things of that nature so in that
sense yes emotional harm could
be part of part of what the
restitution is they do but they
do the CRC has a whole list of
criteria that they look at
one of the things they look at
which really doesn't apply a lot
to this situation but it might
give in the you know the the
state of things in the country
they look at the the acts of the
the victim to see if the victim
was responsible in some way for
the harm you know common example
is someone who might be.
Under the influences of drugs or
alcohol and because of that you
know the the end up getting hurt
or battered well seniors you may
look at that save maybe not so
much we're not reimburse you but
they they do that that is a
determination as far as what
kind of restitution they get but
they are allowed to to ask for
restitution of that sort from
CBRC now as far as from the
victim
I mean as far as from the
perpetrator that is something
that
Prosecutors can ask for and it's
up to the district judge of that
the sentencing judge to decide
whether or not that's going to
be
ordered and if it is ordered
through the probation and parole
has to come up with a
restitution plan and one of the
restitution one of the one of
the requirements
under the restitution Act is
that
if it if it restitution plan is
ordered by probation and parole
and approved by the court and
they don't have the means to
give that restitution that
something the court can consider
to
I guess Fund lemonade or take
away the requirement of
restitution so there is a
mechanism for the court to order
it and it would mechanism for
the court to recognize this
individual does not have the
money to pay this restitution
thank you just one more question
I hope it's quick so how will
the decision so can you can they
get both workers comp and CV it
CBRC or will it be determined
pays what or what they get madam
chair and and not Representative
Thomson gate.
CBRC always.
You the victim always has to
exhaust their own resources
first so in the case of for
example see workers comp it we
don't workers comp would have to
be exhausted first and then if
there is anything outstanding
that CBRC would consider picking
up the rest thank you for that
thank you madam chair.
I work with.
Thank you
Victims rights invoke at with
victims of T. W. Y. crashes or
sexual assault
victims who don't ordinarily
have access to the courts and
that support restitution
I.
I don't understand why
police officers in the line of
duty
Are considered victims because
this is they're already covered
for compensation and different
things
through their employment.
Madam chair representative vice
chair Ferrari
That same argument to be made to
to any victim so I'm
respectfully because again if
you have health insurance is
going to pick up most of the tab
or some of the task but
whatever's out of pocket in two
years you can still pick up
that that my first response to
that question and my second
response to that question I
guess would be
You know I I I I.
I don't want to.
Misinterpret what you're saying
but
I've I've heard a similar
argument that fits this just
part of their jobs so why should
we give them extra well.
Again if you heard you heard
from the lady yesterday.
Whose husband.
Was injured they exhausted
workers comp exhausted
everything that was available to
them they didn't know about CVR
C. because they're not
enumerated crime victim and as
far as the other rights remember
restitution is just one of
thirteen rights and there are
some of those rights that are
that are really important for
example there I there are cases
where police officers are heard
in the line of duty their case
the prosecutor takes the case
it's whatever its plants.
Sentence without them ever even
knowing without an opportunity
to speak before the court and
and I would also invite you to
remember that police officers
when they're heard it doesn't
just affect them it affects your
entire family and I I also
strongly believe that this is a
public safety issue.
Because if someone is willing to
shoot for heard forty tech and
armed police officers they won't
hesitate to do the same to you
me or anyone else and the fact
that this is an you know public
safety right now our
constituents are begging us to
do something about the high
violent crime.
And with the law enforcement
recruitment and retention at an
all time low it just makes sense
to to give these officers the
protections the same protections
that we give ordinary citizens I
mean it is basically tell and
law enforcement.
Now we New Mexico has your back
just like they have our backs so
I mean I I think that it is the
right thing to do I do think it
makes society safer when we
protect our police officers and
hi you know that's that's why
I'm strongly in support of this
bill.
Madam chair if I may.
We're getting hung up on the
monetary side of this and I
think there's another side that
you need to look at and I'll
give you a simple but when I was
an officer myself and another
officer were resting for
individuals who were in route
with Molotov cocktails to throw
them on a house at about four AM
in the morning.
During the ensuing fight to
arrest them I was stabbed with
the screwdriver.
I have no idea what the next day
that offender was arrested I to
this day I have no idea what
justice ever came out of it so
part of this act says that the
DA is going to keep them
apprised as to what is
proceeding in court.
If we look at the police
officers those that are involved
in shootings what is the
standard they get three days
minimum of administrative leave
they must go and talk to the
Department psychologist or
psychiatrist.
And then be cleared that they
could come back to duty to go
ahead and think that they don't
have PTSD out of that
It that occurs on all of those
you know so
I think we're getting too far
off on one side need to remember
what most of this is for is to
keep the police officer apprised
of how is cases proceeding.
I have another question it
that's the truth officers who
are already involved in court
proceedings when they have a
conflict of you know being
You know working for the
prosecution as well as being a
victim and have that conflict of
you know if it's there.
The proceeding is to get the
judge to
you know.
Prosecution and conviction that
then they would also be the
victim and benefiting from that.
Madam chair they are the victim
they were the one that was shot
or stabbed.
So yes I think they do have a
right to know what is proceeding
in the court where it's going
what plea bargains are being
offered they need to know all
that.
Representative this is where
they already are involved in the
case as as a victim and then
they have access.
That normally folk at victims
don't.
Madam chair and
I agree that they understand the
system better and key and come
in and ask some questions but
remember that proceedings for
juveniles or sealed their
confidential.
That's the other problem.
It mainly.
madam vice chair madam chair
You you would think that all
because they're in the system
they are complete do not always
involved you have to understand
that.
Law enforcement across the state
they're shorthanded and police
officers will make the rest
especially if it's it's just one
police officer they may be part
of the case but they don't stay
involved throughout the process
because they have other cases
and it's very easy for their
case to fall through the cracks
now I my office treats these
officers as enumerated crime
victims but we don't have to and
all district attorneys offices
don't have to you heard
Representative green it doesn't
have and more importantly the
courts don't have to listen to
them.
And as far as being a conflict
of interest I don't think would
be more of a conflict of
interest then.
State any other victim we are
the there's they're not going to
be necessarily the arresting
officer there would be a
separate arresting officer
so I mean we we work with them
every day on issues I don't
believe it's a conflict of
interest because they when they
become a victim we're simply
giving them the same rights as
any other crime victims they
don't have anymore right to they
don't have just like victims in
general they don't have a right
to direct the course of the case
they don't have a right to tell
the district attorney what plea
or what since they don't have a
right to compel anything they
just we're just giving them a
voice and the rest of the rights
that are here.
So in that sense madam chair I
don't really believe it is a
complex.
I.
It would have to disagree on
that
there any other questions the
committee.
I mean I I Madam chair
representative I guess and and
this is for the Sanchez I don't
know if it's something that you
all want to continue to work on
because I don't really
necessarily think there's enough
clarity for definitely not for
me I don't know about I won't
speak for the rest but I think
my issue is that.
Police officers already have a
unique relationship with the
community and so there's already
a sense of privilege that comes
with that service and so
I think that's where that's
where the unique benefits
already existed and so including
they're changing the definition
for them in this case
I think without having all those
answers that folks have already
asked for I think is is still a
lot to consider and so that's
what I'm proposing is that maybe
you all look back at the
questions that have already been
asked to to maybe see if this is
something that can be fixed
because at this point it's not a
bill that I can support and and
so I just I I just wanted to
make sure sure that you all have
that that option to to consider
what's already been said before
there's a vote.
Thanks in chairwoman recon thank
you.
Thank you madam chair so this is
all to just make it at the end
correct insurance representative
we're trying to allow law
enforcement officers it happened
into the are victims to have
rights of the victims act with
this is for okay so I'm really
frustrated right now because I
feel like and I've had Leo's
told me this before they feel
that they've been told you
deserved it you're not wanting
to do the to that and I'm very
frustrated because the victim is
a victim is a victim is a victim
it's like almost twenty one if
she's right and she's wearing
something that she deserved it
so I strongly support your bill
and thank you for bringing this
forward thank you madam chair.
Thank you for further reading in
the analysis and this is why I
asked the question about what
what down.
How the money was you know that
we whatever the insurance or or
payments for workers comp all of
those kind of things.
Is that.
What I'm afraid of is we do not
Fund RCB Garcia at nearly enough
and if we add in another group
without security about all
workers must be exhausted first
the so maybe basically to
protect the CBRC is that
somewhere else in law or is that
something you would consider
that adding to this so that and
as I said it's all about
protecting the CBRC and that
means we know there's plenty of
crime victims who are getting
what they need because we don't
funded well enough.
Madam madam chair and
representative Thompson I'm
looking at the statute now you
know unfortunately employed a
lot by my experience
having dealt with thousands of
victims in my career I.
I I know that that is true I'm
trying to see if it's in the
statute.
The.
That the individual victims
resources have to be exhausted
before CBRC that's one of the
questions just ask me just let
me.
It.
I didn't print out the entire
chair and and representative
Thompson I did not print out the
entire statute
It just it does say.
It doesn't it doesn't really
specify that then to fax you
representative.
Thompson and madam chair
I I could get I could probably
get a statement from the
directors to the to confirm that
but I I do know from experience
that that that is indeed what
happens they have to exhaust
their individual resources first
so madam chair maybe what I'm
envisioning is that there's a a
county or a city that there they
had a lot of planes on workers
comp and they don't want their
rates to go up so.
Cost shifting to the CBRC and
without it being spelled out
that that is not allowed we
really need to protect the CVR
C. for victims who really really
need to who have no other
options and I feel like workers
comp is an option in this so I I
would be a hundred percent for
the bill if you would be amended
to add that all workers comp
must be exhausted all other
sources must be exhausted before
we you go to C. P. Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'd also just like to
add
CV our state
provides the.
Representation in court it helps
them.
It represents them if we have an
officer who is part of the
prosecution of the case or is
there and then you're also being
supported by CBRC.
As a big.
That's where I see the conflict
madam chair and and not madam
vice chair actually CBRC that is
not the rules here see each
district attorney's office has a
victim advocate that a company's
victims to court if they choose
however
There's in my twenty seven years
I've never seen every time
there's been an officer that's
harmed in any case severely
harmed there's always another
officer that is the lead
detective so that's that's
easily that's easily remedied
but I you know.
Again they don't.
Even even as prosecutors even as
long even as non injured law
enforcement.
They don't have any we don't
have any control over them they
don't have any control over us
so I guess that's where I'm I'm
having trouble seeing the
conflict
I I just they're they're
already.
They're already kind of part of
the process
but the they don't have to be
heard by the court their case
can go forward without being
consulted by the district
attorney and that's very
frustrating and you know as you
heard well we heard we heard
from a lady yesterday and I
thought she was going to be on
today but her husband
we shot in the neck amongst
other places two years ago and
there she told me her workers
comp they they ran out so they
had to go to they didn't know
about CVR C. because the warning
reads crime victim they were
never notified so they're
struggling right now
and I don't that was a different
districts I don't know whether
or not he was part of the the
prosecution of that case or not
I don't I believe probably not
because he was out on medical
leave for a long time but
ordinarily and I you know I I
guess you could ask cheap
constant but ordinarily that
case would not be the lead
detective or officer would not
be the officer that's injured.
And I'm probably I don't see it
I'm not answering your questions
but hi it's
even though they might not be
the lead they would have best
interest in that prosecution.
madam vice chair madam chair
that that's true but they have
that they have that interest in
in any case if they're the
property if they are involved in
the prosecution I guess what I'm
trying to say is I don't think I
don't think it it changes
anything it doesn't change
anything as far as.
The way to the prosecution does
things because we.
We're still independent.
We don't we don't have to even
with the victim sometimes the
victims get frustrated with us
because they give us their input
about what they want to happen
the case and sometimes we have
to say I'm sorry we don't think
that's the best outcome of this
case and then we let the judge
decide.
But
It's the same thing with police
officers and even when they're
not victims a lot of times they
don't agree with the way we
handle cases but we're very
comfortable in being independent
and science yeah we get it you
guys are officers you have a
different perspective just like
your victim you have a different
perspective I must warn
prosecutor within both to
fulfill my duties and I I.
Strongly about keeping it
separate it's a hard concept
sometimes for victims to
understand and case officers to
understand because yes we do
take their input and we would
consider their input and it's
important but sometimes we have
to do what they don't want us to
do or they would rather
something different outcomes so
I mean that's that's not any
different than what we see on a
daily basis from victims whether
they're police officers are not
and police officers whether
they're victims or not.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative send Adam
district attorney so one police
officer.
Take their oaths and signs of
the documents to the police
officer did they sign anything
that says that they will have
fewer rights than those they are
watching over the community
madam chair.
I don't believe so we can just
chief counsel and.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
representative I just was
wondering if they had like at
exemption single you of.
Your rights in this respect if
you.
Our server for instance.
Madam chair and and
Representative black is actually
not at.
It and that's really not how is
it done that's really not a good
question because having been in
the army you do sign that piece
of paper that you recognize you
don't have all the
constitutional rights that
someone that's not in the
military has but I'm not aware
of anything similar to that
provide forces.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I just think
that's interesting because this
would only just give you.
Equal rights to every other
citizen and this bill with this
act if you've already exhausted
all your workers comp Sir is
that correct okay so.
I guess if this did not pass.
Madam chair representative then.
Once you exhaust the workers
comp who would be responsible
for those costs Senator.
So it would be like Madam chair
representative blocked it would
it would be they would have to
get their own resources I mean
it's
it's it's just like you or me of
for fire insurance runs out do
we still have medical expenses.
Popeater you go fund me page or
or what have you but there isn't
any other.
Public means that I'm I'm aware
of that would allow
Victims including officers to to
get we come to re compensated
for recompense station state for
their their current.
You madam chair thank you
Representative yeah well I think
it's just.
Scary for me to see a police
officer's family that's already
dealing with a potentially
disabled police officer that
maybe can't even do their job
anymore after what happened to
them you have to start go fund
me page just to keep the lights
on Madam chair representative I
find that can kind of scary I
think this bill would be very
common sense and very.
A very good option to close that
gap to make sure that these
families are already affected by
this drama.
Further.
Re traumatized so thank you
madam chair and thank you
representative madam district
attorney.
To table second.
Have a motion to move to table
in the second.
Please call.
Representative lot no to table
and I'd like to explain that
the.
Representative Lord absolutely
no to table Representative
Romero.
Just wanted like to explain.
Representative Thompson.
Yes to take like to explain.
Vice chair review yes to table.
And chair for our yes to table
and like to explain my.
Madam chair we have a vote of
forty to table.
Representative block thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative send Madam
district I I.
I'm sorry that just the state of
this bill right now I I I can be
rethinking this was one of the
most common sense bills I've
seen the session and I just
think it's we're fine that these
families these victims are now
treated like still a human sub
class citizens in our community
because they want to protect it
is as long forces so I find this
the fortunate but I pray that
you will bring this back I will
be a strong supporter thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I very
much appreciate that the thought
of what we're trying to achieve
for victims of crime
and I really appreciate the
process that focus goes through
in order to be able to state
what is going on I think that it
should be a provision of life
for peace officers I just don't
think it fits under the victim
of crimes Act and the intention
of what it was that we were
trying to do for everyday
citizens who don't have access
to to justice essentially so
that said I would hope that we
can sort of re carve out where
where this goes in line I just
don't feel like the umbrella
here is what we're trying to to
achieve and I I hope that we can
work together to to figure out a
better way to do that thank you
madam chair representative
Thompson thank you madam chair I
I to think that this is a good
idea but it's not it's not.
Well written food that it
doesn't I really do worry I have
met with the CBRC several times
and always facing for money
because we just don't fund of
and I don't want to take the
chance that some
police department somewhere and
decide that they'd rather put
that the cost off to C. B. R. C.
rather than their own workers
comp that part was was clarify
ICE's legal for thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and I'd also like to
explain my those that in support
of police officers and.
We should find another way so
that their compensation is
not exhausted that there are are
adequate provisions for any kind
of injury and
Behavioral health initiatives to
are you services that need to be
extended so that you know the
families but I I also agree that
that's right preparation fund is
depleted.
and we need to find another way
that we can help with the
officers so thank you but
It is been disabled for House
Bill.
Two twenty five of those.
Forty two thank you thank you.
Yeah yeah.
So that's not quite.
Thank you for
average have and remember.
Okay we have house bill two
thirty two.
Representative here in New.
Bill and with your with senator
Senator welcome.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee
like you said it represents you
to Senator eyes thank you so we
are here we also have a few
experts in the back secretary
mantles and director
some of them.
Who can answer it may help us
also.
So we're here to present house
bill two thirty two House Bill
two thirty two amended section
of records public records act it
brought to include an exemption
for information concerning
critical infrastructure or in
person information technology
systems if it's shaped could
reveal specific risk assessments
security procedures for public
your bills.
Only bills is that could be used
to unlawfully access or
compromise such systems the bill
the bill provides a definition
for critical infrastructure it
contains an appropriate does not
contain an appropriation and
this bill contains an emergency
clause.
So when we need this bill.
If you're malicious actor you
can go out and get bits and
pieces of information from
different sources to compile it
threat profile it's like
identity thieves go out to the
public database like Facebook
glorify database and they can
get the name they can get your
birthdate they can get your
address and get all kinds of
things and then they go out and
get students to get stolen so
security number or help ID and
they compile that information
they can steal your identity.
they don't need to get from one
source to get from different
sources so with this bill we
want to have the ability to
protect the discrete pieces of
information that are not part of
a formal plan want to have the
ability to make the judgment
that if this piece of
information was connected to
this piece of information we
would it would represent it
present a security risk so
that's what we need to build
house bill two thirty two mins
inspection of public records act
to include exemptions for
information concerning critical
infrastructure or information
technology systems if it's
shaped could reveal specific
risk assessments security
procedures are vulnerabilities
that could be used to unlawfully
access or compromise a system.
And I will defer to my husband
thank you very much
Representative good morning
madam chair members of the
committee
and I do want to start by just
saying what.
It's it's been great working on
this project with Representative
Sarinana because the of the
your technical understanding.
Your networks work
because because of the.
It brought right now if someone
were to request information
let's say on what the frequency
is for the key parts that we use
here in the capital that is not
covered by an exception number.
Okay got that frequency they
could then get other information
from other places and figure out
how to make the the twenties
that we have.
there are there's other the
speed that's been formation
about for example how long into
something I medically locks that
that people we got that
information they could use that
in terms of disruption in both
critical infrastructure and
information technology.
And so this is.
This is this design and up to be
eight
A provision that will cover
those very park very spots but
do so in a very limited way up
as a representative Sarinana was
saying only the only things that
are that are excluded the
publication which could reveal
specific risk of threatens what
could reveal security procedures
or could reveal vulnerabilities
that could be used on awfully
access or compromise those
systems.
So we're not talking about the
forward facing.
Aspects we're talking about the
back facing aspects of the
systems
that we have to stand for
questions thank you anything
else that's it then to go to the
audience those who are in
opposition.
Okay.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Naomi about that on the director
of public policy with the
feeling of New Mexico I wouldn't
call this a strong opposition as
the bill is written currently we
do have concerns about the term
information technology systems
and what that might entail in
terms of communication
you know securing the network
verses securing the that
correspondence voice things like
that that that that could
potentially be a slippery slope
that would just like.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition so anyone in
opposition of this and.
Eight thousand support.
Okay we'll start on the side.
Yes thank you madam chair one in
Spearmint's also and the
secretary does.
Commission technology in the
state of New Mexico.
we're all in favor of.
Transparency
as we perform an oversight
function ourselves you know that
is.
We do not.
You know I letting the public
know of some of these things
about or information.
When we let the public know we
do with that act.
Let me know which windows open
know that which locks your walk.
We let them know how long the
security guard walks by the to
what time.
And
By disclosing this information
we simply make ourselves more
vulnerable so
Yeah which our intent is to
protect.
State systems and the public
data.
If our intent is to make that
safe from these bad actors and
we must be able to say no when
they say Hey we know you just
had a meeting on you know what
tools you should probabilities
how often you ski in your
systems for water facilities
tell us all about that.
We would have to.
At this bill four to ensure the
protection from doing that
cybersecurity is
one element of what we.
Information that we have in the
state.
That should be protected from
these types of releases and
there are others that I'm
speaking in support of even
broader and cybersecurity.
I stand for any questions you
have what shape my chief
information security officer
Roger simple on.
Thank you
asked chair and members of the
committee and I'm sorry I forgot
to mention him two minutes.
To the editor and members of the
committee
as the indicated this in support
of the bill this will give me
another tool in my tool to get
did protect the constituents and
the taxpayer information and any
other complaint information that
needs to be effective right now
I do not have.
This is a big deal and tried to
walk if somebody ask for it I
need to review it exactly what
it is and how do.
Thank you.
All right next in support
madam chair members of the
committee just last for those of
the rest of this.
Government out of state where
we're standing in support
Senator Ivey Soto
representatives are there good
feedback for engaging with us in
this conversation
met with us since the bill was
introduced we are continuing our
conversations about of the
language so at this point we are
comfortable with the committee
moving forward so that we can
continue our conversation to
work with with that Sanchez
thank you.
Thank you yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the White and risotto number
over to access to those as
former cabinet secretary for
proper information technology
overstate your vision offer
forward given W. secretary on
the corrections programs are
very workforce shopping last
year for membership for.
It is my.
We have
a long ways this legislation
point the whole.
I told is being used before and
after we usually get
so support as for the office
this legislation.
That is I'm also a member of the
New Mexico technology council
which committee and the
committee has worked with this
bill is a force for this bill
thank you madam chair members of
the thank you it did not
do we have anyone in support and
save no okay.
So do you like to make any
further remarks before we get to
committee.
Thank you okay thank you
committee yes lock.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative I think I I
promised Senator Ivey Soto I'd
be here for about an hour asking
questions see I'll try to keep
it to that next.
Yet to.
Keep this sort.
But so.
I'm just wondering what the
definition of critical
infrastructure is in this bill
Madam chair representative.
Senator.
But certainly chair of
Representative block a group of
the structure of the definition
bill I on page four.
Infrastructure durable equipment
that is part of the safety or
welfare of individuals and
communities includes damn
specification infrastructure and
infrastructure essential to the
delivery of utility service
thank you madam Representative
Senator so does this have
anything to do with like cyber
security at all.
Madam chair and representative
of what the information
technology.
Alright does have to do with sex
yes.
I'm sure thank you
Representative I just stepped.
Well.
This year but I didn't get
Representative last year with
the department.
A state department and they gave
me back all these pages of
information and one of the pages
they give me kind of password to
actually access the entire
system within that department
and I had to email the
department back until then I
think you sent me your password
for your entire structure cyber
infrastructure and you might
want to tighten this up so with
this.
Require there to be rules
promulgated to ensure that these
departments do not release
that sensitive information that
if I was a terrible person
probably could take down a state
department in one or two days
madam chair.
Madam chair representative blot
it so what what these actors
right now first of all you know
I would without knowing all the
details of the request and and
looking back up it's easy to say
that clearly they never should
set you that password on the
other hand.
that raises exactly the issue of
of of the whole that we have a
program.
Is that there's nothing that
says.
Access to the to the structural
aspect of the systems that we
have.
is protected.
And and that needs to be and so
consequently them up with an
African descent up the distorted
record looks at it and says so
as well just just give up all
this stuff because there's no
way that we can withhold.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative but I believe
that sensitive you were forced
to redact the current the print
center Representative.
So Madam chair and
Representative black the only
things that could be redacted.
Are those aspects which are
provided for in different so for
example you know one of those I
worked at several years ago we
created protected personal
identifier information as being
able to do exactly because
before that we didn't have the
authority to attack to attack
somebody's social security
number on up to one of record or
or reject other driver's license
number or all the last four
digits and so and so if you look
at the various different things
that we've acted right now the
only thing that we have this
column up our task force plans
plans or procedures but those
are only those that could be
used to facilitate the player
execution of a terrorist attack
so it doesn't rise to that level
right now if it doesn't protect.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you representative and senator
so this with this state like if
you.
Have a password that you sent to
somebody in your department
which was the case my doctor
doesn't state that you must
reject that are not provide that
to the request or in the bill
madam chair Senator that I'm
sure Representative blog it says
you may redact right now there's
no authority at all it does say
though if this were to pass you
may reject that.
Got it thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
senator I think that was my only
question for you so I try to get
sort of a short thank you.
Representative Romero thank.
thank you
for being here this morning I'm
it was looking for actually a
definition of information
technology systems it in because
that's so broad
I get the critical
infrastructure to get the intent
of the legislation my concern is
that when we look at IT systems.
That the broadness of that
languages
I mean pretty much anything
related so what we're talking
about April we're talking about
access I'm just very concerned
that with having that brought
language in this definition or
in this statute without a
definition
That we could be treading into
territory where the I. T.
systems is now the provision
everyone's leaning on to keep
all of the information so Madam
chair representative would there
be an interest in trying to fine
tune that I don't know if you
think it's I have already heard
about this would work.
Yes yeah of the chair
representative remember
conversations about that and we
anticipate is that.
It could be an issue this is a
matter that we are still having
some conversation about with the
foundation for government
however if we thought.
About that.
I actually this to other people
with if if if that's what we
would want to that we would be
comfortable with that.
Oct that would be that would.
Okay the definition sorry we
have copies.
Should we be interested.
Thank you.
The
madam chair for those who are
too worked up.
Get a copy of this I have the
impression of this computer
storage networking services and
processes.
Use the creative process for
secure interesting job I do that
which I think also goes to the
issue that was raised by
but the ACLU's about making sure
that we're talking about the the
the first fracture of the
system's not content residing on
the systems I checked the and so
and and if
the committee were to want to
add this to the bills that would
be a new subsection I am age
that we live.
Section J. in addition to that
there are I guess alphabetical
order.
Madam chair.
Senator Senator would be.
On page four.
Between thirty one thirteen and
fourteen.
What the H. four eight thirteen
fourteen just to keep in
your yes Representative Rod I
thank you so much yes.
Yes.
Hi.
This is.
Should be a formal amendments
and.
We could take this into
consideration if you would.
We.
To do it in the next committee
certainly we could okay six if
we just want to prepare it
finally I'm we can just hang out
here so it's scheduled next.
Yeah that's thank you.
And yeah I'm I'm good with the
definition so far I want to run
it through like our advocates to
make sure that this incomers
what we're looking for and but
I'm sure you're having a party
having those conversations so
madam chair that because thank
you thank you very much.
It'll show as amended.
The amendment right now.
Okay sorry.
There is.
All right.
So madam chair I move that we
adopt the.
Okay.
Make it easy on.
I don't think there's any
opposition to that there.
we will.
See the bill as amended with
this have for next committee to
be
Excellent question and.
Okay that was my major concern.
Saturday morning.
You your bill is been invented
as state without opposition
okay yeah we're discussion.
Excellent back on the
so I guess going back to page
three now that we have the
inclusion of the definition.
we were on age seventy there
eighteen information concerning
critical infrastructure for IT
systems I suppose.
Is it is it ordered of.
Chair of observer markets and
for okay so we're looking at
with regard to either critical
infrastructure.
For information about the
system.
The publication of information
which could reveal specific risk
assessment security procedures
or probabilities that used to
offer access
so this
touching.
Definitions again
Okay.
That makes sense to me.
That for me thank you thank you
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair so on page
four section II.
Is that.
To leave those I mean I can't
think of anything outside of the
dams and but I'm sure there's a
million things out there that
could be so is this language
limiting are at that kind of
As needed in terms of that
critical infrastructure.
Madam chair representative
Thompson this this language is
is is intended to be limiting
and the and it turns out of
those things that are considered
critical infrastructure this is
actually been one of the
challenges in this bill because
there are but the structures
from used variously and
different contexts and so what
we're trying to get that was
between information technology
systems and critical
infrastructure was both the
software and the physical
structure structures.
That constitute of the is that
the the protective question is
the perfect thank you thank you
madam chair.
I just have a couple questions
it's been.
From the.
Office of the Attorney General
The critical infrastructure.
Definition is somewhat vague.
and that
they were suggesting
incorporate more specific
definition as used in the
urgency licensing act and tax
administrative.
Do you want to respond to that
Madam chair in up in
conversations with the
governor's office on the impact
that this would have
the again the desire here is to
try to keep this up this aspect
of it to the to the physical.
parts of of what makes our
society help with an information
technology the software part of
what makes our technology so up
but but they have asked for the
department of emergency
department of homeland security
Marci management to keep
changing the names
to to review that and let us
know we're gonna have the two
this past week.
Okay so that might be something
that you change it thanks
committee it is chair of the
this is one of the other places
where up the conversations we've
been having with foundation for
open government and I'm hopeful
with disabilities so you as we
go forward.
has been to make sure that we
don't.
To provide these in a way where
the exception could swallow the
rule or where could be
misinterpreted that's part of
what we're trying to avoid.
Well I'm glad we were able to
verify the information
technology systems that will let
thanks committee take care
critical infrastructure okay
Representative lot chair and the
pants off as amended.
Yes.
Okay.
Okay is there any objection.
Okay you have unanimous consent
on.
Your.
Thanks Amanda as the.
Thank you very much take the.
Okay.
Cool next we have the house bill
three seventeen.
In the region.
It's going to.
Top.
Representative Anjana.
Whenever you're ready thank you.
All right good morning madam
chair members the committee so
personal housekeeping I have an
amendment to this bill I don't
know if you've received your
copies of that already but
really just fixes to issues
identified by the attorney
general's office which for the
use of the terms patient of the
terms injured party to refer to
the same person.
You could wait just not sure
The amendment
we have a movie for discussion
on the amendment.
Second.
Okay now we can pass out.
Everyone.
Thank you this would just
clarify the language that we use
consistent terminology for the
foundation throughout the bill.
In that case you can always do
that.
Okay.
There is there any discussion on
the amendment.
Thank hearing.
I I move that we adopt the
amendments.
Second thank you is there any
opposition to adopting the that.
Okay.
Dr.
Let your bills this is a bill
about segregation which is
really just a really big word
that means I am also owed money
and I will explain that more as
we go on so this bill has two
major parts the first part of
the bill deals with medical
subrogation and medical
subrogation allows medical
service providers and medical
insurers who provide services to
an injured patients to help the
patient recover to get paid back
from the person who caused the
harm in the first place so when
attorneys needed to get a
responsible party to pay.
The existing law already
requires service providers to
pay a proportionate share of the
attorney's fees we require
hospitals to do this and the
same that insurance companies
already do so let me give an
example so let's say you're in a
car accidents and you have to go
to the hospital for your
injuries and hospital bills you
three thousand dollars.
You can file a claim against the
other driver's insurance and if
they deny your claim the
insurance company says we'll
take a hike well now you need a
lawyer and so you will you in
your a lawyer go to court and
you win nine thousand dollars
the lawyer one that money for
you.
And you typically a lawyer one
third I believe is the standard
lawyers fees that will just use
one third for this example to
keep it simple
the lawyer also one that money
for the hospital as well.
So and because the hospital is
entitled to fabrication so since
the lawyer got the hospital paid
back the hospital also chips in
one third of the money that they
were awarded so of the nine
thousand dollars one in court
one third of three thousand to
linger so the hospital gets two
thirds two thousand excuse me
which is the original three
thousand with a one third
reduction after paying the
lawyers fees and you get four
thousand so that's what a
proportional reduction is so you
pay a third they pay third some
attorneys only charge twenty
five or one fourth the cost of
you pay for the hospital would
be four and this is is existing
law the hospitals let's do this
so what this bill does is they
that all service providers
should chip in
it took the assistance of the
Attorney to recover that money
so that would be when I fail
service providers that would
include your physical therapists
are chiropractors acupuncturists
massage therapists etcetera so
they treat you after your
accident and benefitted from the
work the attorney did they
should help cover the cost of
that attorney like hospitals
doctors and insurance companies
already do.
So that is the first half of the
bill.
The second half of the bill now
deals with uninsured motorist
subrogation.
So again segregation still means
I'm also owed money but this
time it's a little bit more
complicated because it's not the
medical insurance seeking
reimbursement now it's an
insurance company who paid
uninsured motorist benefits to
its own insured after an
uninsured driver caused the
uninsured motorist carriers
insured to be hard in a little
of a lot but the state would.
So when the insurance company
paid it's insured for loss
caused by an uninsured driver it
has the right to go after the
uninsured driver to get money
back so ninety nine out of a
hundred times when this happens
in court it is really
straightforward an uninsured
driver ran a red light and hit
you you were hurt your insurance
company paid you your insurance
company then goes to sue the
uninsured motorist you because
the collision who does not have
insurance so usually the
judgment is uncollectible
because an uninsured motorist
usually does not have any money
but that's not always the case
so sometimes the insurance
company does get to recoup some
of their money.
And that will not change I want
to be very clear that does not
change under this bill however
in a in a small number of cases
the uninsured driver was not at
fault sometimes people lie to
get their money from their
insurance company that's a crime
and sometimes fraudsters are
prosecuted so what this bill
does however but site what this
bill is about however is what
happens to the uninsured driver
being sued by an insurance
carrier so I have two expert
witnesses with me I have Mister
Bruce Thompson and it also and
the trial attorney and I also
have Mister David ring who is
again and try a trial attorney
in Albuquerque he David Abbey
practices.
He was excuse me volunteers Act
Christian legal aid and he was
asked for assistance by a client
who is actually a constituent of
mine who is an read to let him
share some facts of her case
with us so I will let him
briefly tell her story.
It is.
Thank you Representative and
madam chair the honorable
members the committee good
morning and I'm pleased to be
here today
I just wanted to tell you the
story of a Mr kin Mr king became
a client of mine through
Christian legal aid as a
volunteer and hi hi I didn't
realize it was going to be a a
long case but it has been and
and part of that is
so so Mister king K..
Is is pretty straightforward but
it's it's actually kind of
shocking it's it's not always
this good but sometimes it is Mr
king was just driving her
children to work
in Albuquerque eastbound in
around the centrals in the area
and all of a sudden she must of
cut off somebody she drives a
large van perhaps she wasn't
paying attention perhaps not I
will never know but she pulled
to the stoplight at San Pedro
and
the motorist after somewhat
brake checking her came around
the other side of her vehicle
and began punching her fifteen
year old son in the face.
this was a a motorcyclist yet
some pretty heavy gloves on and
he ended up breaking his nose
and fracturing his skull.
And this bill doesn't address
road rage in Albuquerque I wish
it did but.
What it does addresses what
happens next what happens next
is out this driver
Told his insurance company well
I'm skipping part there was a
little bit of small justice in
this Mr king
is is somewhat of a car mechanic
etcetera and she picked up a
wrench hi Adam back while her
son was being assaulted and hit
his assailant in the arm causing
significant damage to the arm
and got him to stop he pulled
out of the.
Out of the car and for the most
part the beating of the fifteen
year old has over.
So but what the driver then did
was is he sued Mr will he didn't
see Mr king he claimed to his
insurance company that he had
been injured in an accident and
claim damages for the harm and
then a major insurance company
sued on his behalf because Mr
king didn't have insurance.
So she essentially was being
sued for defending her son.
And I thought that was wrong so
I took on the case
And the insurance company argued
for years that he didn't have to
prove hi any damages all I had
to prove was the rate.
Of the motorcyclist for.
His medical bills to the arm and
his damages is pain and
suffering and suffering these
injuries.
And that results in a confusion
between medical subrogation
hadn't rigor subrogation I
believe.
you know I'll stand for
questioning to explain that but
I don't believe she's done
presenting the bill so I just
wanted to tell you the story of
miss Kirk and because it does
affect people in Albuquerque and
probably people in the rest of
the state and it certainly
affected some one of her
constituents and that's how I
became involved.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
for sharing that really shocking
story so you can understand how
to.
We have the interest in this
so I'm a big believer that if an
uninsured driver causes harm
then that driver should have to
pay and I'm not trying to change
that at all but when insurance
company sues the driver for
harming its client I'm only
saying that the I have this bill
really only saying that the
company should have to prove the
same thing that anybody suing
anybody in court would have to
prove that the uninsured driver
pods the harm and by the way
that the insured claims that it
happened and the person the
uninsured driver hit was damaged
as a result so the second part
of the bill simply says that the
uninsured care here.
The insurance company has to
prove their case I prefer a
preponderance of evidence which
is the same standard for anyone
in a civil case has to prove how
much the damages were because
the insurance company is suing
over the loss suffered by the
By its insured excuse me and
that the insured then has to be
part of that lawsuit part of the
case and then finally because
New Mexico does not allow
someone that has insurance in an
injury case to
Do not allow evidence sorry that
someone who has insurance in an
injury case.
Don't let that insurance be
mention evidence to keep juries
from deciding a case differently
since that would just be an
insurance company paying out the
bill requires that the uninsured
carrier prove its claim without
reference without referencing
that the insurance being paid
out and without telling the jury
how much they were paid so the
and the and the uninsured
motorist carrier the insurance
companies simply has to prove
liability and damages like
anyone else suing another driver
would have to so I realize that
this is a very long introductory
presentation I tried to make it
as short and concise as possible
and some legal legal terms
that's just not doable thank you
very much madam chair members
the committee and with that we
stand for questions thank you
okay we'll go to the audience is
there anyone in opposition.
Yes.
Members of the committee my name
is Hannah Connelly.
I just of this to the state for
insurance The New Mexico hi and
also practice internet in the
area of uninsured motorist
coverage.
It'll probably using testifying
here four years ago I was in the
office.
Is that
the issues that.
I will speak to this process
just today you I appreciate that
I think are concerns here with
the intended consequences to
this bill and I had the story
can be for and and that does
seem like a very unique you
problematic PTA's but I just
speak to the concerns that we
have with this bill and I didn't
haven't seen the amendment but I
estimate there correcting what
was mentioned in the FIR.
Both that because we agree with
the concern is that right now.
So briefly with respect to the
medical separation.
Concern we have with this is
that there would this could
create delays in settlement so
let me go to my keys so that I
can frame it in this I was
traveling in Albuquerque on
constitution I'm sorry in I
forgot to mention you have to.
Yeah that that.
forties five seconds okay I'll
go real quickly I was almost ten
on who's able to store managers
and owners and was T. boned and.
I was told I was taken to the
hospital medical benefits out
and I received physical therapy
chiropractic care as well
my case was settled if this bill
without any involvement on the
part other than giving my own
insurance company State Farm
that information.
If this bill were to pass they
would be required to be in a
lawsuit that uninsured motorist
decided that he wanted to file a
lawsuit three million in that
with this require me to be in
that under this bill all of the
health care providers.
Could hold up the settlement
meaning that I would be
compensated until hospital the
chiropractors physical
therapists have all been
satisfied that is one hundred
hello.
With respect to the other
division I think it's more
important that insurers to
purchase uninsured motorist
coverage in New Mexico would be
required now to go into a
lawsuit and then my final we is
I would just caution on page
eight the provision that
required claim to do provide for
partners to.
For tribal by injury those
parties he lost in my experience
when those provisions are placed
in the statute the New Mexico
Supreme Court that does take
offense so thank you very much
for your time thank you anyone
else in opposition is there any
opposition on scene now okay
those in support.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee doing I'm creating
fiber.
Representative I mean when you
came to me with this bill I will
confess time has been mediating
lays down.
I I do have a lot of creative
practices a lot but and this is
a very complicated issue for me
when it comes down to is
fairness comes down to fairness
really injured party table to be
able to seek remedies at
fairness and accountability to
insurance companies to do with
our policies that do thank you
madam chair.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
Is there anyone I've seen no
okay.
Would you like to.
We go to questions and.
So thank you madam chair members
of the committee my expert here
Mister Bruce Thompson also has a
related story that you would
like to share with you as well
that would be alright to clarify
some.
Madam chair woman and members of
the committee thank you for
taking the time to address this
bill I just wanted to just
something that that miss Taylor
brought up which was the
involvement of the of the
insured person so the the issue
I've Representative to people
that have been sued by their
insurance companies
in one case the the person
simply was not at fault in this
this was an unintended
consequence of the Albuquerque
ordinance that says if it's if
nobody's really hurt then you
have you can move your cars
either way the please don't have
to come in the doesn't have to
be a police report well we're
there's no police report there's
no independent investigation and
so that gives rise to a lot of
claims that are not supported
backtracked into my client
really wasn't at fault but he
was facing a lawsuit from
progressive for the fifteen
thousand dollars our damage to
the to the other person's car.
That fifteen thousand dollars if
you don't have a lawyer and you
don't have
anyway to represent yourself the
when they pursue it as just a
default judgment in other words
they don't have to prove
anything they they pursue it as
a debt collection action okay
and that's where the problem is
the pursuit is a debt collection
action and so that the full
judgment turns into a lien
against property or if there's
no property turns into a losing
your license and then losing his
license law meant to losing his
job etcetera so there a lot of
consequences from allowing
insurance companies to just
pursue this as a debt collection
action and the second
item that I wanted to address is
it really more of an unfair
practice in the industry and I
know that miss Taylor
representative I believe
Representative State Farm is a
State Farm and insured so the
story I'm I'm gonna tell as is
involved geico geico had
settled a claim involving its
own insured person who was at
fault settled the claim and got
a
a release from that person but
then the leader attorney came up
for geico caveman and on behalf
of a different guy co company
that had nothing to do with this
this crash sued their own
insurance in in other words one
hand didn't know what the other
hand was doing and this to this
person and pursued him for six
years through court and it
ultimately turned into a bad
faith claim and I met you know a
legal malpractice claim because
the lawyer has you know did the
wrong thing but the point is in
the course of investigating this
case we found that geico had
done this ten other times they
had sued eight a person who was
they claimed was uninsured.
and they didn't have to prove
anything this to they pursued it
as a debt collection action and
that isn't fair because.
In this world the subrogation
the the the insurance company
that's pursuing the claim should
at least have to prove that they
were liable and at least have to
prove that the because the
damages that's appear anymore
and so whether that suit
involves you know is required to
bring in the the the insured
person or not.
It is at a bare minimum the
insurance company should have to
prove that this person because
the damage and the and how much
damage the cost otherwise it's
just a debt collection action
and it's not fair to to New
Mexicans so I really appreciate
your time and and thank you so
much for considering this bill.
Thank you very much Mr Thompson
and members of the committee
just a small point of
clarification I believe all
references to miss Taylor
actually meant miss Conway
Thank.
Thank you anything else.
I'm no.
Just to really crystallize that
we're not making sweeping
changes to the law here we're
really just trying to clarify
and make it clear for service
providers that they do the same
that we require of hospitals and
doctors and pay their fair share
of legal fees for money that
they were awarded for the work
that attorney and also that we
treat insurance companies like
you would treat anyone else that
you prove your case in court if
you want to I don't think that's
asking too much and I don't
think that
This practice that we don't have
to prove our case is.
Valuable in any way shape or
form especially just as a.
In terms of you know convenience
to other parties
Considering how much damage that
has but we but stories that that
can do to someone being like
just if an and an entire
insurance company came after me
without like for a large sum of
money or anything even three
thousand dollars Fleetwood hit
me pretty hard I would want them
to have to prove that case and
just then claiming that they're
only
evidences that they proved that
is that they've you know paid
out to someone else just the
name of convenience to their
insured it's just of no value to
me so
I believe that that's all I have
and I will stand for questions
now thank you thank you
Representative are there at
Representative David hello good.
Thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I just
have a quick question I know
that we've heard a number of
specific cases and I just wanted
to ask how
it how prominent is it
throughout the state like is it
a issue that is is that takes
place pretty often or what's
what does that look like
generally throughout the state.
Madam chairwoman and and members
of the committee thank you for
that question it what we found
in our development of this case
against geico is that it's
really a cottage industry there
are there are law firms who who
which the most of their practice
is quote subrogation and so it's
just sort of a paralegal that I
you know gets information from
the insurance company figures
out who to sue files lawsuit and
it's just paperwork and so it is
a very common practice in the
industry there are law firms who
are set up just to do this
practice of subrogation and to
sue uninsured drivers.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that's all that's
all the questions I had.
Thank you Representative block.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative my friend
from that government lessons in
the newspaper.
So the dispute here this morning
thank you so I just had a
question regarding miss Khan
is a simple with a.
The patient now with.
Have a longer time having to
wait.
Such as students brought to get
their settlement with this new
language madam chair
representative thank you and
madam chair representative for
that question I believe I know
the answer to that but not being
a trial attorney
I would prefer one of my experts
to answer you to make sure that
the information is correct.
Representative.
Do you agree.
The thank you for that question
it's an important question the
answer is no it would not cause
one of the things that I think
got to got confused with miscon
ways story is this is about the
insurance company going after
someone and so Ritesh it's it's
uninsured motorist subrogation
the way the process normally
works his
When the attorneys and this
works for all personal injury
litigation not to subrogation
litigation but the way it works
is the personal injury attorney
retains the client the client
has not been successful in
settling the claim with the
insurance company then
the patient I'm calling on
client the patients for purposes
this bill gets treatment then it
goes to litigation and it can be
several years before they are
paid but that's not because of
subrogation or any sort of
the providers normally just sit
on the sidelines and we to be
paid effect that's why when you
go to your doctor's office
there's a question on the intake
form that says is this part of a
personal injury court at the
result of a mark motor vehicle
accident they kind of want to
now for the billing department
now as far as
getting paid faster I think this
actually would once the money
comes in hi there through Madam
after the lawsuit is filed were
out through trial
once that money is received it's
the attorney's responsibility to
put it in a trust account and
then pay the providers and and
also PM self
I will I'd like to kinda notes
the trial attorneys are going to
make any additional money on
this this is actually for their
clients whatever their
contingency fee is it stays the
same.
What this is about is some
providers mainly chiropractors
and physical therapists
don't always follow the common
fund drive in and this would
make it explicit that they do
follow the common fund drive the
hospitals you know the majority
of hospitals and insurance
companies know exactly how to
how this process works so yes
the short answer is now would it
will not take any time to get
paid has a has a patient as a
victim of a car accident.
Madam chair and thank you
Representative and experts so
you said that a patient.
That litigation could take
several years in that time frame
with that patient and have to
wait on the insurance company to
settle that claim in court until
they have their claim paid out
that's my question chair
representative.
I think Bruce wants to answer
this one socket attempt.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for that for
the question so the clear answer
is no the insurance company
let's say geico or State Farm or
farmers has what's called a
first party due to their policy
holder meaning they have to
treat their interests above all
others and they have to pay
them.
Promptly and quickly so the
question really is at the back
end.
How does the insurance company
to pay back for in the in the
case of of medical providers and
hospitals the treatment has
already happened and they are
you know collecting from the
from the settlement so it
doesn't there's there's no way
in which this would affect the
The settlement the timing of the
settlement because the the the
duties are to are directly to
the person who is who is injured
and so the person making the
claim it doesn't affect that
part of the claim what would
affect is the after the
settlement the back end of the
settlement if that makes sense
thank you madam chair thank
Representative I think it makes
sense so.
I'm cert I'm I think insurance
you know it's very complicated.
So when let's just say I think
if I remember.
I go to the hospital okay I get
I get it all covered I have to
pay out of pocket originally as
someone to go to the hospital.
And then I get reimbursed from
my answer.
So let's just say I get along
be six months afterward I'm
still doing P. T. S. so those
costs from P. T. are still
adding up.
So that would.
Once I get that.
That medical bill to my insurer
what I have to still be that
cost well the answer is
important getting that
settlement money from the
individual
Representative.
I will thank you madam chair and
representative for that question
I will answer the first part C.
will only pay out of pocket if
you did not have health
insurance.
Just to I didn't happen to.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I
that's such a good question and
and I really appreciate the
question because.
When we as trial lawyers are
plaintiffs attorneys are
representing a a person was
injured.
Really our first message to that
person is.
We do not want to settle your
case until you finish your
treatment okay and the reason
for that is just what you're
raising is that it and tell you
until you're at the end of your
treatment and you know the full
scope of the harm and the full
scope of your injuries
you're not first you're not able
to to prove you're full scope of
damages so it makes no sense to
settle but also you you don't
know what the harm is in the
future and so I think the where
this come where the where the
problem comes in is where there
very limited resources where the
insurance is only twenty five
thousand for instance and then
you've already paid fifteen or
twenty thousand dollars in
medical bills that's a very
that's where this question
becomes will really start but
it's not this bill has nothing
to do with that scenario so the
the real and answer the question
is
Nothing about the personal
injury settlement would be
delayed or hindered because of
of the this bill and in fact I
believe that it would it would
streamline settlements because
all of the providers would no
here's here's our reimbursement
scenario and so we we as lawyers
could negotiate with each of the
providers and say here's the
amount of money that we have and
here's what how we would
disperse it and and it would go
faster I think it would go
faster rather than slower thank
you madam thank you.
Experts so.
You know this adds another layer
like they would have to dental
records and prove the
preponderance of evidence that
this happened so with this court
proceedings.
Keep them from.
Settling out that case would
that be in addition to whatever
the.
Timeline is chair representative
next.
The the ring
Representative block madam chair
and members the committee no I I
I think we're getting a little
confused the personal injury
action is is usually separate
from the subrogation action okay
these are these are insurance
companies going after uninsured
drivers after the accident
there's two two years as a
medical subrogation affects all
cases personal injury cases and
segregation cases the second
part is the uninsured motorist
subrogation so in a standard
personal injury action
this this affects the the
providers
Hey and they have to go to court
regardless this is just we're
talking about how much money is
dispersed to those providers and
whether the common fund drive is
explicit in the statue or not
Any of the providers don't under
the common fund doctrine because
the statute says hospital and
hospitals and doctors do us all
we're doing is we're making it
clear that it applies to not
just hospitals and doctors but
but everyone the second part of
the bill is a subrogation
interest which is what this con
was talking about that was.
That's where after the
settlement is is paid out to an
injured motorist the insurance
company goes after the.
Second motorist but doesn't have
to prove according to some of
the insurance companies and this
is a very common practice in the
second judicial district in
response to Representative
Rubio's claims they treat is a
debt collection action when it
hasn't really been proving that
the other motorist was at fault
or the date the damages were
incurred what we're doing is
we're making it clear that it's
not a that just a debt
collection action is a personal
injury action just like if the
driver sued another driver just
because the insurance company is
standing in the shoes they still
have to prove that that driver
you know was was at fault and
because the damages so so that's
does that clarify which you
need.
And clarify I apologize I'm not
the legislative good
Representative your but you know
I think it kind of terrifies
still questions regarding that
time line though that it was not
segregation you know if it was
just okay personal injury case.
Okay yeah the the time line is
what we're talking about occurs
at the very end there is money
available it's either settled
it's already going to trial so
there's nothing to delay as far
as we your proceedings we're
speaking about how everyone gets
paid there's always the
settlement disbursement sheet
that every attorney uses at the
end and we have to be very
careful about these because
usually if we make mistakes it
falls on us and we get to.
You know Karia clients out of
pocket or out of the TV we are
so we're very careful to make
sure that we have all all the
providers because we use those
providers to prove our damages.
And so we have those numbers
we've been using them you know
since in settlement negotiations
and then in pre trial litigation
and then a trial so we're very
familiar with them we're
actually normally more proof
familiar that our clients are as
to what with the billing is so
no there's no that there
wouldn't be any delay to that
it's just
it makes it clear that the
chiropractors in the massage
therapist successor also have to
contribute when when we we as in
the attorney and the client team
where the patient in their case
I have to work for three four
years to get that money
otherwise there is no money it's
a write off for them and
chiropractors and the reading
off a lot of their
things some of them don't even
take accident cases.
So thank you madam chair thank
representative and Mr.
Three.
All right.
So I just want to point
regarding the settlement you had
not just it's just not as
hospitals now it's any medical
provider within the bill sets so
this with this addition.
Potentially within the time of
the claim because you would then
have to go to those individual
providers that maybe not in the
network.
Thank you madam chair
representative no it would not
this would actually streamline
that process what is currently
happening is the the process of
service providers
being paid back from money
awarded is that that pay out is
actually getting kind of dumbed
up by certain service providers
making the assumption that they
do not have to pay the lawyers
fees and this clarifies the
language that hospitals doctors
insurance companies
acupuncturists massage
therapists physical therapists
etcetera.
We're treating everybody the
same everybody must
help pay the attorney the got
that paid so this would actually
streamline that okay thank you
madam chair representative that
I appreciate the information
Senator investments on that
point just kidding.
Just a couple more points your
question so you know with this
that portion of your bill I
guess regarding your.
We create a new you lawsuit that
you would be able to go I really
new new litigation I'm very
sorry madam chair Representative
can you say the beginning of
that sense again I didn't hear
course yet so on page eight your
with its second portion of the
bill.
With this
Uninsured motorist coverage so
with this allow attorneys to
have new legal means to pursue
these individuals but this
helped the.
The injured party or patient no
it's not a new suit this is just
addressing lawsuits that already
occur so essentially every time
someone is involved in an
uninsured motorist accident the
insurance company pays their
insured their client out now
that insurance company can then
go after the uninsured motorist
and say we want our money back
from you because we had to pay
our client that already always
happens so it's not creating any
new suits it's just saying that
when the insurance company makes
that lawsuit against the
uninsured motorist they now have
to prove their claim.
Not just say.
Give us money.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
My last question was regarding
the forget mentioned it was
apartments in Albuquerque and
with this given those localities
a time frame that they must
become to compliance with the
new language I have some lies
are like well if we pass this
new state law and your in your
municipal is not in compliance
with the have to reject that but
certain date so I believe I saw
somewhere that this would go
into effect July first of twenty
twenty three
And even if that date is wrong.
I just want to make sure that we
understand this would not have
any retroactive benefits for
any claims lawsuits accidents
already in the system is just
going forward.
Thank you madam chair but so
would it I appreciate that it's
good that it's not going
retroactively but would it need
to be stricken from these local
city ordinance Senator.
I don't want to just speak for
Bruce but I believe the city
ordinance he's speaking about it
is not in conflict with anything
in the bill the city ordinance
that he's talking about his the
problem sometimes arises where
AP does not come out to
investigate accidents without
that are just property damage in
other words is no injuries this
was that the ordinance okay and
so a lot of times the scams.
Occur when one of them has
insurance and one of them
doesn't and the person with the
insurance then goes to his
insurance company and says yeah
I this person wrecked my vehicle
and the injured me in such and
such way the on the one side of
the story.
so wouldn't wouldn't affect
their ordinance I mean there's
still a party's gonna
investigate whatever third gonna
choose to investigate nine
understand that they're short
staffed and you know R.
responding to much more serious
crimes in Albuquerque usually
the fender Bender what this
addresses is when that fender
Bender happens and you know you
just exchange information with
the other driver leader when
they scanned their own insurance
company or just tell one side of
the story to their insurance
company you don't then get a
giant bill from progressive
insurance through geico
insurance saying you us this
money and then the steamroll you
through the process without
these protections basically
we're getting okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and experts that
bears it up so I appreciate all
the answers thank you.
Hold
up.
You down with the.
Saturday retired Madam chair
representative of a question
about something that you would
stand about chiropractors they
don't fall into a Billy was
comin frontier they don't
contribute can you explain that
to me.
Okay either I was a kid yeah.
Okay
okay so the common fund drive in
is basically it and an old drive
and the if
has applied this bill if the
attorney and that helps in the
patient help in recovering the
money that the providers have to
reduce their debt by whatever
the costs were to get their
money.
and and it and it works two ways
it also gives a mechanism by
we're hospitals and doctors get
paid because otherwise there
would be no money to rate and so
the with the common fund says is
when attorneys assist in the
recovery of the alright then the
patient their bill to the
providers reduced by whatever
the percentage of that cost is
and that includes.
That includes the attorney's
fees and court costs most of it
is just focused on the
attorney's fees so in other
words
if if I get nine thousand
dollars for an injured patient
and I take three thousand of
those dollars I've reduced the
recovery by thirty three percent
and so then the common fund
doctrine would have the hospital
reduce their bill by thirty
three percent and this is how
it's already done all we're
doing is extending that pass the
hospital and the doctors to the
other providers because some of
them recognize the common fund
drive in and some of them do not
so just say you know on a new
chiropractor I want to get paid
my full amount and that can.
Involves matrimony that we don't
need
so so that's that's kind of what
we're doing as far as that's
concerned now many chiropractors
do reduce
if we're just talking
specifically about chiropractors
hi I think that's what the
question was correct yes okay
that many chiropractors do
produce reduce and many those
chiropractors are very involved
in car accidents I mean your
spine and in your bones
you know affected by car
accidents in chiropractors love
to you provide treatment for
those
and so it's very common it's the
chiropractors who are a large
ones like CareMore part practice
for instance they reduce I
believe for common fund Dr but
certain individual chiropractors
sometimes a no I've never heard
of this why would I reduce my
bill you know
and so what this does is this
makes it explicit in statute for
them madam chair and
representative this is a common
fund doctrine in New Mexico
thank.
Know the common fund is used all
across the United States in
English common law countries
it's a very old drive reason I'm
asking this Madam chair
representative because my ex
husband's chiropractor Network
for chiropractors for ever so I
fully understand that those you
can in a car accident you go to
the internet they signed the
lean we're gonna make sure it
gets paid etcetera etcetera most
of the coverages I know they
understand that they want you to
be the lawyer that they don't
want to mess things up so they
will.
Reduce their fees is what you
get a pop money right and you're
trying to get out so you don't
hand that client here's your
check for a thousand dollars
right you're trying to
everyone's trying to take
reduction so so now you turn to
take is I'm trying to get at
what time to see what you're
doing here so now you're trying
to say they absolutely must
comply this is with this
component of this bill is doing
now Representative is requiring
that all service writers who
give us service after an
accident to an injured party and
are the beneficiaries of the
work of an attorney to recoup
damages.
Must pay out the attorneys who
got those damages retrieved for
them okay so let me see madam
chair representative so now.
This I'm looking at like a pie
there's I money so now everybody
has to pitch in to pay for the
lawyers thirty three to thirty
thousand understanding correct
actually since the lawyer is in
that in that case the lawyer
would be representing the
injured party as well as the
chiropractor the physical
therapist the acupuncturist or
whoever provided a service to
the inner part.
Patient and chairs and see we're
making a start okay so at this
time I'm not going to support
this bill and here's why then
that's not going to say it's not
the future I have to go and talk
to my local decisions about this
my local chiropractors
chiropractic association I need
to talk to insurance companies
because I'm I'm very familiar
with how the billing works in
eight working now I totally
understand where you're going
with this so I can't support
this time to get more
information thank you madam
chair.
Thank you yes.
Madam chair I moved to pass
Senator second thank you.
We take place.
Representative blocked.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Romero.
Yeah.
Representative Thomson yes.
Vice chair Rubio yes and share
Ferrari yes madam chair we have
a vote of forty two were to pass
thank you.
As amended.
As yes.
Okay.
You have a do pass on house bill
three seventeen as amended thank
you madam chair members
committee this was my very first
I was.
We consumers.
Well the.
To get as much as.
It.
Time.
He's here we will recess until
next Tuesday at one thirty.
We.
That would.
What is.
