I am the father we're grateful
to of our and this morning
father grateful to wake up to
beautiful sun and and a
clarity that we might have
understanding that we might have
unity as we work through these
bills and as we just strive to
do what's right for the people
of New Mexico father grateful
our savior Jesus Christ and
friend Ayman.
Deleted from Bernalillo elitism
the pledge of allegiance.
The gentle lady from eighty
eight percent of grounded us in
the pledge of the New Mexico
flag.
Generated from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and we go to that
And you know it's.
Other guests in the gallery.
You're showing off of our
government to G. ani Hartman an
exchange student from
Switzerland will please rise so
Announcements.
The lady from Bernalillo.
amended has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that a do pass
and the answer for the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
lose the Thomson chair.
one seventeen as amended all
those in favor of this and I.
Propose in a the as of a
committee for adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
the Thompson chair for
production we are an adoption or
federal committee put in Senate
bill one fifty as amended all
those in favor say this and I.
consideration point same as
recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair of adoption we
are international fable
Committee put in Senate bill two
committee for the Senate bill
two forty two all those in favor
signify the state line.
Was built in a yes I could
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption we
are an adoption for real this
time of a federal committee put
us at about twelve forty five
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too was been
referred to Senate tax business
and transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three as amended has had
it under consideration point it
was recommendations to pass
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
All the supposed a yes I think
we reported up to.
Thompson chair reduction we're
an adoption referral committee
report and said about three
ninety seven as amended all
those comparison of us in line.
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption we
are on adoption of federal
Mr speaker rolling and grossing
Committee too has been referred
house bill seven as amended
house bill one twenty five as
amended house bill one forty
eight House Bill to own one as
Chavez chair.
Mr speaker move approval we are
honored option of favorable
committee report on house bill
seven as amended.
Po's name.
The S. seven clear board opted
that the record reflect that the
duly enrolled in gross copies of
house bill seven as amended.
Mr speaker and rolling in and
grossing Committee to miss been
referred house memorial twelve
House memorial thirty four House
memorial thirty five House
memorial forty house memorial
Cynthia Borrego chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We aren't optional Federal
Committee porterhouse memorials
Was made yes a good productive
attractiveness of I'm sorry but
that the record reflect that the
duly enrolled in gross copies of
house memorial is twelve thirty
four thirty five forty forty
as amended has had it under
consideration reports the same
has been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted some
different culture.
Well as opposed to a test of the
committee pointed out that the
directors like the duly rules in
the girl's copies of house bill
Mr speaker and we go to that
order of Business messages no
objections so ordered click to
read message from the Senate Mr
on Senate chief clerk Mr be
entered.
The lady from earlier
Representative Chasey.
substitute for Senate bill
seventeen and act relating to
insurance and acting new
sections of the health care
purchasing Act in the short term
health plan and accepted benefit
substitute for Senate bill
seventeen.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substantive percent of bill
seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house health
and Human Services Committee.
fuel at airports Senate bill
seventy five introduced by
Senator souls.
Senate bill seventy five have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house transportation
technical education program unit
adding the career technical
education program unit to the
program cost calculation Senate
amended introduced by Senator
Padilla and act relating to
public employee pensions
allowing retired public
employees to return to work for
act Senate bill one twenty four
as amended introduced by Senator
Padilla.
Senate Bill.
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty eight and act relating to
fire arms including firearms and
destructive devices and unfair
bill for twenty eight.
title is ordered.
Not printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee.
amending the health care
purchasing Act to up to publicly
funded health care agency
obligations Senate health and
public affairs committee
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill four eighty five and act
medical transportation services
by transportation network
company drivers establishing
conditions providing definitions
Senate health and public affairs
Senate bill four ninety two
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to pensions
amending the educational
Senate bill four ninety two
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house Education
public peace health safety and
welfare increasing the penalty
of making a shooting threat to a
fourth degree felony creating
read twice by title is ordered
not printed referred to the
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee fence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House memorial eighty two
Representative Harry Garcia and
Representative Alcon the
memorial recognizing and
honoring the New Mexico Purple
Heart recipients in the house of
representatives House memorial
eighty two introduced by
L. column House more eighty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed in place
on the speakers table.
effect of attorney fees and
attorney fee caps on the workers
compensation system in New
Mexico House memorial eighty
three introduced by
Representative Herndon.
introduced by Senator Padilla a
joint resolution ratifying and
approving the exchange of real
property by the facility's
Management Division of the
General Services Department with
located within the City of
Albuquerque Senate joint
resolution fourteen introduced
by Senator Padilla Senator
solution fourteen have been read
twice by title is ordered not
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to the
order of Business third reading
of legislation see no objection
it is so ordered.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker body I'm
back.
Thank god to be here Mr speaker
I just wanted to rise for a
and certainly helped me learn
about what's happening in some
of our families that are showing
up every day for themselves but
facing a hard road ahead so I'm
provides supportive housing to
women coming out of
incarceration with co occurring
disorders so these are New
Mexicans who are coming out of
incarceration coming out of
decades now in this program are
survivors they are resilient
they are Mamas and parents who
love their kids more than
with the respect and dignity
that all of our New Mexican
constituents deserve so ten
years they have in today I hope
you all have room to chat with
it seems like we're trying to
save somebody
but really sometimes we need to
give up some of our power and
listen to those who have been
through our systems who've been
through
you Mr speaker thank you
crossroads thank you gently the
and to all the folks in
crossroads welcome to your state
house thank you for being here.
Then it
protect table Representative by
my colleague from Dona Ana I am
also very very grateful to
valuable the program is and how
much it's grown and how much
more assistance they're able to
give but I am I'm I'm inspired
all the time by their work and
Thank you just.
Thank you thank you lady from
Travis.
Mr speaker thank you very much.
I want to tell you about
Nineteen members of the
Charlie's angels dance team from
Roswell high school.
in the Orlando Florida and they
want a large varsity pom
division and they were also
voted on as being the sport
Charlie's angels fourth
national championship Mr speaker
they are listening right now if
we do give them a round of
Cool thank you Jim leading.
the volcano Vista hawks are the
best high school basketball team
in New Mexico to get again so
for those of us west side
on Saturday and I just wanted to
give them a shout out Mr speaker
graduation civil cannabis.
Think big round of applause.
of the majority and minority
leadership as well as a
committee chair we miss referred
a bill Senate bill two fifteen
one was originally referred to
taxation and revenue committee
this is a tax bill and he was
agency referred by miss seeing
no objection that is so ordered.
just wanted to wish my daughter
my second daughter Kayla Kersey
happy thirty fifth birthday and
no she's not my oldest sol thank
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business third reading of
legislation seeing no objection
it is so ordered members are
gonna do some third reading this
seven gentleman from Santa
you're ready on that item.
I am Mr speaker.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
expand the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and was in
the house Senate bill one forty
administration we didn't do this
but
what happens is every year
people you know either within
the tax department or
practitioners are CPA's or
others you know issues come up
this is an taxpayers also become
aware of of issues problems of
the spiritual of the brought to
attention and so this bill.
those problems speaker
no
I'm not trying to put a lot of
people to sleep was bigger I'd
like to spend just three minutes
walking through what each
through what this bill does.
Subsection one requires a tax
department to produce a tax
expenditure budget every year
this is the tax expenditure
we had a bill requiring it was
told by our former governor and
we know it's what we're doing
it.
Okay section to technical
corrections to language related
to the distribution of cannabis
excise tax to local governments
this is just.
no change.
this allows them
to.
Mr the special fuels tax.
section for cleans up language
to clarify we're taxpayers
Section five it's insurance
premium tax returns.
to tax programs under section
one seven one twenty six what
easier for folks to request a
refund section six seventeen
twenty twenty four.
Mr spends on to compliance with
all the other licenses that
require a check to make sure
that they're in tax compliance
before that that renewal was
issued.
Section seven updates language
state law and US Supreme Court
precedent so.
Again this is just update to
language doesn't change existing
this that adds to the center for
corporate income tax this is
real if you remember we had a
bill earlier this session that
kind of updated that said
changes section nine provides an
updated definition for disclosed
agency.
exempted from gross receipts.
Section nine
as amended provides.
That response from the cannabis
excise tax are excluded from the
the excise tax on cannabis and
that's the that's a permanent
resident of taxation we are just
clarifying those taxes into in
fact
that's to one it was the gross
receipts tax section twelve
point about data citations with
Senator fuel tax.
To health care providers for
gross receipts tax this is the
second seven dollars that we got
from the Feds the first set of
dollars Representative from
receipts for manufacturers
manufacturers service providers.
How true that is for others
that's just clarified you can
also choose to.
digital good so by a government
entity what's going on here is
public libraries don't pay gross
receipts or government gross
receipts on tangible books.
What is making it clear that
they don't have to do that when
tried to set there G. R. T.
right of their choosing I
sections eighteen twenty seven
twenty eight repeal obsolete
duplicate experts such as the
tax code.
five for the funds that the
insurance premium tax applies to
insurers procurement or new
insurance with no added
insurance this has to do with
the transition that we did in
just a little bit of clean up on
that transition.
Such a twenty two provides that
the credit.
of the medic Mexico medical
insurance pool a pool shall not
And this is
this is just a lining that tax
with receipts tax cleanup of
that act.
minutes to get the results back
so we just wanna make sure that
the of eighteen months to study
and work on on a retaking that
yes in the last section section
thirty
just declares an emergency I
body for dodging me with that I
stand for questions.
Scene for the debate see no
debate the gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker and wins
we are on final passage of the
Senate tax business reputation
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one forty seven hold on let
me get this right.
There is more than one committee
substitute.
There is a group of fifty nine
the affirmative zero in the
Gentleman from Chavis are you
ready and item number thirty
nine.
Mr speaker I am will you give me
to the point that the record
reflect that alleged as a server
twenty three will alleviate are
having to meet every four years
to set the guidelines for child
support this will place it in
The lady from Santa Fe
Representative on.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John will you the gentleman
yield.
The Human Services Department
within certain guidelines would
be able to change those child
support payments periodically
and will not have to come back
that mean they have.
Full responsibility and can
change the the schedule however
they see fit Mr speaker German
the.
the bill and basically follows
Leave us consumer price index
and some other factors that we
Si no further debate the
gentleman to close Mr speaker.
I now move passage of Senate
bill two twenty three as
amended.
Those will close ten.
Nine.
Eight seven.
Six.
I
sixty one in the affirmative one
in the negative Senate bill two
twenty three as amended has duly
passed this house.
Gentleman from really was and
twenty six as was amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution the
gentleman's expendable thank you
six billion dollars but in FY
twenty twenty two they were one
point three billion dollars and
so there's simply just expected
to increase and double to two
affect the early childhood trust
fund or the budget process and
solves two problems first to
make the budget this result
would just reliant on oil and
gas and second it prepares the
the severance tax permanent fund
this will grow the fund and a
more stable and sustainable
weight and in doing so this bill
will prevent general fund
revenues from declining in
future years despite declining
speaker seven questions to no
debate Dylan close Mr speaker I
now move that SB twenty six as
amended do not pass final
passage of Senate bill twenty
Close.
zero in the negative Senate bill
twenty six asked was amended
duly passed this house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative role metal are
The record reflect that election
is to replace in Senate bill
three zero seven as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
a half.
Time load so they could take one
graduating class and still
with that miss stand for
questions see no debate the
gentleman close thank you Mr
speaker I move that Senate bill
three oh seven as amended do now
pass we're a little passage of
Senate bill three zero seven as
Who is a vote of six to the
affirmative one in the negative
Senate bill three zero seven as
amended has duly passed this
house Julia from Bernalillo
Representative onion are new are
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm going
to speak a little bit slowly as
I'm waiting for my experts but
maintains intimidation against
aforementioned parties
constitutes a fourth degree
felony the bill has the effect
of expanding the scope of
existing statute and with that I
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield this.
Mr speaker.
Yes I yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
To go ahead and intimidate a of
poll worker as a fourth degree
felony and the actual act of
level less and this is an
exception to it.
And unfortunately
that is not good policy we
should really should make the
that
and Mr speaker and gentle lady
the example that I gave in
committee is let's assume that
there's a very large man who
And he gets upset me clinches
festivities.
testing and the poll worker is
Anyway we Mr speaker gentle lady
that is the only issue I had
bill forty three do now pass we
are on final passage of Senate
bill forty three the vote is now
open.
Thanks for you just in time.
Devoted to getting a unanimous
consent to reopen roll call.
The what the wrong way I'm
sorry.
There is a close relative
success in the affirmative one
in the negative Senate bill
The lady from Santa Fe ready and
item fifty eight yes Mr speaker
will you give me to that point.
The record reflect that election
observer place in Senate finance
committee subs to present health
five insurers the county jails
canal provided Medicaid existed
a treatment and this creates a
fund for it with that I stand
for questions see no debate
deleted close.
affairs committee substitute
presentable forty five as
amended do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate health public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
Was about to close.
Loser close a lot of six for the
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate finance committee subs to
present health public first
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five as amended
has duly passed this house.
debate amendment or substitution
ability to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
one twenty as amended his
priorities for school enrollment
to military families prior to
their established establishing
amended do now pass.
One of us is Senate bill one
twenty as amended the vote is
now open.
Was about to close.
It is a cruise would have
succeeded in the affirmative
zero in the negative Senate bill
one twenty as amended as we
passes house.
Source full.
The red phone was ringing and
forget about
from Bernalillo Representative
but are you ready and item
is a rock and roll to get to
that point please the director
for the elections are for places
and about three twenty four
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
county deputy assessor.
And Mr speaker and members this
employees in the assessor's
offices based on the level of
circle of certification achieved
compensation levels are shown in
your bill.
I stand for questions related to
close.
Mr speaker and members I urge
vote is now open.
Close.
What is one of six through the
Yes Mr speaker can you get me to
that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for please and Senate
bill one eighty two as far as
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
recycling and illegal dumping
Act to encourage cooperation
in a statewide litter and solid
waste reduction program led by
get New Mexico picked up and
beautified.
That I stand for questions there
is a gentleman from labor
percent of Scott.
This legislation actually
creates a lovers or within the.
actually in education
coordinator.
Gentlelady.
Many people are currently
employed in the Vermont
Coordinators can be paid out of
the recycling and illegal
dumping Act can you tell me how
The
the costs for this full time
employee will be a hundred
fourteen thousand per year and
Session.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe the recycling in illegal
be used for other things as well
for recycling.
Thank you.
comports with information with
the.
non governmental organizations
the final one C. threes if you
will can now apply for these
grants.
This.
entities can you tell the body
please we're now heading to St
Jews to the process.
Jim lady freelancers so you know
for the debate the gentle lady
to close.
Mr speaker I do now.
Ask.
Eight months.
The vote is now closed but I
would've six to the affirmative
zero in the negative.
speaker.
Would you give me the point.
The record reflect that election
is server placing House Bill
three eighty one is twice
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
administered by the PED to for
the purposes of the Hispanic
Education Act and the bill
further authorizes members of
this panic Education Advisory
And they stand for questions
related to close.
I do I do now move that house
What about close.
Supporters include of the sixty
one in the affirmative zero in
the negative house bill three
Six yes Mr speaker we give me to
that point.
The record reflect that election
is there for placing House
excision Revenue committee
substance rows with two thirty
one of final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
for children twelve years of age
or older who spend their custody
for thirty or more consecutive
days without a stable question
there is a be deleted from Santa
I really appreciate that the
intent of this bill and I
supported it in in the committee
I was on that heard it however
that I just wanted to discuss
with you
And I appreciate the substitute
Does this bill.
No longer require a child in the
care of CYFD to get a real ID Mr
Okay thank thank you gentle lady
I
Read the new language at the
include the potential of a real
ideas well Mr speaker gentle
lady yes it could be either one
of those.
that's required for just as the
standard identification card and
with that
with those documents be
something that would be easily
obtainable for a child.
but Mr speaker gentle lady my
understanding is that would be
pretty easy for a child in
custody to obtain an ID they
would need a either of medical
them obtaining that
identification card.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady
you're one of the things we've
heard in testimony and in the
that potentially with these ID
cards we may have a lot of.
Trouble getting that
identification
One one of the things that
foster care in the children's
code R. it occurred the age of
fourteen and so can you tell me
will tend to run away.
The only jurisdiction of their
foster families and the problem
is that most of these children
Mr speaker gentle lady are the
ones that end up being
trafficked sex sex trafficked
these children don't have a
picture and so the age of twelve
was came about because that is
about the age that they tend to
run away and then law
gentle lady approximately I
believe it's fifty five children
will disappear every day from
foster care.
that may be at risk of of
running away one at one of the
complexities of this is that
many of the legal rights that
at the ability to obtain a use
the tourney
the ability to consent to some
of those decisions and so you
know those are some of the
concerns that I have that maybe
better.
with this by having a formalized
record at CYFD that doesn't
include that does include a
photo of the child and and Mr
The first page on line twenty
two.
unless the child objects and I
think there are.
There are some.
working with foster care
involved use.
To.
Allow instead of unless the
having the H. B. fourteen so it
is so that's a concern I have
additionally if you if you like
to respond to that I'd
appreciate that Mr speaker
gentle lady
recommended by children need to
families that language and that
ability to object to the ID card
so that is where and why we put
are growing up and they can be
located and then ultimately as a
age out of the system as you
know Mr speaker gentle lady it's
required that they get and ideas
are eighteen years of age but
know the power to get out in the
world to do something.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
you know the our entire foster
verses making them feel singled
out making decisions without of
you know full information I
think this outlines more of an
opt out system rather than an
as the needs of the youth it's
it's intended to serve you know
I'm struggling with that
balances well of of of what to
After affirmative in terms of a
child actually consenting to it
being given that opportunity
specified in the bill to consent
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady of yes I will Mr speaker
will yield to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo thank you Mr
speaker and lady from curry
became a it's who after the
fourteenth birthday.
I continue to Representative as
their user training and what the
lady from Santa Fe was saying
the court but I so I I think
there's a it's kind of strange
to have the twelve verses the
fourteen now I I did hear you
say that it has to do with the
Representative quite a few areas
who did that.
And one from treatment center or
foster families and children and
teens have a way of of.
But
I I strongly urge that the.
Legislation.
picture some of my little
clients and I I say there's
little there's someone and I am
and
But they were some of them were
older so I think that we should
be asking the children because.
It can be quite overwhelming for
government officials and of a
foster family feeling that and
the child has any.
I don't quite get the connection
with human trafficking but I
certainly want to do everything
I can to protect children from
scared because it was so close
to the border fortunately she
made her about her way back up
to Cibola County.
I just don't quite see the the
connection between getting that
ID card and making the child
When I do know is I'm not sure
about what you said about the
Medicaid card but generally CYFD
gets the Medicaid card almost
immediately.
away for the child to begin
getting the kinds of services
that the child needs whether its
counseling medical services.
And all of the other benefits
get to Medicaid.
So
child to get a real ID and if
you have a an immigrant youth
and I actually representative I
have a case where I
daughter who's now is beyond the
age of of concerned with regard
to this and wasn't it eventually
I worry that she might have been
somewhat vulnerable.
to this so
Concern that what we really need
one place to another that is
often times the situation now.
And
have or do not need because I
don't think that that helps
them.
Is worth discussing but I don't
think I I can't support it the
way it is here I think it needs
some import.
From
adults who have been in that
situation and may be able to
listen to the concerns that are
legitimate about the the human
I just wanted to
Caution about this legislation
at this time thank you Mr
speaker thank you the from curry
there is for the debate the
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally I to I have a as I was
reading through some of the
information on the bill their
questions it.
fourteen year olds to have there
are you to have the consent
because that is the age in which
they can consent on all of the
information and pertaining to
mandatory or do children have
the ability to refuse to have
the ID Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady it is not
mandatory and they do have the
receive that input from CYFD and
actually as I stated Mr speaker
gentle lady people thought the
age should be a lot younger but
they're not required to carry
preyed upon within the six
hours sixty hours of their run
away and then when would
basically it and and Mr speaker
gentle lady they're preyed upon
get that photo out there Mr
speaker gentle lady otherwise
there's no way of locating these
children so it's it's not so
much that it needs to be in line
with the other things of CYFD is
speaker thank you generally so
right now federal law
only required at the age of
eighteen to to get that I do as
it stands is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
leader guess arson is when they
leave the foster care Mr speaker
gentle lady.
I believe is Mr speaker gentle
lady the childhood age out at
eighteen so.
It appears that the federal law
that that eighteen they would
need to get a some type of
identification card or driver's
license thank you restrict thank
you gentle lady said you want to
Even as a parent and
understanding those laws and
having had to abide by them when
my when my child my older child
turned fourteen and
whatnot
really pressures me to to agree
with some of the previous debate
understanding that so I do take
a little I take some concern
there but I also understand
where you're coming from I just
want to say that Mr speaker
gentle lady I think you're
coming from a very good place
and trying to protect our
Mr speaker gentle lady know the
the foster parents I've spoken
with the majority if not all the
kids come into their custody do
not have ID's Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
already in place that even if we
move from eighteen to fourteen I
think that is a really good
measure Mr speaker gentle lady
and that would really that would
cover a lot for us here.
already going out CYFD in my
notices CYFD is working on their
database so that information can
be accessed in the system easily
already so there it seems like
working towards us I just know
that in the past twenty years
there's about a hundred thousand
missing foster kids whose cases
were closed because they could
not be located because they did
not have a photo ID.
On that part of it I just a I
just take a little bit concerned
and agree with some of the other
debate today and I don't know if
there's been an amendment that's
age of fourteen is something
that's
acceptable I I could we could do
a friendly amendment on that I
would be acceptable to that
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and I would ask others that have
could do that on the Senate side
if needed.
Mr speaker generally and.
I'm happy to work on on the
amendment with that with you on
So Mister speaker that was stuck
in the.
Thing and could pull it out Mrs
the average ages twelve.
Mr speaker gentle lady just
average ages twelve to Mr
speaker Donnelly the biggest
problem is that if we do move
Mister speaker gentle lady what
what what prompted this bill to
move forward.
Mr speaker gentle lady there
was.
As.
so they requested a bill like
this so they can help have a
photograph of that child goes
missing Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker dealing with a bit
and when I was talking to law
enforcement they said it would
have run away and have succumbed
to people that are trafficking
them it's huge because even if
they give a fake name they can
run that name Asman have I do
run some questions and they can
I been told that by law
enforcement Mr speaker and only
how look at this is a bill that
is to help are missing and
endangered children and helps
with our children that run away
I look at this bill as I would
be I mean if you wanted to
amended fourteen but I would
stick with to me I think twelve
is better because of kids are
anyway twelve we need to know
law enforcement needs to know
can put it out to me they don't
have to wait because Mr speaker
W. sometimes when you get those
amber alerts of those pictures
they'll send out like four five
pictures look so different or
see examples of when these
alerts go out there's no
photograph of there's just
information underneath that
that child so having a picture
of the child is very clear very
concise we could see that so
Mister speaker gentle lady the
reason that I agree with you so
much in this bill is because I'm
trying to help the traffic
children and there's quite a few
chapter for children CYFD
children there's some more
probability because of what is
anywhere else and they get
talked up with that person and
then because the that person's
convince them that either to
become traffic just to stay as a
your last known address where we
can of the kids try to start
tightening until the child
eventually tells them what I
really name my real name is this
so Mister speaker deland look it
is way to save our children are
think that is you know that's
when kids start running away and
I think it's very problematic
and I think that we definitely
want to save them when they're
out on the streets and subject
to being pray of of other people
the nana Representative Lara
Cadena.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
you were trying to accomplish in
introducing this legislation and
I want to appreciate that.
also appreciated the comments
and questions including those
about the kind of privileges
that come with school ideas as
you all know I have an eleven
year old and a fifteen year old
their body they need to be able
to show it to whoever asks all
of the trusted adults on that
campus Mr speaker gentle lady I
of weeks ago there was a of a
mom called of a parent a
resource parent calling because
they had
a young person in their care
paperwork they had with CYFD
they were able to go into the
the youth soccer league and
register that young person
because of course that CYFD
paperwork that accompanies these
kinds of identification both for
kids in the child welfare system
and for students has not
sufficed so far.
there are currently fifty kids
on run in the state gentle lady
that have no form of ID on them
for picture ID stated Mr speaker
Have the picture and the system
accessible to law enforcement.
They'll somehow be brought to
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady at I
understand your concern and and
that's a whole different problem
in and of itself that I'm not
really addressing with this bill
we can locate them and get them
back safely.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
it's hard for me to separate
those issues when I hear about
these young people on the red.
where they had their beginning
in those bio families.
But just as often perpetuated by
these resource families that
have signed up and began to
level their own belief systems
they can build trust and
relationship where they've been
placed in a system that hasn't
heard or listen to their
concerns are considerations so
Mister speaker gentle lady I
Mr speaker gentle lady I
understand your concern but if
there are missing and they're
not going to be safe and the
system that I do know exist and
why these kids feel the need to
run away Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm sure there's trauma in their
background that's why there
easily pray to people on the
to see those of us that have had
a positive interaction with law
enforcement I have great I have
I've been grateful for law
I have.
My first interaction with law
enforcement I was a young person
far away from home.
Held by my neck and taken and
put in a vehicle I don't want to
be in New when that law
enforcement officers showed up
they went to the driver's side
window the ask the person
driving the car if everything
I'm not officer never came to my
side of the vehicle he never
asked me for ID he never asked
if I was OK he never asked if I
needed anything and then I was
taken across state lines against
idea an assumption that if we
take a photo of every young
person that's in this system and
judgment and whispers and rumors
about who they are and what they
have and the kind of family they
may or may not ever find so
Mister speaker gentleman
something and I think about the
debates we've had even the
session about the strong
difference.
Between an objection.
Which I've spent most of my life
Mr chair and representative that
they actually would like to have
the service available to them to
have the service as part of the
not navigating the life they're
fourteen but I also would
appreciate seeing this move to
an actual consent based process
for the young person asked for
this ID and Mr speaker gentleman
when I think about the kind of
is so relevant that law
enforcement have a database with
pictures of all our young people
Mr speaker gentlemen did you
consider
introducing a bill that would
quite awhile sorry Mr speaker
I've been out of state though I
can hardly stand up I'm trying
to manage without a cough drop
thank you and so my apologies Mr
because that was age Mr speaker
gentle lady that children
generally ran away there was a
lot of feedback from people that
they thought it should be.
As the zero age but it was kind
the police officer should have
definitely asked you for your ID
and had you had an idea and you
maybe that wouldn't have
happened to you this isn't a fix
all to everything that's in the
I think that it's a big step and
it's one that a lot of law
enforcement and people want to
see happen and so to answer
question Mr speaker gentle lady
New Mexico and not just those
within the child welfare system.
Mr speaker gentle lady no we did
not consider that because this
was a bill to help children in
the the system that tend to run
child Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
sure you have a jillion recent
photos on your phone this is
just not the case for foster
children nobody has a photo of
them and while it's it's a sad
violates any type of consent in
the state I I just believe it's
a smart step to helping fix this
problem Mr speaker gently thank
distance and they very likely
have photos of those loved ones
as they work towards
reunification and safety for
themselves and each other Mr
interest and how making sure
when we do objective review
and work towards improving our
systems that we clarify and talk
Who they represent.
Hi my expert Mr speaker gentle
lady is at Maryland back for New
Mexico first child alliance.
Mr speaker gentle lady to
improve the lives of children in
foster care.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
was your expert personally
what what's your question she
personally involved in what Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
I've had concerns and including
called out and stigmatize for
their work to shed light on what
families in New Mexico have
needed for decades and they
don't feel safe engaging in some
as an expert on this bill and
then finally
that the expert on this bill and
this network was also part of
the expertise on house bill
eleven that we passed out of the
Forces us to introduce witnesses
I think we've made a practice of
the last couple sessions I'm
gonna remind the body please
stick to the contents of the
Expertise in the expert ending
the experts are here on the
floor to help us with technical
questions as they relate to the
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker
will yield yes Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan Mr speaker gentle lady I
confess I'm a little dumbfounded
by the the dialogue here this
morning
those children down is that
correct.
That's correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
let me know where it is there
other states that are doing
this.
considered a national standards
best practice yes Mr speaker
Jack a gentleman and is
considered best practice and
recommended Mr speaker gentle
lady when it comes to tracking
and and subject to who knows
what kind of things on the road
to tell me how law enforcement
feels about this type of
proposal Mr speaker gentleman
law enforcement it was the one
who asked for this type of
is there is there what's called
the national center for missing
and exploited children Mr
speaker gentleman a service Mr
speaker gentle lady can you
explain to the body how having a
allows these photos to be
uploaded into that that system
and then put out there when they
run away so that when you have
an amber alert or officers are
looking for child they're able
database Mr speaker gentle lady
is my photo at the D. in the
subject to public inspection.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
believe they can so Mister
speaker gentle lady the this
idea that somehow we're gonna
take photos of children as we
create this public database that
detailed information about
children.
So I'm not sure
Why the the animosity towards
this bill I would just want to
remind the body to bring this
back to what this thing is
circumstances.
were maybe a photo ideas and the
best for them in which case this
bill provides that they can
object to that process but in my
opinion we have been failing
exploited children who need help
children who are on the run and
by giving them a photo ID law
enforcement is telling us that
this is a mechanism to help them
gentle lady from Chavis a curry
and Roosevelt please yield
Mister speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
children may or may not keep the
ID on them is that correct Mr
speaker and gentle lady essay
are required to carry the ID on
them.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
enforcement is going to be able
to identify them.
Mr speaker gentle lady is
because it's down in the system
and they can pull it up just
like if you would not have your
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
doesn't CYFD already have photos
on hand of all of the children
in their system Mr speaker
gentle lady that's I don't
child and the foster families
also so that if they were to
leave that they could you know
be upload it just like any other
hearsay.
Mr speaker gentle lady we have
CYFD there at committees to
testify to this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have a nephew that we were
driver's license he had other ID
and none of that helped us to
locate him even though we had
suspicions and had the please go
all so Mister speaker and gentle
lady I'm not seeing that this is
something that we should
diverts CYFD and and having to
That that would be most
beneficial thank you gentle lady
for bringing this but I can't
support it Mr speaker members
bond to Mr speaker gentle lady I
lot of cases where this happens
Mr speaker.
Thank you there's a division the
gentleman from of the
representative blot he's not in
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Chavis curry
the body I was not in either of
the committees that I heard this
bill
and.
you would bear with me to review
some of that the central.
points and and key reasons for
why you're bringing this forward
I would appreciate it Mr speaker
utilize it using twelve years
old could you explain that Mr
speaker gentle lady as we were
bringing this bill forward we
had a lot of feedback through
average age of a child that that
runs away from foster care is
twelve years of age and so law
enforcement was having issues or
is having issues as the whole
can look at it they make contact
with the child and second the
second part was also the
required at the age of eighteen
Mr speaker gentle lady as age
that actually this should happen
way before the age of eighteen
so that there is an idea in
place so the second part of it
Mr speaker gentle lady is to
actually have an ID for these
Children that are in custody of
CYFD that that run away if we
could talk about that for a
minute Mr speaker gentle lady.
within this age range.
Mr speaker gentle lady currently
in New Mexico today there are
fifty.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I'm not
sure you would have to talk to
see with the I'm not.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
gentle lady of law enforcement
having.
Fast and easy access to a photo.
Mr speaker gentle lady at the
the first you know couple days
of when they run away and so the
benefit of having that photo Mr
speaker gentle lady is there's
probably a good probability law
enforcement may make contact
our phones of those comfort Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady can you remind me
are there other states that
currently do this.
Representative the two most
recent Louisiana and Arizona but
this is something there that is
it is happening in other states
across country thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
children child well being
Children youth and families
department there are a lot of
stakeholders that have different
of that house had an opportunity
to provide insight into this
piece of legislation.
public employers CYFD advocates
and lawyers use.
Aged out you
know attorneys at that I think
stakeholders have been able to
provide input and so Mr speaker
gentle lady as someone who has
not been in the committees that
have heard this legislation
Idea has been thoroughly
discussed that so I appreciate
that Mr speaker gentle lady I
think just a few more questions
Mr speaker gentle lady is the
expert that we have to get their
documents are vital documents
before they're eighteen it takes
a long time to do that.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I think.
Downside and maybe I haven't
been listening closely enough
but.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
and so.
I appreciate the targeted.
Approach
and.
McKinley Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind lady yield I'll yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from McKinley County
What the vote count was in the
first committee and.
When that was heard.
Mr speaker gentle lady in the
first committee it was nine two
gentle lady I happen to know
that you're pretty well and I
think if she saw something wrong
with this bill thirteen
amendment on it or wouldn't move
save them Mr speaker gentle lady
that first committee did
recommend these changes and that
was why we have the substitute
so Mister speaker gentle lady
After the substitute was done
that was.
Even remotely against this bill
based in.
That were assigned to these
committees Mr speaker gentle
know that chair pretty well and
if it wasn't meant to be it
wouldn't happen so my hope is
that this bill gets through
thank you Mr speaker there's a
gentleman from San Juan
from San Juan.
Thank you the young lady and the
Mr speaker I thank my colleague
from San Juan put this billing
perspective adequately
indigenous nations especially of
around missing and murdered
indigenous women and relatives
in recent reports we have
Reasons that I think your bill
would help them to get it
registered to have and can I use
on a.
But I don't think that we should
something that could be grown
into maybe you could say
adulthood so for that reason I
think I will support your bill
thank you very much thank you Mr
speaker thank you Mr speaker
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
to leave the phone home Chavis
curry and drugs will deal yes Mr
speaker I will yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you
foster homes and really really
embarrass Entremont traumatized
and I'm glad to hear that that
they don't have to carry the ID
with them because I know they
want they will know said they
weeks I mean he was who I before
the end of the first semester
how.
They wanted to buy with an eye
I believe it's like if there in
consecutive gusty percent thirty
days they would get the ID and
they would not need to change
their address every single time
and the the main focus of it is
to have their photograph and in
their information on the ID the
addresses and as crucial for
information on them and they
take time to chat actually with
schools we don't get it as fast
as they have it but they do have
all that information how will
these I have a couple of these
information how will these or
help or support the student's
life Mr speaker gentle lady I
think that the important thing
about is it gets you in the
database which get your picture
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
insulated I think that in the
database identifying one already
I'm really really concerned how
these would add to the trauma
they really want to be out of
raising these questions and
raising the issue of all the
students in in these situations
thank you Mr speaker thank you
there's further debate the
gentle lady from you are
system day today and so I really
appreciate the thoughtfulness of
this bill I am concerned though
piece of legislation Mr speaker
and and gentle lady have you
talked into the use that have
been walking around it here with
us today this the session.
When when kids come into the
foster care system is it
corrected all of their
demographic information is taken
speaker gentle lady I I we have
not been able to confirm that
and every officer photographs of
these children and well I I'll
let you know that that is that
and Mr speaker kind lady can
kids our children yet use object
to having to get this ID Mr
Thank you kind lady and Mr
speaker so let's talk about the
objection process what would
that look like.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
they were just say they do not
want to participate or they
would say no.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
used under twelve would have a
guardian Adlai item I believe
they would work with and over
the age that you're asking for
this to take place Mr speaker
gentle lady aged twelve.
Okay and Mr speaker kind gentle
Mr speaker generally fourteen.
So basically what Mr speaker and
kind generally what I'm hearing
makes those decisions for them
is that correct.
Could you repeat the question Mr
speaker generally yes Mr speaker
gentle lady so.
and so Mister speaker kind
generally my.
My understanding of the reason
that is done is because at that
their futures are going to look
like helping to participate in
making decisions is that correct
Mr speaker gentle lady if you
this age because that way the
use have an understanding and
have are able to participate in
that at age twelve those
decisions are made for them.
and I actually sat through seven
are believed put on a you might
be a bit on their Mr speaker
gentle lady where they're
talking about having a child be
more involved in the process of
custody and things of that
year old to decide Mr speaker
gentle lady.
And then once again a kind lady
Mr speaker I think you for the
over twenty five years I know
that we want to give
children as axis of knowledge of
what's going on with their case
but I also think as
bureaucracy as a big system that
once they reach an age of
fourteen where they do have the.
Their own attorney that can help
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I will yield to the
gentle lady thank you very much.
My colleague the just spoke she
just some of the most
significant questions that I had
I to
Mr speaker and gentle lady have
been a foster parent of an at
I have been through the system
both as a parent counselor I am
a former clinical social worker
working with these children and
what you're proposing to do.
But Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'd like for you to add the
answer just one more time I'm
not sure if I understood it.
Mr speaker gentle lady again
this legislation would give law
enforcement of current ID
photographs are current
photographs so that if a child
happen and then also would get
an ID in place Mr speaker gentle
lady for when they age out of
the system.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you gentle lady.
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
gentle lady there in lies the
problem that I have with this
bill.
multitude of reasons.
Find themselves in the foster
care system for a number of
reasons.
I also seen Mr speaker and
targeted are profiled and are
singled out by law enforcement
as gang members for as being
involved in.
With very little understanding
of the very social economic
another
Problems that have caused these
children.
Law enforcement immigration
officials working together.
In these poor communities of
color.
Associate them with things that
are happening in the
neighborhoods robberies.
Our incentives
Drug brings you name it whatever
I also Mr speaker and gentle
lady have seen how law
enforcement can use this data
and this information.
To.
And these children go over
completely understand that they
cannot defend themselves so Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
I'm sure you're and you're aware
of that Mr speaker and gentle
lady that places them more at
risk.
being targeted profiles unfairly
is you mentioned that they can
say no Mr speaker and gentle
lady how is there no there are
no no it.
occur Mr speaker generally if
they said no they would not have
a card so and law enforcement
would not be targeting them if
if that's what you're asking and
whatever nationality they are Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady I've heard this through
out.
My forty years of being a civil
youth children and adults in the
coming from these communities
I've also seen first hand how
that is not the case especially
are brought forward so
So even though it's noted and
that it's not going to be the
case
Through their processes.
their protective services and
all the processes that they do
though they already secure
we I have talked to see where
former CYFD employees he said
CYFD CYFD does not regularly
take photographs so we're
talking about a current
worse because we're talking
about a photograph.
so I understand.
My colleague.
Representative Allison and his
indigenous populations and they
not having the proper ID I
understand that those are under
totally different circumstances
I think that we have to stand up
and speak for those using
children that you're
your bill is addressing.
hanging out her very is homeless
places under the freeway
in the back of
Wish to be identified for number
reasons Mr speaker gentle lady.
The most important reason that
So greatly becoming a ward of
the state as he and his family
mentioned that he.
And locate his body.
And give him has proper setting
off with his name and his
those use those families and the
circumstances that are leading
to their.
Being in the foster care.
military I respect all of our
arms of security that we have.
However Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
For law enforcement to say.
It throws me into the arena of
suspicion and wondering exactly
why this would be needed under
the guise of protecting our
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Herndon.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
dimly the yield Mister speaker I
will yield to the gentle lady
thank you the one that the one
will be on the card.
Mr speaker gentle lady it would
be a current photo data births
ever everything you would
normally have on a driver's
license or an ID card does that
identification card but you Mr
chair gentle lady but to can
that from that it won't be
there.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
concerned about children and
their ID cards and the and
identity theft and let me just
say to you Mr Mr chair to the
security numbers and these are
families to take good care of
their children and they don't
find out about the identity
theft until much later and Mr
cases that I have been dealing
with Mr chair and lady is those
individuals in the good way to
get a passport or some other
vulnerable and you say that they
are subject to running away and
lots of other
unscrupulous I areas that could
affect their lives I just let
you know that I worry about that
security number on and I've I've
confirm that so I don't think
that would be an issue I will
say Mr speaker gentle lady that
we that we have CYFD employees
at I think one now currently has
issues that are happening but I
don't believe Mr speaker gentle
lady that there would be the
issue of identity theft anymore
than it would be for somebody
who had a if they got a real ID
gentle lady thank you Mr chair
thank you gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative little.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
consideration that was given
into drafting bringing this bill
forward.
And as I was thinking about the
issue of that was brought up
about missing and murdered
To be able to identify those
that may have been abducted.
That led me to the next order
and so while I was on that
thought I actually got to the
next one because I did hear you
say that CYFD does not currently
why not hold CYFD accountable
for taking pictures for for
holding those photos
using them these photos Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Are they using them to take them
home and reunite them with their
families.
this bill would actually hold
them accountable hold that CYFD
accountable more to get these
ideas important and speaking
with CYFD
Thank you very much so just to
clarify Mr speaker gentle lady
so CYFD will be taking
responsibility for having the
photos Mr speaker gentle lady
will be given to law enforcement
then Mr speaker gentle lady will
go into a database that will
have a current picture and their
information and I do will go to
CYFD.
Thank you very much gentle lady
and Mr speaker.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
I now move that I'm looking for
the set the house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two three one do now
pass we are on final passage of
house taxation and revenue
Reserve she see.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages to no
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate finance committees
sub two percent of bill three oh
nine with the emergency clause
Senate how the public affairs
sherry do on Senate chief clerk
Mr be entered.
Julian from Bernalillo.
This is Julie from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we go to that order
business committee reports to no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
Senate bill sixteen has had it
for the Senate bill sixteen all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was supposed may be as of the
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption word
optional Federal committed for
the Senate bill sixty three of
those in favor signify by saying
Senate bill one sixty has had it
under consideration reports it
was recommendation added to pass
as amended.
Respectfully submitted D. Wonda
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in in Affairs
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill two eighty six has
had it under consideration point
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Posibles nay the as other
committee reported on to.
Mr speaker your government
elections in in in Affairs
Committee tomb is been referred
federal committee report on
Senate bill for forty two as
amended all those in favor say
if I was in I.
Posing a test of a committee
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report on
the Senate joint resolution
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business third reading
reflect that election is there
for placing Senate bill two
sixty as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the janitors in the
references to the new standard
of taking away mental
retardation and replacing it
with
intellectual or developmental
disability it removes all the
gender specific terminology to
Senate bill two sixty as amended
do now pass we're a little best
of Senate bill two sixty as
amended the vote is now open.
sixty as amended has duly passed
this house.
To leave in Santa Fe.
The lady from you thank you Mr
speaker house commerce will meet
and fifteen minutes after we get
off the floor in room three
seventeen we've got a full
fifteen minutes after the floor
session in room three OO nine
thank you members take note the
gentleman from doing and saying
it has appropriation of finance
committee will meet fifteen
Taos Representative it at all Mr
speaker your agriculture second
money resources committee will
meet tomorrow morning at eight
Image from thousands of what
this Mr speaker your house rural
development and land grants and
cultural first we will be
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages to no
objection it is so ordered.
Members apologies for the delay
and like to turn your attention
to concurrence calendar.
Representative Chasey on hello
Mister speaker I have
concurrence item house bill for
the Senate made a few amendments
you Mr speaker and gentleman
there are a couple of changes
that I think people will lie the
we added a provision that the
consideration of geographic or
could the security concerns and
so that is would be an act as
part of the statute it wouldn't
there were concerns about the
privacy of individual voter data
and the potential for a conflict
with federal law so that was
it's it's clean up because they
had to be rewritten because of
the removal of section three so
with that Mr speaker I move the
Gentleman from someone thank you
Mr speaker the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield I don't want to
speaker the speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo so I think
understood the changes described
a couple other questions though
it's on page twelve but it I
think it's the context is really
on page eleven so Mister speaker
Ginnelly from Bernalillo Mr
question this way so the way I
are not eligible to vote in the
original version of the bill
that that went out of the house
we didn't define
what a correctional facility is
that I meant to say this was
actually the suggestion of the
the gentleman from Chavis the
referred to it so I think ramp.
Of Mr speaker gentle lady so and
a and a program by which I would
submit so I think what this
this is municipal this is county
facilities and these are private
prisons as well is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman as long
doesn't remove your right to
vote and then my other question
on page twenty seven so the way
that I understand the change
here.
containers is that the change.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
After containers online
seventeen.
county the county clerk name
requests from the secretary of
state a waiver from this
requirement Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo and so just
to be clear when we say this
requirement the way understand
from Bernalillo my last service
professionals is dealing with
the changes to the effective
date
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo connected just limit
insight about why we change some
because we remove the section
that it looks like they are
changed.
Thank you Mr speaker that can
generated from Bernalillo and Mr
You will receive your roll call
vote.
Thank you Mr Chairman or Mr
speaker will gentlelady from
Bernalillo county yield Mister
speaker I yield
Mister speaker gentle lady just
Mr speaker gentleman no we just
put the part in about the clerk
was certainly something that
I've been concerned was for
sometime thank you.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Otero
Representative block.
reading the amendments from the
Senate Mr speaker and it says on
page one line seventeen after
the semi colon were striking the
remainder of the line and the
what this is about why we struck
that and what it would do
pertaining to the bill Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
when you remove a section of the
bill as we did section three
three one twenty four all the
way down to page five line
twenty or line eighteen so
Mister speaker gentle lady could
you just tell me quickly what
that section was pertaining to
Mister speaker.
Great thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally and then another
question I had here was
regarding.
I believe it's five of them
amendment I on the Senate side
gentle lady I know previously we
spoke about making sure these
individuals have access to
voting if they have not been
convicted of felonies Mr speaker
Mr speaker and gentleman the
purpose of.
Of the
insertion of the insertion of
what a correction facility is.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady all right I
appreciate that and then my next
question here on page twenty
this requirement Mr speaker
gentle lady is there anything
that precludes the secretary of
state from denying that request.
Mr speaker gentleman yes but it
won't be as statute that
requires the County clerk to
perform according to certain
they don't prefer to they can
always get a waiver and
potentially get that from the
secretary of state Mr speaker
and gentleman I remember the
debate which we said that there
sense to go ahead and codified
that rural.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and I'm glad that
we're putting that in there so
then my last questions are
regarding the effective dates Mr
these states from the original
bill or we just remembering it
or just you know Mr speaker Mr
speaker gentleman now we are
not.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you generated for those
Thank you Mr speaker the the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you.
No worries Mr speaker and gentle
lady before I ask the question
and if you could I'd like some
clarification
the definition of a felon in
what can happen with them as
they progress through the system
On on good behavior and still
have to complete the rest of
that felons term with an ankle
bracelet and reporting to
understand that but I'm just
trying to get a clarifying piece
so that I can understand
sections of in New Mexico.
Completely.
The content of our debate Mr
speaker and only I appreciate
you giving me a little bit of
latitude so I could understand
behavior but still has an ankle
bracelet.
that is still serving the term
of their original sins that
again our remind you this is
actually beyond the scope of the
amendment and we're supposed to
stick to the contours of the
amendment on the concurrence
debate Mr speaker and the lady
or outside of that a new venture
that question I do appreciate
that Mr speaker and the gentle
everybody that sixty five
percent of our county clerk
supposed to spill thank you
additional debate on the concurs
motion deleted from Bernalillo
towards Representative Lord.
quick I do have a question I'm
on page internal computer page
thirteen section eighty that's
just for the purpose of this
section correctional facility
should be jail prison or other
they have to be drug tested as
basic confinement so halfway
houses not listed as a
correctional facility.
as described in this bill.
Your daily I could argue on that
because they're detained they
can they have to be docked drug
tested they have to be home at a
lady what about like if
someone's on a work furlough
which sometimes are just
released from jail during the
week to go to work and then
they're back in jail on the
we are simply in the amendment
suggested by the gentleman from
Chavis defining a correctional
facility and what you've defined
Then they go to work and
sometimes even after report back
to jail at night they are under
supervision they can't just go
and do whatever they want and
freedoms of the free will most
normal people Mr speaker
dealing.
Mr speaker and lately you are
not defined in a correctional
They have to abide by a bunch of
rules there supervised they
don't allow the freedoms of like
a normal person would do the
same thing with work furlough
sometimes our jail to get
that are under confinement and
don't have the normal freedoms
of regular people and I feel
that that should have been
included there and that's very
of no and we would have not
incurred the vote is now open.
Was about to close.
Senate amendments to C. House
Bill Forest Alliance amended.
Members we have a another couple
messages clerk to read.
Message from the Senate I'm
directed to inform the house Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of house bill one
thirty as amended has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate in open
the house that the duly enrolled
in an goes copies of house bill
seven as amended.
House bill one twenty five as
amended house bill one forty
eight House Bill two oh one as
and returned same here with
respectfully submitted sherry do
on Senate chief clerk this is
really under.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
of the officers of the house
respectfully submitted sherry
due to on Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
house and returned same here
with respectfully submitted sure
do the on Senate chief clerk Mr
be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
data on Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
The lady from Bernalillo.
ordered thank you as well thank.
members we and I hold all
accountable for this one result
we're going so quickly this
panel which passed today.
Gentleman from Chavis any
fixtures you wish to update us
with.
I got a picture that they look
like these at the doctor's
Sir and tastic.
Right members thank you for a
great day today we're gonna
break for the day and go and do
some committee work and come
Mr speaker I move the house
stand in recess until ten thirty
tomorrow morning.
thirty tomorrow morning.
