A lot of.
Representative.
Here.
Representative more.
Representative Allison your.
Representative here now
Representative to like to put
your money on the table thank
you madam chair good morning
members of the committee is I
have house memorial fifty nine
and I deeply appreciate your
willingness to meet this morning
just one piece of legislation.
So tragedy happened in Carlsbad
about eleven years ago almost to
the day a little boy needs
center jobs for your soul.
the same was out playing it is
Mr and the small minded and find
them and so where ever alert was
issued and at least a hundred
people showed up to start
searching the neighborhood and
accuracy two hundred fifty
people by the next day.
Unfortunately they discovered
sandy that a day later they
found out he had fallen feet
first into an abandoned water
well.
And this well was on a
neighbor's property there was a
chain link fence for forging the
fence separating the properties
and they assume that Sam calling
that that fence.
Our it was
are just horrible for the
community of course is
devastating for the family and
what they determined later is
that sandy could not be catches
growth he was so wedged into
that will hold you can express
so every everything to rescue
him was was for not.
so the official cause of death
was asphyxiation and
It is so emotionally just think
about it the.
the parents came to me I I was a
pretty new legislator at the
time and they asked me if I
could do something to prevent
this from happening child.
So did you this happened again
March of twenty twelve and at
the next subsection twenty
twenty fourteen our head house
memorial thirty three.
And what I was trying to do with
there was get us to get agencies
and people to come together and
talk this out what we could do.
I did get the memorial pass some
of those seventy to zero and so
we were supposed to get a report
by December what the the groups
you know state engineer and all
the usual people who thank us
and nothing have been done.
And I could figure out why so
where there was told what I had
failed to specify a convening
authority in the more who's
going to call the meeting.
So that was my my mistake.
And so really bad about it and I
have to tell parents that you
know so we've we tried some
things on our own we try to
create some public service
announcements federal radio
things like that and nothing
really move forward on that
either so I have some unfinished
business and wants to concluded
the session if I may and that is
what house memorial fifty nine
sports to convene people to have
a study to get a look at this
issue and see what we can do.
This is really came back to my
mind February hello when I use
report came the little boy in
Morocco.
Have fallen into an abandoned
well and it was the same story
essential this is a five year
old and they were unable to
think he was a lot of thank you
for for a while they put oxygen
down and
Sen Pete and but the little boy
passed away his name was Randy.
And so that reminded me that I
have this initiative so madam
chair members basically it's
it's a bit of a sticky situation
because there are some statutes
already that indicate as well
that the owner shall funded
funding.
Expensive and the really the
first issues where are these
wells who knows where they are
many of them working in New
Mexico.
Started anything and before they
have to be registered so there's
there's a lot here and sometimes
madam chair the wells may have a
similar call around there were
some more profit sometimes not.
Question is what can we do and
so that's what I'm asking for
madam chair is for this from the
past so we can get back on top
thank you thank you
Representative the appreciate
you bringing this before the
committee are there any members
of the audience who would like
to speak in favor of this bill.
Yes.
Here okay here's that's here yes
of course.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and Mary Kay
route registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico groundwater
Association and we stand in
favor of this memorial plugging
and ceiling abandoned wells will
help keep our groundwater clean
and free from contamination one
of the things I noticed in the
FIR was that there's a question
mark as to how do we locate
these well off.
I was most recently the director
of the environmental health
conditions and the environment
department ten so we have the
onsite wastewater program and
others when property is
transferred a permit must be
requests from the department and
they're looking for a number of
things one of those things is
how far are you from yes well
that information
has been mapped so there is a
GIS mapping project and I. T.
project between department of
environment and we were sharing
that information with department
of health so that should there
be a waterborne disease outbreak
they could locate where that
might be and what might be the
issues so I believe that it is.
Very feasible to access the
location information it's of
course not complete for every
every wells in the state of New
Mexico but it would be an
excellent start.
Madam chair representative so
what is here one of the what are
the topics we discussed we did
house more of thirty three was
that we really don't know where
these are back and finances and
technology have helped us
understand more and my primary
motivation here is public safety
but it also does run into
Ostentation Wells and the one at
sandy fell into was a driver
well so maybe maybe not the
issue that we would have
expected but anyway I think I
think there's a lot of that that
could be study.
We have another gentleman.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Erin Wallace and the
superintendent of the.
She Conservancy district within
the boundaries of our district
we have about sixteen hundred
active wells and of numerous
inactive wells but one of the
rules of the PVC the is when we
find a of wealth is is is on
catalog or is in the process of
being abandoned we provide that
service free of charge to the
line or so we will we will
properly whether it's it's
shallow or artesian what we do
that is we we run pipe to the
bottom of the wealth and report
seeing and slurry to the surface
and so it is it is done to
protect our offers and I highly
encourage to.
Mexico all that we just as an
interesting aside the the
concept of the state engineer
mandating well construction was
born within the boundaries of
the city that for the first
concept was born was so that we
would have a uniform standard
for the construction closed.
Thank you for your leadership
the state of any others
scenography and nobody online
I'll turn the.
The subject over to the
committee.
there any Representative
Matthews thank you madam chair
and.
Thank you Representative for
This I'm curious whether
Rather than in interim committee
to.
Move this along or study it
have you thought about simply
asking that the state engineer
do this and perhaps you could
appropriation.
I know you would have how much
money that would be but senses
if the state engineer is the
appropriate state agency to be
dealing with this and
sometimes I get a little
concerned when I see we're gonna
ask another committee to.
And if the license but.
Your bills but I'm just curious
about.
Thank you for the question I
could ask.
This.
Yes Representative so that's a
really good question and I did
have discussions with the state
engineer at the time when I
brought house for thirty three
this is really a broader subject
I thank them just for the state
engineer would do that it's
pretty established here in rural
how these are supposed to be
handled the problem is we we
have homeowners letters may have
well and the cost of doing the
talking the way this the current
role as would be prohibitive for
a lot of families that just
could not afford to do it so I
would like to have a broader
discussion among a number of.
Interested parties and certainly
the state engineer would need to
be in the mix thank you.
Madam that is Representative
Ezzell thank you madam chair I
appreciate.
Still up here I mean this this
is a problem
not just for young kids that are
out exploring and everything
else but for hunters livestock
the list goes on and on and it
is Prof of.
And I do appreciate what's PTA
CD is that in our particular
area that district goes from
fort summer all the way down to
San Juan Representative the
parties.
And I have done they have been
very proactive in this issue I
know that whenever they were
illegally drilling and from this
at the state engineer so.
Illegally drilling those
Wells there for the like are
there will field whenever they
lost circulation they just
started up and because this was
a company not even remotely.
Knowledgeable of that area
killing from the Gallup where
they came up to our part of the
world because maybe there was
really going out early in favor
to be head.
But anyway that's why they ended
up there drill of this I lost
circulation of one of the wells
didn't know how to stop it.
And
I
depths if memory serves arrives
eight truckloads of drilling
that down there will be one of
the men started branching out
we're this water was just
rolling through their.
It sealed off the wells of
thirteen farmers.
And it affected over twenty
domestic wells in that area.
And.
What we got element with the ID
meetings state engineers office
and the Interstate Stream
Commission is we're sorry.
That's unacceptable.
I do have some concerns with the
way that it is done I think what
PVA CD has.
Proven to the citizen round that
area if that is the way that we
do need to plug these abandoned
water wells just to protect our.
Everybody else's water
protecting groundwater protect
the.
Underground awful first neighbor
bank
I'd I don't see why there would
be a problem with the.
State engineers office being
involved in this and.
The.
Lara House committee analysis.
I think that each one of our
districts are water districts
throughout the state should be.
Responsible.
For.
Including this in their work
that they do in our in our.
Areas districts throughout the
state.
An energy minerals natural
resources does.
That whenever somebody goes up
there to drill an oil well well
the gas will they do have to put
a bond that pays for the energy
minerals natural resources to be
able to go back in there and
make sure that those wells are
plugged.
And.
They've already.
Even though there might be an
orphan well out there they still
do have the means to be able to
go out there play at this I
think the state engineers office
as well as at in this analysis
is talking about.
Including these.
State engineers in energy
minerals natural resource and
the New Mexico association of
counties to study feasibility.
I think there would be remiss
madam chair if they did not
become involved see that this
happens.
So I appreciate you bringing
this bill forward I don't want
to hear another little child is
falling down with that is hard.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative takes thank you
madam chair and committee and
thank you for bringing this
memorial forward I just want to
clarify but once again the
memorial is to study the
feasibility which I'm assuming
what are the best approach is
impacting the wells and a cost
analysis so that you can bring
it back within appropriations
necks.
Once the study is done is that
the intent.
Madam chair representative K. I
I I think that's correct all of
it
As far as cost it depends on
what has to be done with the
particularly well it's a cap is
going to be more forward looking
plate
or it could be a metal plate
perhaps effects into just under
the surface of the opening it it
could be a number of things
talking as I said earlier
Senator Representative is pretty
expensive usually and and so the
idea here is to make it
affordable.
Affected affordable at the same
time and as far as the funding
goes we never really had a
question just that it just
depends on wealth and where it
is and more chair representative
I R. I'm already thinking about
putting junior money into this
if I can't have it as an
appropriation house bill two
next time we meet so I think you
ever I can see this also when
this tragedy happened was sandy
the community got very involved
in thinking about how to use
this in our fire department put
out the word if you don't want
to be added as well please tell
us and we will come and that
might have been at no cost to
the landowner but say they have
three people are three wells for
identified two of them they were
able to cap so the cost could be
formed it to some extent perhaps
by some of the local the local
governments if they choose but
yes I I'm sure there will be a
cost at some point in and now we
just need an Intel system
manager.
Thank you madam chair a
committee that so that's what
I'm just trying to clarify I too
I'm like let's let's to school
in.
But I'm assuming the memorial is
we need to find out Hey it's
these are the five ways that are
best to cap any on the well this
is what we're going to ask for
the first the fund then we have
a fund for capping oil and gas
wells you know do need to create
a fund it says here in the
analysis that the department of
interior is is providing funding
to cap the oil and gas I don't
know why state you know that
that might be federal funds as
well so that's what the memorial
is that exploring the data city
you know when to come back and
know how to approach this in
this way correct that is correct
Representative nature thank you
very much.
Thank you and I would like to
just I'm curious if I can take
the pride of the chairman asked
the the gentleman how much does
it cost to do that will that the
flurry and then fill it up.
The cost of buying a house sure.
I guess this is on a very rules
of the the formation dictates
that they're in our particular
part of the world because we're
in our formation and store road
so there's a lot of space that
you have to fill up loss
circulation material of the type
of the most that you run to gain
circulation and then displays
the most with the cement slurry
on on a well that most of us
would be.
Most exposed to it's it's pretty
simple you can grab all the
bottom of it because that still
allow the formation to move as
long as there's not water in the
bottom of the hole what we call
a dry hole we can we can just
sing at the top twenty feeder
that there that ensures a good
seal between the surface and and
where the water many many and up
and so the the price on it can
range from a few hundred dollars
to.
Tens of thousands of dollars if
this is enough of artesian
situation with share of a car's
important mission thank you
that's thank you for that I I
have I just put in a new well so
I realize I have to as one is a
beautiful hand as well with
strong cap on a fast.
You know I should probably do
that and that then I have
another well in it so well house
you know so it wouldn't hurt
anybody if they you know we I
guess we provide sooner later
but you know they wouldn't hurt
would get hurt I hope down there
but
good to know I think I better go
talk to some human figure out
how to do that other well but I
to and really supported that
this obviously I I also informed
the committee that what I'm
trying to do is see if we can do
this I've always been I've
always stuck or interim
committees should have staff
that work with the interim
committee and then come here to
the legislature with this so we
should have experience like Tom
Kricka who's very good at
writing Water legislation of
nose water to work with the
committee all during the interim
and then come back like we do in
the LFC and work with this
appears so that we have people
who.
Study the issue during the
interim with us in the committee
hears so I'm kind of working
with leadership and a number of
us are on different committees
we have the LFC and we have the
LFC but the other you know this
committee is just as important
but we don't have our staff
follow us back to the
legislature so I am working on
that Representative and I'm
working with the leadership and
I think I think that would give
us a better better legislation
and and better studies and and
we could the staff could follow
us to be the staff here so I'm
working on that because I just I
just think we need a better
system for our legislature and
that's something we can do as a
legislature you don't need to
pass legislation is really a
leadership you know both the
majority and minority of talking
together about how we could
manage this all throughout the
year so anyhow with that
care professionals close with
one of our
I have not even spoken with
Sam's parents about my efforts
this memorial we were so
disappointed with.
And with the previous L. in fact
Ready math C. Jones even I drove
to hard to present as meetings
we got on the agenda so we can
try to get this moving and so
they don't even know we're
talking about this today I don't
want to disappoint and so we can
get it to pass and get this
Yes the house floor then I at
that point we'll let them know
we're we're still working on it
fifty one chair chairman of teen
madam chair of movement to
definite the house memorial
fifty nine we have a motion to
pass by Representative Ezzell
this second by Representative
Kate's is there any opposition
to this bill.
Representative you have it does
to pass on house memorial two
fifty nine basically over the
last committee.
As far as I know.
It goes to the full because.
They will all be there with you
okay.
Thank you thank you for.
The nine
days of.
I'm sorry.
By the press releases more this
is my district decided to if you
want find everybody kind the
other who are.
Crucis mom need homemade
anybody Wednesday.
Is this representatives Morris.
