Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum. Will the gentle lady
from Bernd Leo Representative
Garrett lead us in today's
invocation. Thank you Mr.
Speaker, please join me in
prayer.
Our Heavenly parent, our Lord
God, as we come together, we are
each like a pebble in a pond and
we wanna throw our pebble in and
make waves of goodness that can
extend from Santa Fe throughout
the state of New Mexico through
this nation through this world
we pray for all of our world
leaders at this time, Father, we
want to say special prayer for
Pope Francis, who's in critical
condition. What we know all of
our leaders have bigger ponds
that they're working in, and we
pray for them.
And towards this heavenly
Father, I want to read the
prayer of Saint Francis.
Lord, make me an instrument of
Your peace where there is
hatred, let me so love.
Where there is injury, pardon.
Where there is doubt, faith.
Where there is despair, hope.
Where there is darkness, light.
Where there is sadness, joy.
O divine master, grant that I
may not so much seek to be
consoled as to console.
To be understood as to
understand.
to be loved as to love.
For it is in giving that we
receive it is in pardoning that
we are pardoned and it is in
dying that we are born to
eternal life. Amen.
General lady from Eddie and Lee
Representative Brown with the
Pledge of Allegiance.
And the gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez, with
the.
Uh, gentleman from Ber Leo
Garcia with the pledge of the
New Mexico flag.
I salute
Lebo.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good afternoon members.
Good afternoon members.
Thank you.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez, you
have some special guests on the
rostrum.
And I believe a um wrestling
exhibition with the gentleman
from Berle, Presentative de la
Cruz down here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
have a few announcements. I'll
be brief with my announcements.
First off, I wanna welcome
to another, uh, important work
day for our state, uh, of, of
Mexico. I, I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker, I'm pulling it up right
now.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I believe we,
um, sent you the list of names
for our gallery guests if we
could get us started that one
we've got
uh, let's see, we've got 4
students. Guests Hernandez,
these are, uh, students at
Desert Ridge Middle School in
Albuquerque.
Uh, they're in social studies
class and they're learning about
their state government. I'm
gonna read your names please so
we recognized we've got Evelina
Roger, Elizabeth Carmona, Alisa
Carmona and Tatiana Garcia.
Welcome to the house.
They're refusing to stand up but
you guys are the only ones here
so we could totally see you.
Welcome to the house. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and, and body, uh,
this is their first time in a
state capital, our state capitol
building, welcome to your house.
Welcome to your house.
Hm
They thank you Mr. Speaker
again. Um, my guests on the
rostrum, uh, he, he actually
traveled here out of state. He's
a professor at the University of
Arizona and here's Doctor Andrew
Curley, associate professor, uh,
in the school of geography,
development, and environmental
at the University of Arizona.
His research speaks to how
indigenous communities
understand coal energy, land,
water infrastructure and the
development.
In, in error of energy
the house.
trying to get to the
To my notes from NMAA as you
know, Mr. Speaker, uh, once a
year our students from all over
New Mexico come together for uh
numerous state tournaments.
Well, Mr. Speaker, uh, this
week, um, all of our uh young
High school athletes are at the
Rio Rancho Event Center for our
New Mexico State wrestling
tournament. So I want to
acknowledge, um, the gathering
of, of many of our communities
and as we are gathered here, you
know, from it, it, it's really
unique that this is going on at
the same time that we're in
session, we're we're in
community, they're in community,
and I'm really glad that uh over
600 young athletes, um, uh,
both, uh.
Uh, you know, that are there,
um, and over 65 schools. So I
just wanna appreciate the work
that's being done to organize uh
uh.
The state wrestling tournament.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Fantastic, big round of applause
for those amazing athletes
competing today at the Rio
Rancho Event Center.
For their announcements, young
lady from Berlin and Torrance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a
very important announcement
today is the official margarita
Day, uh, and in
I thought they were super
important as part of New Mexico.
So if you get the Santa Fe
Margarita Trail Pass. It has a
bunch of different places you
can go visit in Santa Fe and
when you collect enough stamps
from having margaritas, you get
free things like shirts and all
kinds of different things. So
please go out and celebrate
Margarita today carefully, thank
you. Don't too many stamps.
That's right, not too many
stamps at one time. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Any other announcements?
Gentle lady from Burley or
Senator Borego, Mr. Speaker, I
just wanted to share with the
body that I just heard um a news
report that said that we are all
consuming one credit card of
plastic a day.
Plastic into our systems, um,
comes from uh the food we warm
up from the water bottles we
drink out of, um, just so many
different sources in our food,
and I just wanted to share that,
so.
There you have it.
Members take note, no margaritas
out of plastic cups today,
please.
Nether announcements.
Members, uh, I've got a couple
of announcements. We do have uh
an item on a concurrence
calendar that we're gonna go to,
um, and then a few items on 3rd
reading that I'm hoping to get
through, um, I understand there
is a, uh, I think there's a
celebration tonight, um, I think
it's in Albuquerque, um, so
we're gonna try our best to, to
accommodate folks, but, um,
we'll see how, how the rest of
the day goes.
Any other announcements?
All right.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 as
amended by the Senate and
requests the concurrence of the
House to the Senate amendments,
respectfully submitted, Sherry
de Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
note.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, we are gonna have the
sergeants.
The sergeants of arms.
supposed to be a joke, sergeants
of arms pass out the concurrence
calendar.
Uh, so we'll give it a minute
for that to get passed out and
you'll have it in front of you.
As we pass out the concurrence
calendar for the new members in
the body, uh, the sponsor of the
bill will make a motion to
either concur or not concur with
Senate amendments, there'll be
an explanation of the
amendments.
Um,
once we take up the motion, we,
um, I can take the bait if, if
need be, but I'm gonna ask you
guys to raise your mic and get
my attention. I'll keep a list
so that I can call on you if you
have questions on the
amendments, um, I will have you
know that the debate will be
limited to the Senate
amendments, uh, so please, uh,
try your best to stay within.
The boundaries of the Senate
amendments to.
Our house bill in your debate.
Everybody got the calendar? I
believe we do, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
concurrence.
General lady from Santa Fe, Los
Alamos and Sandoval,
Representative Chandler.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I move that the House
concur in Senate amendments to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8, Mr.
Speaker, and to begin, um, I'd
like to share with the body, Mr.
Speaker, that I support all of
the amendments that have been
proposed by the Senate, um,
a lot the amendments.
A large number of those
amendments, Mr. Speaker. In
fact, a large majority of those
amendments, Mr. Speaker, are
technical, um, word.
Tightening, I guess you might
say, Mr. Speaker, we all have
worked with Senate Judiciary and
we understand their ability to
find ways to um improve on
language in our bills, so.
I'd like to focus on that and
then there are two, amendments,
Mr. Speaker, that I would
characterize as substantive and
those are Mr. Speaker.
One is on page 32 lines 11 and
12, the Senate struck those two
lines, those two lines relate to
the um.
The weapon enhancement device
and as the bill was sent over to
the Senate. It allowed for
multiple counts being charged
against an individual based on
the number of devices that were
found in that person's
possession in the Senate struck
that that provision. So that's
one and the other provision, Mr.
Speaker, relates to the DWI bill
that we included in our package,
Mr. Speaker.
And you'll recall the bill
allows for two things. One, it
allows for law enforcement to
seek a warrant for misdemeanor
DUIs that remains in the bill.
It was not amended, but another
provision was amended out of the
bill in its entirety, Mr.
Speaker, and it relates to um
the ability the enhancement
provision, so the bill as
presented to the Senate allowed
if a person refused a.
draw, refused to consent to a
blood draw that under the bill
as presented to the Senate would
have allowed an enhancement of
aggravated charge to be filed
against the individual who
refused the blood draw that
portion of the DUI bill, DWI
bill, uh, in our package was
stricken, Mr. Speaker, so now as
presented to us through the
concurrence process is we will
there um uh warrants will.
be allowed for misdemeanor DUI
blood draws, however, the
enhancement portion that had
been in the bill was stricken by
the Senate and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I am happy to entertain
questions. There is debate on
concurrence, the lady from
Berlin and Torrens,
representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentle
lady from Los Alamos, please
yield, um, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentle lady from Torrance
County.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies. So to start off, I have
a question. Let me get to it
here because I'm looking online
and I have to get to section 10.
I have a question about the
changes on the weapon conversion
device which is in section 10.
And it looks like there was a
change made to it.
And I think I'm not quite there
yet. I'm looking at some
paperwork I have
that the Senate changed the
definition of a fully automatic
weapon.
to mean a weapon that shoots or
designed to shoot automatically
or can readily be restored to
fire more than one cartridge or
shell. Can you explain a little
bit more about what they're
meaning by what one cartridge or
shell, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that amendment was proposed, um,
I think in large part based on
my understanding of the debate
was they were uncomfortable with
our original language, feeling
it was.
To colloquial, perhaps you might
say because the original
language said restored to shoot
more than one shot, if I
remember, and they felt that
that was imprecise language and
as I said, perhaps too
colloquial and imprecise, so
they proposed that language, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, I'm trying to find, oh,
here we are finally got to
section 10. It was way down
here.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, it looks like it's on page
33. So give me one second to
look at that. So they changed
from shoot one or more shot fire
each cartridge or shell, so they
still kept in here, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that it's
still, I'm looking carefully
through this.
Uh, it's still if they have that
part for conversion part even if
they have that on their
possession, but it's not in a
firearm that is still a crime.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, um,
gentle lady, they did not amend
that provision.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady and then going over to.
Did they change?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
looks like, if I'm correct,
cause I'm trying to get to all
these sections because it's all
piecemealed all over the place.
They kept the shooting threat
the same that's a 4th degree
felony from a misdemeanor and
there was no changes on that. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's correct. OK. So,
I'm sorry to interrupt, but I
believe, uh, the wrong bill has
been passed out, um, sergeants,
please pick the bill up. I
believe it's the original bill,
and I think, uh, the pages might
be.
Misumbered, so that needs to get
pulled back to avoid confusion
on the floor.
Mr. Speaker, generally, do you
want me to wait till it's passed
out because I'm looking at
what's online, but we can wait,
you can keep going, OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, uh, when we start here on
page 3.
The
Senate made a change here.
Um, if the question of the
defendant's compensies is raised
in a court other than the
district court, the case should
be transferred to the district
court. Can you explain to me why
they changed the wording on
that, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, the original proposal
continued to allow the metro
court to have a role in
competency proceedings in the
Senate, um, House Judiciary
Committee felt better of that
and felt it was more appropriate
to send.
those cases to district court
directly, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, that makes
sense and moving on to page 6.
It looks like in here.
Um, we, they changed.
Within a reasonable time to 90
days after evaluation report.
I submitted to the court for a
defendant who's not
incarcerated.
Can you explain to me why they
wanted the 90 days instead of a
reasonable time where they
wanted such a a time frame like
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, they, I believe they felt
that the language that we
proposed, um, within a
reasonable time was too loose
and unspecific and perhaps even
ambiguous and they felt that uh
date certain or a specific
number of days would um ensure
perhaps more speedy resolution
or submission of of the report,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, actually, I can
understand that because if it
has it open like that, there's
nothing specific out there and I
actually do.
like when things are far more
specific in there and I'm gonna
guess probably the same thing
when we look on page 13. It says
our department of how shall
admit a defendant for competency
restoration within 30 days to 7
days. Do you know what they're
thinking he was on that? Was it
just to expedite matters, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's
correct, but I do want to point
out gentle lady that on the
floor after consulting with the
Department of Health, they
offered uh on a floor
that changed the seven days to
15 days to give um the
department a little bit more
time before having to accept a
person into the um healthcare
facility and Mr. Speaker General
Lee, was there any feedback on
this from the people that will
be dealing with this, going from
30 to 7, was there any pushback
or agreement that that works for
them, Mr. Speaker and down lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, there was feedback after
the House Judiciary Committee
initially put in the 7 days.
and department or maybe HHS
approached us and suggested that
they needed more time and that's
why there was a floor amendment
adopted, changing it from 7 days
to 15 days, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. OK, Mr. Speaker, gently,
I'm just roll scrolling down
because there's quite a lot in
this bill to get to the next
portion.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so on page 26 upon motion they
changed it to.
Of the defense to the party of
the court. How does that change
this in in what's written, Mr.
Speaker, generally, and that's
page 26.
So it doesn't give line numbers
on there. You're Mr. Speaker,
I'm looking at the original
bill. It's the original bill is
26 line one and um they made a
very good suggestion there, um,
because it's not just the
defense who could make sanction
um a uh a motion, so they
clarified it could be either
party or the court because the
court could also sue Asante, uh,
makes such a motion, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. OK, Mr.
Selli, that pretty much answers
the second part.
They changed, OK, and I asked
you this part about.
Um, each weapon conversion
device found so it still stands,
they just changed the wording
and that still stands even if
you just have the part, and it's
not in.
An actual firearm and moving
scrolling down, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
I don't have the bill in front
of me, so it's taking me a
little bit longer to scroll, uh,
OK, so when we go in here.
OK, I'll try to explain it
better. Section 17, does that
help? I'm in section 17 on what
I have with the in amendments
and content.
And contexts we have.
So 3 years of the person is in
possession of between 100 and
500 pills, capsules, etc. the
fentanyl, regardless of its
concentration or between 10 and
50 g of fentanyl powder, which,
and they struck out whichever is
less in both sections, do you
know why they struck that
portion out, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, it's because
they concluded it really didn't
add anything um in terms of
clarification and might have.
actually, Mr. Speaker,
confusion. So if either one of
these is met, then the person
may be subject to an enhanced
penalty if the court chooses so
to do so.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
going on to
Section 2, which on this one
starts on 42.
And and mine is on page 43 they
struck out this entire section
of B if a person under arrest
for violation of the offense
enumerated by the Motor Vehicle
Code refuses upon request of a
law enforcement officer to
submit to chemical tests
designed by law enforcement
agents provided in subsection A
of the section and the person is
not cause great bodily injury of
another person or there is
probable cause to believe the
person has committed misdemeanor
while uninflu, etc. etc. Do you
know why did they replace it or
did they just strike all that?
Mr. Speaker Dela, how does this
affect what's happening in the
bill in this portion. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, as I
mentioned in my opening
comments, they struck this
entire section, which has the
effect of eliminating the
ability to aggravate a charge
against an individual if they
simply refuse to consent to a
blood draw.
Um, and the reason gentle lady
as I imagine you might want to
know is they had some concerns
about the constitutionality of
whether we could aggravate in
the context of a blood draw,
which is more invasive, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady then a
breath test.
OK, thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady as I always say all
the time, I like to make sure I
go through everything and that
everybody at home knows what
happened on the bill, so with
that I yield my time. Thank you.
Right, there's further debate on
concurrence, gentlemen from
Colfax, Korea Harding, Kue San
Miguel and Union representative
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, as a gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Curry and all those other
wonderful counties I yield.
Mr. Speaker
I know that I am surrounded in
this building by lawyers and
wordsmiths.
But I would like to have you all
take a really close look.
To the definition of fully
automatic weapon.
Because
Depending on how you read it.
It could be construed to mean
most of our modern semi-autos.
Uh, it says,
A weapon that shoots.
It is designed to shoot
automatically or can be readily
restored to far more than one
cartridge or shell without
manual reloading.
By a single action of the
trigger.
So almost all
Modern semi-autos once you fire,
it is immediately restored to a
state where it can fire again by
a single action of the trigger,
trigger. And I know what the
intent is.
It means you pull the trigger
once.
And uh it just keeps firing, but
that's not what I read when I
read this. I can read it that
way, but I can also read it.
That isn't it is restored.
To to far more than one
cartridge shell.
Without manual reloading.
By a single action of the
trigger. So, um,
Yeah
You guys just might want to
check that real close and see
if, if that means what you
intended for it to mean.
Thank you and
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Montero
Representative Block. Thank you
so much, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind gentle lady from all those
beautiful counties including Los
Alamos, Santa Fe, and Sandoval,
please yield. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from
Otero County. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, only a
few questions for you today. So
I, I just want a few moments of
Just clarity on a few things on
the bill. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I see under page 12 line 7 on
the Senate joint.
Or the Senate Judiciary
Committee amendments we're
taking it from.
A specific and unspecified
timeline to 30.
Oh, it's going from 30 days to 7
days on that, and I'm just
wondering, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what does that do in
regard to, to the intent of that
portion of the bill. Um, Mr.
Speaker, as I mentioned when
speaking with the gentle lady
from Torrance County that bill,
um, the Senate House Judiciary,
the Senate Judiciary Committee
originally changed it to 7.
However, the floor amendment
from yesterday changed it to 15
days, so actually the bill being
presented to you includes.
An amendment that is 15 days.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's
helpful to know what happened in
committee. And then, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I see on.
I'm gonna go down to the mental
health commitment and dangerous
determinations portion on page
24, line 3, that's the Senate
Judiciary Committee amendment
and so that amendment.
states that DOH or the district
attorney can initiate
involuntary commitment at any
time. And I'm just wondering how
this changes the effect of due
process protections for
individuals facing potential
commitment on that regard.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I am not
following where you're at. I'm
looking at the original bill,
not amendments in context, which
I believe are informal, so, um,
if you could point me to the
bill and what amendment you're
referring to, what page? Oh,
sure, Mr. Speaker, let me find
it real quick. I was just
looking on the amendments in
context for a second, but let me
find that for us.
All right, I'm trying to find it
right here, but I can continue
on my questions until I, until I
do find it. I apologize for
that, Madam Chair, or Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, sorry, I
was in committee this morning,
so I remember Madam, Madam Chair
is a default cause both my
chairs are, are madam chairs.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, OK, I know we went a
little bit into.
I think it was the fentanyl and
sentencing enhancement portion,
we could have talked about that
earlier, and I'm gonna try to
find that portion in the bill
bill. I know where it is in the.
Amendments in context, but my
question was,
You might be able to just answer
it from this.
It says apply to the lesser of
pill count or powder weight, I
believe is the change in the
Senate, and I'm wondering how
this changes impacts where
illicitly manufactured fentanyl
varies in concentrations.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen,
the amendment struck language as
on line 19 in line 23 removing,
um, whichever is less.
So, um, now, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, if either one of
these criteria are met, the
person may be subject to
potential aggravation, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, that helped me on that and
so that's pretty much all the
questions I had, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you so much for the
answers, gentle lady, and the
other portion, I think I figured
it out. I think I answered my
own question on that.
Thank you, gentlemen. Let's go
next to the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Lee,
Representative Mason, on
concurrence.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Will the gentle lady yield?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, just to
Couple of questions.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I too is, is
in.
Representative Chatfield.
said earlier.
I have a problem with that.
Change on the fully automatic
weapon, the new language I'm
reading off the.
On page 33.
Of the new bill, I believe I
have it on the automatic weapon
needs a weapon that shoots is
designed to shoot automatically
or can be restored to fire each
cartridge or shell without
manually reloading by a single
function of the trigger.
The federal law defining an
automatic weapon, says.
Any weapon
Which shoots is designed to
shoot or can be readily restored
to shoot.
Automatically more than one
shot.
Without manually reloading by a
single function of the trigger.
The main difference there on the
federal law says more than one
shot where this.
Bill says,
Restored to far each cartridge
or shell. It uses different
terminology.
Which to me also.
The language in the new in the
new bill.
mirrors a lot in the next
section 2 of this uh uh
requirements of the
semi-automatic weapon. Is that
true gentle lady? Mr. Speaker,
um, gentlemen, um, actually I
think, um, we're off track here
a little bit, uh, the amendment
that was adopted on the Senate
floor, Mr. Speaker, on page 32
of the original bill line 18 is
um we struck shoot more than one
shot, and we
and they added fire more than
one cartridge or shell.
That was the amendment, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. So, um, I
believe you misquoted and maybe
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we're
looking at a previous
Provision. I'm not quite sure,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
may be, but I pulled it up on
the.
on my computer.
HBO8J 0 this I guess this is the
Uh, I didn't, sorry about that,
Mr. Speaker. This is the
In context amendments in context
from the judiciary Committee.
So, I made, I, I will, I'm a
little confused, doesn't seem
like we've got all the right
pieces of paper for the right
thing here.
I've got lots of papers and
they're all a little different,
but if what you say is true,
then it does fix my problem.
One other question, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
section 16 again, on the papers
that I'm reading, we're
increasing.
The penalty for a shooting
threat.
From a misdemeanor to a 4th
degree felony.
That true gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that was part of the original
bill that passed the House. It
was not amended by the Senate,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
It never was a misdemeanor. It
was always a 4th degree.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the
bill that we voted on increased
the um the the um.
Charge from misdemeanor to 4th
degree felony when we voted on
it originally on the floor of
the house. It was not changed in
the Senate, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Again, uh, I'm
reading from what I thought was
changes in the bill. I will look
again before we go, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, thank you.
All right, there's for the
debate, gentlemen from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Yilt.
Speaker, the gentle lady from
Los Alamos yields to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Thank you so much. I am a little
brain dead today. Um.
Mr. Speaker, I have a clarifying
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, was there any changes to
House Bill 8 on the Senate
floor?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, in gentle lady, the
reason why I'm asking is the
only thing that we have in our
books and that were handed out
our judiciary subs.
We have nothing with amendments
from the Senate floor.
The
We sign asking questions don't
have them.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they
are also published on the
website, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
do appreciate that very much.
Um, this is the committee sub
that doesn't do it. But these
are judiciary committee.
Judiciary committee.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
don't know how to read these
correctly, apparently we do have
the strike from there and uh
that was my question with
respect to this. I do appreciate
the amendments that were made on
the Senate floor. They still
cannot support the legislation.
Thank you.
Right? We have a motion to
concur with Senate amendments to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8S3
times amended. All those in
favor of the motion to concur
signify by saying aye.
Opposing a.
Good try. The ayes have it. The
house has concurred.
With the Senate amendments to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 is 3
times amended.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I will we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
It is so ordered.
Gentlemen from Bernalillo.
Item
Number
11
As the speaker, can you get me
to that PowerPoint?
Let the record reflect that a
necessary for placing how rural
development land grants
Committee substitute for Alvi 24
on final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate,
amendment or substitution,
gentlemen, to explain the
bill.er the judiciary sub for
House Bill 24 make some
streamlining changes to our
community governance attorney
Act established in 2020 as a
tuition waiver program for
students.
Uh, for 30 year law students to
engage in providing free legal
services to our Spanish land
grant Asea and colonial
communities as Simao speaker
since 2020, our community
governance attorney program has
gone through some growing pains,
used the speaker of these
growing pains are resolved in
our judiciary so, which is a
collaboration by the community
governance commission, the UNM
School of Law and the higher ed
department and with that is the
speaker, I stand for questions.
See no debate, gentlemen, close.
Estima speaker, I appreciated
the silent debate.
And with that I
do not move that House Judiciary
Committee substitute.
For house will development and
nogra and cultural affairs
Committee for House Bill 24,
DuPont.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Rural Development Land
Grants Committee substitute for
House Bill 24. The vote is now
open.
The boat's about to close.
The roads are closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
rural Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 24 has
duly passed this house.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry.
I push my button and it didn't
work.
And it was before you said it
was closed.
So
I would
Generally accommodate. I have
close it and gaveled before he
got my attention, and that, um,
next time that happens, get my
attention before I close and
gavel because at this point in
the parliamentary procedure I've
closed the vote, OK, apologies
for that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Is the
Gentle lady from Bernard Leo
representative Hockmanby Hill
ready on item number 2.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
take me to that point that all
action necessary for placing in
House Bill 36 as amended on
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 36 as amended as amended
amends the optometry Act to
expand the definition of the
practice of optometry to include
several types of in-office
surgeries, except interior
chamber paracentesis procedures
and an interest camera placement
that is a sustained release of
drug eluting implants. It also
requires the optometry board to
to promulgateditionally
requirements for optometrists
who would like to perform these
procedures. With that, I stand
for questions. There is debate,
gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Does the
gentle lady you.
Yield to uh the gentleman from
Otero County.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does this bill
allow for optometrists to
perform procedures, say that,
um, ophthalmologist would
normally do.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill would allow optometrists to
do procedures that opt the
ophthalmologist can't speak
today, Mr. Speaker, would do
normally. That's a mouthful
gentle lady. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
and, and gentle lady.
Why would we want
ophthalmologists doing
ophthalmmologist.
Procedures.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so the
point of this bill is to
increase the availability of
health care, so, um, these are
procedures that optometrists are
safely performing in other
states and so this bill will
just allow them to do so here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, gentle lady.
With the training that they
would be giving the optometrist,
would that be sufficient for
them to do the procedures that
you're requesting, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentleman from
Otero, um, the optometrists
received extensive training
while they are in school for
these types of procedures and
they also would be required to
receive additional training if
they express interest in getting
credentials to do these
procedures.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So is this, would
this help our rural areas and is
that what, is that what this
bill is aimed for is more on the
rural side. Is there a waiting
period? What, why do we want
optometrists doing these
procedures, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Otero, precisely, um, this, this
bill would allow.
Mexicans, especially in New
Mexicans in rural areas who have
been waiting for these types of
procedures to get care quicker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So I've, this is a
hot topic and I've, I've got
people on both sides that say
it's a great thing, and then
it's a poor thing.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, how does the education
clinical training of
optometrists compared to
ophthalmologist and does this
bill blur the lines between the
two professions.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Otero, so, um, right now,
Optometry students receive
extensive training and anatomy,
physiology, pathology,
pharmacology, and pharmacology
that are relevant to laser
procedures during their 1st 3
years of school they take
didactic courses, labs, and
hands-on laser training, which
occurs in their 4th year of
school. This education spans
months to years, not just days
or weeks, and I also wanna add
that studies showed no increased
complication rates for
optometrists performing these
types of procedures as compared
to ophthalmologists. So to
your second part of your
question, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, there's really no
blurring of a line
ophthalmologists are absolutely
still welcome and able to
perform these procedures as well
if we were to pass this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So,
If I'm someone from a rural
area and there's a backlog.
I have the choice, correct? I
can either go to an
ophthalmologist where I can go
to an optometrist.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
correct.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I always
like to have options. Options
are good, and Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, so do people know
that they're making a choice and
they are going to an
optometrist, and will we make
that clear to them that the
optometrist.
Let me, let me rephrase my
question, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady,
Can you explain to the body what
an ophthalmologist is in, in
very briefly, what an
ophthalmologist is and what an
optometrist is and what they do.
I don't see the point of that
question.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker I'm
kidding. I'm just kidding.
It's a joke. OK, thank you.
That was a good one. It's been a
long day, Mr. Speaker. Sorry.
Trying to be serious here, Mr.
Speaker.
Good to know that you listen to
me every once in a while.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I'm gonna take
the opportunity to first
introduce my expert here who is
Doctor Dwight Thibodeaux, um,
standing to my left, and so, um,
the difference, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is ophthalmologist,
go to medical school and then
they do 3 years of residency,
whereas optometrists go to 4
years of, uh,
School, it's not medical school,
but it's eye-oriented.
Training. So
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
And gentle lady, I guess the
point that I'm making is I want
to make sure that people
understand that ophthalmologists
really do the surgery and they
actually.
Touch the eyeball.
And optometrists from what I
understand, they're more
checking pressures and, and
vision and things like that. And
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so, uh, one of the people that
reached out to me said that he
has, he's an ophthalmologist and
he has 6 optometrists that
worked for him, and they, they
would
Ask that he don't ask them to
even try to remove a stitch out
of an eyeball, and I, I'm asking
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you think we're giving them too
much that they're not
comfortable with.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
within the parameters of this
bill, this just allows for a
process that for optometrists
who are interested in getting
training, more training and
being credentialed to do these
in office procedures that
generally last between 2 and 3
minutes. I think the ability to
do those procedures should they
want to do them. This is not
force an optometrist to learn
how to do these procedures and
it, it, it just gives again
options, choices for those who
want to do it to be.
able to do it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So if I lived, say
I lived in Magdalena, New
Mexico.
Do you think that that
optometrist there would be able
to see enough patients to be
proficient.
And using that laser procedure,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I would
submit to you that these
optometrists are proficient in
these types of procedures after
they leave school, um, as I just
explained they have extensive
training in these types of
procedures and so they're ready
to go on day one. Thank you Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, so how, how does this bill
impact the medical malpractice
insurance and would insurers
increased premiums for
optometrists performing more
advanced procedures, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for
those states that already allow
this for optometrists to do
these procedures. We have not
seen an increase in medical
malpractice insurance at all.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I appreciate
the debate.
There's further debate, gentle
lady from Donana Hidalgo Luna,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, does a
gentle lady from
yield. I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady I yield, um.
Now I need to figure out where
you are from, if you tell me all
those counties Donana, Hidalgo,
and Luna, thank you very much.
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I, I think.
I, I'm disappointed that a lot
of times we make decisions on
legislation that we maybe don't
fully understand and, and I
don't, I don't, I think there's
probably some confusion still
about what is an ophthalmologist
and what is an optometrist and
the differences in those two,
providers, they're both very
important and uh they they had
they provide important important
er um important treatment.
Um, so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, an ophthalmologist after
uh getting a 4 year
undergraduate degree, has 4
years of medical school and an
optometrist has 4 years of
optometry school.
And after that, um, the
specific.
Um, training that they have
would be would be what?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm
not sure I understand your
question in specific training as
it relates to these procedures.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, as
it relates to their ability to
practice as an optometrist
ophthalmologist as a surgeon and
um an optometrist in their in
their current field.
Uh, I, I will just, I'll tell
you what I have here is 4 years
of residency for
ophthalmologists versus a year
of optional residency for
optometrists, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, all of that is true, um, but
I wanna point out to you that
New Mexico's um ophthalmologists
have had, have held topical and
oral prescription rights for
decades, which is the same as an
ophthalmologist as well as
surgical privileges for lid and
ocular surface procedures since
2007 and currently 12 states
permit these types of procedures
by optometrists, so there's
nothing, there's no difference
in what the
procedure is and what the
training is for the procedure,
the difference between an
optometrist and an
ophthalmologist is just the
amount of training that they are
schooling that they have
generally, but it's not like
optometrists receive different
training on these procedures
that ophthalmologists do. It's
the same procedure.
Uh, thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's not
the information I have. I have
specific and you did mention
surgeries, superficial
surgeries, eyelids and that sort
of thing, but, but for this
specific uh procedures that are
listed here in this bill and the
legislation that we're looking
at those are.
Those are procedures that are
much more um
Uh, involved and they are, they
are surgical procedures that um
That optometrists if they are to
get certified according to this
legislation would have 32 hour
course, um, in, and they would,
they would be learning on
mannequins and that that's what
I, that's the information I have
is that not what you have,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct. However, the 32 hour
course is in addition to all of
the other previous courses that
I named, um, speaking to the
gentleman from Otero County. So
it's not just that they do a 32
hour course and they're good to
go. This is on top of many years
of training that they have
received in optometry school.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I, I think we're not quite
connecting on this because I, I,
I know that if you compare up,
uh, you compare apples to apples
here, the 32 hour course with
mannequins that the optometrists
would be um.
Would, would have to take to get
certified would be in comparison
to thousands, 16,000 to 22,000
hours of residency and training
with real patients that are up.
Thermologists have um in order
to be considered eye surgeons,
so I think there's very much a
difference in their training.
Is that not what you have there,
Mr. Speaker gentle lady, um,
there is a difference,
absolutely, there is a
difference as to their training
or the level of training they
receive generally, um, an
ophthalmologists are a medical
doctors. Um, however, I kind of
wanna take your attention to the
outcomes of allowing
optometrists to perform these
procedures as we've seen in
several other states. Right now,
the data shows no measurable.
increase in complications
between optometrists and
ophthalmologists who perform
these procedures and in over
146,000 procedures, there have
only been 2 reported adverse
events, which is a testament to
the training and experience of
optometrists, even if it does
vary to not received by
ophthalmologists. Thank you
gentle lady and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that brings up
another concern I have.
The data that's available from
other states is, uh, it's
coming, it's not coming from a
medical board where uh surgeries
would normally be reported. It's
actually coming from optometry
boards, which are not are made
up of uh individuals that are
not surgeons and so there is,
there's conflicting data. I
don't have it right in front of
me. I should, I don't, but, but
the, the data that we have from
other states is, I think
doesn't, it's not really
relevant to what we're seeing
here, um.
So this bill, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady does, does also um
require a board to be developed
or uh to be um.
To be, um,
Formed, thank you.
To be formed as a board would be
formed and that they would be
responsible for the guard rails
that would be on these um
procedures they would be
responsible for um taking uh
data just like we we've gotten
it from the other states that
are not, it's not necessarily
medical data from a medical
board that normally deals with
surgery. So, um, that's another
concern I have. I think that.
That
We all want um improved access
to health care, but.
I fear this bill lowers the
standard of care by not having
optometrist be accountable to
surgeons, which would be a
medical ward.
So I think that just for my
health care perspective that it
creates a dangerous place for
patients and it lowers the
standard of care, so I'll, I'll
stop there but thank you very
much, gentle lady. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, gentle lady. Next on
the list, gentle lady from
Berlio Torrens, representative
Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
gentle lady from Burleyo County,
please yield. Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentle lady, uh,
from
Torrents and Bernal Leo, there
you go. Thank you so much. um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so I am looking here and
currently there are 12 states,
correct that allow our
optometrists to do laser
according to the latest data
that I'm looking at. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker Ginellini, that is
correct.
OK, so Mr. Speaker Deli we have
South Dakota, we have Oklahoma,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Alaska,
Indiana, Arkansas, Mississippi,
Wyoming, Wisconsin, Virginia,
and our neighbor to the north in
Colorado. Are those all the
correct states that I'm asking
off the top of my head. I'm
looking at it, so would you
believe that is correct, Mr.
Speaker, young lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my experts
nodding yes, so, yes. Thank you,
those, so this isn't something
new that we suddenly decided
we're just gonna make up and and
put in into the Mexico.
It's already been established as
my point. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, and young lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, very much
so, yes. And Mr. Speaker
Delaney, did I understand
earlier you said that it hasn't
had an effect on the
malpractice, uh, in those other
states, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker Delai, that is correct.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
You also said that it wouldn't
be mandatory. They would get the
training and if they wanted to,
they could do that as a as a
specialty in their office. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker, and
young lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I is correct, this is an
option.
So Mr. Speaker and De lady, one
of the things that I heard from
optomesters because whenever we
have a bill that comes up and
make sure that I go and talk to
the people it's going to affect
and what I was told.
is if they get that licensure
and they go ahead and they get
all that training and their
experts are medical doctors,
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker Jelani, are you
talking about ophthalmologist or
optometrist? Optometrist.
Or they're, they're doctors,
sorry, that's what I'm trying to
say. They, they have a DR in
front of their name.
Mr. Speaker and lady, that is
correct. OK, so I wanted to make
sure we're not saying, you know,
physician's assistant or anybody
else, we're saying that they
are, they're doctors because
there's been a lot of debate
about who's a doctor lately.
So Mr. Speaker Delaney, what are
the concerns that I heard was
If
Somebody gets that training.
And we have, we have a shortage
of doctors, do we not, Mr.
Speaker, we have a hard time
recruiting, keeping doctors in
New Mexico. Overall, I mean,
that's a generalized statement
wouldn't you agree with that to
some extent?
Mr. Speaker, gentlelani, I would
definitely agree with you.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so how the, the question I keep
hearing over and over again.
is if somebody gets that
training because I know a couple
that are going to go ahead and
do this and guess where they're
gonna go.
Colorado.
They're going to leave the
state. So Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, one of the things I'm
looking at that is super
important, we already have a
shortage and saying OK 12 other
states and other states can do
it. It's almost like we're kind
of saying it, it's it's almost
to me a slap in the face. You're
not good enough to do that when
even though they've had the
training and I can understand
their frustration with saying
I'm going to leave New Mexico.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I say this bill helps expand
there's already 12 states that
have it. It's already been out.
for some time and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, there was a study,
I don't know that if you've seen
it I love studies, I've
mentioned that numerous times a
of research that there was uh
articles that doctors optometry
and safely, they're safely
performing.
And
That uh there have been no
issues. It's good for patients
and a study indicated that
performing these laser surges
was effective, safe, and
convenient, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, do you happen to
see that article because I'm
kind of an article research
nerd.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't know if I've seen that
exact city, but I've seen others
that have that concur.
And Mr. Speaker, that's the,
that's the thing because it says
in here effective, safe and
convenient, and Mr. Speaker, we,
we voted.
On another bill where there was
allowing midwives to have a lot
of responsibility, so I don't
understand why we can't do the
same when it comes to our, our
doctors here in New Mexico and
allow them when it's been shown
that it is safe, it is good for
us, especially in our rural
areas, and we don't want to lose
any more doctors to Colorado. So
with that, Mr. Speaker, I yield
my time.
There's for the debate general
lady from Katherine Sierra Coo
Valencia, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Well, the, um, majority
whip from Burnley O please
yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
minority leader from the largest
House district in the country?
In the state, but that's OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um, I, uh, have
constituents and people on both
sides of this, uh, debate, but I
think I might have an answer. So
with that, Mr. Speaker, um, I'd
like to move, uh,
House Amendment.
Number one for House Bill 36 as
amended.
Uh, gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left? Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, it's
231-261.1. OK,
uh, that's what I have and I
believe it's getting passed out,
so let's give it a
Has he ever made it all the way
through it has is it online? It
is generally to explain the
amendment. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. It looks like a long
amendment, but it's only because
we had to take out an end and,
and, uh, move some commas and
things like that, but
ultimately, Mr. Speaker, and,
uh, body, what this does is this
holds this to class B counties.
Only
Only Class B counties can do
this, um, that's really all my
amendment does, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady from Berlio, is this
a friendly amendment. Speaker,
uh, this is not, this is an
unfriendly amendment.
Gentlemen from
Lee Chavezanetti, representative
Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady you? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
This
And, and I didn't know till
earlier, what is a class?
Class B county that is.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, kind
gentleman, uh, this would allow
it pretty much in every county
except for Bernalillo, Dona Anna
Sandoval, San Juan, Santa Fe,
and Los Alamos.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, so basically this is
putting the emphasis on rural
New Mexico. Is that true, gentle
lady? Yes, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady,
uh, these may be questions more
that I was gonna ask on the bill
itself, but it I see on here a
laser application to the lens
capsule.
And treatment
Of
Whatever that word is, capsular
clouding and other defects,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, so
this is not allowing our
I'm gonna get these words off. I
get tongue tied. The glasses,
doctors.
Uh,
it limits, limits the scope of
their surgeries. They can't do
everything that the
ophthalmologists do, is that
true, gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
uh,
It doesn't do anything in the
bill except for
Move it to certain counties are
allowed to do it.
So they can do it if the bill,
it doesn't really.
It changed the bill that much
except to limit it to the
counties. OK. Thank you, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, that's all I
have on the amendment. Thank
you. There's debate on the
amendment, lady from Santa Fe of
Romero. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Does the gentle lady,
uh, yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
just have a quick question on
Class B counties, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think I
understand the intent of trying
to focus on getting folks into
rural areas. However, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, are you
aware that in my class B County,
we have a lot of rural areas,
um, that would be exempted from
this, including tribal areas.
Was that your intent, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
I'm not aware of, I wasn't aware
of the tribal that it would
exempt. No.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
therefore uh pueblos in my
county, um, which would be
exempted from that, in which
case I think the impetus for the
overall bill um was to include
even those counties that have
rural areas, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and with that, um,
I think if we eliminate counties
like mine, um, we would be
eliminating the access points
that I think this bill creates,
which is to try to invite more
folks into um
The ability to have these skill
sets in not only rural areas,
but counties like mine that have
a patchwork of tribal and rural
areas, um, was that the intent
of, of your, uh, amendment here,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
um, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, my
intent of this amendment was to
hold it to where, uh, to grow it
in rural New Mexico and it was
not my intent at all to exempt
those tribal areas and with
that, Mr. Speaker, um, I will
withdraw my amendment because I
did not.
intend for that to be the case.
Um, I would just say that, um,
ultimately, you know, we're
talking about health care in
rural New Mexico and so uh that
was my intent is to, to keep it
to that and did not mean to
exclude tribal entities. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker, I
withdraw the amendment. Thank
you, gentle ladies. Seeing no
further debate, the gentle lady
to close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I now move that House
Bill 36 as amended do now pass.
We are a final passage of House
Bill 36 as amended.
32nd vote clock.
32nd bolt clock, the vote is now
open.
The vote is about to close.
vote is now closed by a vote of
56 in the affirmative, 7 in the
negative. House Bill 36 as
amended has duly passed this
House.
Gentle lady from Bernard Leo
Representative Thompson, are you
ready on item number 15, Mr.
Speaker, can you get me to that
point? that all action served a
place in House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 79 on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the bill. Speaker. So
House Bill 79 is just.
Pretty much, um, what we did
with occupational therapy bill
yesterday. It's a it's an
interstate compact bill,
everything I said yesterday, you
can just take out occupational
therapist and put speech and
language and audiologists in
there and with that I stand for
questions to close. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I move that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 79 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 79.
The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. How's Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 79 has duly passed this
house.
It's a gentleman from Katherine
Grant Hidalgo already on item.
Number 5.
I am Mr. Speaker.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, that all
action deserved replacing House
Bill 117 as amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, uh, and this is a
basically uh HP 117 amended is
basically allows uh physician
assistant to sign a death
certificate and expands it
extends the time where uh
they're required to call the
medical examiner's office at
making this a little more
efficient way of us handling uh
deaths and excluding OMI from
having to report to every single
death.
With that I stand for questions.
I now move, Mr. Speaker, HP 117
amended do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 117
as amended. The vote.
The vote's about to close.
How do you wish to vote,
Representative Chavez?
Chavez votes yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative House Bill 117 as
amended, has duly passed this
House.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
The clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Finance Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 3 as
amended by the House,
respectfully submitted, Sherry
De Luhan, Senate chief clerk
will be entered.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business committee
reports to read.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 114 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted.
Representative Little for.
Do you want a Johnson chair?
Mr. Speaker,
I
Move adoption. Thank you. We're
an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
114. All those in favor and if I
say 9.
I suppose nay, the IA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 221 has had
it under consideration report
saying with recommendation that
it do not pass, but that House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 221 do pass and
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
representative Little for Deanna
Johnson share.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're on adoption of an
unfavorable community report in
House Bill 221, but a favorable
committee report on how
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
our Bill 221. All those in
favors by saying 9.
I suppose na.
The ISA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee 2 of us to whom has
been referred House Bill 260 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted
represented little on behalf of
Deanna Johnson chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption. We
are an adoption of a favorable
community report in house with
260. All those in favors and if
I say 9.
Oppose name
Yeah, I saw that committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 291 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
that
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 291
due pass, respectfully
submitted, represented little on
behalf of Deanda Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're on adoption of an
unfavorable community report on
House Bill 291 is amended, but a
favorable committee report in
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 291 as
amended.
of
All those in favor of Xenop say
and I.
Or the supposed nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 293 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
Taxation and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted,
represented Little on behalf of
De Wanda Johnson share.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
293. All those in favor say say
9.
I suppose nay, the habit
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to women has been
referred House Joint Memorial 6
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted, represented Little on
behalf of DeWanda Johnson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report and House Joint
Memorial 6. So all those in
favoring probably say 9.
Of the supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Joint Resolution 8 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted represented little on
behalf of Deanna Johnson Cher.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report and House Joint
Resolution 8. All those in favor
CA 9.
Boney.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment and natural
resources Committee to who has
been referred House agriculture
asseos and Water Resources
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 137.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
house energy environment and
natural resources Committee
substitute for house agriculture
and Water Resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 137 to
pass and thence refer to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectful submit to
Matthew McQueen, chair.
adoption. We're on adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
in house agricultural ase Water
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 137, but a
favorable community report on
how it's energy environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house agriculture
asecas and water Resources
Committee substitute for House
Bill 137. All those in favor,
signified by saying I.
Of the supposed name.
The ISR that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
Resources Committee to has been
referred House Bill 403 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do not pass, but that house,
energy, environment, natural
resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 403 do pass and
he referred to the taxation
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen,
chair.
We're on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 403, but a favorable
committee report on House energy
environment, Natural Resources
Committee substitute for Housing
403. All those in favor.
I say no.
I suppose me. Yes, the IA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 17
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
17. All those in favor and if I
say aye.
I suppose nay.
Yeah, it can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 406
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
to A J Ferrari chair. Move
adoption of a favorable report
in House 406 so those in favor
of signify by saying a.
I suppose, the ISI committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, a consumer and
Public Affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill
418.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Juan Ferrari, chair.
Move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in the House
with 418. All those in
favorbainna.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're consumer and
public affairs Committee too has
been referred House Bill 440 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne G. Ferrari, chair.
Move it a favorable committee
report in House Bill 440. All
those in favoring up saying I.
All those, all those, all those
opposed, nay.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, consumer and Public
Affairs Committee to M has been
referred House Bill 442 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joan J. Ferrari chair.
Move it. We're on adoption of a
favorable committee report and
house 442. All those in favoring
9.
I suppose nay.
I have it be report adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
announcements.
Is Chicano prom happening
tonight?
Oh, Representative Nicole Chavez
is like, yup.
She's already ready to go, OK.
lady from Berlio, Mr. Speaker,
how's Health and Human Services
Committee will meet at 8 o'clock
on Monday morning. Members take
note, announcements, gentlemen
from Berlio. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House Education
Committee will meet at 8:30 in
room 309 on Monday morning.
Any other announcements.
gentle lady from Bernard Leo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
House government elections and
Indian Affairs will meet Monday
morning at 8:30.
Members take note.
Any other announcements? The
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
This one's right up your alley,
Mr. Speaker.
Can you tell me the first animal
that was in space?
Tell me, gentlemen, the cow that
jumped over the moon. OK. Round
of applause.
That was pretty good.
Why did you stop running your
jokes by me ahead of time I'm a
little I'm a little concerned
we're gonna get in trouble.
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think
you're trying to take my job.
Uh
I saw that one coming.
Get it? Fair enough.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. Monday morning.
Alright, members, great work
today. We'll see you Monday at
10:30. The housing stand in
recess.
