Well as close we have a quorum
please rise for today's
application led by the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
today thank you for the water.
The rain gently falling across
the state.
Thank you.
Even strength give us wisdom
give us compassion.
Gentleman from looking at that
previous leaders in the pledge
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson the place
New Mexico flag.
Play ball.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
The gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker point of personal
privilege please state your
point.
Mr speaker.
We have to look around this room
working in all of the offices
monitoring the halls and
especially our sergeant at arms
Mr speaker these people work
Today is sergeant at arms
cheetah sentences seventy third
birthday.
The birds a tune you have the
birthday to you the the burners
state do need though had the
Announcements and miscellaneous.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Borrego.
Came with me to work today and I
actually I I wanted to her to be
here in honor of all of our
and just take a minute to thank
everyone for
the things that we do here it's
twenty twenty three Brett the
break of.
What was.
Mince.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go that
order of Business messages to no
Committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty eight Senate
health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill four eighty five Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
Really familiar Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker on that order
business introduction of
legislation no objection it is
so ordered.
health protecting the privacy of
providers recipients and others
engaging and reproductive and
gender affirming health care.
Texting providers recipients and
penalties describing relief
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirteen.
Senate Judiciary Committee subs
to present a bill thirteen have
been read twice by title is
relating to license plates
creating a standardized
registration plate for public
purposes creating special
registration decals for New
Mexico miners make a wish New
forty two Sen forces to present
a bill one forty two have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
Senate bill to I introduce by
Senate bill two zero I am having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house taxation and
revenue committee.
Senate bill two seventy six
two seventy six introduced by
senator Gaydos Senate bill two
seventy six amendments was by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house taxation
and revenue committee.
special New Mexico Special
Olympics vehicle registration
plate making appropriation
Senate bill two eighty four
introduced by Senator Lopez.
entities by Senator Campos and
activating to motor vehicles
amending sections sixty six dash
three dash four to four point
eight NMSA nineteen seventy
route sixty six commemorative
vehicle registration plates from
the department of transportation
to the tourism department Senate
bill three zero five entities by
Senator Campos three zero I have
and act relating to children
expanding eligibility for the
fostering connections program
Senate bill three twenty eight
entities by Senator Padilla
Senate bill three twenty having
entities by Senator Griggs an
act relating to court
administration creating the
court emergency property reserve
fund making appropriation Senate
bill three seventy four entities
entities by Senator Rodriguez an
act relating to municipalities
allowing the commissioner of
Housing Authority to hold office
or employment for the same city
for which the authority is
house Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill four forty two as
amended introduced by senators
minnows and to heck and after
leading to elected officials
amended entities based Senators
manuals and to heck.
Senator for forty two have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
lenders from refusing to provide
borrowers with outstanding
balance information prohibiting
certain lenders from charging a
penalty charge or fee to obtain
outstanding balance information
affairs committee tens House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate joint resolution thirteen
introduced by Senator o'neal a
joint resolution that of funding
in approving the sale by the
General Services Department to
introduced by Senator o'neal
Senator solution thirteen have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
Mr speaker I go to that order of
Bill twenty seven as amended
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill ninety
five house bill one twenty seven
house bill two seventy four as
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Cynthia Borrego chair.
House Energy Environment
entrances Committee subject to
president ninety five house bill
one twenty seven house bill two
seventy four as amended house
bill two ninety eight as amended
duly enrolled in gross copies of
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House with twenty
seven as amended House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill ninety five house
bill one twenty seven house bill
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go that
order business third reading of
Goldenrod.
Conversations with Sanchez as
well as the majority and
minority leadership there are a
number of items that we've
Interjection is there objection
to placing these are Morial's on
final passage.
Okay see none.
calendar house joint memorial
seven how strong moral eight
Senate Joint Memorial Levin
house memorial fifty five.
House joint.
more forty five house from one
forty House memorial forty four
house bill seventy four in house
memorial fifty one.
do now pass.
seven house of immoral eight
Senator moral eleven house
memorial fifty five house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House memorial ten house
memorial fifty eight House
seventy four and house memorial
fifty one.
We are on final passage of all
Those are the clues.
I would have sixty three in the
affirmative one in the negative
all of the items right out in
Gentleman from three one zero us
and the violence and one are you
ready and item number twenty yes
Mr speaker good afternoon which
please give me to that point
that the record reflect that
election is a server placing
House excision rented Committee
thank you Mr speaker and then
begin this discussion I do have
an amendment for the bill.
The amendment Mr speaker move
house amendment number one to
two to six number is two two six
zero two.
Zero point two.
Okay that's what I have
gentleman it is being passed out
to the chamber and it is being
that amendment you will also
receive a color to graph that
will represent some of the
aspects that will do be
discussing about that amendment
as well.
have LFC economists here with me
I have chief economist easy
daughters as well as Jennifer I
beyond both here with me and
have both been with me
A couple more minutes Williams
fast seven that will have you
explain the amendment.
we pass this bill earlier in the
week
I've always made a commitment to
the constituents to this body
regardless of party affiliation
leadership or as an individual
legislature to make things right
as much as we can that
commitment still holds true
today and that was one that
some changes and it it is a
couple of changes that I think
will satisfy many of of our own
constituents in regards to what
simple technical change on line
on item number three which
strikes the year twenty twenty
five instead replaces it with
process that took place here in
the house and the leadership
that was certainly experienced
by by me and by others in that
way that through people like you
concern that the rebate
discussion that was what that
was had early on in the session
that if the governor had first
initially got her seven fifty
as a committee we came through
and we proposed the dollar
figures of three hundred per
single filer and six hundred
especially during times when we
have a three point six billion
dollar budget to which we made
the change in this ammendment do
not propose that we will now be
taxpayers of New Mexico that's
just that's uh on page number
five the second the second
item.
Then finally on page number one.
Another aspect that was
had increased the taxes on the
three percent wage earners in
the state of Mexico the top
highest wage earners in state
New Mexico and we were met with
rates on hard working members of
our of our citizenship here in
the state more so to the point
of we should not look and force
What we did in this ammendment
is that we struck the six point
four and six point nine percent
tax rates that were approved
that now no one in the state
we'll see any personal tax
income tax increase at all and
so with that is because of a
deduction in the way that a
graduated tax bracket system
works is that even the top three
percent of New Mexicans that
that our top wage earners will
still protected and we'll see
the most benefit out of this out
of this amendment as well and so
that's something that we are
excited to still hold together
for allowing one individual
giving them the latitude to say
if we can make things right
let's do it let's try our best
to do so and in doing so
allowing me the chance to go to
good tax package at this point
that I that I think that each
one of us should be extremely
proud of but also I want to
thank one of the members of of
collaborate on issues like this
to ensure that we are addressing
the concerns from not just one
side for from both sides to
ensure that that if if we can
leadership team that we have I
know I'm on both sides of the
aisle and that is the focus of I
believe at this point the tax
revenue committee and so with
that Mr speaker I will stand for
The Santa and Bernalillo you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to the
ranking member of the tax
revenue committee.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman all up.
Also the majority of my
item number three I was a just a
minor technical fix that
actually are are a analyst can
powers down and I'm grateful he
found that to that you're
did a fabulous job at trying to
balance many different competing
interests.
Right and this rebate is a great
example right I think we all
some good things in our tax
code.
And some had a balance out what
can we do with the tax code
versus what we do with rebates
and so we can say that every
taxpayer in New Mexico every
every filer in New Mexico many
file that don't pay taxes
receive five hundred dollars or
here speaker and gentleman.
So the other.
Sierra and two major change that
you mentioned I just want to
make sure folks understand why
and why this is important and
It's not just individuals right
is not just families wage
earners.
It's also the vast vast majority
of all of our small businesses
and businesses in the state.
else an LLC a partnership they
all paid personal contacts
doctors pay personal income tax.
Concern is bigger and gentleman.
close together is Mr chairman
what we're doing is we're
spreading those out to make it
more progressive.
Mr chairman you turn that it
and so with this ammendment
we're actually helping
those low income and middle
income earners
and Miss Vigil gentleman I
mentioned to you in the tax
And those new brackets were tax
increase like I mentioned the
spiritual and not just on high
wage earners but on doctors and
small businesses.
away I just didn't think that
was right especially when we
were sitting on three point six
billion dollars of surplus and
we had a record budget of nine
with this with this ammendment
the personal income tax now is a
roughly eighty million dollar
tax cut for every new Mexican.
which is amazing Mr chairman so
Juan Representative Lee thank
you Mr speaker the gentleman
from renewable Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan you.
Okay yield my friend from San
Juan thank you Mr speaker thank
to do is members so I thank you
for your time in doing that time
away from family and from your
work I do want to just ask
question on the changes under
the two additional rates of.
Well let me ask the question
that we relating that to hide
the two new high rates is that
change and I'm a little puzzled
why it took us as a state for so
long the way our brackets are
currently set up is basically if
you make more than twelve
absolutely correct Mr speaker
and gentleman as I understand
the amendment what we're doing
is we're actually expanding the
these existing income tax
and gentleman you are correct.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The debate on the amendment the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
underwater Santa Fe
Representative Chandler thank
fiscal impact of this current
arrangement of tax brackets.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so to
impact of the tax would tax
spill Mr speaker gentle and so
what is the total impact is at
the total impact Mr speaker
gentleman.
body to implement these tax
brackets we are we are providing
a tax expenditure of over a
hundred and twenty million
dollars
the gentleman yield.
The speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you Mr speaker
I would I would like to say
to to be in that five point nine
percent tax bracket not a one of
us but there are so many small
businesses Mr speaker that this
great thing and I I can only say
thank you for the thirty
thousand people that I represent
I appreciate this thank you Mr
speaker.
For the bid on the amendment is
objection to adopting the
amendment.
Back on the bill gentleman.
Mr speaker thank you thank you
body for that discussion on the
amendment I I just want to once
again thank I'm all about
heart and regards to how we
functioned as a committee and I
want to thank all those
committee members that made the
tax revenue committees so
enjoyable to be part of this
open and Frank can collaborative
Lee is all that anyone chair
person could ask for on a
committee
and and and the way that we help
single member it regardless of
party affiliation into that
process and I hope that of those
that were on the committee feel
the same way and I believe that
they do based on their
discussion in committee earlier
tax bill it'll increase the
refundable child tax income.
Child income tax credit for New
Mexico household who need it
most providing up to six hundred
opportunities for parents reduce
child poverty and improve
outcomes for all of our children
it as mentioned before in the
amendment will cut income tax
rates for all New Mexicans.
While giving New Mexico
businesses up to three hundred
thousand dollars in a special
deduction to ensure that they
are taking care of.
Ensures that corporations pay
gross receipts tax rate from
from five percent to four point
five percent until July twenty
twenty four and four point three
tax in twenty twenty one with
five hundred dollars for single
filers and a thousand dollars
for joint filers.
Related to renewable energy
initiatives that creates
It establishes large scales and
individual energy storage system
tax credits.
Related to health care.
It expands rural health care
which is huge and I give a shout
out to representative Garcia for
his tenacity and his continuance
on this on this matter to
Increases the alcohol excise tax
industry revenues to the alcohol
harms alleviation Fund the local
D. W. Y. Fund drug court funds
administered validating and
And finally for roads provides
over a hundred and sixty million
dollars more to the New Mexico
road fund with that Mr speaker
gentleman yield please Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from McKinley County thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I would like to rise
and thank the gentleman for his
income tax fees concerned about
capital gains fees and certainly
concerned about a couple of
other things they did have some
question starts with the
alcohol excise tax does this
increase in the alcohol excise
tax have any effect on the
assess that tax.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes ma'am
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
curious also as to what a
House bill two appropriation.
It is subject to appropriation
Mr speaker but what is it for.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's
for treatment behavior health
issues and all the issues that
Mr speaker gentle lady it could
be according to stat be
administered by.
By grant process.
Mr speaker gentle lady it is the
same as as the personal income
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's
forty percent.
Mr speaker gentleman does this
When it says it brings the
Mr speaker gentle lady question
I believe that staff is going to
look up the answer.
it's something that the staff is
looking up right now Mr speaker
I think what's important about
that is that we're looking at
how competitive New Mexico is in
I also had a couple of other
questions when it comes to.
Looking at the
Gross receipts deduction for
from the earlier comments but I
would like to say Mister speaker
the staff is looking that
question up I would like an
answer you know I I I want the
body to know that I am
gentleman I really like what you
do with the personal income tax
payees I like what you did with
the reduction for gross receipts
tax I think that's really really
on the capital outlay bill.
Yesterday Mr speaker gentleman
there was discussion about
McKinley County got forty six
million dollars.
And it was.
of the situation and could with
our infrastructure so what I
don't like about this bill Mr
speaker and gentleman is the
energy storage system tax
credit.
credit of forty percent for the
purchase and installation costs
of an energy storage system.
I forgot you don't have
electricity in your home.
Story is energy storage system
tax credits when the people I
represent across the board did
not have electricity in their
homes.
income tax on want to thank you
personally because you knew that
swear I have heartburn and you
fixed it.
Of the thing with the gross
receipts I think it's great.
But when we have these other
that are in the bill it's very
clearly and urban benefit for
something like that.
But I can tell you the overall
I'd like what you've done here
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
the staff could find is that
Arizona does have a special
deduction right on there's an no
information on Colorado but as
stabilization next summer some
of those things can be taken
into consideration the rural
urban divide when we start
looking out an omnibus bill like
this
other rural areas in New Mexico
the generally Mr speaker and
gentleman I certainly appreciate
the changes that you've made to
regarding my County yesterday
and why on earth would we be
getting so much capital outlay
well guess what we're not gonna
be able to take advantage of
Thank you.
The gentleman from real reverse
Santa and San Juan you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
session it was among the best
run committees that I've ever
been associated with.
And
we had full for hearings on
prevent I'm very much Sam
appreciative of Mr speaker and
gentleman on cultural belief
that the changes that were made
specifically with working with
regards to the liquor excise tax
how much of a tax increase is
Mr speaker and gentleman the
increase is about twenty Byrd at
its aggregate is about twenty
for twenty one percent across
the board.
Mr speaker gentleman by staff
amended to look that up.
Thank you Sir.
Mr speaker and gentleman status
on it's about thirty six million
which will be raised for the
fund that it's going is going to
of worker excess tax increase.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
Sir.
Can you tell me what the total
tax increases would be for the
Mr speaker and gentleman of
regarding the cigar increase the
there there's the tobacco
increase your but if you want to
call it that we can and we can
talk about the definition of
will perspective capital gains
what is the current tax increase
additional dollars coming into
numbers that we have it looks
like it's about a little over
fifty seven million dollars.
it goes quiet form of and for
that reason Mr speaker and
gentleman I would like to move
house floor substitution number
House Bill five forty seven as
it is now.
Gentleman I'd like to request
please Sir a roll call vote
you've got to roll call can you
please read the two to six
Zero four zero point three
that's what I have has it been
passed out.
Everybody have it.
I believe this.
We change the best.
What.
Was
Will continue with thousand
dollar tax rebate for married
couples I prefer singles matches
the lower personal income tax
rates.
Requests additional tax relief
from New Mexico small
businesses.
Looting.
And professional.
Second question for child
current child tax credit
remains.
Matches to original tax package.
Motor vehicle excise tax
distributions.
I just wanted to has that is
significantly different.
Change of spots which I've
already been accomplished for
from the moment.
Changes to corporate tax rates.
Is.
Transaction for.
With respect to the court but a
judge of the.
Madam storage system tax credits
are going.
The.
Hi this for energy storage is
also going and with that Mr
on house floors observer one.
Gentleman from someone thank you
Mr speaker the gentleman from
Lee yield.
Mr speaker.
personal income tax brackets
does this still would just the
the.
The range for the that's what I
would call for the middle income
introduced to this afternoon I
believe we accomplished very
similar goals to that amendment
and Mr speaker gentleman from
Lee does your substitute is it
for the amount we carve out for
the tax package.
Well it was significantly rule
of the tax increases that were
present tax package it does
any type of tax increase.
Mr speaker and gentleman know
don't believe so.
Mr speaker gentleman from we
corporations that make less than
five hundred thousand dollars
and so Mister speaker generally
I wonder if if this addresses
those two tax increases you Mr
Mr speaker and gentleman just
ended this afternoon.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I think there's one other
point and this is really this is
approach as well is that
correct.
Gentleman that is correct
good to slightly modify the
would accomplish so from someone
like me who provides
professional services a small
business who can't afford in
house counsel right now they
have to pay of the at least in
my municipality a little over
speaker Jennifer Lee this this
concept would help address that
that the discrepancy is that
correct.
bit of the way toward solving
the problem.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman for the
clarifications.
yielding where we're debating
the floor substance substitute
thank you Mr speaker so
gentleman from we in terms of
the pyramid in do you remember
the meetings that we had in
Speaker and gentle lady I don't
remember those specific numbers
We're still looking for the
unusual.
fund Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
would be correct and Mr speaker
gentleman what is the fiscal
think.
Education is about another
sixty.
Mr speaker and gentleman and do
you recall during our public
the public comment that we
received on the pyramid in peace
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee Mr
speaker and gentle lady I don't
recall that most of it was
negative.
this thing correctly that the
room was filled with local
government officials Mr speaker
and gentleman would you say that
was not correct.
Engine lady I would say the
appeared Mr speaker and
gentleman is that not right.
Speaker gentle lady repeat the
question please Mr speaker and
I have seen.
On several occasions I can't
recall whether it was here for
opposed to this anti paramedic
proposal would you agree that
the more fobs is very much
opposed to this anti pyramid in
a proposal.
Mr speaker gentle lady I.
Okay thank you so much it's well
I do recall of I have a very
vivid memory of that and I
remember if of the financial
Mr speaker gentle lady went go
from one by one of our most of
the municipalities were not in
favor Mr speaker and gentleman
budget was that not right Mr
speaker and gentleman from
firmly.
Speaker gentle lady I don't.
And Mr speaker and of this
correct Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady I don't recall the
City of Santa Fe being.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
remember representatives from
Mr speaker Germany remember the
municipal leagues represented Mr
speaker and gentleman speaking
against this proposal.
league Representative speaking
in opposition to this proposal.
Speaker gentle lady I do.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
we do not also agree that each
and every one of them indicated
that this would be if a
significant financial hardship
for them where they have to
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
remember no one from municipal
or individual units ballot is
standing in support.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I recall those conversations.
Very good Mr speaker and
opposition of local governments
to this proposal.
Speaker gentle lady.
We're gonna have to fix our
gross receipts tax system so now
system is just a small point.
The process Mr speaker and
gentleman what data do you have
that will show that there will
It is a form of dynamic scoring
which we do here I want to I
believe our government.
Also in support of reducing the
substantiate your contention
that this will spur on economic
activity that's what I heard and
as to the position of the
governor we don't really know
what her position is with regard
So members and Mr speaker I
strongly encourage that we
well that'd Mr speaker and
gentleman and our tax committee
and I know that our chairman
worked very hard with the
sponsor of the original bill to
revenues that will is the result
of this particular item and the
gentleman from Louise Committee
substitute.
work but each and every one of
your local governments members
will be adversely impacted
should this anti pyramid in
committee some Mr speaker
and with that I would I feel
back thanks for the debate on
the surface to the gentleman
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from motor all thank you Mr
speaker and thank you kind
gentleman so I'm reading this a
proposal of yours and I just
have a few questions here for
you so Mister speaker gentleman
tax increases on alcohol Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and these tax
speaker.
The.
Gentleman from
and the chairman of tax
committee representative was
of our great state thirty six
million dollars annually in
taxes if I understood that
correctly Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct okay thank you Mr
on what that would cost in the
original bill verses I believe
what was stripped in this and
you said Mr speaker.
Gentleman those tobacco taxes
the good hard working people of
our state is that correct Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
Great thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and so I'm gonna go on
Mr speaker and would this be
saving are good businesses and
people in our state money by
stripping that I believe
increase Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
door taxes on money that has not
been or Mr speaker and
gentleman.
share prices that has been built
by an
her over for a few hours in the
substantially Representative
attacks on small business and
for that reason we were trying
to eliminate that provision.
need to look at who is working
for these businesses Mr speaker
we have average everyday New
Mexicans working for these
businesses Mr speaker and these
funds are not just representing
been trying to accomplish this
legislative session so Mister
speaker gentleman regarding your
new proposal is talking about
the new higher personal income
or would we be changing that
whatsoever Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
would now be status quo with
respect to the a movie it
original tax package bill.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so that with just
talking about the new sixty
million dollars in tax increases
as well as that thirty eight
million that's about a hundred
taxes is that correct Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Motorola is correct in
particularly at a time the state
of New Mexico seems to be
taxes on working people at this
time.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
and I I think that's a really
good thing I I do like the sound
of saving taxpayers from being
forced to spend a hundred
thing to do so I appreciate you
for putting the little guy first
and putting the house the hard
working people first in our
state so Mister speaker
Tax credit so Mister speaker
gentleman that was in the
original tax package would that
have increased taxes on the good
hard working people of our state
Mr speaker.
Energy products
contained in this circumstance
most of Los crucis go to
individuals and or.
To these purchase so.
Rather than.
Give credit to what we will
tubes or appropriate given the
current technology.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so we're so what we're
saying is we don't want to give
tax breaks to the top echelons
these green technologies that Mr
speaker gentleman our average
everyday New Mexican cannot
afford is that what I'm hearing
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
Sure we will folks who can
afford to participate okay thank
you Mr speaker German so I do
appreciate you for stripping out
hard working Americans that live
in our great state we would be
saving these folks a hundred
million and I will repeat that
this proposal I think this is a
very common sense and we would
be saving the good hard working
good people of our state who we
all love and respect.
guy so thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen from Lee I
certainly appreciated.
There's further debate on the
house floor substitute.
to keep the chatter down Mr
speaker as the gentleman from
the kids.
To the gentleman from San Juan
on the tax committee for the my
first eight years here in the
legislation is the first year
that I've not served on the tax
We're we would go over best
practices.
Of tax policy Mr speaker and
gentleman did did that occur
this year at the beginning of
the session.
considered very poor tax policy
is pyramid.
and Mister speaker for the
All the way till it finally hits
the market Mr speaker and
gentleman.
example four.
That is a small business owner
will not generally have in house
accounting for her own
insurance.
they hire an accountant and
accountant and it's a gross
receipts tax to their services
which gives permitted you to the
digits for the end product
finally gets to the consumer
Mr speaker and gentleman large
corporations all of those
services available
and gentleman I actually think
you gave me part of the answer
of I think you're right that it
hit small business as far as
business goes ahead small
business the hardest Mr speaker
Mr speaker it would be the end
user.
We're concerned.
Mr speaker in New Mexico do we
speaker John we have a lot of
working poor in the state and Mr
speaker we have a lot of people
on fixed incomes Mr speaker and
gentleman what tax form do they
Mr speaker and gentleman at the
consumer level.
Probably not.
Are there revenue stabilization
and tax policy committee also
had several of these tax
summits.
That I attended in Mr speaker
and gentleman I know that's why
It hurts the poor the most Mr
speaker and gentleman there on
able to differ because at the
end it hurts our small
house account service speaker
and gentleman that service is
paid for they have to pay for
that if this in house Mr speaker
larger firms as you mentioned
and and gentleman.
The states around us.
would the would be fair to say
that the three states that
surround New Mexico.
New Mexico.
The bottom of most George took
so Colorado Arizona and Texas I
believe Google before above a
This is generally not a problem.
There's always some level of
permitting along the way and
cost when services are passed to
another Mr speaker and gentleman
part it is because of this
pyramid and provision and the
reason that they say that this
is a bad provision is because
of.
scoring and I believe the gentle
lady
from Los Alamos did mention that
all of these communities are
policy.
Mr speaker is better economic
activity so rather than trying
to tax more people all along the
way what happens Mr speaker and
speaker and gentleman instead
what we do in New Mexico is we
had the same people over and
over and over and over again and
I do agree.
One of these counties looks at
this as a potential lost revenue
but that's what we're looking at
it as if there is one pie Mr
we are all chipping it shipping
out of they believe in baking
more pies and Mr speaker and
gentleman as long as New Mexico
escape the poverty they live in
so Mister speaker hi support
this substitute and I think once
Mr speaker and gentleman more
than that.
It would encourage the
businesses we have to stay in
business and to hire and to grow
their businesses so with that Mr
speaker I would just like to say
gentleman thank you dear lady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
On the floors of the to
provided a million thank you Mr
earlier how this is going to
cost the elimination of the
liquor excise tax and the harms
say but Sir do you Mr speaker
and gentleman do you know how
much it costs every taxpayer in
New Mexico.
make that clear the costs of
alcohol
harms to our state Mr speaker
gentle lady I do not Mr speaker
to people in our state due to
cancer heart disease alcohol use
disorder anxiety and depression
but in taxable dollars it's over
four hundred dollars per person
in our state so we were going to
Adults don't even drink so it's
only a few percentage thirty two
percent are not excessive
costing each of us in New Mexico
a lot of money and by taking
this out of the tax package
which is trying to
that we will be able to help
reduce this cost in it it will
help save especially for people
who by the
your amendment because it will
help increase
that day burdens on our
taxpayers thank you Mr speaker a
lady from Bernalillo Mr speaker
House Bill five forty seven as
amended there's been a roll call
requested and granted in one of
this and we would have tabled
the floor substitute it would
What is one of thirty seven in
the affirmative twenty four in
the negative house floors
substitute for House taxation
We anticipate.
To be very interested to listen
to the rest of the debate thank
gentle lady from Los Alamos New
Orleans Santa Fe Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
it I am very pleased with that
Mr speaker and and several
components of it especially.
The most notably is the increase
and included in our tax code
this was done Mr speaker and
body because the in part because
the federal government has had
families in the state.
And what we know Mr speaker and
gentleman is this tax credit has
gentleman to be in a position
where we have sufficient
revenues to increase the the the
credit particularly for the
component to our tax package
there were some other things as
well Mr speaker that we did that
I think are very very supportive
of working families we
remember from last year and past
years when we talked about
elector we've been modernizing
our illustrious program for
these past few periods and so
in the state as a way yet again
to address the the for the
regressive nature of our tax
code Mr speaker and gentleman we
rely very heavily on G. R. T.
wrecked regressive tax so lower
income people.
Pay the same amount as higher
income people and at the same
rates in the city clear at the
same rate as higher income
Mollified or adjust to some
degree the impact of the G. R.
T. I providing a rebates for the
income tax system and it hadn't
installation area index to the
actual rebate amount Mr speaker
but in this package Mr speaker
and gentleman from Bernalillo we
income brackets because in the
in comprehensive income tax
agents in elector it's tied to
income so you get a higher
rebate based on your income we
as it goes up so another
what I would say reform we all
have been talking about reform
Mr speaker well this is very
proud of the work that the
committee's been doing in that
regard for the last few years
let me see what else the gross
one of eight states that do not
tax capital gains as ordinary
income we're very we're in the
minority we're in the minority
and I hear a lot from my
do and what we're doing now is
really bringing us in alignment
with what most states do which
is treat capital gains as
will be a deduction you'll be
able to deduct that amount and
also recognizing concerns about
small businesses for small
businesses located in the state
ensure that small gives
businesses when they're being
sold the capital gains tax will
be limited to the three
know the chairman was very
inclusive and open to changes
most notably the change in the
personal income tax.
I'm pleased that we have finally
reform a structural change that
was necessary and I'm very
pleased to be supporting this
tax package thank you very much
Mr speaker there's further
debate the gentleman from
yield to the ranking member for
the tax review committee.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
So I'll just start off by saying
that
Talking taxes my love language.
my best to keep my my comments
short of thanks to some grimaces
over there too for that I I
understand.
Speaker and gentleman.
For a dreamless and appreciate
seven with seventy percent of it
and will disagree with thirty
percent of it depending on where
you sit on the political Lyall
Senator first seems bigger
gentleman I am so grateful for
your leadership on this
committee you were fair you were
of respect for you for that
respect that you should all of
us on the on the committee I
just want to say thank you for
that
just to focus on two items that
I think are important so this
measurement this is.
Roughly a one point two billion
committee we had like twenty
million dollars we had like
forty million dollars so this is
incredible this really is an
opportunity to do some great
things.
I think there is broad consensus
on these items so the rebates
our number one that costs about
six hundred.
Million the next is the G. R. T.
the gross receipts tax rate
Helps everyone in the state
I want to go to the grocery
store and also helps with
permitting because the rates are
permitting.
As a little bit lower right so.
another hundred twenty million
there
I'm very excited about the motor
vehicle excise tax going to
That's great and then if times
get hard of June and we we need
so much revenue we can always
call back like it's been done in
the past.
that's like eighty five percent
of the content of this bill.
Speaker and gentleman
so.
Tesla model S. plowed if I can
afford it that is an amazing car
ride and the and I do believe we
work we're gonna see more
adoption of electric vehicles
stations the Arby's for
renewable energy storage you
know these kinds of things.
when you add those up that's
like fifteen million dollars
So
the.
We have structured the look
right size tax a little bit
differently sure there's the
cigarette tax cigar Tax.
Deduction research element a lot
of folks reduced discussed that
I just really want to say thank
you to you and to the gentleman
from Los Alamos for listening to
our concerns and actually
dollars because that's roughly
how much someone sell their
business for if you have a mom
and pop of Business and they've
been you know they don't have a
four one K. of this business is
the committee listened and made
that change so thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman for that
so.
The two items I want to focus
on.
that is good tax policy.
Of the reasons why you have that
brackets for people because some
of lower income.
can be owned by folks who are
hiring a rural income it doesn't
doesn't matter they just pay the
same amount of tax and you're
you're taxing tents on the far
right to the far left all agree
And I'm not able to deal here if
anyone is really fascinated I'm
happy to give you a two minute
explanation of why this and how
that works was good tax policy.
But.
Mexico and rewards them for
expanding outside New Mexico and
for hiring more people outside
New Mexico.
And the rest of the state to
So not not necessary the
because they realize they want
to punish a business for
investing in our state.
And this includes Alabama
Arkansas California Colorado
In Pennsylvania Rhode Island
South Carolina Texas Utah West
Virginia Wisconsin and the
district of Columbia.
So it is about time.
All right so the last thing I
want to focus on the speaker and
gentleman.
Just tell the story so.
tax policy for an iPhone in love
with Senator shares two percent.
that we could just go down to
said look whoever does the
studies given the same day
access to data we have.
And I asked TRD for all their
data and we did our own study
the average restored before half
five percent.
This happened when I was in
Africa helping with you bill a
crisis.
But I then worked.
That's not what can we do what
we do work with experts and I.
percent if it's a sales tax is
not a problem with the sales tax
of all the other states that's
about average.
The problem is unlike other
states.
we would potentially instead of
being the worst.
consumption tax system in the US
we could be the model of the
out those just worst forms of
paramedic for Mr chairman and I
and I am sad moment it's not in
here Mr Chairman I understand
had a balance several voices in
and this.
Bill that's in front of us is a
great balance.
can we work on this together and
I appreciate that so much so.
and
working with you as the chair of
this committee and this will be
the first tax package in many
many years that I've been able
to support on the floor speaker
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from house thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
really excited about this tax
package I think is
We can do a lot of things in the
budget and the tax package to to
move us toward a clean energy
future and we have done that
of a different opinion I think
it's actually a really
remarkable thing that we're
doing
If you're low income New Mexican
low income family can get four
thousand dollars
An existing tax credits that we
already have on the books for
home charging stations you're
getting closer to a vehicle that
not going to cost as much as gas
so I think that's really
important for us to address when
you combine all these tax
credits together the state and
federal level you've got a
vehicle that's that just cost
we have here in the state.
Now with regard to the Energy
story energy storage system tax
credits for you know for
residential commercial
massive benefits for all of us I
think about my community we've
got a lot in in my district for
renewable energy we've got we're
under present a time solar you
know what we're putting those
facilities we can meet the needs
of of of New Mexicans in the
north and I'm hoping that we can
do this all around the state so
that we can build resiliency in
storage brings resiliency we had
a massive snow squall in twenty
twenty one it devastated our
forests there were communities
in my district that had no power
system and that's why I'm so
excited about those large
facilities energy storage
systems but they also bring big
money to our state of billions
help that helps them meet their
clean energy goals as well you
know I when I was a.
a municipality has but so this
is tax package it reflects our
priorities and where where we
need to go so I am I'm grateful
for your leadership I'm grateful
that from all the work that the
package does that thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker to the
gentle lady or gentleman from
want to ask some questions about
the capital gains changes that
are happening Mr speaker and
gentleman from Rio Arriba can
you send on someone can you
explain to me how does the cap
So Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan currently and one
person would get forty percent
of their capital gains deducted.
gain.
Treatment and the same eight
hundred thousand dollars on it
so does that mean under current
law I could deduct forty
thousand of that and be taxed on
the remaining sixty thousand.
tax package change that
treatment.
businesses three hundred
thousand dollars would also be
that deduction as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
three rivers so the the first
piece what I think maybe it
phone in New Mexico business and
I sell the business and I'm
allowed to deduct up to three
hundred thousand in capital
gains is that correct.
there would be
and I'll point cap of basically
a hundred twenty thousand is
that right.
Mr speaker and gentleman exactly
right Mr speaker and gentleman
there's basically two types of
transactions there's what's
commonly referred to as an asset
purchase type transaction we're
literally just buying assets
you're not actually buying any
cell of a business.
A lot of times probably three
quarters of the times in my
experience you're not buying the
business and I'm not selling the
business actually keep the
Would an asset purchase the be
eligible for this preferential
capital gains treatment Mr
speaker and gentleman it would
not.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
riverside I'm.
reason why most businesses are
brought asset purchase.
Because if you buy the
corporation you're taking on all
the deaths all the liabilities
disappointed to hear that Mr
speaker and gentleman from Rio
Arriba currently under state law
are you allowed to take
advantage of the captain's pref
Mr speaker and gentleman vendors
any question you have to be two
of the last five years and even
a claim that.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
captains long as it's your
primary residence to last five
years I guess what I'm saying is
maybe maybe it's awful to put in
the in the context of an example
so.
than twelve months after twelve
months I sell that rental of my
understanding of current law Mr
speaker is that that rental that
I hold on to for more than
though is really the there's no
incentive for folks to hold on
real estate investments long
term so whether I own it for a
month for ten years it's going
various I that that to me is is
troubling as well and and the
reason why I say that to the
body is.
The the main rationale behind
preferential treatment when it
comes to real estate as we want
folks to live and be and in a
state where we have we know
frankly a lot of people who who
ran it who don't own their own
homes I'm concerned about when
I'm afraid that there might be
some unintended Kwan
consequences of of removing real
estate for preferential
treatment under cap gains so I I
I understand the law it's
basically if you're if if your
corporation and you choose to be
taxed like a corporation and you
make less than five hundred
thousand there's one right that
re but what is that that current
percentage.
Mr speaker respectively it it's
going to be four point eight and
five point nine.
Mr speaker and gentleman from re
rebound I actually do like the
pay so what what is going to be
the new flat tax rate.
Mr speaker and gentleman will be
five point nine.
four point four nine and I
understand there were there
really are a lot of corporations
that that files a corporation or
five hundred thousand so I I get
the sort of practical decide I'm
more concerned about what we
the lower rate as a signal to
out of state corporations that
New Mexico is in fact open for
business so I'm I'm concerned
The electric vehicle.
Credits so the way I understand
that tax credits work is I make
twenty three taxes that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from a
remote so I it's hard for me to
wrap my arms around the argument
electric vehicle tax credit for
anywhere from you know fourteen
months.
Dipping when you buy it and when
you file and I I don't think
these these type of tax credits.
Mr speaker gentleman from Rio
Arriba.
In terms of of taxes how do
Mr speaker and gentleman for the
longest time there's been
complaints that they don't
contribute.
Mr speaker and gentleman from re
rebuilt so it you know the
typical combustion engine motors
I have to put fuel in it and
From the river the way I
understand that that gasoline
taxes a portion of that is used
to to reinvest our communities
to to maintain and improve our
electric vehicle credit is going
to be our our upper income folks
you really don't need the credit
I'm concerned that that really
these higher income folks and
then on the the backside when it
comes to maintaining our roads
and highways I'm concerned that
these folks are paying their
cool there there they have
tremendous potential both in
terms of you know our caller
exhilaration control
but it's I feel like it's still
a very select group of people
Were signaling to you know the
of the you know middle class
upper class folks that were
stripper with the cap gains
that I think don't need tax
credits our benefiting these
large out of state corporations
that are these electric motor
vehicle manufacturers so the
really those are the only reason
I I frankly think that might be
one the biggest things we do
this legislative session when
you talk about expanding those
those practice for folks that
are making fifty sixty seventy
thousand a year I think that
I have Mr speaker is with regard
to.
Section six of the bill which is
on page fifteen.
Evey discussion that would just
mention I think it's worth
noting that hundred percent of
the four percent excise tax that
is charged on EV's doesn't that
registration fee to EV's which
would also go to the road fund
just so that you can understand
as well Mr speaker delivery
ready versions clarification I
clarification so Mister speaker
John from really but I just want
to point you to
section six of the bill page
amendment to this section and I
would like to move them and ask
for a roll call vote.
Do you have a roll call can you
Yes German explained the moment
so Mister speaker and gentleman
from Rio Arriba I'm hopeful that
this is a friendly amendment and
this this that this idea
career out of state you know the
stuff inside and out said that
he he's the genesis of this idea
and the idea is that it's
fabulous that we have this
exemption for our military folks
retiree pay so this would just
extend exemption to the spouse
of the military retiree.
It is just a friendly amendment.
Gentleman from Santa Rosa
Martinez.
Mr speaker will the kind
gentleman from San Juan you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Santa.
thousand surviving spouses in
New Mexico so it's not a wide
swath it's not a large number.
But the reason that this
amendment is important is
because.
save for these military retirees
surviving spouses is extremely
important.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
were at home.
Holding everything together so
Mister speaker kind gentleman I
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment.
Jennifer really appreciate the
the dialogue as always when we
debate I always enjoy that that
part of the session and again
thank you for the amount of work
put this package together thank
you Mr speaker is for the debate
the gentle person from Santa and
Bernalillo Representative
Kate's.
Bernalillo incentive all
counties.
Thank you gentle person and
neighbor from Santa Fe County I
wanted to thank you Mr speaker I
we talked about the the bigger
issues the things that will
change our working families
lives I really appreciate the
amendment for our veteran
package but it makes a big
difference in these individuals
lives on page thirty six it
provides a G. R. T. waiver for
individuals who are doing home
years ago their budget was
dropped down to five thousand
dollars every five years plus
they're planning to G. R. T.
individuals that will be using
this in the great state but this
is a big difference between
keeping people safe and
comfortable at home that three
dignity and their independence
and and thank you very much for
to making this happen.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Leo read the
Santa and San Juan please yield.
does something with the low
income comprehensive tax rebate
we often refer to that as
elector.
From the so section eight of the
bill
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
that that's put in there so
that.
It doesn't lose the power of
the way inflation has been
trending for the last state
couple years Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's
going up and up.
So Mr speaker and gentleman
I think inflation affects
everybody in some form or
fashion it is especially affects
New Mexico senior citizens most
with technology meant that
inflation is taking a bite out
of their income.
So Mr speaker and gentleman I do
have a four amendment to Mr
committee substitute for House
Bill five forty seven.
Agility can use the two to six
number Mr speaker that number is
speaker Representative request a
roll call vote.
You got it.
The amendment has been because
of that is online would you care
some language to the bill title
on page one one sixteen after
the semi colon we'd insert the
words providing for the indexing
on page fifteen between lines
eighteen and nineteen would
insert
the language regarding ended B.
on page two of of the floor
mindful of the impact that
inflation is having on on the
income for seniors so Mister
speaker hi.
Would just like to mention that
She and I had have been co
sponsors of house bill one
ninety three which would do this
actually what this for men would
what might be minimal to the
general fund however might be
very significant to our retired
senior citizens and so with that
Mr speaker I stand for questions
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
from Lea and Eddy counties after
conversing with our staff
you Mr speaker all the gentle
lady from Eddy and Lea of yield.
I yield.
Mr speaker kind lady can you
tell me how long you've been
you Mr speaker thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady and Mr
speaker gentle lady why did you
choose to do the index
Of that proposed lifting the
caps all together and Mr speaker
gentle lady was our sense after
we presented that bill that we
would probably be more favorably
of of approved of so that's why
I've done it this way Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker and kindly
the I just want to thank you for
The citizens of New Mexico will
thank you as well thank you Mr
speaker.
For the right.
adopting the amendment I see
none do you have a thrice
amended bill.
Chile from it in the back to
you.
Sandoval and San Juan please
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady and chairwoman from Dona
Ana County thank you first I
want to thank you Mr speaker and
there's been an exchange of
ideas and real of rolling up his
sleeves to to get the job done
so Mr speaker and Mr chairman I
kind gentleman is the it is.
Section ten of the tax package
it invests in our children and
our families and I know we've
we've talked about this before
lowest three income levels by
changing the tax credit from a
hundred and seventy five to
dollars to six hundred for
families earning less than
kind gentleman is it also
correct that we are increasing
from one fifty to four hundred
for families earning less than
fifty thousand.
hundred for families earning
less than seventy five thousand.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct thank you Mr speaker
and kind gentleman what I'd like
majority of these children are
children of color and to ensure
their families have more money
in their pockets and to take
care of their needs would you
agree with me Mr a speaker and
going to happen Mr speaker and
kind gentleman I also want to
make sure that we talk about.
There's the support in this bill
for the grandparents that are
gentle lady absolutely so of the
body Mr speaker and kind
gentlemen I just want to make
sure that we are I emphasize
that there is a hundred million
this package actually does that
would you agree with me kind
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady one
hundred percent so that's all
I've got Mister speaker I just
want to make sure to read those
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield my friend from San Juan
County thanks Sir Mr speaker
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
just a couple of things and and
I'll make this brief on we were
would be made we actually this
our increase would go up about
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes Sir
okay thank you Mr speaker
thing and I appreciate the work
done for rural health care as
well I think that's going to
help us try to fill some of
those slots that we currently
don't have right now and I think
things in there that went up in
that and and one of these days
we if we can Mr speaker if we
could ever get the chair and and
on the discussion that our
leader had about the real estate
when those cap gains go away
what happens is industrial or
institutional investors come in
and they start buying up and
unity that would we hadn't hard
fought and and well respected
the committee thank you very
much Mr speaker there is very
very the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative got to
Mr speaker I yield to their more
model from Bernalillo county as
speaker a is the most because I
kind of rises on to kind of
Speaker of the house with thirty
eight the course will go into
the
Into the tax package and that
the does is they must be
committed.
It adds on funding categories to
run existing rural health care
practitioner tax credit at eight
the the the leadership well
being thanks committee added one
other
profession and that was a
The last because.
The the credit for these
professions is set at three
thousand dollars Mr speaker you
it was not a in the tax package
I don't think we had a tax
package that you're we kind of
basically just let out the
individual legislation
insurance.
As the last speaker that kind of
person who had a piece of
legislation for a long time what
I stated in tax committee was.
building on the forty eight
years old I won't want to that
from the front lines of Germany
and France and I was eighteen
years old but
Growing up in a teen's body
would refer to these include
savings every now and then and
and every now and then when I
kind of you know of the
school my dad would resort to
name is in the state.
If at first you don't succeed
try the rosary and try again.
Mr speaker that's what I've been
or so as the last speaker.
this year I'm pulling out my
rosary once this bill passes the
Senate that of appreciation and
credit act was established in
two thousand seven.
And it was a two tiered
A two tiered provided a piece of
legislation five thousand dollar
a kind of high powered
physicians in that five thousand
dollar credit and the rest of
again kind of falls into three
thousand category but just last
week when we pass that I
legislation yes speaker and also
to reduce what shortages in the
rural areas testing speaker and.
The last component was that it
some of the land there by house.
In the shop in the local retail
outlets in these rural
communities pandemic as the
mascot for a.
That as originally drafted and
when it came to the qualifying
hours
Limited registered nurses in
kind of rectify that oversight
and that languages the must be
was incorporated into the tax
package.
Also some speaker Representative
And we also needed the
suggestion of a tax revenues to
upgrade the reporting right to
the requested by of the health
This must be for a.
Share with the body I remember
when it comes to health care
practitioners.
There are sixteen thousand four
hundred sixty six registered
nurses and certified nurse
specialist in New Mexico.
Ninety percent of the sixteen
thousand four hundred sixty six
five percent of New Mexico is
rural.
So for purposes of our tax bill
three three thousand sixty
registered nurses are eligible
for the tax credit.
Twenty five percent of these
practitioners practice in rural
areas.
Yet.
Mexico sixty five percent rural
system a speaker.
in New Mexico.
Twenty four percent of these
pharmacist on rural areas yet
the Mexico sixty five percent
rural.
Twenty five percent of those
detainees our rural areas yet as
to my speaker in Mexico sixty
five percent rural.
addition of vices midwives we
can estimate that five thousand
six and the new practitioners
will be eligible for the tax
credit.
Just last week for.
fiscal impacts in incorporation
of the I professions in the tax
credit essential chair thanks
committee was the tax revenue
twenty five million.
To the lower range of of foreign
impact is currently but
unfortunately estimates speaker
after four years of having that
estimating a more accurate
picture of which was is the my
speaker going off of.
Licensed practitioners that are
bill isn't it is fairly accurate
based on that and then
approaches the massacre.
Nationals last week
Is monumental this is really a
great day for rural New Mexico
in terms of those rural health
care practitioner tax credit
infusion into the tax bill.
practice among the legislature
to systematically target our
tech tax packages that rural New
Mexico.
Which includes sixty five
percent of all New Mexico
residents estimates speaker.
And vice chair cut in a that the
help.
This must be good entire tax and
Rev Committee should be
complimented fund raising this
real.
Tax credit initiative.
continue to be predominantly
proportionately Representative
and tax packages to come in the
future because as as the my
speaker Jim of Sunderland.
gentleman please yield my good
friend.
Madam speaker and I the
gentleman I yield to you from
all those counties.
is our housing and and I'm sure
you took into consideration
Madam speaker gentleman how this
would affect different sectors
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think there's a number of ways
that it probably could help
housing we look at the the
income tax could range from from
families
let's go on and on but I I think
it's very helpful.
So madam speaker Joe and I think
you're right there's a lot of
things that are outside of
explain what I'm what I'm trying
to say I think there's a lot of
very good things in this bill I
mean it is there's a lot of good
things and I think we've heard
that support and in opposition
I want to see how this is really
going to what is what is really
going to yield house is going to
work and and so I'm I'm thinking
different situation of that or
issue for me is that.
Our young women big men and
women that are their graduation
want to stay here it's getting
the the the demands there but
less less supply causes the
price to go up and so forth we
have people moving from from all
over the country to enjoy our
beautiful state because real
a huge I was going to come in
New Mexico and see that the the
lack of housing certain areas
what I want to invest in New
Mexico for what I have second
these places that that I'm not
talking about the guy that built
one or two houses here there we
always want to help them I mean
my dad's as a contractor members
a contract all that I'm talking
thousand crash and so forth
we're still trying to catch up
but madam speaker gentleman I
think one of my big question is
how would as an amendment as an
rather go to another state where
it's not going to affect me as
much what what how would you
answer the Mr speaker John madam
speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker and gentle gentle
man you know if if if if you
hypothetical their their
businesses building houses and
hypothetical New Mexico is is
business friendly I mean without
a doubt I mean it I know that
there's been some issues brought
up in regards to us pushing
provides it it's a hard bed that
with taxes alone it would be
inviting but that's only a
portion of what makes Mexico
great miss madam speaker and
gentleman.
look at the factors included in
regards to why not or why would
a business come here.
So madam speaker Jim and I agree
with all that Senator as far as
would actually be investing the
money to develop.
Because the reason I'm saying
that is that you know by just
changing that capital gains tax
it throws into the same caliber
a quicker game values increase
faster than they would in New
Mexico it just I think for
people wanting to come in bigger
business that's going to create
I'm concerned about this portion
of the bill figure gentleman on
how this could.
Inadvertently hurt us with new
jobs coming in
or or big development companies
or maybe gentleman Madam speaker
gentleman they have a property
that they bought.
find another place to invest the
the actual infrastructure and
stuff Mr speaker gentleman.
madam speaker and and gentlemen
means in trying to be unique in
any in any sense the words so I
understand your concern but I
think at this point it is well
considered and and the yes we do
forty percent increase so madam
C. speaker gentleman
Another question the you know we
have the real world
road infrastructure help
A new rail somewhere rails old
Maria our our rail is older The
New Mexico and so it's it's not
speaker Jim R. madam speaker
gently.
Madam speaker and gentlemen in
Yes the right Mr speaker madam
speaker Madam speaker gentleman
yes those ability past on both
the house and I believe the
Senate side so something has to
be considered about rail I don't
infrastructure tax credit for
very little was there any other
infrastructure tax credits in in
your bill madam speaker
gentleman's.
lower the G. R. tease.
Okay I'm gonna bounce back real
quick so Madam speaker gentleman
on how would this hurt our
agricultural people those have
hit I'm on on a large field a
large purchase like that could
you could you tell me maybe
maybe to help us all understand
land like that then Madam
speaker Jim.
Madam speaker and gentleman
there there's no there's no
income on on the purchase right
and and having a farm and ranch
lifestyle not just for our lives
but our our children's lives in
grand children and and there
after so the intent on that is
to try to not change and not
that would be the most likely
some people would
a rancher or farmer could
sustain a large
speaker in J. and gentleman at
this point with the amendments
made and and with the bill as
it's written they'll get the
deductions up to three hundred
thousand on that sale.
I'm I am concerned about the the
investment in New Mexico it does
make me worry a little bit about
big companies coming in and and
possibly wanted to invest in New
and and possibly the capital
gains P. and.
now that we would be able to I I
need to tell you I wouldn't
and and so.
It raises it some residency I
think it was thirty or forty
percent is what calculator dot
the top of my head on capital
You have a lot of hard and what
you're doing and and I
appreciate them for guy we've
been Madam speaker we've been
grilled grow arms of excuse me
Mister speaker us changing on Mr
speaker.
There is for the the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
corona.
county thank you thank you Mr
speaker but at Here went there
for all of the work that you
have putting these be able I
like that water you use creative
with that and renewable energy
incentives
sure easy and it is that is
technology that is going to come
to us eventually and that's
feel we are ready to provide a
updated and but only part of the
them I set the chair I think I'm
more with consent what is a what
we providing for reporters
here was about the
the public should be called will
no contribute to the fund for
the like the gas cards to the
actually exceed the average
The average contribution that
the guy's car does and
put gas in our cars Mr speaker
we up we whatever we use in the
cars with the elected fees late
fees for the electric vehicles
correct writers and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady you are
correct.
Thank you that's all I wanted to
say that I'm I was very very
happy to hear all the different
ways that we can support low
our in our state thank you thank
you for the committee to every
all the work I have done
the and everybody who has done
that equal to the to provide for
kind gentleman from those three
counties please yield Mister
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Otero County thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
I'm glad the gentle lady brought
which I have and I'm seeing Mr
speaker and gentleman the amount
of the tax credit for EV's would
be.
But the two thousand five
For households with an adjusted
income so Mister speaker John I
could you just please tell me
how the four thousand differs
from that twenty.
Five hundred and my reading this
correctly Mr speaker.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen do we know what
that two hundred percent is in
dollars with what the income
would be Mr speaker gentleman.
I'm just wondering like.
Because I'm seeing the the price
Mr speaker gentleman of electric
vehicles and I'm seeing that the
fifty five thousand down to
fifty one thousand Mr speaker if
you qualify for the though the
highest credit Mr speaker
gentleman.
some thousand dollars and then
if you look at the the most
affordable and and and newcomers
to the market those Senator As
those fords I think you're
looking at closer to about
of a vehicle but Mr speaker
gentleman they did report that
it was about thirty five
thousand four just an average
four door sedan for an average
consumers Mr speaker and
that that's at least a fifteen
thousand dollar.
Change from just an average.
Gas car verses and even so
Mister speaker John and how how
more vehicles and therefore
create a lower price for
vehicles Mr speaker that we're
trying to do with this.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
know I I I understand the
frustration with the EDD's
was one that was only there for
for the rich and at this point
time technology has shown itself
that these prices have have gone
down and so with the way the
bill rates now and and the
opens up the market to a whole
slew of other people that maybe
I have the means so to speak
maybe maybe the lower to middle
income folks that say oh we need
a new vehicle maybe this is an
I certainly if if the good
gentleman would have given to me
a Tesla I I certainly would not
say no to that Mr speaker John
but a so regarding this Mr
on the base cost of what the
vehicle would be Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
bay on the base cost and on the
this range need to be reported
annually or.
How does that work Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
particular tax credit Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentlemen yes Sir.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and I appreciate the
affects the cost of of prices of
these EV's so then I will also
go into the other section in
specifically were doing in that
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
representative from Bernalillo
Sandoval County resident gate as
I gave up a pretty good
housing improvements up to five
thousand dollars of the grab
bars if you will the rams up to
their house hold of the the the
then allow them to maybe get an
additional grab are their house
or go go get the read the next
to five feet or ten feet up to
their house.
Mr speaker and gentleman it will
be both okay thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
because I you know we heard
concerns of I think it was a
gentle lady from Los Alamos who
affected extraordinarily by this
so Mister speaker gentleman do
we know the fiscal impact to
those local counties per year
that's a I guess whatever was
New Mexico so it's very minimal.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and I appreciate that
answer and then I will continue
in the bill Mr speaker gentleman
Can you just explain to me what
we're changing in the tax code
regarding tobacco Mr speaker
gentleman are we increasing it
are we decreasing and can you
fifty fifty cents per product
and now we're gonna be
Putting it back to twenty five
percent just like everybody
else.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
Mr speaker and gentleman only
cigars.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and is is is is this
person gar or could this also be
if they're sold in a package Mr
speaker gentleman and I don't
you gentlemen and so this tax
would be.
Going from forty percent to
twenty five percent Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
for a cigar I know any of that
even in the range of a cigar
Mister speaker that would be two
fifty per cigar.
Mr speaker and gentleman you are
correct.
chew tobacco things like that Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
receiving preferential treatment
before in this at this point put
collecting annually on those
cigar products Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle man staff has
done a calculation looks like
this would potentially Mr
speaker create a black market
for cigars in the state of New
Mexico Mr speaker like I I'm
just wondering Mr speaker have
we looked at other places in the
have not.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you John I would just be
interested to see those numbers
because I certainly wouldn't
want to have to just say if I
want to go are I can drive down
Mr speaker and and and gentlemen
if you know nothing preclude you
from doing that it's illegal to
I think that twenty five cents
or twenty five percent is very
high at least as a tax because
our dear T. as well a percent
like it would be a hot commodity
that we might just want to go
out of state for Mr speaker John
and so.
I just really have concerns
regarding that I feel like we're
targeting a specific industry in
preferential treatment and so at
this point just put it in the
same playing field as others I
think is is not targeting them
but just making it fair thank
you Mr speaker thank you
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and I'm just one I
don't know what a pack of
cigarettes costs these days
quite frankly so Mister speaker
gentleman so it's ten cents per
cigarette.
Mr speaker and gentlemen it it
it's not necessary comparable to
do that of a of a cigarette
pack.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
confronted with staff and and
those those details of numbers
is something that that we don't
have readily available to be
differs from cigarettes to
cigars Mister speaker because I
don't want to be targeting any
specific industry or our
demographic I guess Mr speaker
bill Mr speaker gentleman I'm
not necessarily interested as
much as where these tax revenues
will go as to how much per an
ounce it would cost do we have a
for beer or cider it would be a
thirty eight cents to fifty
cents per twelve months
increase for spirits it would be
two point eight nine or eighty
nine percent or eighty nine
cents per five ounce per
serving.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen so we said.
gentleman so for a five ounce
serving that would be between
sixty seven cents and eighty
nine cents.
Thank you Mr speaker John
how does this differ from
Mr speaker and gentleman I stand
corrected that this reflects the
tax increase which means that
right now it is at sixty seven
gentleman and have and we
consulted with the folks in the
alcohol industry regarding these
taxes on on their products Mr
speaker gentleman.
time for the folks that are
large distributors that is who
this tax would impact and we'll
talk about the and highs are
bush is of the world the courses
strongly what they bring to New
Mexico.
Okay thank you Mr speaker
gentleman and so I just wanna be
crystal clear so.
Is this what's the size cap that
At this point in time Mr speaker
and gentleman the only folks
that are exempted as Mexico
craft breweries and wineries.
already been defined.
Okay thank you Mr speaker
gentleman and so I'm guessing
from what I'm hearing this would
selling alcohol within the state
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman again
going back to language only
affecting the craft breweries
and wineries of New Mexico okay
this Mr speaker gentleman and so
that we have a lot of really
good one down there and I'd love
to see you down there so thank
you Mr speaker gentleman and so
I I really have some heartburn
there Mister speaker also with
the if personal income tax which
I didn't really talk about the
others did Mr speaker gentleman
the hard work that I I've seen
your committee and the great
committee members do in your
committee and so I appreciate
the time that we we've had to
discuss this and I also
appreciate all those individuals
small thank you Mr speaker Mr
speaker with the gentleman from
from Dona Ana County the state
we will we will not talk of the
shot that was agency
Mr but by this by the bye bye to
now Mr speaker gentleman the two
pieces that you took out Mr
speaker gentleman those totaled
forty six million the two
additional brackets is that
right Mr speaker gentleman
this tax package is that
accurate to say Mr speaker and
just Mr speaker and gentleman
you're absolutely correct Mr
speaker and gentleman and so
Mister speaker gentleman
majority of the share of this
package is that accurate Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman you are
correct upwards of about six
hundred million dollars of that
doing here today is this
targeted there is this brought
relief as the gentleman from
Santa talked about for all New
Mexicans Mr speaker gentleman
first that is this is a very
close collaboration with all of
us at the house appropriations
and finance committee the work
that you're doing now comes in
your bill Mr speaker gentleman
and because of this
collaboration Mr speaker and
gentleman larger components of
this actually most new and many
New Mexicans are going to see a
a tax cut because of your bill
today Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman
we're talking about right now is
they're going to see a tax a tax
decrease because of the tax
package that you're passing Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
were instead of we're not doing
anything at the top of Mr
speaker gentleman you're doing a
lot within this tax code to make
it a more fair tax code for the
lower wage earners here in New
that now back to some different
approaches Mr speaker gentleman
that took place in the past Mr
speaker and gentleman when we
gentleman Mr chairman it was not
believe that way Mr speaker and
gentleman in fact back then
there were cuts and especially
cuts at the top in fact Mr
Mr speaker and gentleman here
correct thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman and I just
want to again say a very big
thank you to you and I'll go
thank you Mr gentleman it is so
important for us to sort of
think of these lessons that
we've learned in two thousand
then promised jobs promised
investment and Mr speaker
gentleman the decade twenty ten
to twenty twenty that sort of
scene or twenty oh eight to
and gentleman in fact during
that decade did we not recover
if not the slowest one of the
slowest of any states from the
Great Recession Mr speaker
want to say thank you to you to
your entire committee is a
corner store and it has to be
sufficient it has to be
sustainable it has to be fair Mr
in New Mexico Mr speaker and
gentleman is it some of the
things that we're doing some
more of your increasing the
child tax credit here in your
of the the only kind of it's not
one of the only of its kind in
the state of New Mexico course
of the state in the in the
country in the United States Mr
first timers are did that get
started previously Mr speaker
and gentleman that started last
year.
there either increasing other
tax credits here in this bill
your lowering taxes on New
Mexicans some of that work
stretches back to two thousand
settlement Mr speaker you the
the speaker now the speaker was
the chair of the tax committee
then Mr speaker gentleman we
talked about to two thousand and
top to cut capital gains to cut
cut at the very top Mr speaker
gentleman and we went into the
lost decade Mr speaker and
do the things here today like
making a single corporate income
tax Mr speaker gentleman did
they do some of the work within
the tax brackets that you're
bringing to us here today Mr
some really good work and at
this point we're committing to
the point where it's going to
become a reality and I'm excited
about it Mr gentleman I I am I
am very much excited about it
until two thousand and nineteen
Mr speaker gentleman that in
fact the approach we're seeing
to structural fairness
structural sustainability
receipts tax for everybody
you're continuing that work Mr
speaker gentleman we talk about
the child income tax credit the
increase in the the the elector
all of these started in two
thousand and nineteen and Mr
speaker gentleman I think we see
here today with your work and
incredible a claim that you've
speaker gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman I agree.
I I totally agree Mr speaker
gentleman it makes me excited
because when we set out capacity
the challenge saying we're gonna
cut taxes for all New Mexicans
we're going to do rebates for
all New Mexicans Mr speaker
gentleman but we're also going
that responsibility are we Mr
speaker gentleman Mr speaker
gentle and we are not this
figure gentleman that is so
exciting Mr speaker gentleman do
you think that we can continue
tax fairness structural tax
reform and sustainability Mr
speaker gentleman Mr chairman
you know with the paradigm shift
that I mentioned before watching
people come into spaces within
conversation because of the work
over this session I really I I
absolutely agree Mr speaker
German so Mr speaker gentleman
tax day is April fifteenth is it
this bill now that will be there
the next April fifteenth Mr
speaker gentleman I think is New
Mexicans we can look at April
fifteenth as a day where the
legislature has not only lower
gentleman and the gentleman from
from Santa is informing and now
it's moved to April eighteenth
Mr speaker and gentleman I
always think of April fifteenth
Mister speaker gentleman since
since the time that I was able
old enough to go with my
grandfather April fifteenth was
always Turkey hunting day I
guess this time around Turkey
up for historical opportunities
really makes me look forward to
both days Mr speaker down and
not only April fifteenth but
also a parade things thank you
Mr speaker.
bait all those in favor say have
a state line.
All those goals may.
Language we keep talking about
this.
This.
The I. seventy BIZZARRO closed.
affect every single new Mexican
in the state this package is
truly transformational it'll
provide generational
opportunities for every single
new Mexican that are all going
heart out and gave me themselves
during our committee hearings
and and and it was really
objective and at the very most
respectful of the process
respectful of the bill that we
people in this body on both
sides of the aisle and finally
the public and their
participation and where we've
come to today that it goes to
the point that when the people
House Bill five forty seven as
thrice amended do now pass we
are passage of house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for House Bill five forty seven
What's about to close.
is one of fifty in the
affirmative eighteen in the
negative house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five forty seven is
three times amended has duly
passed this house.
reflect intellectual server
please and Senate bill three
tennis placement on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentlelady to
defining triage center and
authorizing peace officers to
bring individuals into crisis
triage centers for mental health
status the examinations and with
Thank you Mr speaker could you
just give me a little bit more
information so I understand what
I'm voting on I I I know that's
the title of the bill but I
a mental health crisis to the E.
R. the law enforcement can take
them to a triage center that's
equipped to handle them to
Mr speaker they do I know that
in Dona ana we have one in
Bernalillo and in in Santa Fe.
So Mister speaker July the these
are.
facilities but they're more
let's see basically there's
there's usually you reclining
chairs of there's usually it's
situation is they have access to
medical
it's the medical
Medicines sorry thank it
medications and nurses are at on
hours on end to even get
evaluated.
Thank you Mr system one more
question
these I can see how this can be
very helpful I've I think we
probably are.
Communities that are looking
into this I know you're bringing
this forward and if these
already exist is this man.
wanting to follow this simple
bring this forward thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman of both I
think that we're wanting to see
more these type of facilities in
how long generally is someone
stay at one of these triage
centers.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
kind gentleman no more than
twenty three hours.
granted the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott thank you
Mr Jonah from Donahue I yield to
the gentleman.
Could you.
Could to the bonding no.
How that's going to work speaker
a person in crisis they can be
taken to the hospital at four to
a triage center and either way
the person is going to is can be
evaluated
in most cases the it turns into
a voluntary evaluation now these
facilities do not keep people in
voluntary at the facility that
Gentlelady.
To the valuation is complete.
These folks.
there at once they've been
evaluated they can be given meds
they can be given sometimes a
meal they can be given referrals
client needs what this person in
crisis needs as and at that
point
is but.
Gets them there gets their needs
Mr speaker and gentleman so
see of people that are
handcuffed to budget that is not
one of these restraints so but
there are you know within within
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
challenges debate the gentleman
from of the representative block
thank you Mr speaker and my good
friend from Dona Ana please
yield Mister speaker I will I
lady but I just want to make
crystal clear so Mister speaker
gentle lady if they didn't go to
a triage center where would
these individuals be going in
gentle lady so then is there a
certain time frame that they
must be in these triage centers
to get help or is it on a case
by case basis Mr speaker gentle
legislation are they mostly
folks who have developmental
disabilities out of order can it
range from a certain amount of
things that are involved in the
case Mr speaker thank you Mr
people whether it is due to
drugs whether it's due to the
behavior of a diagnosis
rural communities or are they
already present their Mr speaker
gentle lady us so Mister speaker
and gentleman so in the case of
done and I know that our share
of
patients to the triage center
there so we're we're hoping and
wanting them to utilize this
type of treatment center much
mandate that the local law
enforcement must put these
people into these centers or is
it just they may Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman this is an option.
structure for their crisis
triage centers Mr speaker gentle
lady have we spoken to these
different health care providers
of how it could affect their
payment structure.
impact these facilities.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so do we know if you
NM does have a triage center
though that they would be taking
fourteen day facility said that
at this time this our facility
is very different and the model
is very different okay great Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
kinds of issues and to ensure
that these people can get
meaningful help so that they do
not percent of a Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentlemen and you
Mr speaker the gentle lady from
doing in the field I yield to
the to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe but generally I really
appreciate.
having crisis centers I myself
have had to help of family
members in times of crisis and
actually go to of with voluntary
some of the analysis here
from the house democratic
leadership below the bill
analysis.
impacts on other laws in
C. instead of a hospital jail or
for evaluation which may be a
legal has just been addressed
through this legislation.
not illegal and this is just a
of a for another level of care
for these patients.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
Personally involved in some of
this this care but I really
really really like to is that
you the margin to triage
evaluation mission on a stable
stabilizing individuals
time thank you Mr speaker
there's a gentleman from San
Juan Representative Eli and.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally yield I yield to my
friend.
with those things so my
questions is how is this funding
mechanism gonna work Mr speaker
and and what will it look like
for those counties that that are
already expending dollars to
gentleman so basically this is a
more specialized type of unit
and so so many times when you
take somebody to any are that
that spends more dollars and
Thank you Mr speaker the lady so
but how will San Juan County for
example Mr speaker be able to
tap into those funds to be able
to increase what they're already
doing and spending their tax
my question thank you Mr speaker
there's further debate generated
from Chavis Representative
Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady from Dona
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
whatever we're trying to create
the crisis crisis triage centers
he stated there were three of
Bernalillo.
Thank you for that answer
I guess down in our area we
don't have any of those the need
for those.
administrative default faces of
the Courts.
States this bill has the
potential to reduce retain Kerr
serration for individuals
further to say the existence or
potential lack of existence of
crisis triage center.
has the potential to impact the
thoughts and they use stated
them in analysis on this bill.
Services is wanting there to be
access within ninety minutes and
currently there that's not
happening and so that's that's
part of the
frame that is going to take to
have a patient.
Entered into one of these
centers.
That leads out everybody
everybody that southeastern New
There is there is that that's a
big thing in my opinion because
we do have problems here Mr
speaker gentle lady I was
reading through your bill and
page two line nineteen under
section two.
Hey this is a perceive stimuli
can you explain that to me.
Mr speaker and gentle lady my
understanding is that it is
part of the definition that's
already in the statute
how is of perceive stimuli
administered is the door Lee is
that through an inoculation tell
me how that is done because as
So so Representative and and Mr
speaker.
ways of administering of of
medication to make sure that
they are calm down so they're
not hurting themselves
depending on on the situation
didn't answer my question how
was it determined stirred it can
be it Mr speaker and gentle lady
can be orally it could be
through a shot it could be
we have a general idea.
So Mister speaker when they were
talking about a perceive stimuli
when we're talking about the
least dramatic means principle
necessary to is to achieve
acceptable treatment objectives
for the client I'm assuming that
this would be a trying to
another prescriber who is
licensed within the state of New
Mexico.
So Mister speaker one of the
state licensed we are talking
okay because another one that
caught my eye was the insulin
insulin coma treatment that's
for consoles C. treatment that
licensed registered.
Nurse drive tray load licensee.
Mr speaker and kind gentle lady
you are correct.
Mr speaker and kind lady that is
correct.
Okay so Mister speaker I.
Mr speaker and kind gentle lady
of it's not we're not asking for
any funding.
Okay but Mr speaker again once
again I will point out.
for the southeast the eastern
side of the state to be able to
have these treatment centers
where would we go to get the
help that it would be needed for
the licensed people to work
County we work collaboratively
with the county and so that's
what the different from the
others there's three total so
they've all worked within their
and through Medicaid and to look
at getting it more access for
your county as well.
Mr speaker the money does come
from our area of the state and
from.
Police to roads the name and we
are lacking in it so.
I would like to see this
happening anytime in the very
near future for the eastern side
of the state.
I think we're up against the
wall one more time thank you.
I'm just wondering I know we
heard a bill like this but I I
think was a mayor bill that we
heard and health committee a
house bill.
Senate and so it's crossed over
into gentle lady Mr speaker
gentlelady so no differences in
this bill.
and I'm glad we're close enough
and and Luna to take advantage
of of your facility in Dona Ana
I know this is off the often are
much better approach in treating
very very happy to support it
thank you Mr speaker there's
further debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
the like loose.
just a brief statement
While I was at Bernalillo county
commissioner Wayne in activity
behavioral health tax and
as well and it was one of the
highest priorities Mr speaker
gentle lady to Burleigh county
and actually the nation because
with a mental crisis so Mr
speaker gentle lady I just
wanted to share that.
Thank you Mr speaker.
You know for the bigger later
close thank you Mr speaker with
We are on final passage of
Senate bill three tennis twice
amended the vote is now open.
and item fifty five thank you Mr
speaker can you mean to the
point that the record reflect
that election certification
Senator committees of the
present for as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
schools operating the national
schools program school districts
charter schools and special
schools can opt in to the
national schools program they
receive the funding available
students bill of rights by
calling it the healthy hunger
free students bill of rights and
this is this bill provides for
free breakfast and lunch for all
students it increases the
strategy and allowing districts
that do not already find and use
food to local food banks and not
for profit food pantries
districts can design develop and
implement healthy food options
funded hospital two and three
with a twenty two point five
million dollars in the in the
governor's food initiative
program the funding will be
utilized for equipping school
meals we be the only consistent
through the received center my
Google yeah started this has
stated many times that taking
the focus off virtual the
stomachs and placing it on their
close the achievement gap for
all the Mexico students with
that Mr speaker we stand for
questions there's a gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
match for this program speaker.
You Mr speaker and gentleman of
if if if there are funds
available but is it a match is
there some sort of a
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
the state already doesn't match
for the federal government and
if I may Mister speaker kinds
almond I'd like to introduce my
expert witness Senator Michael
partake in this or is this just
open to all students across New
Mexico in K. through twelve or
pre K. to twelfth.
Mr speaker a gentleman the
answer is yes the if the schools
are participating in the
nationalist program the they can
often.
open to all students the speaker
gentleman Mr speaker gentleman
that is correct yes.
Thank you Mr speaker so of what
is the cost.
could repeat how we're paying
how how it's gonna be paid for.
funding in there too for the
good for the continuation of our
twenty two and a half million
dollars as matter of fact.
Thank you Mr twenty two half
speaker there's so Division lady
from Chavis Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from done yet and the
yield I will yield to the
kindly.
passion about New Mexico grown
especially whenever it comes to
our protein which means meet.
Mr speaker right now we have
several bills that are in the
beef are pigs are goats or sheep
the list goes on and on so
Mister speaker whenever those
bills get freed up if they ever
do we might be able to keep our
Representative from done in a
what is the percentage of our
protein that is it going to our
schools right now that is New
Mexico grown.
Mr speaker god kindly the
approximately fifteen percent.
Mr speaker I don't understand
how there will be more funds
available to create the
relationship on having more of
our meats processed in the state
of New Mexico that can be
Mr speaker gentlelady this will
promote for greater of
processing and for greater
access to to these foods.
other one in the state is on the
side of for all school.
And they're just now starting to
utilize that in some of the
But we also have.
People here that would like to
see R. B. for our lamb are poor
Section L. it is talking about
the unprocessed and mentally
minimally produce processed
beef dried products such as
being but just not include any
products that are heated could
err can.
Would you mind explaining that
for me please.
Mr speaker gentle lady you are
correct and in the following
section explains explains out
gentleman I do get that but them
whenever all the changes took
place whenever once upon a time
to catch up was referred to as
being a vegetable and that was
many years ago and I think
suppose I'm not real sure what
that was all about but anyway
A lot of those kitchens in our
schools the majority of those
kitchens in our school were.
Things in the oven and took
amount or put things in.
On the stovetop and served in
that way so all of those
Mr speaker gentle lady the the
twenty two and a half million
dollar appropriation of the bill
will allow the school districts
another point when we're talking
about scratch cooking.
Are we going to have to spend
the funds necessary to re
is healthy hungry free students
so I'm agreement with that but
it seems to me like we're going
to have.
lucky kids growing up.
I went to cut wood school which
is part of the Artesia public
school system which I'm very
done on site and we were spoiled
out there because then well
Leyva was the cook out there so
in the seventh grade that not
was not necessarily the case
that we were in for quite a bit
of a shock because we were like
trying to redo those kitchens
where everything can be made
from scratch.
In retraining our kitchen help
to be able to do that or even
Sentence of food products here
in the state.
I question the the day whenever
we heard this bill about let's
see where was it.
Just last month late to turn to
for
menus in the cafeterias that it
will be up to the locals that
make the decision for these
meals is that correct.
Okay and Mister speaker let me
fund the other section I did
have a question about there was
one of the things that I think
people need to really
understand.
go dictionaries to third graders
of the list goes on and on but
whenever I'm there at meal time
I'm always invited in to visit
with some of the children as
they're eating their meals and
You have in the new material in
there that addresses food waste
would you care to expand on that
so the rest of the members might
know what we're planning on
two there's two parts to this
the first part is the chair
table aspect of it and the the
second part.
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
there's an additional twenty
minutes added to to lunch time.
children will not waste as much
food if they go out and have
Reese's first before they are
brought in for their lunch
period is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman.
May be held prior to lunch time
so that the appetites may be
stimulated more there will not
be as much waste and as far Mr
this allows the students if they
haven't eaten their food they
can take at this particular
table that is set aside and that
was Mr speaker and gentleman the
environment department and the
reason I'm bringing up the
environment department over this
And so they had baked brownies
that bake cookies they had bait.
Cakes whatever the case may be.
And
Whenever these drugs were.
was a court whatever the case
may be the environment
department came in and shut them
down so that they could not do
that in their own school so is
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
anticipate any problems because
I I perceive that this would be
in the auspices of the student
speaker and gentle lady bye bye
I highly anticipate that this
would be under the auspices of
the student internship program.
I'm sorry the students what I
didn't quite understand that
You can't talk that fast okay.
Mr speaker the student nutrition
program I get but the students
don't understand what the
student nutrition program is are
restaurants could even utilizes
which is presently they can't
but Mr speaker.
I do support the bill but we
have to get working on it
kitchens we need to get more of
New Mexico drugs into our
schools in the chair table is a
very good aspect of it but there
may be a problem with the
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
yield.
I I yield to the gradual one
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
twenty two and a half billion
dollars is a drop in the bucket
compared to what I believe are
schools and school districts are
kitchens in schools that have
been built have a very tiny area
for
Warming up.
appropriation committees and on
those of control the purse
strings that we're going to have
to addresses a little more
state to truly accomplished
scratch cooking within our
schools so with that Mr speaker
and gentleman I hope that we
move in this direction but I
of space and lack of equipment
to actually cook thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman
there's a debate the gentleman
from Colfax Kerry Harding quay
some again and you
Resistance we can they can
debate okay gentleman back to
you thank you Mr speaker Mr
another bill this year that
would provide many more in state
beef inspectors that is the key
provided to the school for for
the school children you have to
go through the USDA inspector
once we could leave this program
once we get the bill all the way
through this year we will have
promulgated rules.
we also created a couple of
years ago a position at New
goes can process the B..
For our school so we have a
readily available supply in Mr
speaker and gentleman I I.
they they could many many many
other things from scratch in
fact I know one of them that has
a grow light in in a greenhouse
in the kids race vegetables and
they have a salad table in their
like to eat some of our good New
Mexico home grown products thank
you Mr speaker there's a
division of promoted
Representative block thank you
speaker gentle and I'm so glad
that you brought this forward
because when I went to school my
folks you know they were in that
bracket that we were we were
kind of poor so we didn't
comment I had was on page nine
it says school food authorities
should take steps to maximize
federal revenue and minimize
debt on families so Mister
speaker gentleman I totally
or something Mr speaker John I
don't want to have to be totally
reliant on those funds so you
know I do appreciate your
legislation I I definitely
supported I think it's a long
time coming I'm so glad we
finally are doing it this year
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that the Senate Education.
Senator cases that makes a
committee substitute for Senate
bill four.
It would have sixty three in the
affirmative zero in the negative
take me to the point that the
record reflect that election is
server placing House before
seventy one of final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker house bill four seventy
the board duties of reporting
and I just remarked that this
forty three thousand or more New
Mexicans above the age of sixty
five currently with this disease
we are on final passage of house
bill four seventy one the vote
is now open.
What about the clothes.
ready and item sixty nine I am
Mr speaker we give it to that
point the record reflect that
elections are for placing House
Judiciary Committee Senator
browser fifteen with the numbers
across on final passage has been
taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
programming up to the age of
twenty one with that I stand for
questions from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker and this
with.
Someone that has crossed the
border with them and they're
being abused what what exactly
is who are you trying to protect
unfortunately many of them don't
know about this special
immigrant visa capability for
them to access and is basically
what we're trying to do is
are abused or neglected there
and within a special category to
be able to access this very
specific visa type and that's or
allowing here with this this
Potentially
there's been law enforcement
issues that and their second
somehow recorded and I'm trying
to understand your extending the
Mr speaker gentleman there's no
list these children have the
status because they end up in
the court system because they
don't have representation and
of of justice and so without
once they are in that category
unfortunately many of these
children are right at the age of
eighteen or nineteen and do not
have the ability to apply for a
you know challenges essentially
because of that sort of strange
buffer but again we're just
trying to meet federal
guidelines to be able to offer
this opportunity thank you Mr
because they have been.
Assigned a guardian.
And since they're in that
situation with the guardian they
would be as with guardian until
understand thank you Mr speaker.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Travis thank you
Mr speaker does the gentle lady
the yield I yield to the gentle
legislation is very important to
me personally.
I am the guardian of an
Constantly lived in the fear
under the fear of deportation hi
the under the fear that he would
Is now nineteen.
And is doing wonderfully.
That he's had.
There are children in New
Mexico.
Reaching the age of twenty and
In New Mexico we must align with
the federal law so that these
kids have a little bit more time
to be.
Don't pass this.
Those children will be lost for
ever.
To give those kids a chance.
The same chance.
The young man that lives with me
now has.
He has the opportunity had the
Mexico to have that same
opportunity and I ask you to
please vote yes on this bill.
There's further debate the
gentleman from the
I read the as defined by federal
law Mr speaker and gentle lady I
just like to know how far behind
the eight ball we are with
And only the I guess that's
where I'm trying to drive to.
How long is this has this been
in federal statutes.
Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
I will yield to the gentle lady
from Los Alamos thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady I have
two to six number I move the
amendment floor amendment one.
To House Bill fifteen in the two
Yes but as it is on line deleted
explain them and with yes Mr
speaker this came up Mr speaker
and House Judiciary where I
pointed out on page six of the
be liberally construed to carry
out its purpose that is an
unusual clause in isn't really
not
seen in our legislation are
speaker that we take it out now
and and forego the they're
needing to having to come back
for concurrence Mr speaker
bill.
See no debate over the majority
leader close thank you Mr
speaker I now move that house
bill fifteen as of.
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Close.
What is the vote of sixty four
you ready and item number
seventy one yes Mr speaker would
you get me to that point please
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill to mediate a final
Representative Lujan
this bill is relating to
disability accommodations and
acting the closed captioning Act
enforce the closed captioning
Act and providing penalties.
December questions I stand for
questions there is debate the
gentleman from lame
Places of public accommodation
movie theaters for Liz to
sentiment are.
Now.
Been closed captioned.
of places does include movie
theaters.
This.
Mr speaker and gentleman any
place that is a public place
would require at least you know
we did this in Albuquerque this
is actually in law in
Albuquerque and it is being
enforced right now as we speak
simple change
you know usually of your remote
in public places like a movie
Is.
Understand closed captioning is
transmitted.
The signal and then Dick code.
the gentleman yes that is
accurate it is a simple
procedure and therefore
simple change in a remote.
Speaker is at center city for
transmitting side.
Public facility would have
of coding.
Will.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that for older model
equipment there would probably
Programs transmitted.
Captioning.
Thirty percent corporate content
these days can accommodate this.
Speaker gentle lady I understand
to receivers.
Closed caption.
transmission side.
Sorry percent for.
That is not.
Mr speaker gentleman that is not
covered in the bill.
Sorry this is how we're going to
enforce this.
During the same force for.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Transformers
is described in section C..
in the public can file a
complaint.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr leader
for answers there's further
let you go to the lovely lady.
Mr speaker thank you very much.
Mr speaker I see lots of
problems with this and I'm going
our small businesses and right
now New Mexico is perceived to
be.
No friendly to the business
can be cost prohibitive to the
small businesses.
Mr speaker if a person wants to
go into the local the.
Corner cafe down there and the
walked into or maybe their local
bar if they want to go in there
and have a beer.
These places cannot afford to do
staff and of to go out and
follow through with every one of
these complaints that may be
coming again.
I'd rather have I don't want to
we're talking about our movie
theaters going to do this.
I see it as we are going to be
about all the emails I have
gotten regarding this bill it
will small businesses out of
implementing Mr speaker I
understand.
Why you want to do this in
certain ways.
Closed captioning on there
because they cannot do that Mr
speaker we've seen them try to
do it on the golf.
A man of golf tournaments that
businesses to the attorney
general's office and also what
we are going to potentially due
to the movie industry about
There's the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan.
yield I will thank you Mr
speaker
I think that there's a there's a
value and no reason why we are
bringing for this piece of
legislation it is to provide
gentlelady yes thank you.
Mr speaker generally are there.
Is the Attorney General gonna be
burdened with a lot of
complaints
for people and businesses that
are cannot
accommodate this request there
are some exceptions thank you Mr
speaker the general but the
everyday life experiences as the
as those who don't have
exceptional it is would you
agree with that.
don't yes Mr speaker and Madam
constituents and and my district
those here may know him as
Johnny Hooper.
and he he came to me and you
to fully participate in all
those things that those with
again without exception
allergies are able to
participate in Mr speaker gentle
a councilwoman and then bring it
forward here as no legislator
and actually work with the
twenty general so make sure that
we're not going to be we're not
over burning anybody but we are
thank you Mr speaker as for the
division of Katherine Graham the
lower percent of the process.
Thank you Mr speaker will gentle
can you explain to me Madam
speaker.
I went wool wool will we'll
pull.
madam speaker Mr speaker gentle
speaker how do I work that into
my business please can make sure
I'm doing my job right.
Number six excuse me on section
three Lucy here.
Funded.
Right here on page.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
tell you that the last funeral
that I went to had a TV and they
To include closed captioning.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
suggesting that I turned my
mortuary into a karaoke bar.
to make you smile a little bit
but Mr speaker gentle lady the
reason I'm saying that is
because.
Most of the time when we do sure
pictures and stuff like that
probably words of for the song
so I guess you could sing along
and so I didn't is that the only
thing you're asking us to do Mr
speaker gentle lady.
police ninety seven years old
and the other day she could not
hear the TV it was at the very
loudest volume when I walked in
about ten o'clock listening to
Thank you Mr speaker gently no
I'm just I want to live in the
the the move here we've been
working hard and so but but in
all fairness Mr speaker gentle
lady
what I would have normally done
when this would have happened Mr
speaker gentle lady is I would
have accommodated that that
individual but
and make special accommodations
to that but I think it just I
was just wondering now I have to
do it for every funerals I would
just say Mr speaker gentle lady.
accessibility to people who are
hard of hearing and last week Mr
speaker and gentleman we had the
school for the deaf in order
and this really is just a a bill
of accommodation.
A couple more questions reserves
figure gently so when I go to a
doesn't specifically say church
but it does say auditorium
convention center lecture hall
or other places of public
gathering.
know does it have to be English
Spanish coming up is there any
particular.
Would I be in compliance for
just forty years sure Spanish
for is our Mr speaker and
Summary Mr speaker gentle lady
for for the are bilingual a
crowd I may have Spanish
speaking people and.
that would be depend on and
you know whoever's attending and
if asked.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I just wanted to understand it
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady please sealed yes I
will Mr speaker thank you
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady.
I would have joined your bills
had I known I am hearing
impaired.
I believe it was
I don't remember the here
anymore but I I think it was
house bill forty eight may have
been in twenty nineteen or
twenty eighteen I'm not quite
and be have a the public more
informed.
About the this precise issue so
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
thank you for bringing this
if you would call or if it's
noted somewhere all when the
American disabilities act was
passed.
accessibility thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady in fact the bill was passed
in nineteen ninety.
and I know this.
the nation it's been a long hard
I.
I.
To have.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
awareness.
For the hearing impaired.
We have much enforcement and I
would say Mr speaker and gentle
lady there's still a lot of way
and gentle lady that still has
to be done.
But I'm particularly sensitive
to the hearing impairment Mr
speaker and gentle lady and I.
And he has worsened because of
his many battles on the
battlefront as a US army three
more veteran has hearing
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
twenty eleven.
And the funeral home.
Luckily.
Closed captioning.
And my father sat there.
In complete awe.
Because Mr speaker and gentle
quotes and other kinds of
Ways in which we wanted to honor
her in writing.
And the funeral home.
Was able to.
And my father came to hear tears
because he was unable to hear
for the most part he was ninety
six years old and he was unable
to hear.
placed an under each picture
that we posted.
And he was not a good singer at
all but he was able to sing on
So.
And that was accommodated in
twenty eleven.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
was not difficult from what I
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'll
tell you one other thing.
I was when we shut down.
courses that that year.
And
And then I had to be able to
receive the participation Mr
If we could is was able to
closed caption.
And of course it was it's a.
That was offered.
We assume I would not have been
Finally Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
In my health facility.
I as I am.
Often times because of the kind
of hearing impairment I have
Mister speaker and gentle lady
if there's too much noise I hear
everything muffled.
bill on page two page three all
those items and even when
they're not listed.
If it's a public place it makes
common sense that if the public
is there.
worst case scenario you don't
want to separate the hearing
impaired place them in separate
Fe of areas in public places and
accommodate them.
talking accommodating and access
so the accommodation is is
really really important.
And we cannot wait we all Mr
having difficulty hearing.
And they're in a public place.
As was afforded to me then of in
the train depot I was going from
I have to get them upgraded Mr
speaker and gentle lady quite
often because of the type of
impairment I have is leading
towards is worsening.
They did not know.
because I wasn't moving when we
were we were given the
instruction Mr speaker and
gentle lady that we needed to
look to progress on the line and
we weren't moving and I wasn't
let me tell you what they said.
But at the same time the
monitor.
Indicated the instructions and I
That is fellow
Neighbors fellow church goers
And everybody's sitting next to
us.
Has the capacity to hear.
As we do we cannot make that
protected under the disabilities
act.
Because it's one of those
circumstances that unless you.
Noticeably see that a person
that is hearing impaired is
impairments Mr speaker and
gentle lady and so I rise today
in full support and full
understanding and that's one of
Not only because it's the law.
And this state this bill will
By his or her office.
And so Mr speaker and gentle
lady thank you so very much for
bringing this up I hope that
As everyone else may have or
assume that they have.
And when you see someone who has
difficulty in responding to you.
and thank you gentle lady I urge
everyone in this body to vote
for house bill two eighty eight
Beijing lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker webmail.
co sponsor I think I want to
clear up some misunderstanding
perhaps this this bill require
the
captioning.
Mr speaker and gentle lady only
when there are exceptions and
closed captioning they don't
have to go buy a new one today.
That is correct and Mr speaker
that is correct and it was just
Baker and lady from Bernalillo
let's say all for their TV's
don't have closed captioning
they still don't have to go buy
on in their place of business as
those kind of how they operate
do they have to turn on closed
doesn't require the movies to do
closed captioning we're just
talking about the TV's right.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
Tom Harkin sponsored it he had a
brother who was part of hearing
or deaf thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you ladies debate the
gentleman from Lee
Mr speaker and gentleman I
yield.
Thank you.
Senator my questions have been
answered.
correctly.
Item number three line ten the
motion picture house theater.
Mr speaker and o'neill stopped
provided in closed captioning
would that be correct gentleman
doing if if I may just
interested him quickly because I
was reading and re reading that
bar restaurant lobby attached to
the movie theater that has
televisions are displayed
television programming my
interpretation of the bill is
and in fact those televisions
of the movie house whether it's
avatar or created three check
and went to lunch
would not be required and I
gentleman that is the intent.
The lady do you anticipate.
not anticipate that because it
was a simple implementation when
we did this at the City of
Albuquerque the code enforcement
times before they actually
imposed any kind of fine so
there were several warnings I
would anticipate that this would
be a similar situation of
compliance.
Mr speaker and the lady I I
appreciate the intent.
And the understanding that I got
item three does not specify that
the movie itself does not have
to have closed captioning.
The gentle lady I understand
that we have made the intent
clear in the discussion but that
does not change how things are
enforced outside of this house
it's not for the actual screen
itself it is for house side.
Not inside within the movie
theater.
on lines six and seven it says
television receivers that are
turned on an operating in public
areas during regular hours
except when an item eight the
captioning so there is an
exception there Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I I
read that and again I just don't
theater owners across the state
hammered me and text messages
and phone calls when they knew
to eighty eight was coming up
tonight and so Mister speaker
It's not very clear and so I
hope Mr speaker and gentle lady
that you consider very strongly
a.
If this were to pass out of the
The attendance.
In a closed captioning.
Movie this anywhere from twenty
movies same thing so we took up
two screens on one have closed
captioning one didn't to offset
that cost we would have to
movie goers to be able to do
that that clarification would be
great I mean the math is simple.
That that's not the hard part so
the debate the debate the
gentleman from Chavis and and
the Representative Mason.
Mr speaker thank you David
Establishments refusing to turn
on closed captioning.
In their places of business Mr
the the businesses were happy to
accommodate them because these
this population actually they
spend money just like you and I
and says connect on and close
that.
Closed captioning I can imagine
about emergency so I.
I guess a little round one is.
But all these supplement.
The same black.
Well but I know that they're
Senator Bernie hearing.
Representative I have some
customers that sign language
training at all.
A lot of things without being
required by law to do that.
Mr speaker
owners other business owners
thanks that'll run do this but
for science if.
According to offer their TV's.
I'm sure if somebody with
hearing impaired if they had the
ability that would turn it on
but I guess my biggest problem
Mr speaker gentle lady is.
Required by law.
To provide.
The service the state.
Don't feel that they want to
What business calm about it.
When we can.
Another question the Mr speaker
Come in and of the.
Provide the service of.
In one.
As a private citizen and states
I will that I should be.
Control of what I did.
private business posts notice
that this service is not going
to be available.
Mr speaker gentleman if this if
this bill is adopted by this
accessibility and it requires
accommodation for people's
disabilities we may not always
know and as the gentle lady from
they maybe blind or they may
have other
issues of of disability that
would require accommodation and
can not be these this particular
these particular
of policies that are set out in
this bill then there are
would not small business people
want to accommodate these
populations as I mentioned
earlier Mr speaker and gentleman
I have no problem you know I've
never.
Personally
vital business that when asked
So most of my customers if.
If they have a problem with
some of the us one way or
another likes that I have some
It's a I don't.
I
have a problem except I guess
passing.
All the only.
Myself I go to a place where I
don't feel comfortable.
I don't
know but you know it's a.
So it's.
That
Labels some of the small
business like mine I will shop
for.
Some of the.
dollar to food it may just not
have a TV for anyone.
That said.
Thanks and I hope nobody ever
did not as.
But with a disability anything
that they can give thank you.
will yield Mister speaker thank
you Mr speaker delayed I just
have a couple questions on this
so I I would have to double
check English is not the
If for mandating the closed
captions and someone speaks
Spanish or Mandarin and we put
English on and they can't read
it how is that not
discriminatory Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
I think that would be up to the
business owner.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
if it was Mandarin I we have
lots we're multicultural state
and when I'm trying to make sure
languages are made so how how do
we make sure we're not
discriminating against those
people that speak other
languages Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
to many different populations of
but I think the the answer to
your question is you know the
that is what the bill says okay
Mister speaker gentle lady so I
do have a question that's going
to lead to this.
So.
Mr speaker gently Mr speaker and
gentle lady the way that it was
implemented in Albuquerque and
this is our intent is that
that would be a an issue that
the Attorney General would look
into Mr speaker gentle lady can
you explain the due process with
that of of how that plays out if
hi this is a business owner
defend themselves and say no we
we did we just forgot or or we
got a new hire and they forgot
it they didn't know how to do it
so Mister speaker gently to how
to.
Torrance on page four if you
look at line twenty four twenty
five and you continue on to the
said knowingly or anything about
the intent is that in this bill
somewhere Mr speaker gentle
lady.
basically what the Attorney
General would be looking for and
what has been violated but I
think that
do not.
You know respond to the
violation then knowingly they
would have an issue.
Mr speaker Delaney so the
to me that speaks louder.
Pun not intended on that at all
if it said the word knowingly in
remember wouldn't do it and that
at least another question Mr
speaker delayed how to set are
we gonna have to have a special
training now for our employees
because if you hire somebody in
business and business New Mexico
Mr speaker dealing.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't think it has to be a
special training I think that
most businesses that have
Mr speaker Delaney so that again
I see it the problem I'm looking
at a small business and they get
turned in and you know that they
going to maintain the database
for this Mr speaker dealer
because I'm just have to have a
database how is that being
maintained Mr speaker gentle
legal section and any any
complaints will be filed through
them and I think that's already
available.
so I think those things need to
be out of I'm a tell you.
As being hearing impaired myself
it's the most frustrating the
world I understand and I
understand people when they're
what they're saying.
frustrating thing was ever
during the COVID we both read
people's lips and nobody would
accommodate us to move their
mass so that we can see what
they're saying so for years we
go out to socialize and it's
hard enough to here is it is not
reading the screens or anything
we're going they're socialized
but the mass to me were far more
intrusive to people's rights who
are hearing impaired thank you
gentleman thanks gentle lady I I
too had some concern for I
started reading this but I got
on page four line three to
fifteen and it seem to be pretty
thoughts does that mean that
our.
Webcasting and the screen right
up here.
But if if the public is
least one TV that would be
available that would suffice.
So.
Closed captioning would be
our televisions are
technologically able as listed
on page four
line nine then yes.
something that would have to
consider we have you know of the
school of the deaf for.
Come in and they're trying to
participate it might be
something we want to add in our
Thank you Mr speaker and I would
move that house bill two eighty
eight do now pass.
Final passage of house bill two
eighty eight the vote is now
open.
Mr speaker.
today from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey are you
ready and item seventy two.
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker house bill four sixty
two would allow use of holidays
with populations of two hundred
thousand or more to offer now
to be generated close Mr speaker
I move that house bill four
sixty to do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill four sixty two is twice
amended the vote is now open.
has duly passed this house.
Generated from earlier presented
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill two and three as
amended by the Senate and
Message from the Senate I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed house bill
one thirty as amended by this
house and further amended by the
Just for the Senate Mr speaker
I'm directed to inform the house
that the duly enrolled in gross
copies of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill twenty seven as amended
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
eight as amended House Bill
three forty two as amended have
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate vote
session return same here with
respectfully submitted sherry do
concurrence calendar item number
two Jennifer Burley you are you
ready on that item.
Speaker I am.
Eleven million proceed.
Speaker.
I move to
amended and has the most I just
the body.
Yes concurrence.
The gentleman to explain the
amendments.
Madam speaker.
amendment added the sun get
County partition land grants to
the house bill two sixty eight.
Together all the qualified
foreign and then.
Corrects.
Change that resulted from the
house Judiciary substitute bill.
political subdivisions since two
thousand and four.
Speaker without the amendment
the seventeen and grants would
have cease to exist as article
Senate confirmation Committee
amendment.
San Miguel County partition
requests were included in the
Senate from following is the
ads House Bill to sixty as
amendment spells out of twenty
six active involvement I know
sevens I think it's a great
of the motion to discussing I I
say nine.
Well as opposed made the eyes
have it we have occurred with
of legislation soon objection it
is so ordered.
From Dona Ana you're ready and
item number fifty seven yes Sir
yield and a final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill thank you very much Mr
speaker Mr speaker body Senate
Centerville
did set out to do a few things
first Mr speaker body it set out
to create no new programs Mr
speaker body it's set out with
conservation land health land
stewardship programs that do
exist that take Federal matches
Mr speaker body that set out to
where annual distributions go to
programs ranging from energy and
minerals Mr speaker body Mexico
department of agriculture Mr
speaker body the department of
and with that I stand for
questions there is debate the
gentleman from Dallas
Representative worth this Mr
speaker will the gentleman from
going into please yield Mister
of many many people in this
body.
folks all around the state have
been asking for something like
this for such a long time so I I
public lands it invests in our
outdoor recreation our outdoor
economy it's I really could go
on and on but but I will not I
will focus on some of the things
funds at the federal level they
just don't have the money in
their community so does this
fund to help smaller communities
governments to help us safety is
to help all in New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady including
conservation districts who are
one of the few jurisdictions
gentleman that's that's and has
I think that's I want the body
to understand what you know what
it means for that to happen we
can build more parks we can
healthy soils Act Mr speaker and
gentleman you eat a lot of work
on that my my executive
secretary that I work with
easily Romo acequia has been
able to tap into those healthy
the soil do amendments.
can you tell me a little bit
about how this funding will
support the healthy so that and
how it will help our farmers and
speaker gentle lady will go to
the New Mexico department of
agriculture which of course Mr
speaker gentle lady and
ministers the healthy soils
department of agriculture where
in the the healthy soils program
will be eligible for some
perhaps all that funding
depending upon what the New
nineteen work with with
producers with tribes with
conservation districts all
across the state to get
healthier soil better yields and
I work with a lot of the partner
communities who have.
Who are engaging in the letter
yet program Mr speaker gentle
and you know what that is.
where local communities get
contracts with the for service
and I hope now that the state
forestry department to manage
my district
Additional users including Land
Grant communities will get a
contract to stay in state.
on the contract and then they
can sell the wood or give away
the wood in their community that
that the harvest from the forest
it's been extremely successful
has will there be money in this
in this fund for the something
like that Mr speaker gentle lady
absolutely yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
want to introduce my experts
doing fuse the general counsel
for the energy minerals and
natural resources the fire
department and Sir cultural
so the we're gonna have an
annual distribution that goes to
each of the entities in this
case for the energy minerals and
natural resources department
it's twenty two point five
being placed on matching federal
grants of which Mr speaker
gentle lady this the healthy
forest thinning our forests
improving our watersheds have
that you described as well as
others would be eligible where
folks would be able to sort of
say we now have an annual
matching source of funds from
do more work in in your case the
forest adjacent to their
communities Mr speaker gentle
lady regardless of the lan says
it'll be working course as the
for as I were a.
Forreston at
watershed restoration act does
fund the line yet program and is
Mr speaker Jenna can you tell me
a little bit how private land
conservation and folks who are
interested in conserving their
lands how how this funding will
through briefly energy minerals
and natural resources they have
a number of these the programs
that they currently administer
again Mr speaker gentle lady
restoration area up in the
northern part especially in the
northern part of our state not
just in the northern part of our
state Mr speaker gentle lady the
department of agriculture we're
those are you know producer
focus as they should be programs
Mr speaker Mr speaker gentle
lady so those are all areas
where in private landowners
gentleman I'm glad you mentioned
the we program we have a very
active lead group inTaos.
Really do that working on
this these funds will help
communities all around the state
especially rural communities
will preview bringing those
dollars back to our districts in
everyone of our districts and
Harding quay son me again and
you Representative Chatfield
thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Dona Ana yield
Mister speaker I gladly yield to
the gentleman from those
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
have that off the top of my head
but I imagine the gentleman the
does Mr speaker I just happen
to.
what densities of sulfated right
along our rivers and all right
very in areas.
Mr speaker gentle lady they
reach I don't know the density
reach densities of up to five
thousand plants per acre.
Each one that has at least and
the diameter of eight inches use
and to enter down.
Of with this bill fund some of
the projects to to treat those
all stater areas and restore
them back to native vegetation.
Mr speaker gentleman the black
fire.
In case anybody wants to know
what's called the black for the
I grew up down there that's the
fire burned three hundred and
three thousand seven hundred and
one acres.
Mr speaker gentleman the little
bear fire.
That is acceptable.
Our state is burning down.
For the lack of attention to our
watersheds.
For every dollar the state puts
in the federal government will
put into is that not correct.
Mr speaker gentleman at least
two yes Sir it's it's usually
So Mister speaker gentleman with
this bill provide funding for
projects such as small diameter
timber operations Laupen
scattered the variety of things
As a committee you.
Those of us who work in this
industry have always looked for
a way to have matching funds
That one thing is is what we've
talked about in the past over a
couple of years.
So Mister speaker.
Number one.
To Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill nine
great I believe that is being
six point one.
Two two six two oh six point one
that's what I have gentleman the
gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Page six section do it says six
district distributions.
Maybe pursuant to this section
It is a fairly amendment thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen Mr speaker gentlemen
despite the gentleman from those
counties being one of the
friendliest and a great friend
you Mr speaker body and
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
body I talked about the
sponsorship for this bill that
actually created this bill Mr
speaker and body Mr speaker and
body this ranges from
conservation districts that Mr
speaker body the Western
agricultural base and non focus
Mr speaker general and gentleman
is there dozens of organizations
as is been discussed for work on
agree on every one of us
stakeholders not legislators
stakeholders we can agree on
every little thing then that's
fine we'll make that amendment
can't all agree on one thing and
in this case it would change the
underlying statute for the
department of game and fish said
this is not a this is this is
speaker body all of the
different stakeholders who have
come together to build this
piece of legislation and bring
it to where it is today could
friendly Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Right they will is a debate on
the amendment the gentleman from
so the one is on the
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr leader
gentleman the gentleman yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield.
with this bill is because there
are so few avenues.
For the acquisition of land.
Because I believe the
acquisition land is a important
I understand the some concern
about buying large tracts of
land.
Mr speaker chairman but the
plants expensive and and now the
through this bill.
In.
But it's really what was left on
the table and fortunately for
the smaller pieces.
Fire and interests in land.
To further conservation to
enhance.
access to simplify management.
I was not happy about that
because I think that's really
important.
Mr speaker German debated this
at length and the House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee
In frustrated they were tying
our hands on acquisition.
But Mr speaker tell and that's
the reality of this bill.
It does not expand acquisition.
Mr speaker and gentleman I just
one more thing it's it's
interesting.
The section here amending which
are races that we won't use
The voluntary transaction.
Mr speaker let me start by
What this money can be spent
used for so even if it were a
for our little orchards are
little farm fields are ranges
are family farms I I think when
you take forty seven percent of
land being owned by the
So I do not think that even if
it's a voluntary sale that it is
fair for the state of New Mexico
to be is against our for small
What we're talking about in your
amendment would cut off
voluntary transactions is that
correct Mr speaker German.
Mr speaker that is not correct
transactions Mr speaker German
it's.
It's frustrating to me.
That.
Mr speaker German because a
property.
The the I as a landowner and you
know I own my home that's all I
don't.
want the responsibility for
managing.
And they're willing to do it.
Mr speaker German that might be
a financial transaction for all
concerned.
The concept of the meeting.
I'm sorry Mr speaker I wanted to
speak German I want to hear this
of.
He was whispering in your.
For private land involuntary
transactions.
Mr speaker No they do not I've
seen several deals and you most
often is bought by another group
Mr speaker a I would like to
reiterate this fact this does
not limit transaction the
private property it only put
side boards on the use of this
How do the other they figure out
the price of that private
property in the voluntary
transaction.
Mr speaker I have not ever
bought the property for the
Mr speaker German exactly.
The state.
The by property the by that the
fair market value.
They can't by law.
to get out the state by hundred
dollars maybe a thousand.
And.
The state can't can't top that.
There is no building when it
comes to the public acquisition
Thank you Mr speaker thank you.
Thank
the amendment is related from
Travis representatives in.
He took months under because
that's where I was going on this
discussion of the bill I do not
want the state to buy any more
Whenever land is taken off the
tax rolls in those particular
counties how does the county
make up for that at these lands
are acquired by government Mr
speaker no it we're just
Mr speaker not to the gentleman
not too awful long could go the
game and fish bought a huge
tracts of land in the
southeastern corner of the state
Therefore that land is not being
used for ranch land anymore it's
for a habitat for who knows what
I don't know.
in our state Mr speaker we saw
that happen whenever the
Interstate Stream Commission was
buying land up and down the pike
is from fort some or all the way
Do you tell me of any farmers in
our state right now that can pay
ten thousand dollars for water.
owned I was scribbling down as
fast as I could as these
thoughts are coming to my head
forty seven percent of the land
in the state of New Mexico is
That is our government at work
and I've had it with government
intervention in the livelihoods
we're talking about agencies
going in there to help the land
it was pap Alliance whenever he
was the director of the state of
New Mexico State Land Office
alliance that cleared those
lands of the lands that the
State Land Office owned by the
schools to prevent them from
Mr speaker.
Hearing about the stakeholders
input.
farming because my brothers and
I still important we work our
**** off on it.
I still rent in is doing sure
She will turn things around and
with the help of god in our
prayers it will happen.
Mr speaker I don't believe that
our communities were brought
Mr speaker I can answer that
question I've been in on the
status should return three years
protecting our watersheds and I
do know that the several of my
water conservation district down
there from for some or all the
way down to the state line go on
that's been sucked out of our
rivers that Mr speaker.
Is to support your amendment to
Why would we not insure that
these.
Those people that don't want to
remain out into rural areas have
of the over pricing such as the
Interstate Stream Commission
such as all the over the other
government entities that are
listed here there is a problem
and fish bones so yes I'd like
this amendment the to put on
there and I appreciate you bring
in four thank you Mr speaker.
gentlemen would this ammendment
limited.
Political subdivisions lake such
Subdivision of government any
person any entity from acquiring
land this amendment simply put
soil water conservation district
cannot tap into this funding
what this amendment to acquire
land.
Speaker gentle lady that is
correct.
lot with there's is fantastic
collaboration inTaos called the
real Fernando collaborative it's
unlikely bedfellows we've got
similar to the group that that
brought this legislation forward
to protect our watersheds to
enhance outdoor recreation
communities and we have long
been looking for some funding
source that would allow us to
purchase the executive sensation
in particular would like which
family they want to unload it
the and the a second so ciation
wants to purchase that land
because that is where the head
gate of the a second mother to
that comes off of the real
second sensation can do the work
the important work on the head
again.
We cannot find the money
at all and and I look at this
kind of matching funds and this
is the kind of funding that
could help us do that and reach
our five year goal now of
getting this this property
would prevent us from doing
that.
Mr speaker gentleman how would.
Your amendment affects.
property with this money
conservation easements are sold
out to many different groups in
many different ways other placed
the the group you just named a.
I manage a project to work
through twenty one state and
federal agencies I work with the
a state given the work with the
of the of the fund I I said from
the start that I support the
fund support the funding and I
supported for the restoration of
our watershed or watershed is
fund.
Needs to be the has all do all
be all for all of our hopes and
dreams is funds needs to restore
our watersheds it needs to
is going to use it in the future
I am very grateful that all
these groups to at one time when
I first started in this they
were so far
eye on do not
In any way.
The little that or or or B.
sports that I I just I think
health of our watershed so this
time when Albuquerque Santa Fe
many of our cities are starving
for water we're not just by in a
bagel rages and things with this
acequia that we did negotiate to
maybe put a size cap on it with
no we weren't able to come to a
like say this is something that
I'm not just a Monday morning
quarterback column this is
something I do and I
understanding of Indian talks
so Mr speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
Thank you for all the work that
you've done with that such as I
said except for this one little
detail in this ammendment.
Mr speaker gentle
I fear that it is vague
conservation easements are a
conservation easement and I
think it.
Could be really detrimental and
there are lots of there are lots
of political subdivisions that
are doing the real work of
grant lands to protect those
communities from catastrophic of
fire they all want to do what
you want to do Mr speaker but I
don't think this I think this
amendment limits their ability
the gentleman from all those
counties curry parting ways and
again when you you Mr speaker I
yield thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen
dominated most of our
conversation and I wanted to ask
you Mr speaker gentleman what
was what was the response to the
if you remember recall what the
from the for the folks that have
always been against the forces
of property were still against
the purchase of property and the
folks that were in favor of it
there are many of us in here
that have been in this
discussion for twenty years it's
not a new discussion but I think
there are also a lot of folks in
about it in this photo on it and
go on.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
I too am a protective and have a
lot of questions about this
Sanchez is that it was that
there are two agencies that
would be responsible or have the
ability to have contracts for
land purchase do you recall that
this amendment.
In no way affects their
legislative authority to
purchase land it only put side
boards on the use of this
funding.
the conversation with is that
those entities that this funding
could only be you use for land
purchase through those agencies
Mr speaker speaker gentleman and
But you recall Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I would to induce their way from
amendment does is very much more
simple it just puts side boards
on the use of these funds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
chairman I really do appreciate
you bringing this to the full
conversation the debate on the
amendment the gentleman from the
current about the with the
proposals on the interpretive
someone.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
And I want to give examples why.
I have farmed in range.
For a long time in manage farms
for other.
and how I see things.
Is that farmers and ranchers.
And money which is could be all
in one.
To purchase land to take control
By the government between.
Elida and for some.
To protect the prairie chickens.
managing all their land.
We had low level wildlife water
for the birds for the coil for
the deer.
we kept water important.
We built fences according to
guidelines by the federal
government for the deer could
spent a good part of your life
time restoring watersheds.
We have taking care of our
clients.
Are good stewards of the land.
And we don't need these
acquisitions we need help in
funding.
The government and and and and
then I go back to the the words
that my.
The former representative said
working with the people that own
the land to make it better.
I've seen that the land grab
from the government in the
When there's no more private
land to be bought.
I don't know when it stops it
just.
I understand the bill the bill
is a good bill I'd like it just
government doesn't do a good job
with it.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm happy
to rise and support to your
amendment.
Bernalillo Representative of the
La Cruz thank you Mr speaker to
the gentleman from Colfax and a
whole bunch of other counties
you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield about
it's so apparent to me this
evening.
In the counties I come from
Bernalillo county.
There was a the farmland seventy
speaker and the.
Flexibility was also reform
further south gentleman by the
name of money back buyer wanted
to develop it into a shopping
didn't want to see that seventy
acres be turned into a shopping
center and they came out in
protest effective signs one
morning along the entire section
Have the money to buy that land.
They wanted government to buy
that land and you can open
space.
Well it didn't happen and now we
have a great shopping center the
And ranchers the old one people
Mr speaker that.
Property that is.
Madam.
I would like to sell it perhaps.
Really sellers I'm a little
disappointed Mr speaker.
But this particular bill.
Was a long way to all of those
Imagine that we have because of
the coverage.
Legislation gentleman that the
vast majority this morning.
money to goal and by all of
these lands somehow this if it's
it's just fiction fiction Mister
And one of the things is
desperately needs to be improved
or enhanced there's a parking
lot parking lot to accommodate a
To buy a little loaned those
funds.
One ourselves into a corner.
Imagine that two sided coin Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
It was stated earlier that of
the reason that
Undermine the statute that's in
place such as game and fish has
Mr speaker and gentleman just to
make it clear.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
game and fish can still purchase
land the parking lot that was
talked about in Bernalillo
county or the shopping center
land it only put side boards all
the use of these funds.
Speaker and gentleman.
The section of the bill that
Potential option currently with
funds that already exist.
But this limitation of no
the end of the demand clause is
the restriction of eminent
domain on these funds.
It's the exact same thing you're
looking to see what what what
your law.
And this bill.
Only you deal with the use of
this fund they do not deal with
the enabling legislation of any
agency.
appreciate that Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
mentioned also that.
hear from two groups that stated
that they were not included I Mr
speaker and gentleman I believe
the cattle growers and is the
wall growers are she point four
committee that I serve on both
committees heard this bill and
each case Mr speaker and
gentleman they said that they
were not at the table for
negotiations speaker and
stakeholder I would think.
Mr speaker Germany.
Speaker and gentleman I I would
like to talk a little bit the
and the federal government owned
up to the larger numbers forty
seven percent of the state
speaker and gentleman I'd like
to talk to a little bit about
San Juan County.
fee simple land.
Mr speaker and gentleman ninety
three point five percent of San
Juan county is owned by one
percent of New Mexico is owned
by the government but also maybe
of our homesteads in our private
land the federal government owns
the mineral rights underneath
many of the later homesteads the
federal government was held the
mineral rights.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
and those rights those property
rights Mr speaker and gentleman
literature property rights would
Mr speaker and gentleman.
One thing that I found was
pretty interesting I'm I'm a
several hundred acres in San
Juan County once again Mister
speaker mind you ninety three
point five percent.
Of this of the San Juan county
is owned by one government
the former treasurer from San
Juan County representative
Duncan.
the understanding of why that
land was purchased Mr speaker
good investment is because as I
stated earlier only six point
five percent of San Juan county
is private property.
overabundance of Mr speaker and
gentleman it is government
owning property in the state of
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
Speaker and gentleman is
because.
As far as I'm concerned federal
government should be paying us
rent I got a big footprint in
It's been stated that the.
Government cannot it can only
pay you what the property is
valued at Mr speaker and
When we had to purchase right
away.
For expansion of five fifty.
Mr speaker and gentleman we were
there are there money if if the
state wants to buy something
there are ways to get around
paying just what the evaluation
to this legislation because we
once again it does nothing to
currently limit how.
Of game and fish and I believe
the speaker and gentleman so
nothing would stop them under
dollars that are coming in from
other sources.
Your amendment just would make
heard you ask for a roll call
vote so I would suggest when you
are finished with this debate
that you make sure and ask for
that roll call vote and I will
Debate on the amendment the
gentleman from the they'll go
actually of the gentleman from
Travis Etienne noted about his
Speaker and gentleman.
Coming from an agricultural
family
to sell it and there's some
there's some credence to that.
and that's private property
rights.
You Mr speaker gentleman I have
seen appraised value I have seen
value that was set forth by a
lawyers that set the set forth
the value of that property I see
that where they looked at the
similar sales in the area
there's a variety of ways to set
it was fifty four thousand acres
of so for thirty four million
dollars.
Pretty pricey.
But as you well know and then if
you buy a ranch down in the.
to we got to play that game.
But gentleman several years ago
and there may be a way around.
but.
If the state.
It was restricted from paying
being over priced.
And
When you look at.
Fifty four thousand acres it's a
little over eighty four
sections.
hundred mama cows on eighty four
sections.
Which would mean that they were
paying like.
You know.
But it also.
Equates to about six hundred
and.
A little over six hundred
dollars an acre.
And just also for six hundred
may be some more may hello some
some that that would because of
their scenic value would have
higher values but.
I I think
I think.
Piece of the bill that causes
many people concerns and
I would like to get to where I
could vote for him I think your
amendment would do it I also
three times the price and that's
what's got everybody's stirred
the.
Mr speaker gentleman not that
I'm aware of a you know a and
I'll I will just say that I
believe in free enterprise I
enterprise by soul of purpose
with this amendment is to put
side boards on the use of the
money in this fund it is not to
a wise amendment I think put
aside boards on that protects
taxpayers in New Mexico protects
in industry it's vital to New
that's what he really needs to
happen Mr speaker gentleman I
would like to see this money
used to restore our watersheds.
Mr speaker if we did that plan
presented of the last US.
The gentleman please yield
Mister speaker Mr speaker I
yield.
know there's a simple app that
you can get on I use this for
hunting it's a great app it's
called an onyx screen the onyx
that have you ever use that Mr
Mr speaker Joan and it's exactly
what it looks like and why does
it look like a checkerboard
Mister speaker because there is
State Land federal and private
anybody took this on X. map and
literally just took a minute and
downloaded and looked at it Mr
speaker you would definitely see
that we are have no lack of
gentleman this this map tells
you tap on the top by the four
corners and I'm screwed up on
the steel and it'll tell me that
I get out of that and I just tap
on any square right up to zoom.
Zoom up and and and look at it I
can tap and you'll you'll just
two hundred twenty five thousand
six hundred fifty six of fifty
fifty acres.
For the civil national port
forest.
Mr speaker John of I just type
in the middle here.
forty seven thousand three
hundred twenty five acres for
tribal lands for the come up
level.
Welcome approval.
I'm gonna go to my neck of the
four point oh eight acres.
Let me go to the top on this
particular colors green.
I mean certain things and of and
it's a light gray color I'm
one hundred ninety five thousand
fifteen acres you could sit here
for just five minutes and I
would encourage as the the body
Mr speaker gentleman to take
really are and you would be
shocked we have we are not
lacking in in lands and I agree
Mr speaker German idol I really
like this bill the only the only
that we can that we know that
that I can use that money to
further purchase property that I
think I think this in New Mexico
in the state out of that and
that's just my personal opinion
little colored dots on it each
what little shade file is a
different color depending on who
owned it what whether state and
and asked him if they like to
participate in our project and I
had about a ninety some odd
percent participation because
most people want clean water
maybe not supported simply
because of that it is really it
I'm I'm most likely not going to
support it for that reason I if
you could just put some
parameters around that Mr
download that app and look at
that it would definitely have a
different opinion about this
bill thank you Mr speaker Jim.
The lady from Bernalillo on the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
it's not a good amendment for
this bill it's my understanding
that the elder acquisition was
done in consultation with local
community including ranchers in
has been a huge success thank
you Mr speaker.
The debate on the women's lady
from Bernalillo Representative
little.
please yield thank you
I would like to echo the
comments made by my colleague
the other Representative lovely
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county because this is a
help our acquisition was a very
of.
was it difficult at issue that
was addressed in the year in the
that ranchers are be are able to
sell their land if they choose
to do so thank you gentlemen
thank you Mr speaker speaker
this would have no effect on the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Colfax curry
party quite a San Miguel and you
you.
Mr speaker I yield.
weeks the number of groups that
came through here
with kids.
That work on different different
Mr speaker gentleman I I do
remember that.
The only.
As as we have those
conversations and I had several
right down here where I had the
And Mr speaker and gentleman I
talked to them but I did they
did they realize.
These are taxpayer funds to
acquire private land that could
keep them from being able to
access those properties and they
Mr speaker Jim and I went in on
that conversation but I think
that our our watershed projects
routinely use kids to help
amount of water in the river the
cleanliness of the water my
project for one is a doctor
level people to come out and
train on our school children to
help them understand about their
clue that this could potentially
be used for for acquiring land
by eminent domain.
In a total on the less we were
able to change that I probably
Mr speaker gentleman I do.
Thank you you know when I first
got the honor of sitting on
House Appropriations.
speaker and gentleman as the
appropriation and passes.
Ellen and member me raise and
all kinds of hell over that
because.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
God hearing for the substance
was the.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe the substance of the
bill is debated in the committee
that deals with the substance of
the bill the Appropriations
in the phone Mr speaker and
gentleman.
thank you a lot of respect to to
chair small he he he heard my
did get the chance to start
debating bills and at the end of
this bill.
When the roll call was done I
voted no do you remember that Mr
leader gentleman when I'm gonna
No I'll get to the point three
call me voting no on this and
then change my vote.
Mr speaker gentleman the.
Handelman I that changed by the
speaker and gentleman I stand in
support of your amendment.
I think it's well guided Mr
speaker and gentleman that very
day that we had that debate.
Some of those acquisition for
and talked about for instance
the Baca and Roosevelt purchase
until after I brought it up.
Mr speaker gentleman are.
Just tool gentleman one of
the dilemmas could gentleman
from Chavis eighty in the
Representative Mason.
The gentleman yield Mister
This this bill is a good bill.
And with his amendment I don't.
For state hardly anybody wanting
to vote against.
of the land.
Not a lot of money in the bill
forward to the.
Information of mental that with
only agencies in the bill that
Not.
The facilitate the purchase of
land by the state government
agency for that reason I support
Senator.
Grateful we are on a motion to
table house floor amendment
number one to Senate finance
One of the thirty four in the
Mr speaker I thank you for the
time hi I just this is a good
bill many of those have dreamed
of it for a long time to have
matching funds to keep these
from Rio Arriba some of us on
the Fe Intel's Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker for the
kind gentleman yield Mister
speaker I gladly yield to the
protect our land and water is
that what this bill is really
about Mr speaker gentle lady
yes.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I I
opinions about watersheds and
land restoration and soil
conservation and and all the
things it seems we never have
enough money to do is that
endowment that will that will
finally create sustaining funds
in our budget so that we don't
have to worry about the the ups
and to really we have the money
to work on those watersheds we
talk a lot about soil and
conservation districts but I'm
in agriculture and I chair that
group culture committee and I
is set to Mr speaker gentle lady
you're exactly right the we have
watched as other states all
around us have done better at
drawing and federal matching
this is our shot this is our
chance and that's why folks are
so excited.
And Mr speaker kind gentleman.
stakeholders to one create no
new programs let's work with
what's there to Mr speaker
gentle lady focus on those
programs that need a federal
match because we know up until
out as a result.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman as
chair of probation you also
understand that we hopefully
it'll still come out when the
help these different political
subdivisions right grants to
bring in this these federal
dollars is that not true Mr
speaker gentle lady yes and
thank you to you Mr speaker
writers in those communities
have funds to actually say we
can leverage these federal funds
with that Mr speaker and a kind
gentleman I can't take credit
recognize it was a bipartisan
sin issued and it was really we
were really trying it was a
really a rural unincorporated
issue that's cities have their
passed a couple years ago we
created
the outdoor recreation division
within the Economic Development
We did so Mister speaker and
kind gentleman because we
recognized we really recognize
the economic opportunity that
this state has an outdoor
although we have lagged behind
other states we have grown Mr
speaker gentle lady faster than
other states our New Mexico true
program which leverages our
outdoor heritage and our
one part of the state Mr speaker
gentle lady from the northwest
to the southeast to the south of
south central Mr speaker gentle
gentle lady they have been
frankly uniquely successful at
being able to move funds out
into communities all across our
shining star when it comes to
working in local partnership
with local communities now
they're going to have a little
over I think it's two point two
three billion dollars Mr speaker
Joe you later yes the the and
rising these are these are
quickly rising it is a
something when the stakeholders
put together the existing
programs that was one of the key
programs Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you kind gentleman Mr
two funds Mr speaker gentle lady
there is a permanent fund that
the goal is to reach Mister
speaker gentle lady upwards of
three hundred million dollars
the reason Mr speaker gentle
year will come from that
permanent fund that gets
invested that has the highest
rate of return and goes into the
legacy fund Mr speaker gentle
lady the legacy fund is the one
that annually puts out these
to touch this this will be self
sustaining Mr speaker gentle
lady and and energy minerals
gets twenty two point five New
Mexico department of agriculture
imagine a day with fun like
that.
I can imagine a day when
watersheds won't have to compete
for money when they can go to
the fund and say here here's
what we need to do in our in our
speaker and gentleman a group of
ranchers took me up in the north
it was above Abbey Q. and and
they and they really showed me
how they were doing watershed
and how you how you conserve the
water how you protect the land
how you restore the land and how
you keep it really for future
generations isn't really that
I think this is really one of
the most important bills we have
this session I really do because
we are talking about you know
seven generations from now
this body kind gentleman I thank
you for being at Ford I'd urge
this body to vote for this bill.
There is further debate the
gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
gladly able to the gentleman
from Lee.
Support this piece of
legislation.
Representative.
In this chamber tonight.
The state.
More than market rates.
Thank you transaction.
question roughly equal.
Mr Chairman.
Forward by.
Well connected in need of
conservation groups.
Money is one.
that went for time.
Economic value of the property
to.
On the other side of the
generating a rate of return from
the resources available on that.
pay for those resources.
For that reason Mr speaker and
gentleman.
One side.
Sources on the other.
Should not be passing
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you to.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Dona Ana you Mr.
presentation on this bill both
in house energy and House
Appropriations and one of the
things that I was most struck
took place and really the
desire.
By the Sanchez and legislators
was something that everyone
could agree on Mr speaker and
permanent fund Mr speaker gentle
lady and fifty million dollars
going into the legacy fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
the items that I see is that.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
bill does stipulate that the
distributions will only take
place if the balance of the
hundred fifty million dollars Mr
speaker gentle lady that's why
there is fifty million dollars
put in the legacy fund so for
the for this next several years
which will then be self
sustaining to have a few years
the wear and all of the
different programs we discussed
here tonight will be able to
determined you is it similar to
the distribution of that we have
set up for for instance the
lady its the
anything above Mr speaker gentle
lady five million dollars that
is generated and interests Mr
speaker and gentle lady and so
gentle lady we ensure that this
trust fund will continue to grow
and therefore become this more
and more self sustaining not
need additional injections of
interest in the permanent fund.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen in terms of the
distributions from the land of
enchantment legacy Fund.
agencies Miss Iglesias.
And Mr speaker gentleman does
the does Senate bill nine set
thought so highly of the
collaboration and the coalition
that they had built that they
saw fit to clearly put those
distributions in statute.
does seem very comprehensive at
for instance Mr speaker and
gentleman I did notice I think
just in terms of funding going
watershed restoration act and
the prices that prescribed
burning Act
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
Thank you Mr you're generating
thanks to my experts Mr speaker
gentle lady it protects land and
water available for forests and
watersheds Mr speaker gentle
that work for wildlife and
wildlife habitat natural areas
agricultural production speaker
gentle lady working farms and
The quite a few things actually
and and I forget exactly what
item I was going to sort of
piggy back off of but I did
also one of the beneficiaries of
these funds and
Mr speaker and gentleman I
notice that noxious weed
point five percent is going to
the department of agriculture
Mr speaker and gentleman what is
the significance for the
lady first the soil and water
conservation districts are
uniquely positioned Mr speaker
gentle lady and body in that
they're able to work across all
whether that land is public Mr
speaker let gentle lady or or
state they can do true watershed
restoration work and soil water
position and have a strong long
history of working very closely
with agricultural producers Mr
speaker gentle lady this body
soffit in a bipartisan manner
activity in the soil after after
farmer plowed that soil Mr
speaker gentle lady and so the
healthy soils Act updated and
other entities tribes and other
stakeholders that goes through
the department of.
Or culture and finally you
mentioned the noxious weeds
gentle lady and so I think it's
frankly it's a point of pride
that we should all have the
department of agriculture is
really tied at the top of this
I had not noted specifically
that the New Mexico department
of agriculture was receiving the
same amount of distributions as
energy minerals and natural
stewardship is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman speaker
gentle lady yes.
Thank you and then Mr speaker
the functions that we have seen
the outdoor recreation to
Division.
What what they've undertaken in
the past year to Mr speaker
so Mister speaker gentle lady of
round the state these of often
taken the form whether it's key
trail infrastructure in parts
maybe along the continental
speaker gentle lady and in fact
for entire network trail systems
that enhance the recreation
value in areas and Mr speaker
something downtown perhaps Mr
speaker gentle lady go to a
locally owned
establishment whether that's to
grab a bite whether that's to
outdoor recreation division to
be able to connect to those
recreational opportunities that
Mr speaker and body we know
surround every single community
recreation division has been
particularly successful of
partnering with communities no
matter where they are no matter
who comes from there there is an
how outdoor recreation is really
something that is beneficial to
all of our communities both
urban and rural and so I was
Silvercity and that in the queue
a or in Farmington with some of
the.
Mmhm.
ATV I think don't don't they
speaker gentle lady I love it
because in fact Mr speaker
gentle lady who here you know
outside of Santa Fe it course
inTaos Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady in fact
we've heard that one of the
largest raft manufacturers that
sends rafted down those rivers
and rivers all across our
approach those businesses exist
all across our state because we
have unique opportunities all
across our state Mr speaker
gentle lady if they don't yet
speaker gentle lady I think a
big thanks to folks like senator
Neville
continuing work that that built
out our outdoor recreation
isn't this fixes that Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen that actually leads me
to a suggestion that perhaps
Mr speaker and and gentleman my
last question is just about the
distribution for the remaining
thirty percent we've actually
talked about how seventy percent
development but there to other
agencies that are also
beneficiaries and one is a
that you think of.
How those departments would
utilize these funds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
and protecting state on cultural
property Mr speaker gentle lady
and again the state on cultural
properties exist they're spread
all across the state enhancing
that I think of fort Selden
lady with the department of game
and fish that could be
everything from enhancing
species recoveries Mr speaker
gentle lady to say it it to
through Mr speaker gentle lady
for wildlife viewing and some of
our state wildlife areas Mr
speaker gentle lady
enhancement Mr speaker gentle
lady and the department of game
and fish will now have resources
to partner with federal agencies
in ways that they just frankly
never have had before Mr speaker
gentle lady.
would benefit from this funding
I think maybe we could have its
own interim committee.
Mr speaker gentleman that is all
the sort of the questions that I
how we are looking at some of
our surplus funds that we have
today and needs that we have now
and into the future and how we
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker and looking over your
bill on page one online twenty
four.
Land grant permanent fund means
the permanent school fund and so
signify as a permanent fund.
Is that considered Mr speaker
and gentleman a school section.
by my experts Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
every town to there is X. number
sections that are school
On July the first of each year
the conservation legacy
permanent fund exceed that
exceeds one hundred fifty
million dollars.
And that goes on and All is
else to yes I do the land of
enchantment legacy for there it
is okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman on I'm
going back to.
Line fourteen.
Twenty two and a half percent
should be distributed to energy
minerals natural resources
the projects and programmes
pursuant to the cop forest
conservation act are.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
be other forest.
Health of Forrest forest health
projects Mr speaker gentle lady
samples I'm gonna look through
with power lines Mr speaker
gentle lady strategic public
land funding Mr speaker gentle
lady restoring riparian habitat
this is in the support of both
land that's a very high wildfire
risk Mr speaker gentle lady
those are just some examples in
in almost all of the examples Mr
especially post fire it's a
focus on watershed present
protection and resiliency again
strengthening current habitat
rest Brett.
programs force conservation act
of course if they're going in
there to the in the force what
happens to those trees that are
filled thank you Mr using a
secondary uses Mr speaker gentle
lady
so I in my I think the answer my
very in case the case but I we
know that they also partner with
because I know since we don't
have any cell mills lived in the
state of fire would is that what
it's being used for.
of things Mr speaker gentle lady
think there's still hope that
there's ways to get laminin from
small diameter trees and and
thinning and to look at other
forests were used in the trees
that were in the forced to burn
okay I get that since we don't
have any so mills anymore said
Mr speaker.
energy minerals and natural
resources.
contractors so Mister speaker
the city that you typed job than
it is through private
contractors and my understanding
that right Mr speaker gentle
And Mister speaker when we're
talking about the forest and
watershed management projects of
give me a little more
information about that because
of those watersheds are an
visiting about Mr speaker gentle
lady to the noxious weed removal
Mr speaker and gentle lady to Mr
speaker gentle lady actually
planning so if you're there in a
vegetation species in order to
stabilize and then hold it more
and more moisture there in my
period in areas so Mister
speaker gentle lady to
everything from clearing that
about the success helping mother
nature through the succession
process after some of these
catastrophic events Mr speaker
There were people that actually
grazed or forest and we didn't
have the problems that we have
for now Mister speaker whenever
New Mexico was even the state
and we did not have these
problems but now we are making
sure that we have this little
malice that is making these
about watershed management
projects along the river never
think you're talking about
noxious weeds what about
invasive species such as salt
areas of our referred one of one
of those that it includes is the
Honda river that does originate
right there at the Honda New
taken upon ourselves and our
neighbors have to to read it
Kate the salt cedar with no help
from the environment department.
that dear nor and low but nor
Bob kids nor maps Alliance nor
jackrabbits can get into that
so we again we can see what
government does to help
everybody else out because we
are the down river side at that
particular thing so we
Projects and programs prescribed
to the person pursuant to the
prescribed burning Act talk to
me about that are we going to be
starting fires again whenever
the winds are over forty miles
Harm to our livestock and our
wildlife.
Mr speaker gentle lady no and Mr
speaker gentle lady this
prescribed fire acting what
sorts of things that we saw
federally that happen Mr speaker
gentle lady
so we are going to work very
hard to avoid those things Mr
it is meant to bring folks
closer together and I'd like to
know who's some of the
stakeholders are Mr speaker and
gentleman.
That were involved in that
I've I've I was not a sponsor
that legislation so I can and as
well described that Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentleman
may be your expert witnesses
could.
program the process to have more
clarity more safety when it
comes to fire Mr speaker gentle
gentle lady apparatus in sort of
year round Mr speaker gentle
lady folks who can be out there
doing this important work.
Describe everything that took
place of the little in the calf
canyon fire because I was down
in the rid of so area at that
Mainly because of wind problems
that we've been having down
there.
Whenever these fires and compass
such a large area.
The cattle and if there's any
sheep.
For renters left a list their
hearts.
We kind of put them out of
livestock do you think that that
might create a hardship for
these ranchers out there that
are actually bits on the ground.
Speaker gentle lady yes.
We decided it's not a good thing
to have the natural setting can
are forced due to lightening.
whenever there is one Mr
speaker.
The state also down under energy
minerals and natural resources
that fifty percent goes to the
does it encompass and how badly
is it going to affect those of
us that are still trying to make
a living off the land.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
twenty force action plan a
couple of executive orders Mr
speaker gentle lady those were
the funding projects I described
on Joplin region Otero County
lady Sikora both K. and and
Sikora County setting again
those are all examples of the.
The
That raises concerns for me
Mister speaker.
Mr speaker twenty two and a half
percent should be distributed to
the board of regents for the
of information on that talk to
me about that.
Do you know what goes to with
noxious weeds Mr speaker more
often than not they eat them do
you know what she beat those
grasses that cattle one eight do
you know what cattle do Mr
And yet we have to take care of
our animals and we also have to
could take care of the state's
wildlife is will Mr speaker.
We're gonna learn from New
Mexico state.
How to take care of the noxious
weeds so I want to hear what
Taking care of the land we not
only live on the land Mr speaker
we live with the land.
And we are the true
not only our state but for our
country and the world so I want
to hear what New Mexico state is
going to do to help us with the
noxious weed management thank
lady but on the ground I think
what I know this takes place Mr
speaker gentle lady there might
be night shade that is blooming
balloons and some areas
particularly having blooms
depending upon the weather
patterns and Mr speaker gentle
lady the range improvement task
force and other partners from
in some cases the disease or
death amongst livestock and
other animals Mr speaker gentle
lady working to help defray the
impacts of that working Mr
to grant or other sorts of
things Mr speaker and gentle
lady New Mexico State University
and the New Mexico department of
action actor culture is
gentle lady to help work with.
Producers and others across the
state on how to manage or how to
adapt or how to deal with what
can be pretty traumatic events
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
behind an office and doing
nothing nothing to protect those
people that are out there
working day in and day out okay.
So
horses excuse me not free
roaming horses the wild horses
now.
It will kill our.
So the.
Would that be the environment
department that is going to
carry that out oh wait no that's
watershed restoration let's see
what that fall under game and
fish I don't know it might not.
Certain species of our livestock
and our wildlife.
Mr speaker gentle lady I didn't
hear the first part of it but I
think the answer is yes Mr
speaker gentle lady you just
time for for death Mr speaker
gentle lady but it makes those
horses dangerous and
unpredictable during the hotter
months when they're sweating and
other things like that Mr
informed by my experts that the
stakeholders again including the
conservation district and others
ask for this specific program to
be added for its eligibility to
districts throughout our state
have done an excellent job with
limited resources that they do
have.
But like I said for every
Often are met with no you can't
do that no that's not one of our
rules no you cannot do that we
met with that all the time they
Thank you know what.
Of.
Also we have county extension
offices that are available to be
help and people that are I have
The stakeholders that were
involved I heard that the New
Mexico cattle growers
association was not involved in
these conversations The New
speaker gentle lady I'm told by
my experts that the meetings
were open Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm also told Mr speaker gentle
lady that at least one of the
groups that is the New Mexico
Mr speaker gentle lady by other
stakeholders but
so so that's all I can sort of a
test to hear Mr speaker gentle
growers always have their annual
meeting in December.
And if they were sent what this
is going to be.
Taking place while we were in
bill you say ten percent should
be distributed that far
apartment of the environment to
plan design and construct
projects to improve surface
controlling and reducing erosion
Mr speaker gentle lady that
could be enhancing right parian
areas so water filtration
through those right period in a
contaminating water quality
right along the bank that Mr
speaker gentle lady that that
this could be used for those are
just some examples Mr speaker
contamination of water and
whenever we saw what was going
on down at the former like
McMillan area that does
now.
anything to help that particular
area.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I can't
speak to that Mr speaker gentle
lady I can speak to again the
existing shared responsibilities
the Mr speaker gentle lady we in
New Mexico have lacked the
matching resources to help do a
kind of puts a Burr under my
saddle okay.
Because that's what their job is
and that's what I'm trying to
get out here we've seen what
energy minerals and natural
resources as done which is.
might be happening over there on
the hill of forced with the.
US Forest Service going day in
there and early.
makes me sick.
I never heard a response back
whenever we are talking about
the the the department of
agriculture they do the best
an exceptional Hey quality that
we have now surely that they
have produced the pool testing
stations that they have the list
goes on and on.
Mr speaker the environment
department does the same thing.
We've seen what they have done
to dairies located throughout
our state.
The majority of the dairies have
complied with and gone above and
Whenever I am looking at oil and
gas as being the number one.
Mr speaker.
We weren't successful right now
what we do how are these people.
speaker thank you gentle lady
first I appreciate your bringing
up the oil and gas industry Mr
speaker gentle lady chevron I
think Mr speaker gentle lady as
I understand it either the
lady that's deeply appreciated
Mr speaker gentle lady
Furthermore we've talked about
there been conservation and for
its lead within geo partners and
limited staff the speaker gentle
lady I submit that that's in
fact the case when it comes to
the energy and minerals and
natural resources department
when is comes to the environment
either protected enhancing
conserve it it pales in
comparison to states East West
south or south East West north
Arizona whether it's Colorado
whether it's Texas we're finally
getting Mr speaker gentle lady
with these funds the ability for
the state of New Mexico to
very limited budget
in with limited resources.
Mr speaker.
just try to to for that's right
how many trillions of dollars.
Our window right now.
Folks we're gonna have to work
harder so we can get our start
twenty to
twenty five percent of their
money the fifteen twenty five
percent of their fifteen percent
is going to the outdoor
recreation division of the
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
The outdoor equity fund Mr
speaker gentle lady we've got
The ex that enhances
connectivity between people
plants and lands in the middle
Rio Grande Valley the speaker
gentle lady there's the Vista
resources while connecting to
their cultural heritage Mr
speaker gentle lady and I think
that really the thing I take
from that is that you take any
meant specifically to help
connect them their it's not
limited to one type of outdoor
experience or another and over
time Mr speaker gentle lady
just for a couple years Mr
speaker gentle lady those are
some of the examples of what
it's done.
Mr speaker if we could wish
Water doesn't come just out of a
false.
If we could extend that
experience for every kid that
lives in town.
just tell me about projects to
really didn't tell me about any
the infrastructure and I heard
it from the Albuquerque the
Gallup area and where was
southern inTaos.
with the skycity trail project
and again thanks to my experts
Mr speaker gentle lady
there is a effort in San Juan
County creating an eight mile
see this happen and all other
parts of the state speaker
gentle lady I don't I could not
agree more Mr speaker gentle
lady there are
the the projects that I talked
this legislation would unleash
Mr speaker gentle lady will have
will provide a perpetual source
of funding for those communities
to utilize those these sorts of
carry out projects and pros and
programs for the cultural
properties protection act thank
you Mr so one of those and I do
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady I know
down in in my neck of the woods
yet for Seldon in Nash the state
as a as a young child or a
younger child we're his I
believe his family was stationed
Mr speaker gentle lady that Ford
is falling down going into
lady have frankly deteriorated
and if we lose too much more
than Mr speaker gentle lady then
we don't lose that history we do
lose that connection to previous
frankly more folks from all over
the world good to see and
experience our unique history
and culture.
Mr speaker I have a problem with
talking about restore more lands
which kind of gives me concern
because government be involved
in restoring more lands those
working with folks on the ground
for land and watershed health Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
with that the I don't know
this evening Mr speaker gentle
lady private land holders are
eligible and in fact in many
cases do participate in them
from the healthy soils program
including private landholders Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
whenever we're talking about the
healthy soils Act I have gone
into our local.
get approval and then you have
to do this then you have to do
that about the time that you get
all the stuff done I don't know
Of.
There's all sorts of problems
with that held the soil Act
don't get me wrong I understand
Commission whenever they started
buying the land from for some or
all the way down to Brantley
damn Mr speaker they were buying
water rights along with the land
those lands were to be planted
back into native grasses and
established before that water
right could be moved Mr speaker
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
familiar.
Mr speaker I have an answer for
the.
Zero.
Zero.
whenever we're talking about
noxious weeds Mr speaker those
noxious weeds at one time and I
can still verify with the
Government work again Mr
speaker.
We got we got that law changes
Exclusive of the land for the
landowner kept that plant to
take better care of the the
government could they could not
subdivided list they had the
The burden that it put on those
farmers around them was
unbelievable.
Talk about a cost in in
herbicides eve bit was it was
ugly Mr speaker.
propagation of game and fish.
Mr speaker one more time.
To actually on a day to day
gentle lady there is a great
deal of work that's been put
into an Mr speaker gentle lady
in this case as we talk
specifically about the
department of game and fish they
laws Mr speaker gentle lady they
have done work to conserve
restore bring back species that
were frankly Mr speaker gentle
lady on the brink of extinction
Mr speaker that might have been
discharged to the wrong
department should have been
discharged farmers and ranchers
because we are the ones that are
feeding and watering the state's
the past thirty years we've had.
Three major blizzards up there
and I haven't seen him out there
wants help me feed and their
in their pickups where were they
whenever they were needed Mr
speaker I'd like to know
gentleman if you know the answer
LA I don't have those numbers
off the top of my head Mr
speaker gentle lady nor to my
experts with Mr speaker gentle
lady some examples very limited
popular recreation area Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker they have holdings
all over the state.
species right down at dexter New
Mexico there is.
The dexter national fish
hatchery.
of the world with the golden
algae bloom.
To the environment department do
anything to help out with the
did game and fish do anything to
Is there any disk explanation
for the.
The Mr gently and not in the
bill this is of just a funding
bill Mr speaker gently that Mr
very devastating problem state
park down there bottomless lakes
it was killing all the fish down
there it was.
I don't know if you all know
to a private entity Mr speaker
and nineteen hundreds.
And bottomless lakes was given
to the state of New Mexico it is
the oldest state park in the
and district because of the
golden algae bloom.
It was devastating.
There is that we help with
coming Mr speaker.
I don't like this bill.
What really brought my attention
to it.
It shall not be used for the
purposes of eminent domain.
Taxpayers dollars going to
buying land for the government
to stop in those lands be taken
off the tax base of those
And I will reiterate again all
stakeholders we're not involved.
There is three major groups
right here that unnamed earlier.
Communities.
Are under fire right now.
And it's getting harder and
harder every day you Mr speaker
as far as I can tell.
The percentage of farmers and
ranchers in the United States
right now is right around two
point six percent of the total
population.
There is further debate the
gentleman from all that all
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Dona Ana please
thing with which is a noxious
weed Mr speaker gentleman can
you tell me Mr speaker gentleman
which department of the state is
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman because I believe in
Otero county I know for a fact
Mr speaker gentlemen we have a
big problem in the Sacramento
mountains with noxious weeds up
gentleman so you know I've been
looking at my Otero soil and
water conservation district
website Mr speaker according to
the website Mr speaker gentlemen
says the energy minerals and
gentleman how with this bill and
this fund affect those
happenings down in Otero county
where I'm from my neck of the
woods regarding the noxious weed
and making sure that we can take
gentleman so with this so I
guess with the supplement what's
already happening Mr speaker or
would this be in addition to
what already supplement Mr
D. A. they're getting a twenty
two point five percent of this
land of enchantment legacy fund
for fifty million four we're
getting twenty two point five
each fiscal year Mr speaker.
This gentleman roughly two point
eight million dollars of this
initial twelve point five we'll
gentleman it's going to be up to
twelve million no more than
twelve million per year in the
current conception because
conceivably Mr speaker gentleman
you may see a lot of
toward this twenty two percent
total speaker gentle inside it
and I I appreciate the
opportunity to add to that
because this is these are state
funds to leverage federal funds
twenty five to probably fifty
million dollars per year
utilizing all of these funds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
county were using the department
of New of energy and natural
major minerals so Mister speaker
gentleman how utilizing these
funds the Energy verses these
they're eligible for Mr speaker
gentleman working with New
Mexicans on the ground all
across our state.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and so Mister speaker
between the federal government
or are those individuals already
in the departments Mr speaker
tenement Mr speaker gentlemen I
think in many cases the folks
are already there Mr speaker
gentleman to these individuals
Mr speaker would they be working
alongside the conservation
districts primarily regarding
the noxious weed Mr speaker
individuals person things like
that Mr speaker from the federal
government how are we going to
be utilizing those federal
individuals are already on the
would we be utilizing those
staffers to our state advantage
to make sure that we will get
the best bang for our Buck so to
speak Mr speaker from this new
fund Mr speaker Mr chair in some
locale better so Mister speaker
gentleman this is all about the
match this is all about the
leverage that it provides and
the ability to put that money to
work on the ground.
things like noxious weed or
water management things like
this Mr speaker or is there some
kind of formula that's built
into this fund Mr speaker thank
resources so that there is the
ability to fund more projects
over a greater period of time.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman to these projects that
speaker Mr leader gentleman all
of these are current programs
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and so with the
outdoor equity program Mr
speaker Mr leader gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so.
Regarding his outdoor equity
fund Mr speaker are we.
speaker Mr leader gentleman to
enhance the experiences of New
Mexicos a young people all
across our state and to bring
them closer natural and cultural
connections.
speaker Stacy and Mr Mr speaker
I'm just gonna read a real quick
Mr speaker twenty two point five
percent in New are do we have a
twenty two point five as well
that's that's equal NMDA Mr
speaker Mr chairman for the
Sanchez and primarily through
the stakeholders okay thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen
and the you know I appreciate
the answers and I certainly
the in the different places in
our state that we're so proud to
call home and I appreciate the
answers today Mister speaker and
I yield back thank you so much
Say no further debate gentleman
to close Mr speaker I greatly
appreciate the conversation
we've had here this evening Mr
as long as our state is here
which will be far W. as it is.
Which will be far into the
future there is no more
important bill I appreciate the
You're on final passage of the
Senate finance committee.
Substitute for S. P. line the
What is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of fifty four in the affirmative
at eleven in the negative
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill nine
Julia gentlelady from Bernalillo
ready on item.
Number.
Mr speaker for you'll take me to
that place is a record that
elections are replacing house
with three forty five a final
president taking it is now
subject to debate amendment or
suggestions related to explain
House Bill three four five is to
set up a recruitment fund for
firefighters
this will begin to address
recruiting and pay issues for
we have captain Martin Salazar
of the Albuquerque fire and
rescue and he's also with the
And I will stand for any
questions also Mr speaker I do
have one floor amendment this
bill made its way through labor
veterans of military
because of I will move our
amendment number one.
the to to six number at the
bottom hi Canada's point two two
Thank you Mr speaker there are
four items on can you please not
can you stand by real quick well
the amendment gets passed out.
Yes Sir Mr speaker thank you.
Is imminent passed out it is
almost instead of.
Thank you Mr speaker the
amendment are basically those
four items and this is a result
two we are discussing the fund
of which we are basically
creating in this bill and then
item number three we are
department for the first time
and then item number four is
basically some cleanup language
from Katrin supporters had about
as a representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa the old
would be dispersed is this money
in the budget Mr speaker kind
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
this money will was not
for an appropriation.
Mr speaker kind lady and and the
clawback or recapture rules
of fire fighter if they are
recruited and they did not state
the entire three years then the
clawback commits them to pay now
Mr speaker and kind lady of
homeland security would be in
charge of this.
amendment is there objection to
adopting the amendment C.
Mannion amended bill committee
are you ready for questions.
Thank you Mr speaker I stand for
There's more incentives good
well as representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady
Is it normal.
Mr speaker kind lady we do this
all the time.
full time
career firefighters.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
set to create the fund with no
money in it and I also think
that it's that presidents as
presidents to set to not include
all firefighters thank you Mr
speaker.
Will it be able to the kind
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
of police is that correct.
Mr speaker kind gentleman this
is actually became the police
Fund and of yes.
that the fire department has in
the in law enforcement is called
the law enforcement protection
it needs to be some fund that
the fire department already has
set up.
No Mr speaker but I mean that's
just a statement I mean it's a
it's a there's no funding for
which had about fifteen million
in it per year so I mean you
know if the firefighters I know
they have a retirement and all
Religion lady from Bernalillo.
I'm sorry yes I will yield.
We could.
dollar signing bonuses if you
will two firefighters Senator.
Mr speaker Representative Scott
channels gentleman that is
Students Mexico is not short of
firefighters.
For one point
one firefighters percent one
thousand residents which is
approximately.
thousand dollars bonus would
appear to be a well staffed.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Santa Fe alone has a fifteen
percent deficit and smaller fire
fight fires
firefighters if they lose to
them their short.
For more file of the.
thousand dollars bonus which
would imply.
We have the falcons for these
jobs.
Mr chair and gentleman Mr
speaker I'm sure I'm sorry
So Albuquerque currently has
about sixty firefighters that
John legend which forms a.
Other questions.
For firefighters rheological
from chairman finally.
H..
workforce applying for
firefighter job somewhere the
same department but possibly a
different department would be
to finish my statement there are
also approximately fifty eight
openings in the Albuquerque
area.
in Albuquerque retired and moved
to halt for example and obtain
the signing bonus.
firefighters and this is only to
recruit new firefighters.
And it's a one time
State and basically.
and and entry level if you will
with experience presents some
bones.
the types of issues that that
the rules should address and
also if he's already drawing
attention then he.
firefighter and then he goes to
a different fire station and
says he's an entry level so he
would only get a one time five
also with my expert is telling
me is that Mr speaker all
departments all all firefighters
in his retirement.
But stop.
Attorney General would come in
if they are sent to disbursement
available to external hires
internal candidates or both
could you explain.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
to deliver close.
Mr speaker I am urged the body
support of H. B. three forty
five thank you we are on final
passage of house labor militants
The vote is now open.
Close.
Loser close Google forty nine in
of business announcements and
miscellaneous business objection
it is so ordered.
Deliverable you Mr speaker at
eleven fifty nine am I move we
session there's objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Messages to objection it is so
ordered.
Members we have a Madam account
to be passed out on concurrence.
Colleges it is titled the
concurrence calendar number one
not supplemental it is
concurrence calendar number one.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the House concurrence and
amendments to house bill one
thirty just twice and it the
gentleman to explain the
amendments thank you Mr speaker
it keeps the sixty hours of in
padded professional work time
for elementary school but it
changes middle and high school
and he noted orders of Townsend
thank you Mr speaker
Gentleman will yield.
Speaker I yield.
Gentleman of this amendment
of of curriculum the days
working what exactly are we
doing Mr speaker and gentlemen
so if you remember in house bill
for professional work from sixty
in middle and high school down
to thirty in middle and high
school.
So it would
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
it would have the thirty hours
that's not embedded professional
work the instructional time and
all those in favor say about us
and I.
Was me the eyes have it the
house has concurred with
sentiments of house bill one
thirty is twice amended.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Stand by members.
Julie from Lee are you ready on
is replacing Senate bills.
Sixty four I as amended on final
passage is been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
and create standard parole
eligibility for those serving
long sentences for crimes
committed when they were
children this bill would bring
New Mexico in line with national
leave room for their potential
to experience positive
transformations many in this
body have seen this bill before
and many of how the opportunity
during the session to meet
stories of redemption and hope.
And I'm grateful to all of our
members to listening for
listening to these stories this
bill looks different from the
differences because we work
tirelessly during the interim to
address concerns of diverse
stakeholders and on the Senate
side we continue to work with
created a two tiered system for
parole eligibility setting
eligibility out either twenty
five twenty excuse me fifteen
twenty or twenty five years
cases and I would like at this
point Mr speaker to let my co
sponsorship on this bill I've
heard and learned stories of
redemption and change one of
those such stories of the story
miss Kristen Magee who is here
Carissa was a star athlete in
high school at sixteen she was
well on her way to stardom with
basketball scholarships ruling
in inside though she was
almost ten years an adult prison
as a consequence.
Unlike those impacted by this
bill Carissa did have an
opportunity to return to our
community after a decade in
accounting for the harm she
caused her family and community.
Caresses not wasted the second
chance she was given today she
works for you NM supporting
undergraduate degree from UNM
and hopes one day to be a child
psychologist to help try believe
to be the kind of intervention
that she needed in her
communities and our collective
futures.
It's people like Carissa show
this body who are state might
miss out on if we declined the
invitation to give people who
from tiles thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady lake
digitally from Bernalillo
Representative on in our new I
also have the opportunity to
named Darcy.
I am sharing her story with her
permission.
When Darcy was seventeen years
old she got involved with an
He deprived her of food.
He deprived her of sleep.
He would driver out to this
Sandia mountains to shoot at her
She was always expected to be
with him.
all the time and she was with
him that night on in the winter
of nineteen ninety two when this
killing occurred she was charged
with felony murder and was
sentenced to life in prison.
She's been in prison for twenty
It has two associate degrees she
finished her bachelor's degree
she teaches math to other
inmates.
C. will not be eligible.
mother who is listening right
now who supported her throughout
her incarceration.
Now has stage four cancer.
in this time of need Mr speaker
and body this bill would give
Darcy that chance thank you Mr
speaker thank you generating
out of jail free card it does
not guarantee release.
It only guarantees that the
stories will be heard.
have experience transformation
after decades of presents an
opportunity for the state in the
community to see how people have
done.
I hope ways to become the twenty
seventh St.
So I want to just let everybody
know what we changed in the bill
diligently during the interim.
I want to compliment Senator
city of continent Sedillo Lopez
it was a primary sponsor for the
So.
We have
The spirit of the bill remains
the same.
Life without parole sentencing
I have more in extreme Tax cases
parole eligibility will be set
at twenty or twenty five years
into an adult sentence for first
of first degree murder an
individual must serve twenty
five years before being eligible
for consideration for parole
these changes reflect an effort
to account for the heightened
advocates and Office of the
Attorney General helped with the
clarifying amendment Senate
judiciary to codify the.
also.
Senate bill sixty four after the
fifteen twenty twenty five years
depending on the crime for which
excuse me that the and then adds
it's intended to address the
situation of staff sentences in
which a child receives an
extraordinarily long term.
timing of parole eligibility in
a case such as that this bill is
not intended to disturb
consecutive sentence in entirely
separate cases those cases
quote if the offender is serving
sentences for crimes arising
from multiple convictions the
time counted towards parole
eligibility for a particular
case does not begin to accrue
Mexico corrections department.
Mexico for the parole board
practices in this kind of
scenario and Senator Pirtle and
relying on brain sciences says
the children have developmental
deficits that affect their
culpability and also the
children have a remarkable
the brain that in discussions
for thought an oversight so the
result is in terms of teenagers
can appreciate this is an
unbalanced brain that more
older adults they often make
decisions that are possibly
driven by passion Mormon
momentary excitement at the same
time because these deficits are
excused is just that there is a
recognition that the child can
actually be ready and and a
really relies on a strong parole
system and a system of reward
for prisoners it makes it safer
for the employees of the
potential for bettering one's
circumstances.
And then there is the cost of
incarceration as well so in New
it is also
the evidence regarding the
science of incarceration it's
sound in that regard to.
to roll back any of these laws.
Increase the penalties and the
reform is working from Oregon to
Arkansas to a high to Maryland.
lifers of only one point one
four percent.
Increasing parental options to
those serving long sentences
provides a powerful incentive
for.
thinking presents and the
communities people return to
safer.
So.
I I do want to emphasize again
this has become a very
who voted for the bill and I
want to indicate to their some
national conservative
organizations endorsing this
legislation Americans for
in Arkansas West Virginia Ohio
Illinois Utah and Wyoming
similar second chance
legislation had Republicans
Sanchez in Maryland Democrats
have a super majority in both
that effort in Illinois became
the twenty sixth state to
abolish wife about programs the
sentencing option for children
and it created a tenure
and please give some thought to
the fact that we
Thank you Mr speaker Sir to
hustle back over here with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county please yield I don't.
The interesting thing I found
out during this one's life in
prison is not life in prison in
New Mexico.
Life in prison is thirty years.
That'll go down to twenty five
years before the elves of pearls
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and lady from
juveniles sentenced as adults
discussing.
It was to adult sentences
juveniles to adult sentences yes
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
I was talking about is a lot of
Early on Torrance.
That's exactly about this bill
at all but in New Mexico until
that didn't win one about out in
fact not that many get out at
thirty years but when we
repealed the death penalty we
LA that's exactly what I was
saying I but my point is a lot
of people think that life means
life and it what it means is in
Mr speaker and waiting for
Children sentenced as adults.
Mr speaker gentle lady so we're
Mr speaker gentle lady yes okay.
Children sentenced as adults as
a thank you for the correction
thirty dash to one NMSA motors a
first degree of the killing of
one human being or another
without lawful justification for
any means with which to death
Mr speaker yes.
Okay.
What I'm trying to do here
Mister speaker DeLeo trying to
We're talking about first degree
murder.
Somebody is willfully.
Deliberately and premeditated
killing the willful and
deliberate and premeditated
killing of another person Mr
speaker and gentle lady are
dog and the neighbour with would
they be exempt from that Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and eight million
times.
the the that the jury's decision
or the judge's decision will
very with that that that
particular case but if the
present itself until twenty
years so a seventeen year old
who is convicted of such a crime
one eight the eligible for
horrific.
Those are those are minor would
not be eligible let's say if a
minor let's see seventy
seventeen year old orchard
no exceptions for them.
board they just.
The persons convicted and
sentenced but the parole board
doesn't just.
they're they're people who will
never be found suitable for
parole and unfortunately all of
the twenty six states that have
passed this kind of informative
and I'll have had cases like
the case of Malvo from DC sniper
case and both region and
Maryland.
The convicted Malvo and he is
serving.
abolishing life without parole
for kids and making all
juveniles including Malvo parole
eligible after twenty years with
no kind of exclusion but making
support of a bill just like this
in Maryland.
And the lawmaker said to the
victim whether he believes and
although should ever be released
and he replied I don't know but
scenario that we must continue
to build on to trust our parole
boards to make the right
decision in these cases.
Mr speaker and gentleman
thinking about public safety and
There's a kid Eric Smith in
nineteen ninety three I'm all
riding his bike for a local park
in New York he was thirteen the
time I know that's not
Derrick Robie was walking home.
Smith over the ball into a
wooded area strangled them
smashes head with two large
rocks and then sodomised his
body with the tree limb.
The child was unable to show any
remorse and court psychologists
believe that Eric Smith can
never be fully rehabilitated
releases aside I think it's
pretty obvious goes without
stating.
To be eligible for parole in
twenty years instead of thirty.
I don't see how this is good for
our community.
Good for created the grieving
And now I'm thinking about these
parents who now.
Where we're gonna get over this
right.
I think that's fair for the
parents have to do ten extra
years of having to come in every
year to the parole board to
testify whether child.
amendment to this bill last year
which is part of the current
bill that does not permit a
second hearing.
and I think our experts
experience I'm sorry for not to
introduce my experts I have W.
Wilson who is an attorney with
the ACLU and does work on these
Representative anu anu the lady
from Bernalillo R. they are here
today I think pretty much you
Mr speaker and gentleman I wish
it was true but he was released.
Mr speaker not here Mister
speaker I was on one of I was a
fisherman stability so Mister
And what I'm saying is there's a
couple things.
This bill passes.
And this kid should be locked up
for thirty years plus for as far
to go for prone so in the state
of this parent is grieving gone
K. right away thirty years
that's twenty.
Other come back in five years
and every five years.
That we should not even think
about the idea of releasing
these people in the community
and.
Having his parents have to leave
re live the trauma Mr speaker
gentle lady.
twenty one for the death of a
toddler.
The two year old boy was.
And right.
And the Ramsey county medical
examiner's office ruled the
bleeding.
It's hard to read Brandt played
and trauma.
Anally raped the two year old.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker translated from
Bernalillo and Torrance.
sentenced here or were to be
sentenced ten now that we have
this
If this were to become law that
individual would
Is it every five years after
that no then thank you.
After thirty years anyone in our
People that have some serious
issues.
That we should not even
consider.
For thirty years it's not fair
to the parents have to relive
the trauma and it's definitely
are increased they reported
recidivism rate this in the
study one of the one per rest
for requested at a rate of
nearly doubled.
Forty nine point six percent
Of fourteen percent and five
years twenty one percent to ten
years and twenty four percent in
fifteen years.
the long after their discharge
based on a twenty five year
follow up the researchers found
the sexual recidivism rate of
thirty nine percent.
then murder them.
Rapists have a very high rate of
recidivism and should not be
allowed to be separate early
parole should be excluded from
this early release.
The lady would you care to move
the amendment.
Yes Mr speaker as we move house
floor amendment one number one
to Senate bill sixty four and
ask for a roll call vote Mr
speaker what is a two to six
It's been passed out
given it will gets passed out
and uploaded online and then
we'll have you explain the
amendment.
Would you kindly explain the
amendment.
Yes Mr speaker so on page two we
had to do so to put some wording
The provisions of this section
so not apply to an offender who
was convicted of any sorry
convicted of a given any adult
sentence for first degree murder
Deleted formerly as a friendly
amendment Mr speaker is not a
from management.
and there are very few cases of
courts are committing but more
importantly this budget is
honestly address sexual violence
by depriving those who commit
sexual harm of opportunities to
rehabilitation reform.
the body not to adopt the
minutes.
Related from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentlelady yields yes
absolutely.
intent to also include attempt.
Yes absolutely because Mr
speaker gentle lady if you're
attempting to do sexual
penetration on a child another
parole board and for them to be
examined whatsoever.
Now Mr speaker gentle lady with
a reply to the thirty years that
is currently there this is just
been in excluding them from
this.
Can you explain what we would do
to exclude them from this
process that's proposed Mr
speaker gentle lady absolutely
Finally rates a ten year old
and a years subsidies Dick
inside of them that they should
not be eligible for any earlier
parole release Mr speaker gentle
lady.
every single crime that's ever
happened in New Mexico and I
would bet you that if I got a
hold of some my district
attorneys are I got a hold of
some I police officers that I'm
in contact with I'm sure they
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
that's part of the point here is
that we're looking at a system
that is currently broken what
you're proposing today Mister
speaker gentle lady is with this
you know chasing after ghosts
here that don't exist Mr speaker
gentle lady and what we see from
the data based on what the
gentle lady from Bernalillo has
said and what I've heard is that
this doesn't meaningfully
possibly reform Mr speaker
gentle lady what you're doing is
the fear mongering at a at a
crime that hasn't been committed
that folks that we're not
that I would urge the body not
to vote yes on this ammendment
thank you Mr speaker.
Children from native some
pointers in with them.
I believe you quoted the actual
crimes that have taken place is
that correct the speaker and
gentle lady absolutely Mr
speaker gentle lady I'm sorry
It's not like you're making
these stories up at it I I heard
I heard the the statement there
of fear more monitoring of
things that have not happened in
New Mexico.
want to look at that way there
this is not applicable to
anyone.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady
Unfortunately when I uh them out
because she's watching real
things that have happened.
not all of those have happened
in New Mexico Mr speaker and
gently those things that
happened.
Juvenile has been convicted and
serving a life sentence right
now in New Mexico is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
according to the CYFD currently
It sounds to me as if
The judges to whatever degree
These crimes are not happening
New Mexico one of those two.
Either way Mr speaker and gentle
lady it appears to me as if we.
in the case of heinous crimes so
Mister speaker and gentle lady.
since we've been in session.
Have there been.
against us here and legislation.
So Mister speaker.
It does appear as at the very at
the very least.
Acts of murder at least at least
and threatened is that correct
Mr speaker you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and and here's kind
If we look to the reality of all
of this if CYFD is saying that
this is not applicable to anyone
and the counter argument is that
this is not applicable to anyone
They should not be eligible to
simple exception we're just
saying.
There's a recidivism rate of
super high.
They're not going to get any
inserted an object in which
House **** and kill them act I'm
gonna know if this happened when
the Telecel Liber afterwards.
But if it is something that
heinous you should not be able
and gently there have been
stories and the I the idea of
allowing.
For the opportunity.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the.
I believe what we're seeing.
And.
opportunity for there to be
rehabilitation that is something
that is looked at.
bar regardless of the
circumstance for every
circumstance it just seems on
reasonable and Mr speaker and
gentle lady I think your
the gentleman from older
Representative block thank you
Mr speaker the kind gentle lady
from Bernalillo and Torrance
please sealed absolutely.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
Brutal rapes by individuals that
are under age in the state of
New Mexico are we saying right
now today Mr speaker the it's
fearmongering to say that.
people that right and the rape
of minors and there's miners
that rape other miners as I read
other stories.
And they're people that commit
murder and I wouldn't say it's
fearmongering because I'm going
torturing a child before they
kill them Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady and the
it's a song somber note that we
have to talk about this kind of
just a piece of fear mongering
Mister speaker gentle lady so
Mister speaker gentle lady I'm
gonna read you an article I have
here from the Taos news Mr
talked about and they are trying
to be better about.
Thank you Mr speaker gently I
will not read the article Mr
speaker but I will references so
Mister speaker gentle lady it's
favors fourteenth two thousand
of his classmates Mr speaker
gentle lady and this happened at
school Mr speaker generate and I
will not mention the the
individual or the victims
because I'm not going to re
this is not fear mongering
Mister speaker gentle lady so
Mister speaker gentle lady
sing this specific example and
I'll just reference the date of
the article folks can look it up
evidence that this is not quote
unquote fearmongering but truly
there are victims out there
hurting from this disgusting
right that is happening in our
state Mr speaker gentle lady.
Minor and minor right happens
all the time that happened in
the CYFD building were child
right another child so it does
Somebody that does this this is
willful.
Intentional.
And I'm sorry.
More more.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and you know I certainly
agree with you Mr speaker gentle
lady this is such a hard topic
to talk about because there are
victims out there and we saw
Your case that you defer to
Mister speaker there are people
who have made these horrific and
terrible things and Mr speaker
to not give them any breaks
because what they did was so
deliberate and so intentional.
These are the worst of the worst
people.
would be like for the parent who
has to live with that for their
entire life well for now twenty
years instead of thirty and now
they have to start going every
and know that this worst of the
worst criminal who rate their
child.
And then kill them.
They don't have to start this
that are still alive today Mr
speaker gentle lady should not
be forced to have to be re
victimized five years after five
against these discussing rapists
Mr speaker gentle lady thank
you.
The lady from sun from Los
What you suggest here is except
for a conviction of first degree
murder as described in this
ammendment that you're proposing
commit criminal sexual
penetration.
And gentle lady
you're talking about someone who
might be fifteen year old
so what you're saying here in in
our various discussions in this
debate Mr speaker and gentle
lady is.
A fourteen year old who commits
speaker and gentle lady what I'm
saying is a set of a fourteen
year old child puts a stick in
another child's **** and races
gentle lady I'm going to ask
saying that if fourteen year old
willfully deliberately and
premeditated rape somebody.
And they murder them and they
interesting fourteen year old is
expected in under this provision
that you're offering gentle lady
to have the same.
speaker Mr speaker gentle gentle
lady I'm saying if a person sits
parole in twenty instead of
thirty years Mr speaker gently
Mr speaker gentle lady this bill
does not apply to just a person
young as fourteen years old is
that not correct gentle lady Mr
speaker No ladies are promise at
fourteen year olds don't know
the difference in right and
wrong Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
Should be treated with the same
level of maturity and knowledge
the ability develop attend as
someone who's thirty five forty
forty five fifty years old could
you answer that for me the
children can determine whether
they could have a sex change so
if they can do that then they
should be the same to know the
difference of right and wrong
eligible to be out on parole ten
years earlier Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Do you.
Is this based also on the
there's no possibility that
you'd be able to change their
redeem yourself Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady my degrees in
psychology with an emphasis on
neuropsychology and you know
seven to seventy four percent Mr
speaker and a lady so Mister
speaker gentle lady based on
your degree we are to to accept
Mr speaker gentle lady that a
were age forty is that what
you're saying Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentle lady
I never use age forty and Santa
child when the fourteen is a
difference in right and wrong
and this is premeditated willful
In essence that is a fact what
you're saying because what
you're saying is we shouldn't
treat a minor any differently
that we should treat in adult Mr
speaker gentle lady so in this
lady that's not into the
amendment what I'm saying that
if a child is fourteen year old
and willfully and deliberately
and premeditated Lee waits
another child and then murders
we're not going to allow the
parents to have to go through
that and we're not going to put
them out to the community Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I guess I
respectfully disagree.
I am not arguing with you gentle
lady that that young person
young person should be punished
who obviously made a incredible
terrible decision when they
chose to engage in this horrible
conduct I'm not saying that they
should not that conduct should
should be taken into account
through this legislation and I
request the body to reject this
amendment thank you.
yes I will allow them to go and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and members of the
sentences of on I.
Mr speaker will gentle lady
absolutely yes I yield.
Yes they were in the old prison
but let's look at a.
William Wayne Gilbert age thirty
seven.
Robbery escape from jail murder.
Anthony Michael Anthony goos mon
right and murder.
Adams rate of an eighty year old
woman and murder.
They will go on to all come back
to prison.
sorry that juveniles commit
horrible crimes.
I hear that at times the their
brain isn't developed.
We can't have it both ways.
We have individuals
And I'm sorry that I say it that
way they are just wired
differently.
And unfortunately.
Of this legislature of
government is to make our
community safe thank you Mr
amended of there is a roll call.
A vote of yes in the memo to be
tabled a vote of no and we are
back on the amendment the vote
is now open.
Was about to close.
bill six four as amended has
been tabled the lady back to you
thank you Mr speaker so the last
thing I want to say on this is
that.
decisions about their body also
know the difference between
willful deliberate and
premeditated murder especially
when they're also including
rape.
People that right when they get
And I think we've done a very
much a disservice to our
community by allowing these
rapists and murders back on the
street and I think we've done a
Repeatedly and relive the trauma
thank you Mr speaker thank you
lady next is generated from
earlier so hopefully be hill if
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady
additional lady yield.
I'm sorry Mr speaker I certainly
yield.
in I will say at first I was
hesitant.
because I do think.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
want to ask you
some questions which at which I
think have been answered but
just Austin briefly.
people eligible for a parole
hearing is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentleman yes.
Mr speaker generally in the
parole hearing.
Mr speaker gentle lady is also a
factor would be the
rehabilitation of the
perpetrator the juvenile now an
gentleman.
The some Mr speaker gentle lady
given that information I mean
the the addresses my initial
would just leave on leave with
one thought and that is.
Limited horrific cases.
Mr speaker gentle lady
it's a difficult topic but I
appreciate your approach and I
think this is sound policy thank
you Mr speaker telling.
thank you gentle lady
Just so we can be kind of clear
there is nobody serving no the
series is full of under serving
thousand and nine when we repeal
the death penalty and replaced
it with that so that that's not
the way we're taking that off
extraordinarily long sentences.
In
are sentenced to ninety years
from all eligible for an
opportunity for parole.
you Mr speaker the lady from to
to curry.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so in all those years we
haven't had a judge.
Order of life without parole
gentle lady yes Mr speaker and
gentle lady from curry and Mr
speaker gentle lady
What does that tell you because
what that tells me is judges are
without parole Mr speaker gentle
lady would you disagree with
that.
Mr speaker and lady from hold on
one sec.
What it tells me is that in the
cases that have
where it has been sentenced one
I personally prosecuted the the
mass shooting at the Clovis
carver library and that was
obviously I think it was like
five six years ago and it was
sentence to help every single
victim or punish for punish the
diff the juvenile offender to
where he was serving a partial
cases and are able to fashion
sentences that takes into
account giving a child a second
chance later but still
fashioning a sentence that is
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
you disagree with that.
Mr speaker and the lady from
take a lot off the books because
it doesn't apply to these
children even though it has not
yet been imposed it does not
mean that they could not and the
rules so we don't need this
legislation over the last decade
the Supreme Court has
dramatically narrowed the
circumstances in which children
can receive the harshest
the death penalty for the same
reasons the Supreme Court
announced in twenty ten twenty
twelve twenty sixteen and most
recently in twenty twenty one
decisions involving life without
than adults.
Those differences have
constitutional importance
because of children's diminished
capacity and culpability a child
circumstances begins will
considering a life without
parole sentence for child and
because a mandatory sentencing
scheme deprives the judge of
Supreme Court made clear that it
is.
That.
This will.
Generally letters that digitally
the minutes separate there's can
The claim that we don't need it
because the judges are using
that's understood gentle lady
the and I appreciate that and if
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
lady so how many of our most
serious violent youthful
offenders will this affect this
law.
This bill.
Sears youthful offenders are
currently going to be they're
they're good release is going to
be earlier if this bill is
passed.
offenders and serious violent
offenders because I'm taking
that this is retroactive so it
will affect seventy five of our
most violent city to little
useful answers youthful
the lady from PTA's again was
of a of an individual who would
be eligible for an earlier full
she was to present and it was a
felony murder conviction and Mr
speaker and gentle lady but a
felony murder conviction
requires an intent to kill it
look this up.
Mr speaker I'm gonna have to
read my notes here
the lady from curry in the
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
but the uniformed jury
instructions Mr speaker gentle
lady is what has to be proven in
death or great bodily harm so we
jury must provide an intent to
kill or to inflict great bodily
harm.
Would you disagree with that Mr
speaker generally.
Mr speaker related told that it
was it is an intent to kill for
there's a probability of great
bodily harm.
Mr speaker gentle lady with and
This is a this circumstances
sanitary because that's what
what was described with the life
story of this particular
proven by a jury Mr speaker
gentle lady in addition if it
was an accessory the jury would
have had to found that there was
an intent to help cause or
wrong time I'd be very surprised
to find that a jury would
convict somebody without finding
the proper intent Mr speaker
gentle lady.
gentle lady I I guess I disagree
with that because if you go to
the statute of first degree
murder which is thirty dash to
dash one there are three ways
can have to pray money which is
also contemplated in your bill
so first degree murder is
actually there are three
different ways Mr speaker gentle
lady and I eight don't believe
degree murder would you disagree
with that Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker lady I guess I
disagree with the statute okay
and that the based on that about
murder cases tried a prosecutor
can present that case with all
different levels of first degree
murder which would be
premeditated murder felony
murder depraved mind murder Mr
Which type of first degree
murder it is Mr speaker gentle
lady so one concern I have with
the way this bill is worded
where there's a twenty year.
How would we know Mr speaker
gentle lady what the jury's
theory was when we're not
required to look beyond the
verdict of what they provide a
complete as depraved mind murder
so how will Mr speaker gentle
lady a.
I guess the parole board no
worry judge which parole period
I was trying to understand your
amendment and now I have lost
amendment and one second but I
want to kind of set it set up a
little while I am doing the
amendment Mr speaker gentle lady
when you try a case for an open
count of murder you don't have
to declare what type of first
depraved mind murder.
And you can't look beyond the
verdict and you can't ask the
jurors how many of you found
premeditated how many of you
found felony murder Mister
first degree murder the jury
actually found Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and later the judge
generally identifies a very.
Judgment that tension and
all move on and I want to before
I present this ammendment talk
about on page nine your fifteen
first degree murder Mr speaker
gentle lady is that correct.
Mr speaker and from
yes and Mr speaker gentle lady
that replied second degree
murder am I correct.
with intent to commit a violent
felony kidnapping aggravated
battery aggravated battery on a
peace officer shooting added
dwelling or from a motor vehicle
possession of dangerous
fourteen and eighteen would fall
under this fifteen year propane
right in my correct Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker yes right and so
And you've got one I'm sorry I
know she did that one what is
the two to six number two two
six two zero five point one.
into on page eight into section
two with the other first degree
murders which would put all
three first degree murders under
the twenty year category which
and now is not a friendly
amendment there is a debate on
the amendment the young lady
from Santa Fe.
You Mr speaker does the
gentlelady yields yes I yield to
of this because I've read it a
few times and if the gentle lady
would just help me understand.
First degree murder in the
commission of or attempt to
understand the circularity or
what the intent of how this is
structured to what it's
referring to in paragraph two
yes yes Mr speaker gentle lady
of subsection eight of thirty
two dash one NMAA a nineteen
seventy eight first degree
murder in the commission of or
attempt to commit any felony
pursuant to paragraph two of
paragraph three.
Thank you gentle lady I
understands.
How it's read I just don't
understand what you're referring
to in paragraph two since this
language that you're inputting
supposed to be Madam them
subsection to is what it looks
like.
First paragraph to Mister
speaker.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
it's for the under subsection
aids so it's paragraphs one and
two.
Mr speaker gentle lady so you're
referring to language that
in that entire paragraph so my
confusion is.
When you say pursuant to
paragraph two it's pursuant to
every the list of everything in
in that
paragraphs it's circular doesn't
make any what we I don't know
what you're referring to in the
Paris can you clarify Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
Paragraph two subsection a is in
this subsection Mr speaker
gentle lady I'm I'm Mr speaker
gentle lady of my amendment of
this is drafted correctly maybe
the gentleman from Chavis can
help us look at this.
Mr speaker thank you
I need to yield are asked to be
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
believe the.
Language is.
With the amendment paragraph one
it is now it's only paragraphs
one and three.
That helps explain.
understanding now what we're
referring to and thirty dash to
dash one my confusion again
going back to the at addition of
this Mr speaker gentle lady is
but is possession of illicit
substance a a felony Mr speaker
gentle lady in the state.
Mr speaker gentle lady no it's a
statute language Mr speaker
gentle lady when we're talking
about felony murder in this
context Mr speaker gentle lady
and you look at what we're
talking about with intent verses
verses strong probability Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady at what I
do I don't necessarily agree
with that I believe the
you Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
reading the statute my apologies
Mr speaker but to be clear on
the what the gentle lady just
said it's intent to kill or knew
the You J. I'd for these types
of crimes for felony murder are
two different standard one is
intent and two is a strong
probability Mr speaker gentle
lady would you agree that those
and one two and three and two is
in the commission of or attempt
to commit any felony.
Mr speaker gentle lady again any
attempt to commit any felonies
so not only do you talk about
any felony Mr speaker you also
talk about attempt Mr speaker
gentle lady so we're not just
elements to this were Mr speaker
gentle lady my understanding of
what the gentle lady from
Bernalillo brought in and why
she just kept it to paragraphs
one and three is because it's
having a possession of a illicit
substance would be a felony Mr
speaker gentle lady we're now
adding these types of crimes
into this statute which was not
kill Mr speaker gentle lady but
also a strong probability these
are completely different
standards and we're focusing on
first degree murder and looking
board Mr speaker gentle lady
could look at this and be able
to understand the difference I
give great pause to
I think further complicates it
on and makes it a lot less
probable perhaps Mr speaker
gentle lady that the parole
board would be able to make a
rational decision over adding
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative late thank you Mr
speaker the gentle lady from
Chavis curry and Roosevelt you
yes I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan Mr speaker I want
to go over the language of the
mimics I think there's some
Gentleman Jim so this doesn't
apply to an attempted murder I
think what the confusion is is
when you when you look at the
felony murder and I think it's
the gentle lady is
included under that section for
fifteen years so what we're
talking about Mr speaker gentle
lady's when somebody kills
somebody during the commission
of a robbery or we shoot into an
possession of a controlled
substance Mr speaker
gentle lady and just make this a
felony murder someone actually
has to die in it has to be an
correct yes general meant
someone had died Mr speaker
gentle lady from.
Chavis Curran rose well and in
correct yes Mr speaker gentleman
that is correct there is a list
of felonies and and the stuff
leave in the U. J. or in case
are there only a certain number
of felonies that fall into the
felony murder category Mr
and it wasn't the intent to kill
somebody that actually the
intent was to commit to an
handling dangerous felony but
what came about as a result of
that conduct was the death of
dwelling and kills a child that
would be felony murder Mr
speaker gentle lady from Chavis
current Roosevelt so I am found
guilty by a jury of felony
gentleman issue are.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from.
Chavis curry and Roosevelt so
the way I understand the
underlying bill this would seek
to amend.
Which for the body means the
first subsections by any kind of
willful deliver premeditated
killing that's typically what we
think about when we say first
degree murder.
just loop in basically all three
types of murder under a law
which again are subject to the
same penalties that correct yes
Mr speaker gentle and I would
put all three categories of
first degree murder under the
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment right were motion
table the amendment roll call
has been requested able to yes
in one of table the amendment to
The votes about to close.
Initiatives leave it open for
you so that you can both.
This is in the affirmative
twenty five negative house
amendment number one to Senate
bill six four as amended has
been tabled to lay back to you.
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
district attorney's that I
talked to because they're all
first degree felony premeditated
or deprive my murders but
cover library shooting so we had
to librarians that were killed
we had another librarian shot we
had a couple of a child shot in
the his sister shot and then
another individual in there are
threatening them so despite the
fact Mr speaker gentle lady that
the judge ordered consecutive
sentences in this case and
for parole in under your bills
because he's killed more than
one person twenty five years.
Yes Mr speaker and leader from
curry and I would believe that
New Mexico ciation so this past
summer to try to you know a lot
of the states that have enacted
this law have gone with ten
Listen to the Vic Toews and to
the district attorney's and it
was really because of
advocacy that we went to the
stated twenty six states that
have enacted this legislation Mr
speaker Mr speaker yes.
And Mr speaker gentle lady.
years on the very low end of
what these other states we're
doing Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker animated west Virginia's
Maryland did you want to cover
all are all twenty for everyone
under eighteen retirement is
twenty
Ohio and Illinois are ten years
nineteen and Minnesota and
Indiana have fifteen your bills
pending Mr speaker gentle lady
and when I looked it up it.
Delaware Michigan North Carolina
Utah Washington when we were
twenty to thirty years I did see
Nevada and California and West
Virginia at the low end of
fifteen years I guess my
the numbers I mean why Mr
speaker gentle lady are we
trying to let our most violent
juvenile offenders out early
when we can't control the crime
problem we have as as.
Last minute if we were on the
low end and I said not of the
twenty six states and that's
what I how I answered I don't
the cost of incarceration and
then the the value of having
approval a strong approval.
others in prison because the
guards are safer the other
prisoners are safer because
individuals in prison I hope
they have something to work
hasn't recidivism rate of one
point one four percent.
So Mister speaker gentle lady if
nature Mr speaker gentle lady
that person would be subject to
the twenty five years and they
would be eligible for parole.
Mr speaker.
that you could kill Aid
kindergarteners and be subject
to a twenty five year parole
period for you could get out Mr
speaker gentle lady.
what I see and so I worry that
Mr speaker gentle lady you're
going to have situations where
gang members and gang leaders
cartel leaders are gonna be like
about that Mr speaker lady I
think that is far fetched.
Well Mister speaker gentle lady
I think it would not take much
maybe be better to have the kid
do it because he'll definitely
be subject to a poll of fifteen
years even if you kill somebody
in that situation first an adult
it's at.
in the past and the client of
crimes we're talking about here
are by juveniles who are.
Really.
and trauma and whatever else it
is.
It's there's extremely high rate
of these individuals who have
committed terrible crimes as
on their state suffered
intergenerational poverty
they're not part of cartels.
Mr speaker madam chair you said
they're thank you talked a lot
isn't that true Mr speaker lady
from curry I actually read
recently that it goes up to
seventy.
Mr speaker generally seventy
what.
saying up to the age of eighteen
yet the research I've done and
and more get in court she and
the experts I've called to set
up to twenty four regardless
we're we're carving out a
may still be developing Mr chair
gentlelady.
Mr speaker and waited until the
American Bar Association.
Is.
Conside impact tricks has
endorsed this kind of
legislation and it's all because
of the brain science so I
adolescence I still would not
feel comfortable to be debating
brain science on the floor this
house.
may I have some data on the aces
adult studi.
Mr speaker to address childhood
mentioned it I wasn't asking Mr
speaker gentle lady that you
give me the data on and I was
going to actually refer to
something else but I just wanted
to ask a question if you did
that answer for you Mr speaker
gentle lady did you state that
these serious youthful offenders
have post traumatic stress
disorder.
likely have have been
traumatized in their lives.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
anyway heard something I just
want to clarify and I guess I
gentle lady and are you
concerned that the victim like
I'm concerned would have to go
re live this experience every
I have never been on for years
I've worked in criminal justice
reform tried to speak for
victims I don't think I have the
right to do that I have.
presume anything about the
victims what I do know is that
the parole board offers the
they may simply withdraw from
that and what I know for certain
and I I wish we could right
time with victims and and just
going back to the library
shooting case I think every
victim in that case had
posttraumatic stress when I
spoke with them and every time
this bill would come up they
testify anymore on this bill
because it was just wearing them
down and it would bring it back
all the old memories of the
library shooting Mr speaker
gentle lady when I I spoke with
could actually read a statement
they said well that would be
great except if he gets out I'm
going to be worried that it was
because I didn't show up and so
I think it's at the Mr speaker
did not show up it would affect
them even more so I just wanted
to state Mr speaker gentle lady
that that that's a concern I
have about this bill.
would just stay today I can't
support this bill I I would be
more inclined to support it if
we had included all first degree
had a fourth grade boy shot
through the window of his home
for they're aiming at his
brother but they shot him in the
head and there was a bunch of
it and if I.
New that a juvenile would only
get fifteen years for something
like that and be eligible for
parole at least fifteen years
all these other states where
we're letting our most violent
juvenile offenders out early I
don't think that that's a good
thing and so I appreciate the
debate Mr speaker and gentle
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
first so first off I want to
start by applauding you gentle
lady from Bernalillo for
school I was in criminal justice
class part one and the professor
started off by helping us to
justice is just what it's like
it sounds an eye for an eye to
do something wrong you need to
pay for it you know crime must
be punished.
Restorative experiences that
will not only help heal the
trauma that has been inflicted
on the victims but it also helps
this bill based upon a
restorative justice framework.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo.
The meeting of the victim and
the perpetrator although we have
a lot of those and I will say
giving us an opportunity to heal
to try to get this bill passed
opportunity for certainly the
The child who is now some of
them fifty sixty years old.
found throughout my life Mr
speaker gentle lady is that the
concept of empathy and
forgiveness is not just a legal
one.
It's also a religious one right
just one and truthfully a
The the dead horse here but we
want to talk about neuroscience
and brain science Mr speaker
gentle lady at the front the
development of the frontal lobe
you know it.
people who don't have the
physical ability to understand
and know what fully the
minute defining restorative
justice for me because this is
what this bill is about even
though it's not directly about
restorative justice but it does
point of restorative justice but
for me Mr speaker to lady
restorative justice
It's it's about getting people
opportunity to heal from trauma
because trauma has a very and I
am going to get into the
neuroscience of trauma because I
know quite a bit about this
actually and when you talk about
what trauma does to the brain.
cycle of fight or flight.
You do not have the ability to
think through because you are
not in your frontal lobe which
And to think outside of that
fight or flight mode and so
people that are victims we want
to talk about aces for a second
these people are victims
themselves.
Most of them.
And that's really what this bill
is about is it is.
And so we have to think about
humans every single person in
this room Mr speaker gentle lady
is a human being and has had
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
want to remind people we're not
saying hearings bill these
people shouldn't go to jail
we're not saying in this bill Mr
speaker only that these people
shouldn't go through some sort
No human I don't care who you
are.
This is United States of America
we are the land of second
chances no one should not should
where they can be productive and
pathetic forgiving individuals
of society that are continuing
to society themselves.
The way these people do not
understand Mr speaker gentle
lady respectfully to all of
them.
Is how these people themselves.
What does.
Mr speaker delayed more
productive campaigns that are
of these kids who is in prison
right now you look and they have
heard big backgrounds with six
stuff has happened to them.
As well.
Its ability to develop it like a
muscle Mr speaker gentle lady
and that's what this bill for me
is about
I grew up in this town someone
can tell you a story I'm sure
to.
But Mr speaker gentle lady.
I'm.
this bill in previous sessions
but trauma can be healed
contrary to what we've heard
here today trauma can be healed.
These victims.
hearing is going to occur when
you want to do the work to to to
heal yourself to fixer hate.
So that you can turn around and
Every single person here who's
willing to make this courageous
vote I know it's a hard one.
But it's about being a human
being.
And empathy.
Thank you miss the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Mr speaker I
yield.
Not be rehabilitated.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe there are some people
Just for this is simple.
Do you recall the name of
Charles Manson.
Mysteries of Manson goes all the
way back to when he was seven
refusal.
Working in over a period of.
Two months in his late sixties
early seventies.
To.
Fifteen twenty twenty five
years.
Mr speaker gentle I don't even
want to speculate that it isn't
comparable to what we're talking
about.
Zoom in this state.
We have witnessed to read about
crucial.
Full.
that question we don't have
anyone sentenced under our life
without possibility of parole
statute because that requires
one of five aggregators that
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
is one currently incarcerated in
state.
It is.
Does not have some point.
Mr speaker gentleman I thought
it would be thirty years but
can go way past thirty years
before they're eligible for
parole.
Which absolutely brings up my
next question.
Mr speaker gentleman not Senator
when we're talking about with
this bill.
Opportunities for.
decision it's decided by
statute.
Mr speaker.
Why not let the system work I
guess my question is.
Need to get the life without
parole statute on the books for
juveniles even though there's no
sentenced under right now it
could happen and the Supreme
Court has said that's not
hearing the debate we are
talking about the system not
working because we have people
who were sentenced as children
their prisons the situation
they're volunteering their
graduated from college they're
helping other prisoners are
counseling everyone and the
costing us.
Close to fifty thousand dollars
a year per person who could.
President.
We have been.
A well structured parole system
Translating the land for the
cost to keep proportion
incarcerated should play a role
whether they can safely reenter
society but it should play a
role in our decision about what
our values are do we want to
spend fifty thousand dollars a
Want to spend fifty thousand
dollars a year to keep my
constituents state of from our.
from harm.
I believe I mentioned I heard
the speaker and gentle lady
during debate this was going to
speaker John it would make
seventy five people who were
sentenced as children eligible
for a parole hearing that does
Percentage.
Population that is correct
I'll try to get that for you but
prisoners is as just slightly
over one percent.
Mr speaker and gentleman are we
talking about seventy five
Gentlelady thank you for your
answers for.
There's a lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
I just have a few questions and
I'm particularly interested in
making sure that I have an
so Mister speaker and gentle
lady
Is there guidance from the US
Supreme Court.
On
Bernalillo I am glad you asked.
Yes the Supreme Court has
restricted application of the
criminal justice system's
harshest punishment it's on
Mission for children.
And then in twenty ten the court
held that it violates the eighth
amendment for cruel and unusual
years later the court held that
except in the rarest of cases
life without parole was also
prohibited for children who
commit homicide.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Part of the rationale that
Did the Supreme Court find a
distinction a constitutional
Yes Mr speaker and women from
Bernalillo they did and again
yes and and for me one of the
important factors and and this
has been a topic of discussion
is the court stated that because
most severe punishments and
children are constitutionally
different from adults for
purposes of sentencing so.
From my perspective one of the
What the Supreme Court has
previously held
For juveniles who were sentenced
is there
is there any difference.
In.
speaker and lady from Bernalillo
absolutely
thank you the children I think
we gave some examples of.
Been in the most cases here this
in areas that we describe model
prisoners they have not had
disciplinary
To exit something to work toward
and
so.
They want to make things right
taken but they want to do as
best they can and they're
they're really quite desperate
to do that they.
in a way it's like they're
trying to.
Hey it forward by working with
other use there are a number of
really
gotten out and even those who
are still incarcerated here in
New Mexico so many of whom are
working with my experts will
Associate deranged they've
earned bachelor degrees and they
have become in a sense model
prisoners.
communities safe and you know.
I have been.
Proud of the actions that the
I think I do not believe that
this bill is in conflict with
that and so I
look forward to supporting the
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so Mister speaker earlier
in the debate or in your opening
Mr speaker you said something.
gentle lady so then do we do you
believe that miners have the
cognitive ability to make major
decisions Mr speaker gentle
lady.
miners have the ability to make
a decision to.
To kill somebody Mr speaker
gentle lady.
quite often so
Recognition of the severity of
Calculated based on the
potential consequences or
anything like that.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
well as these miners Mr speaker
gentle lady since we were just
talking about the cognitive
approach to this horrific.
Calling Mr speaker Mr speaker
question so Mister speaker
gentle lady are we saying that
miners and their brains.
Who are accounted for in this
bill are different
I'm sorry Mr speaker I'm not
understanding your question
could you present of course Mr
versus somebody who is full
brain capabilities at the age of
twenty four per cognitive
science Mr speaker.
dealing with these individuals
is different Mr speaker gentle
lady how is the the individual
reference and your bill fourteen
to seventeen different than
in the twenty twenty one Supreme
Court decision yes it's common I
described as a lack of impulse
control.
Would you think the the gentle
lady.
Read from a part of this record
decision I don't know that it's
guess the gentle lady is using
this as.
An answer to my question Mr
speaker gentle lady so I guess I
will ask the gentle lady agree
with that particular statement
leader gentleman that would be
just one factor.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady well so we've heard other
proposals I won't specify which
gentle lady how is this a
Hernandez crime for instance Mr
speaker different than engaging
in a civic duty or changing
so I'm asking Mr speaker gentle
lady if this individual has
these different certifications
or things that make them
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
okay well then I'm gonna go
directly to your bill here
Mister speaker gentle lady I'm
gonna go on page nine here.
offenders shall be eligible for
parole and entitled to a parole
hearing every five years were
after their after Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady wise is
Unable to change Mr speaker why
would we then.
Give them a statutory right to
another hearing in five years Mr
speaker gentle lady.
you generated with this is a new
language this is not set to
Yemen Mr speaker gentle lady
white and we account for maybe
putting and then there instead
speaker gentle lady she made
that clear this is the way
statutes are drafted and this is
not a statue yet it is a bill in
front of us.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
five years and we shall give
this individual an opportunity
five years.
Every five years Mr speaker
gentle lady I just don't see the
And so to speak Mr speaker
gentle lady so Mister speaker
gentle lady
Can you tell me once again I
don't think I caught the figure
a juvenile Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle I actually
think are these people are
housed in adult facilities at.
incarceration of juveniles is a
little more expensive than those
in adult prison is that right.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady so forty nine thousand
dollars a year so then Mr
speaker gentle lady how much
circumstances of the particular
case generally a wrongful death
is a different kind of
going to come to damages thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
okay so then let's just say a
minor kids another minor process
is seventeen year old killed a
or would it just.
Would it just be flat lined Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman it the
futile.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
okay so then Mr speaker gentle
lady also in your vote I believe
you stated a few organizations
you you claim they were
anything about this particular
piece of legislation Mr speaker
gentle lady.
this type of legislation okay
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
but have they said anything
specifically regarding Senate
bill sixty four as amended
currently.
Mr speaker gentleman.
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
German the campaign for fair
sentencing for use.
Has received the endorsement for
working with the stakeholders
such as the one I mentioned in
the drafting this legislation or
in the general thought process
behind the legislation Mr
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady for that
clarification I appreciate it so
then Mr speaker gentle lady I
would just ask regarding the
seventeen who is a school
shooter.
And who is sentenced to sixty
five years in prison are more Mr
parole hearing rather Mr speaker
gentle lady.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
concern is about I use.
Mass shooter.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes that
is correct Mr speaker.
So what what's the best of her
scenario Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady was just say there
are a dozen victims who have
passed away and there are others
there who have been injured Mr
When with this individual be
eligible for parole under your
legislation Mr speaker John I am
really not going to try to
figure out the answer to a
hypothetical.
Mr speaker gentle lady okay well
I I give this exact scenario
during committee.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
answer I got in committee was
citation Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker I will defer the
parliamentarian.
The gentleman let's give the
Would you ask for.
Mr speaker gentle lady the the
gentle lady said it is improper
to speak about what happened
committees on the floor Mr
Do you what do you proceed with
the line of questioning well the
parliamentarian does her work
this is not an official ruling
so we'll let her continue look
continue to ask questions and
regarding an individual who is a
school shooter a mass shooter
who hurts.
Multiple individuals kills
twelve at the school Mr speaker
individual be eligible for a
parole hearing Mr speaker and
the incidents that we mentioned
was also mentioned in committee
which they said it was eligible
at twenty five years so I'm
wondering if that's correct is
Mr speaker.
If I may
If the judge sentences the
individual would be eligible for
parole.
At twenty five years.
That does not individual would
get out.
Would be eligible for parole Mr
speaker gentle lady.
I think I just answered that Mr
speaker Mr speaker gentle lady
the case that is a case a sure
you and I appreciate Mr speaker
thank you so much and that with
that I have a floor amendment
Mister speaker and I would move
Investors out what is a two to
six number make sure got the
right one.
You Mr speaker the two to six
number is two two six zero zero
Give it a minute we'll get the
best.
Without a both the take.
Where.
amendment is very
straightforward and so Mister
speaker gentleman our body
rather we would be putting
to dash one NMSA nineteen
seventy eight and Mister speaker
body this amendment would
include changes throughout the
bills so on page two line twenty
thirty one dash twenty one
destined at don't point to NMSA
nineteen seventy eight Mr
speaker we would also be putting
speaker line six or striking the
closing quotation mark and on
page eleven between one six and
seven were inserting the
following which is subsection
mass shooting pursuant to
section thirty dash to dash one
NMSA nineteen seventy eight as
used in this a it is subsection
mass shooting means a shooting
that results in the death of at
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker No is not is not a
friendly man Division MM
provided a brilliant Torrance.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
some numbers before about
recidivism so I made sure what
looked to journal articles and I
found M. I. T. professor Joseph
liners that.
I put into the jail system in
the prison system it's actually
seventy six percent within three
years and eighty four percent
Mr speaker and gentleman we look
at German member of quick.
So is another interesting thing
that we heard earlier.
there this some exceptions which
I'm sure that you considered
with in writing this because
we're for citizen review
recidivism and we have age that
If I would ask you this
question.
You probably drafted this
because these are people that
you feel should not be on in our
don't believe that the victims
should have to be re victimized
every five years due to the
heinous crimes a potentially
killing or harming their child
who was shot in this mass
not really fair to the victims
and would you agree that with a
lot of this bill we're not
looking at the point of view
from the family of the victims
their school Mr speaker gentle
lady however the the bad day
that is certain individual had
cannot replace the life of a
thought that out and then and
went and committed that act so I
think there lies the issue
because.
And the other circumstances I've
understand what we're talking
about people who willfully and
intentionally went and shot up a
school is and that we're looking
at Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes
speaker this would be justice
denied tend not include this in
this bill in my opinion Mr
speaker gentle lady so Mister
speaker done if I'm
understanding correctly this is
is horrific enough and then on
top of that Mr speaker done we
talking about the big done the
the family who has to go back
for now the instead than having
Mr speaker gentle lady yes
that's correct and Mr speaker
gentle lady I would just note
that mine and it says very
clearly an individual who have
individual is not only hurting
of family Mr speaker gentle lady
turning a community that's
hurting our state and it's
hurting our country Mister
not be children have been killed
in these tragedies and these
individuals their legacies are
going to be live on for years
and years and years because
there is nothing we could
amendment honestly it is only a
bandaid Mr speaker gentle lady
we can never ever replace that
individual however we can give
street looking for more
vengeance Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker Domingo exactly going
back to that recidivism rate
which I was completely shocked
because I thought it was just in
On to re offend so Mr speaker
and gentleman I I definitely
support amendment I would
support it even more if we just
said period end of story if you
willingly willfully
Willfully intentionally went out
of their way it was and that he
to the moment they weren't
sitting in the car were another
crime is involved this is a
minor that went out of their way
There is no heat of the moment
there's no passion there was no
although I accidentally do this
because I was so angry they
planned this out.
You did it with intent you know
what you're doing you will fully
did it he planned it out he made
it happen.
we could say well it was just
kind of a little more light
there is no murder light it was
plain and intentional murder so
I appreciate you bringing this
forward because again this is
figure out how to get that fire
arm.
And it was more steps to it than
that.
So I absolutely agree with this
that.
degree murder we you
intentionally planted out so I
support your enrollment thank
you Mr speaker down.
Elated General.
it was mentioned earlier is
that.
I believe his name is Malvo the
the the under H. shooter who was
that he should be allowed to
The B..
Able for to to get early parole
at least to get a hearing
someone who was with a person of
influence in his life and the it
was a.
From what I remember was either
fought father son or a step
father son.
as I understand your amendment
you're talking about someone.
premeditate.
And carries out a mass shooting
as at least one person getting
killed and others being injured
at least Mr speaker gentleman.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
in the instance of this in mass
shooting.
I couldn't speak to everyone but
the ones that have been widely
reported Mr speaker different
towns come up and in different
schools for instance Mr speaker
have been planned out and there
is a reason that these
individuals obtained a weapon
went into a school and willingly
and knowingly.
In San Juan County just a few
years back we experienced a mass
shooting at a school speaker and
gentleman in that instance the
A few years younger this would
fit exactly what you were bill
of what your amendment.
We had someone who.
Illegally was able to obtain
weapons had to had to.
I don't believe we're
necessarily taken seriously as
quickly as they need to they
were taken seriously and there
was some efforts made by the
speaker gentleman and then he
An under age.
Perpetrator of this crime.
That.
Devises a plan.
And with intent follows through.
First degree murder.
sure how we as a body can not
take this seriously if instance
of a mass shooter a mass
I do not I I can I can
understand Mr speaker and
gentleman how we as a body would
It goes beyond just.
The families of those
individuals that have been
killed or injured.
Mr speaker and gentleman that as
an entire community.
of the the.
Little girl that was killed in
Aztec is the granddaughter of a
friend of mine.
needs to be considered by the
body as an act of compassion.
Not just for.
heal some speaker John and I
stand strong support of your
amendment.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment we are on a motion to
And there is a roll call the
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
Chairman thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady so just.
Point I would question is have
to I mean we can make infants
later if you want we can talk
about right now thank you Mr
speaker yeah I would just like
to know that the number if if
you like to Texas I welcome that
I'm asking does it exist and is
it exist thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate that some Mr speaker
and gentle lady going back on a
bill here just a few just
change it to inmates Mr speaker
is is just cleaning up or or
what is the purpose of the
change of words Mr speaker.
Got it thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady I appreciate it so
Mister speaker gentle lady
We understand that these
individuals were sentenced for
the the thought process behind
that.
That specific order Mr speaker
Mr speaker Jonas just drafting
regarding the actual point of
the legislation to allow this
parole process Mr speaker do you
think this interferes at all Mr
it's not Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentleman I've been talking
about that all evening and I
think it's repetitive for me to
say it again.
court itself stated Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker John
you're asking me about the
rationale for the legislation
and that has been under
discussion for a considerable
amount of time.
asked is not getting answered Mr
speaker.
But Mr speaker gentle lady.
Regarding the tiered steps that
we put in this bill Mr speaker
What is the.
The first
amount of time that would be
allowed Mr speaker gentle lady
lake is I believe it's ten years
minimum for parole regarding the
crimes listed in the bill Mr
speaker Mr speaker gentleman for
a parole hearing it would be
fifteen.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
Mr speaker John.
of crimes that would put them
listed the crimes earlier I
won't listen again Mr speaker
gentle lady however I would just
note Mr speaker gentle lady that
we are regardless allowing
individuals who have committed
the ending of lives Mr speaker
and these lives are never going
to be brought back Mr speaker
and so this potentially.
Could leave these families
vulnerable to.
parole hearings for individuals
regardless Mr speaker gentle
gentle lady I just wanna make
that crystal clear that is what
this legislation does Mr speaker
streets Mr speaker gentle lady I
don't care if they feel like
they've been reformed or not
there is nothing Mr speaker that
could potentially bring back.
The children.
Mr speaker gentle lady I quite
frankly provide is not not good
policy and I also find it Mr
so many problems there's no one
thing has just figure that these
individuals cannot potentially
be rehabilitated.
But these individuals Mr speaker
recidivism for these youth
offenders Mr speaker gentle lady
there is a large.
Potential for these people to
kill.
think of voting for this
horrific legislation thank you
Mr speaker LA from Santa Fe Mr
speaker this matter having been
under consideration for three
hours I moved to close debate
to close Mr speaker in closing I
would like to reiterate for
about the fourteenth time the
recidivism rate among this group
is one percent.
substance abuse counselors
restorative justice
practitioners chair specialist
school teachers pastors they're
And with that Mr speaker I move
that Senate bill sixty four as
amended to now pass we are on
final passage of Senate bill
sixty four as amended the vote
is now open.
Is.
sixty four as amended as we pass
this house gentleman from San
Juan are you ready and item
fifteen yes some disturbing to
me that point that the record
reflect that election is server
placing House Education
modernizes the reading materials
funded ads language change to
encourage local districts to
select court in some of the
tools that are that emphasized
That gentleman for rural San
Juan hills.
Speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo thank you
I'm gonna to be brief because I
think what I have here.
speaker but if focus getting
materials from.
This section leaders.
the seventy one of the kids or I
question I have a couple of
questions is
how these of bills.
Support tool to run with the
pursuance.
Mr speaker generated from
that Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so the the culturally
and linguistically relevant
consideration is one that we've
those actually have have already
received that culturally and
linguistically relevant.
After.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
so much so
complete count consideration
that is students on them in the
same way monolingual students
can there and one way but
of and so if somebody is called
west to access that fund but the
lease is not included there but
I've called all relevant
linguistic pulled over months
the list of local districts can
use their monies to act to
purchase any of any text books
they want even if it's outside
of these lists.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you a
gentleman but no from this fund
that I mean I understand that is
not thank you ways to access
materials but I I think this is
better between something that we
are fighting for years trying to
for at is is efficient Susan of
the fitting way.
I I I appreciate the fine I
appreciate that we tried to
reach to materials but the same
way that I in the committee room
you Mr speaker thank you Julie
J. Lente from Santa Fe
representative on thank you Mr
speaker with the gentleman from
San Juan yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
from Bernalillo brought some
questions to me.
Through the purchasing.
Of these materials as I'm
reading here it makes an
appropriation of thirty five
gently from Santa Fe no that is
not correct.
Mr speaker gentleman can you add
the correction or was there.
An amendment the change that Mr
Thank you Mr chairman so now
without that appropriation or
was it The appropriation sh
struck because the money for the
funding is in H. B. to Mr
fund so that way local school
districts can take advantage of
the structure reading materials.
So Mister speaker gentleman is
German Mr speaker generated from
Santa Fe yes so every item on
that list that has published
does in fact have the marker of
speaker generated from Santa Fe
so right now the language in the
fund wouldn't allow local
districts to tap into this fund
in order to provide these kind
Fe I would agree with that
statement.
You Mr chairman.
And I do apologize Mr Chairman
Mr speaker German.
From the existing frontier what
The gentleman.
I'm not understanding that just
for clarification if the fund
already existed you're creating
Mr gently from Santa Fe so it is
an existing frontier this is
changing the language of how the
fund can be utilized.
Okay thank you Mr speaker
gentleman I appreciate the
Thank you Mr chairman I I
appreciate that if if we are
maybe those amendments to
clarify those concerns I
appreciate that is that what is
happened Mr speaker German Mr
given thank you Mr speaker I
yield there is a delay from
Santa Fe representatives of
local thank you Mr speaker will
the general in from San Juan
Colorado department education.
that do these at it do these
changes I should say
do anything to increase testing
for children from K. through
eighth grade the speaker gentle
the lines of explicit systematic
diagnostic unit of instruction
for finance I can this pandemic
awareness phonics etcetera what
is that in reference to exactly
with this without additional
pieces and we're looking to
Colorado to help inform with
this list would be is that
correct Mr speaker generated
from caller from from Colorado.
How dare you.
supplemental materials.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman.
Seeing the Division medicals Mr
eighty one the vote is now open.
The clerk to call those members
for eighty one has duly passed
this house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Santa in San Juan Representative
Lente good morning Mr speaker
just to let people know that
good morning Jack station
revenue committee will be
canceled later on this morning.
Meeting from earlier present
those and Mr speaker could you
give us an idea of what time
floor session is going to so we
we're thinking about noon
tomorrow twelve noon okay thank
you Mr speaker so
health and Human Services will
Find members thank you for it
and Nelson McKinley San Juan.
Mr speaker House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning at ten AM.
for productive day members we'll
be working hard and long hours
this week as we enter the final
five days of session generated
from Bernalillo.
that's right today today.
Students sued later thousand
sentences of twelve PM.
Today.
