Your resistant meeting at nine
thirty so we're gonna go through
that first and then it goes to
Representative Greenville.
Oil sixteen then here just the.
Seventy so
Senator.
On the table looking to the
committee thank you madam chair
and here we.
Of the house sponsor
Representative McQueen
please help.
On this bill before this bill
that's been around for quite
awhile it actually passed both
chambers in twenty nineteen and
was pocket vetoed by the
governor of the challenges again
figuring out the right balance
of appointments in the make up
to the Interstate Stream
Commission and I believe that
this year with the version
we are very close and I think
we're there to something that
will not only passed the
chambers but also I'm hoping to
be signed by the governor
governor.
So here's what the bill does and
what I think the best way to
explain it is to kind of give
the committee an overview of the
current statutes which is been
in place for many many years and
then explained change and madam
chair I would say up front that
changes in this bill changes
that have been worked on over
the years and the evolution of
the bill through the process in
multiple committees so we didn't
start over started from where we
were and we find it tweet.
So under the current statute the
Interstate straight Stream
Commission consists of nine
members eight are appointed by
the governor for a term of six
years and nine member is the
state engineer and I'm gonna
read from the statute the
members appointed by the
governor shall be representative
of major irrigation districts or
sections and no two members
shall be appointed from the same
here cation district or section
the governor shall point at
least one member of the New
Mexico Indian tribe or pueblo to
the commission of the commission
self neglect the chairman and
the state engineer so he the
secretary that's the current
law on that's the way statute is
been in place of.
Why why the proposal to change
the Interstate Stream Commission
make up I think the reason that
that I have sponsored this bill
I think this is important is
because we have changed
the role of the Interstate
Stream Commission from what it
originally what's in two
thousand three we act we added
to their.
Normal functions of contact
compliance and those types of
things we had a water plant want
to proactive roles for the
Interstate Stream Commission of
which I think is a good thing we
want to have an agency that is
focused on water policy and
being proactive and that's why I
think that the make up of the
board really should be more
reflective of the diversity of
water users in the state so what
the bill does it continues to
keep the commission at nine
members it continues to have the
governor appointing eight of
those members and the north
building the state engineer our
budget changes the membership as
follows our first
One of the amendments that was
requested by the Interstate
Stream Commission was to add to
I will Representative currently
there was only one on tribal
Representative Representative so
what we have done is added to
tribal representatives one from
you get the exact language here
this is on.
The top of page two the
committee substitutes on could
states that just.
At least one of whom shall be a
member of the New Mexico Indian
nation our tried and at least
one of whom shall be a member of
the youth level the Interstate
Stream Commission up felt that
because they deal with both I.
Water settlements involving the
Navajo Nation for example I also
all from those sentiments.
Two of the appointments for the
two of the nine members will be
from tribal communities one from
a nation tribe and the other
from well.
And then all of the of the eight
members appointed by the
governor of four representatives
will continue to do from here
occasion Conservancy districts
for sections of the state of New
Mexico so that the language of
the existing.
Statute.
One representative will be from
the New Mexico acequia for
community Dench.
one representative will be from
the New Mexico drinking water
utility to provide these five
hundred acre feet of water
annually for domestic use.
One member will be the water
resources resource research
institute for civil or
environmental engineering
faculty of New Mexico State
University for the New Mexico
the water resources research
institute I think I'll just
remind you all it is.
New Mexico state and is doing
policy.
for something Senator Paypen was
instrumental in the health and
then finally there we won
hydrologist with expertise in
New Mexico groundwater resources
who is a faculty member of the
New Mexico in mining and
technology or a professional
here with engineer with the New
Mexico consulting engineering
practice in water resources for
water utility engineer so we
bring in our various
universities for possible
ointments we deal with
groundwater we deal with the
sake yes we deal with water
utility and there's that
diversity on the appointments
couple of other things that are
important in the bill
basically at the bottom of page
two members of the commission
shall have no less than ten
years of experience with New
Mexico water resources and then
it states no more than two
members shall be appointed from
the same year the chair
Conservancy district or section
of the state or the same New
Mexico Indian nation tribe or
pueblo again to get the
diversity
no more than three membership be
appointed from the same
congressional district again
over the years this is to get
the balance around the state and
then finally members shall be
appointed side at least three
different state engineer Water
Rights districts so again what
we try to do and then there's
some language about elections
and and making sure that is
balanced appointments from the
parties on the commission so
madam chair that's that's
basically what the bill does I
do think that as we have changed
the role Interstate Stream
Commission the balance is
something that will be more
reflective
of so you have members that are
on the commission and I'll just
and with this I was down at a
how water leaders summit at New
Mexico.
The tech and sat next to one of
the current members of the
Interstate Stream Commission and
just that I wasn't sure I care
is build us and you know what
what do you think and and and
the response I got was
absolutely need to have that
diversity and so and I will I
really appreciate that that Rolf
Schmidt Petersen Akhil we've
worked with him Interstate
Stream Commission on this to
make the changes that make it
work for them.
And one final teams that's in
here you'll know on page four
there's a temporary provision it
feels with with the timing of
appointments the last of the
current members of the
commission to basically serve
out their term so we're not
forcing this change
automatically I think that gives
it time and that's something
that was requested and we agreed
to do so that's what it does and
I certainly Representative he
could at if there's anything
you'd like to add to the bill.
Chair members of the center.
Well thank you gentlemen and now
we'll turn to the audience
anybody there anybody in the
audience who would like to speak
in favor of this the staff.
we'll start with the state.
Thank the sponsors for greens
for closely with our our
Interstate Stream Commission to
develop those skills secretary
of state Stream Commission I
support.
Thank you rob.
Madam chair members of the
committee I also I think Sanchez
we've gone back and forth
actually on the field for over
years I I I I really believe
that the way that it's set up to
date with that overall
membership gets brought aviation
across the state from very
knowledgeable Water of
management and the and what
rates of think of a groovy.
Something about the tribal
membership fees and applicable
fees.
As a
as of Senator Wirth indicated.
Of the other State Street
question is taking on the
the roles of the fifty years in
addition to the state water
climb he's the regional I he's
were responsible for the
implementation of the Indian
Water itself Mr itself.
And our experience to date with
for example the Navajo Nation
activities Correa transportation
our
responsibilities that goes
beyond just the actually just
the cost here piece of of
because the project yes please
put in place the of the water
supply project is files
provided the perfect report of
the nation have another easy ten
years before the San Juan
lateral goes into Gallup hope we
all.
We need to be there at the table
for that for them and we are
the other side if you're in the
middle of those for some of the
state police and the proportion
of Allah construction project
the Legislature provided as a
hundred and four million dollars
to help build that project and
so we're engaging in activities
while also started discussions
with the six memory ram
Pueblo is another supports
negotiate so so those
responsibility to become bigger
and bigger and I don't.
The increase in the size over
time so with that stage Madam
was fourth thank you.
Some more people in the back
Yes Sir right
It was.
After Representative thirty five
thousand members and supporters
we said as part of this bill is
a really great billion for
example adversity to the
commission lots of Bill thank
you thank you so much.
Good morning.
The committee my name is that we
Parker and I'm the water systems
conservation voters New Mexico
and in order to be able brief
here I would like to say that we
support this bill for all the.
Thank you so much thank you so
much and
The from the
On the.
Zoom and is there anybody who
wants to speaking access bill.
with that I'll turn it over to
the committee and I know the
representative Armstrong this
have some thank you madam chair
I do also have to leave and
present a bill of nine o'clock
so I I'll be brief and along try
to get back as soon as I can
One of the questions I get is on
page three the number three no
more than three member shall be
appointed from the same
district.
Scene the math why would so I'm
not sure how that's going to
work we're already the water
goes down the Rio Grande court
or and and how.
Just pick different gradual
districts are how it what if
there's no applications so on
and so forth how how are you
going to do that madam chair and
and Representative that's a
great question and this I
believe this was a Senator
Paypen change way back when to
get the diversity but right
think about that this is the
districts have changed but it's
part of you know I think that
the overall mix here making sure
that's the governor who's gonna
make these appointments so I
think that that one of the
things that Mr Schmidt Petersen
has testified to during the
process is is having the
flexibility to be able to fit
folks and what your rights are
this will require that that
diversity is math so I certainly
can yield to him and if yes and
thoughts on that so that they
can be making recommendations to
that you might without our not
at all.
Madam chair representative
center I agree it's it's another
layer rating that is required to
kind of make your way through in
order to get.
But given what I'm thinking
about the Interstate Stream
Commission in its entirety
absolutely we ran is an
important place for the compact
those places the rate goes and
for months so in my mind
the San Juan with a lot of the
issues I've talked about and
each of those that are different
congressional districts so in my
mind you know with those the
places we normally get people
from already okay thank you yes
I I I'm not real familiar some
might be good.
Rational districts so that we
can have a visual the other
thing thank you madam chair and
and senator and so the other
thing is the three different
state engineer Water Rights
districts.
Why don't know where those
districts are and how many are
there so madam chairman Senator
you'll to our state engineer
cincy sitting right behind me.
Thank you madam.
Representative Armstrong we have
suffered in the districts of and
most of them are lower they're
placed strategically at the base
general hydrology based thank
you so much thank you madam
chair thank you the state
engineer line last question is
are the all the appointments on
the Interstate Stream Commission
full now.
Mr chair yes okay madam chair
okay thank you that's all.
I'm gonna run madam chair to
okay.
This is the.
Representative
during a math use thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
presenters
Okay my questions are is a
little bit along the same lines
as representative of our sons I
was soon drawing change into the
little map I have a general idea
of where the conventional
districts are responding in the
irrigation services right.
Those are and then we had a
state engineer Water Rights
districts and so forth.
We can only have and is all
these limits I from one party
for party and so forth.
And I'm wondering if this is
going on.
Kind of a one of those tools
where you you're you're looking
for confers and three thousand
four firs fibers and that the
pool that in order to get the
first city that the pool of
people we.
Armaments is going to be very
narrow effect and wondering if
there's maybe just nine people
in the entire state.
I'm sure that's probably.
But
it.
it seems like.
This is a very.
I'm not able to fix and so forth
but it just reading it feels
like it's a very narrow field of
applicants who are going.
Phil listen.
Actually to be able to write
down ninety.
Well I right now I is that
really going to be.
The best way.
so madam chair again I think the
place this to start is the
current statutes which is
perhaps all the other direction
and it basically says of the
eight members appointed by the
governor they shall be
representative of major
variations districts are
sections and no two members
appointed from the same district
or section so that so you could
have a whole bunch of members
appointed from you know so so
that's the that's the the
alternate side of this there's
no question that we're putting
in some additional
requirements for sure I don't
think finding Representative the
sake is going to be an issue a
drinking water utility I thank
you know someone's going to have
to be willing to step up and
serve and and we'll have that
discussion and then I think the
two representatives from the
from the university The New
Mexico one member of the water
resources research institute or
several environmental
engineering faculty of New
Mexico state or U. N. M. again.
When when we reached out this is
the language that came up with
and working with the specific
institutions so you know we have
we have tasks that we have given
significant recurring dollars to
New Mexico state to the water
resources research institute and
so I think that program this is
certainly healthy are likewise
in New Mexico tech on
groundwater I think that is a
very healthy robust program
always can use more resources
but I don't envision those
being.
A problem to the extent they
will be able to find someone
willing to step officer but
obviously these are and there's
a ten year required to in terms
of experience so the questions
you're raising certainly are
ones that I know that Mr Smith
Peterson and acting and madam
chair I don't want to you know
bring him up unless you'd like
to hear from him but but they're
going to make the appointments
and the fact that we've come up
with a bill here that's all the
state engineer and the
Interstate Stream Commission
support leads me to believe that
we've we found a balance that
that they feel like they can get
those candidates but I'm happy
to yield.
Seventy two what you like to do
mention madam chair Senator
thank you.
It
was there any consideration
given to it with so many
pharmacists that it would be
kind of an insular Kernan
insider group I mean maybe
that's maybe that's what you
should have but I'm just.
I'm still a little concerned by.
Are they gonna be fresh ideas or
in the innovative ideas coming
up or is this sort of the
establishment in the water
resources for all and we're
giving them all these positions.
So madam chair and and I think
that's a great question I think
what led to this bill is the
fact that we had in Interstate
Stream Commission a number of
years ago that basically was
dysfunctional they were fighting
amongst themselves and it was
such an insular group appointed
you know keep came political and
I distinctly remember you know
we have.
Challenges between staff on the
then state engineer with policy
going one direction Interstate
Stream going a different
direction and I think what led
to this bill is the fact that
this has become such a and
insular group with such a sat
group of appointments that the
whole purpose of broadening this
is quite frankly to bring in
other voices to bring in other
perspectives and to to get away
from how near what was is it
still narrow I hear what you're
saying I think there is a this
is a pretty pretty think about
what they're doing I mean it's a
just just to have the knowledge
to be able to really contribute
and understand compact
compliance tribal settlements
water policy you're already
dealing with this for the small.
A set of folks so I think that
that the current statute that's
being proposed actually helps
broaden what we're that's what
we're trying to do not let.
Thank you and I'll yield to.
Representative Kate's thank you
madam chair and committee
I think you senator represents a
program this forward is this
that this was created and very
mindful way I know this piece is
part was very complex and very
much appreciated on page three
items need was this already
existing in the compact the
staggered.
the appointment members service
staggered terms for years
provided their initial member
you know that.
That that progress there of so
madam chair no that's new
language the current statute
says
that eight the eight appointed
by the governor are appointed
for a term of six years so the
staggering was not there of this
I believe was work that came out
of the.
Rules committee
Probably five or six years ago
trying to to do a balance
process so that you get half so
you did have a steady set of
turnover versus all seven huge
swing everyone went off the same
time thank you madam chair
committee I just think of you
know that's that's one of the
you buried the lead is that
you're you're you've created a
process to keep historical
information at all times and not
just a political move of
appointments every six years I
appreciate that I think I did
hear you when you said that the
current members are
grandfathered in until the end
of their terms and their terms
are Indian staggered time
periods.
madam chair.
I'm in the old agency okay Madam
Representative there there were
actually a little bit secretary
now it just because of actually
still have some of the
appointments came into place but
I don't have the exact terms for
you.
Okay thank you thank you
Representative he said thank you
madam chair can see record this
committee senator Wirth a lot of
time ago we were both on this
committee as representatives.
Of in regards to vote
Representative cakes is talking
about we have seen the governor
fired entire commission.
And of even though they may be
for six years on the
appointments
come in there and say nope
you're not welcome anymore we
don't want to hear that has
happened in the past because one
of my friends from down in
southeastern corner of the state
was serving on that she had
completed two years of.
And she was five hundred for
this administration to echo.
I mean the whole commission with
Justin at people right.
So I I kinda concerned are we
going to hold trades at that
these appointments are not of
the standard and that they will
hold true without any of in the.
Following for the governor's one
hell of that because if we need
this knowledge to continue one
of what the commission has done
to leap forward on the new
appointments.
so madam chair on page four of
fair graph the we actually have
a program that deals with
exactly that issue and we tried
to spell it out I'll just read
it and pointed member may be
removed from the Interstate
Stream Commission by the
governor for failure to attend
three consecutive meetings for
for all other costs in the same
manner as provided for removal
of members of board of regents
pursuant article twelve section
thirteen of the constitution of
vacancy occurring other than by
expiration the term shall be
filled in the same manner as the
original appointment for the
remainder of the unexpired term
so that's an important
provision they are so you don't
have a situation removed and
they're getting reappointed for
a new four year terms Phil that
that term so again it's the same
process that's in place I don't
have the constitution in front
of me to be able to tell you
exactly what article twelve
section thirteen but that's for
boards of regents and I do know
yeah we've had some there's been
tension in this yeah the
residents of it's about.
And madam chair Senator Wirth
yes whenever the certain
governor Lujan the region's pre
send their letters of
resignation yeah that was a
problem it sure was there was a
problem.
As far as our the state on page
through your bill's very top
line.
We will start out on to members
of the commission shall have no
less than ten years experience
with New Mexico water resource
what constitutes that.
So madam chair and
representative is that I'll
again I think that would be
something that.
Of the Interstate Stream
Commission that's gonna
recommend these appointments up
to the governor is going to have
to look at that individuals.
Body of work in the in the water
arena and and have that ten year
window I think it's designed to
prevent appointment of someone
you know was brand new to the to
the world of water but again I
could yield to the.
I mean we've got the the
individual who will be making
that specific recommendation but
the I think the point was to
make sure that we get folks
actually have you have yeah I
have been in the field of work
in the field are able to have
that Representative that's
knowledge.
Will and madam chair and senator
I understand what you're getting
out there that might be with me
might need to be a little bit
more specific there I mean.
Ten years experience with New
Mexico water resources will they
take a shower.
Maybe.
And I'm not trying to get that.
I think it needs to be spelled
out just a tad more so it is
specific to that as far as there
are seven different districts in
our state.
So what we're going down on page
three to number three started
online said that.
The same second Groeschel
district right now with
everything that took place over
redistricting this past year.
Chaves County now has three
districts three congressional
districts.
In the district I am in.
Goes all the way up to tell
Santa Fe all the way across over
Department.
So if we're trying to pick
somebody's the specific that has
knowledge of the pagas river
compact they're also going to
have to be knowledgeable of the
St one sided to.
Of we've we've got a problem
there I'm afraid that we might
be maybe I'm just mysteries this
I hope that's all it is but I
can see some of these
appointments being very
politicized do you see that when
madam chair and senator so madam
chair and representative I think
we've certainly seen that in the
past and I think that's the the
genesis of that relate to this
bill
by putting in a director of
different backgrounds by putting
in staggered terms of what we're
by having these different.
Requirements of I think the
whole point is to try and and
have different voices on four
different terms on the board and
have it so that again governor's
term is for four years and then
opt actually a second term but
there's going to be those
transition periods and I think
you know we've been having a lot
of these discussions session and
I know Representative McQueen
had a bill in the game
commission
and and you know you all are
going to have we passed the bill
on the floor of the Senate
yesterday dealing with public
education the past with only one
vote in opposition to go back to
elected you know board of
education something Senate bill
and and the pro tem Kerry
together and I think that what
you've seen and what I've seen
is the pendulum swinging wildly
and when it comes to water the
need to be in a much tighter it
doesn't mean that there's not
going to be a difference because
obviously the governor from
different parties they're going
to have a different potential
the U. of things but the hope is
to just bye bye.
Widening the Brett the type of
folks on their I think addresses
what we've done in the
Interstate Stream Commission but
the stagger terms and trying to
put in this diversity of
locations and areas and not
being in the same Conservancy
districts it really is to try to
have a breadth of of voices on
their.
Madam chair and senator Wirth
I'm not disagreeing with I see
what we're trying to do right
here we do need to change of the
way commissions throughout our
state our.
Hand.
Because some of them were just.
Anyway out part of that.
But.
The knowledge that some of our
people have over of the hi this
riverside with compact over
there versus what's going on and
on the west eastern western side
of the state in regard to the
Rio Grande in elephant Butte
middle Rio Grande Valley and.
The Indian tribes in the
nation's or pueblos.
I I can't help but feel that.
That pool that we're going to be
able to find people that are
actually.
Qualified to work in it and that
we want to work in it we're
doing this to weird flooding
that.
And therefore that gives me a
little bit of concern there.
Should recommendations being
made from different.
Water districts throughout our
state madam chair and senator.
So Madam recommendations to the
governor about points I mean I
would certainly think there
could be a process for that and
I I think what we've seen is and
I think we now have Interstate
Stream Commission and my opinion
is working for the well and I
appreciate the fact that you
know Mr Schmidt Petersen has as
as.
Said and I think as recognize
that there needs to be more
diversity and they use the.
Of the existing statute to go as
far as they can
but I think the fact that we do
have specific representation
that no more than two membership
because they are patient
Conservancy district you know
we're trying to balance that out
but ultimately this is one of
those situations where.
You know you can only go so far
and especially I want and
Representative this this is the
big the big the big one and I'm
just gonna put it on the table
you know we don't have
legislative appointments in
here.
And.
You know that would be a way for
us to have a voice in this but
the statue was set up in such a
way that it it did have this is
an executive function what I
appreciate is that we've now
gotten to a point where.
I think we put enough potential
columns of different categories
and regional locations to have a
better Interstate Stream
Commission but they're still
going to be it's still going to
be the governor who's making
that those appointments with
with obviously the input of the
Interstate Stream Commission
staff and and that's going to be
a key part of it but I'll just
say again I think that if you
really wanted to balance you put
in in legislative appointments
but.
You know we just get that's a
that's a very tough one to get
it signed and so I think that
doing this would be a good step
forward if we could if we can
get this site and and quite
frankly this took a lot of.
Shaping and work at input from
all the different members on
both sides of the aisle over the
years and and you know recently
I just I really appreciate that
that that Interstate Stream.
Folks and the state engineer
have been willing to make
suggestions with make a ton of
sense I'll give an example
having a having someone from a a
nation or tribe isn't having a
separate pueblo Representative
that makes a ton of sense
because again we've given them
the the role of overseeing those
tribal settlements.
So again I think I think we've
got a bill here this that is it
perfect.
no but it's certainly in my
opinion a lot better than what
we have on the books now.
Madam chair Senator thank you
very much for that but I do have
a question regarding regarding
the member from the Indian
nation our I want this members
in India with.
It doesn't specify that those D.
B. of different districts or of
differences grant all districts
it is just one one from the
national drive and one from.
So.
Potentially there could be a.
A little bit of.
Racing about press there would
you agree with grated that and
so on and and madam chair I
think we kind of follow the
model that is in the current law
at one point we put in there's
there's one.
Check now of a member of the New
Mexico Indian tribe or pueblo on
the commission but you're right
we didn't specify.
A diversity districts there I
think by very nature given that
for example the Navajo Madam is
up in the northwest part of the
state's tribal settlements are
different parts of the state I
think there will be diversity
just based on where those
members would come from but for
example you got something the
Mescalero you know that would be
down south so we don't specify
in there that Mr and madam chair
and senator but if we're talking
about the Mescalero nation down
in the southern part of the
state
That water that comes from
Sierra block of from their ski
resort everything else whenever
it does come on down to the east
side.
That recharges are off of and
then at that water is specific
to be and I being in fulfillment
with picus river compact because
it comes down out of the Honda.
And like this gentleman because
you know our price.
So anyway did of the impact that
we have regarding this gives me
a little bit of concern I do
want to.
At.
In regards to the Interstate
Stream Commission madam chair
that this is just capitalize on
the maybe a little bit Senator
Wirth you know what Mr Schmidt
Petersen look like whenever it
first started working here now
see that this year's change
significant.
So evidently he has been working
very hard to.
Madam chair and senator and
representative.
I will probably go ahead and
vote for this even though I do
have some concerns here I think
that we're just literally
shrinking that pool I like the
make up of the this.
There are some issues that.
I don't think if there's an
appointment made from the San
Juan region that they're very
kind of be as knowledgeable as
somebody from the package
Representative school and
whenever we're talking about our
river compacts.
Once again you know.
Whiskey's for drinking the
waters for speaking over so
madam chair here we go.
For your responses thank you
thank you Representative
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair my
question is kind of a long line.
Is that.
Thanks to you this evening of
there was a representative from
to.
To save their lives.
The ability to Representative.
X..
So I wonder how the feeling is a
Correa.
The Mescalero and this is yes
that was for sale to them that
we.
Of.
How are we working that do you
have a Navajo that serves one
term then replaced by had to
later or have those were.
so madam chair and
Representative so this bill
doesn't specify that so probably
the best thing I can do is again
yield back to the to the
Interstate Stream Commission
will make those recommendations
and and as I mentioned the the
suggestion to add a second
tribal member from an Indian
pueblo I think.
Makes this a better statute in
the current status quo which
just has one member so right now
it's one memberships read the
statute one member from the New
Mexico Indian tribe or pueblo so
right now you've really got a
challenge because you're right
you could have a a Navajo I'm
not a member of the note no
Pueblo representation so we
created both in those
appointments I think the
question you raise is a valid
one how the is there a balance
of that how they provide those
folks alternately that'll be
something that the governor will
need to to.
Way and make that determination
after I I know all speak for
this governor tribal
consultation I think that's
something she believes strongly
in and that will give an
opportunity for those
tribal members that would
fifties different rules to be
able to make a pitch for what
should happen and and and again
we've got that balance here but
this the specifics ultimately
will be up to the governor's to
help house Mr Senator and madam
chair the reason why I ask is
because with the workload it's
not much of a problem because
there are both the twelve all
along the Rio Grande for as with
the Correa there are more east
more eastern than the Navajo
Nation the increase or the
Mescalero was down the route
though so the sales are going to
be in that building so.
I guess it's okay if they don't
want to have levels represent
them.
So thank you for that thank you
madam chair.
one more time this may I forgot
yes madam chair.
Of.
Senator Representative a page to
your bill's line twelve section
C. says one representative of
the New Mexico drinking water
utility that provides at least
five hundred feet of water
annually for domestic use.
Why did you go that route
instead of the number of hook
ups.
Madam chair and representative
that is a great question that I
can't.
Give you the I can't remember
quite frankly this is one of
those provisions this bill been
around for such a long time I
can't remember exactly why we
did that.
And and didn't put it.
Thank you madam chair thank you
the general entertainment
option.
Of all the motion for do pass.
Second segment okay we have the
do.
Representative creates a second
by
Is there any opposition to this
motion saying that.
You have a bill sent to
committee staff to two percent
bill fifty eight.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay and then we're going to
Representative
Representative McQueen on house
memorial sixty.
Madam chair House memorial sixty
it is just a moral for attention
to the the return the compact
and figure.
Problems in terms of about
potential future under and we're
very I'm joined today by Mr Paul
Wesley and engineer house
present of the million from the
water at the kids
the the hope for this this
memorial is simply to bring it
into additional attention to
this issue and make sure the the
it's being addressed before we
sort of run into problems and
madam chair if I may I'd like to
first Mr Wesley person.
Certainly.
Welcome.
Thank you.
madam chair members of the
committee.
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to describe.
House memorial sixty.
Of my name is Bob Westford.
As president motion grand kids.
And I've been.
We're water issues for many
years starting with organizing
the.
Regional planning process for.
Of Santa Bernalillo left to
counties.
Of New Mexicos as we required to
deliver amounts of Rio Grande
water television Pete rose.
And that's for.
Use Mexico's war on the elephant
Butte.
irrigation district and.
So long as well as to Texas for
their.
Unfortunately we've been fall
falling short.
In those deliveries.
The last many years.
Is to address okay I think you.
Yeah I think yes.
The.
It the pixel perform.
Going.
Here.
That.
Our cumulative credit.
To a precipitous drop
in a decade.
In fact we under delivered.
Forty thousand acre feet each of
the.
Recent years.
And by the end of the twenty
twenty one.
The twenty twenty one account.
We were just seventy thousand
acre feet and two years away
from violation.
And that's despite intense
efforts by the state engineer
and the Interstate Stream
Commission.
This memorial seeks to to raise
broader awareness and concern.
For this series.
And rapidly approaching of
problem.
The real risk we run by failing
to meet our obligations is not
only costly.
But it has the potential of
ceding control of our water to
the cold.
Our judgment.
Interstate Stream Commission.
Can use provided funding to to
improve river flow.
The state engineer can manage
provisions for the versions
drive by wire with the company.
And the water using agency.
Should recognize their rules
and sharing shortages to
maintain river flow.
Very difficult decisions.
Left to be made and will require
everyone's concerned operation.
Agencies.
Have not been oblivious to the
compact.
They have been trying very hard
within the resources I have.
We're hoping this memorial will
bring compact compliance to the
full.
And with that thank you we can
stand for questions thank you
very much and
The audience now is there
anybody who wishes to speaking
of they did you want to record
Representative is there anybody
who wishes to speak in favor of
this memorial.
Okay state engineer.
Of madam chair members of the
committee of.
What the hell of the State
Street commissions activities
relative to deliveries.
Or
and and happy to do that
a little bit if you like to do
we supported with this other
partners technical related and
then also supporters of our
budget request of these that are
focused on a specific issue.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of the structure
for bringing this issue for this
is on the floor of our minds to.
Office of the state is here and
the Interstate Stream Commission
we come in the same light of
what we're talking about in the
earlier discussion on the
membership of the Interstate
Stream Commission they're the
worst in the of of bases Mexico
the one of the rules.
What the situation some
regulations on profit.
To to work through and.
This section this is probably is
the context of of institutional
requirements is it's very
islands and and just to give a
quick history in the compact as
a very elegant document that was
developed in the twenties and
and and and put into practice in
nineteen thirty eight of the
three states of the U. S. route
Fund and it's been functioning
for a hundred years very well
socialized in addition to the
act.
Of the nineteen twenty two the
the Representative the more you
see the front of the that
product Ortiz to do a number of
things and that's been
functioning for the past two
hundred years of
today and and that we have the
funding prolife forty fifty the
federal government and the bill
that authorize the use in
general work to to route said
water down
One of their their primary
mission Phillis
and and then the
we had the the growth of fifty
obviously and in that time the
local commission was constructed
by the federal government to
help rough water reduce help the
state of the the series that we
were in front of actors.
and then we have the workers of
the eighties that you know
essentially spilled off of you
wiping out all of this the
presence of that and then two
thousand through I we've been
dealing with yes a related
issues of change the nature of
how we manage that system to be
more of a pandemic element.
Species preservation as well as
still meeting our our goals and
missions of getting water given
what's happened under this
period of time that something
like a call you'll be honor
guards of the of the church
street system and we need to
some of our requests for
funding.
are going to leverage federal
dollars to help correct that to
move us in the right direction
and the good news is we do
start.
From the from twenty one of four
hundred and thirty thousand two
thousand roughly ninety thousand
acres.
Because of us to go she did so
with taxes as well as a pretty
good year of this year.
No
storm.
The the part of the good news
that we can work with this year
the other pieces are all always
be reconstructed to be fully
available I hear recommendations
in twenty twenty six we we've
gotten some authorities to re
operate with you them for native
storage we're we're looking to
do the same as we develop our
our settlement with Milner six
milligram posed to look at at
approaches the so there's a
number of moving parts that were
working together on
but I want to emphasize
partnership with.
Service our water without those
strong partnerships we we the
all of these we would say we
would struggle to try to we are
so the farmers we have there
your reclamation pueblos we
believe we're on the right
program for which to the walls
of the FY place moral and and we
think this issue is important
now here everyday some The New
Mexico to utilize all of our
resources to the full six that
to use our water user needs as
well as our contact obligations
and RDSA responsibilities so
thank you madam chair thank you
state engineer yes
morning John Thompson reserve
this for the Rio Grande
Conservancy district Mr have on
a lot of points that was made
but I will make a couple points
mention over the course of
course of the past twenty years
emergencies reduce diversion by
forty three percent compared to
twenty years prior to that share
with the board in the RTC have
implemented a host of different
programs to try and reduce our
diversions those being voluntary
founding program we've hired a
promise we have over the soil at
chair so that our our our
producers can can produce a
house with a little bit of more
information and and makes inform
our manager and there's one
thing I want to take you back on
when is your hands as
we can.
A water to Senate possible
reasons very efficient however
the lows and Harsha.
Here emergency has no
maintenance four and that is
where we experience of Stachel
losses as it pertains to
evaporation.
That is where we experienced
severe losses and.
What state engineer reporting on
this that is where we need to
focus some of our time energy
and funds to improve those
deliveries in that tough stretch
down the thank you for your time
thank you thank you John.
Anybody else of saying no see no
The problem at all.
Madam Representative Matthews
you thank you we have with the
correct person room if they
would like to answer this I I do
though the yeah I for support
for the funding offer natural
resource agencies including the
off the stage here transition
there I believe there is funding
in their anticipating the
settlement of the Texas The New
Mexico legislation which of
course affects our.
Reason our contact clients I I
don't have the details madam
chair to do with you on your
project.
Here if you don't mind
Representative I'd like to turn
it over to our state engineer
and Rolf I I know we work very
hard I worked very hard to get
money in appropriations for the
state engineers and I know
Representative Armstrong sits on
that committee to and that yes
if you could speak to that I
mean it's not over till it's
over that you so far I think it
looks pretty good afternoon.
This committee representative.
Thank you very much for this
opportunity I you know as
mentioned in support that we
have a.
Requests to go directly to these
issues the first one of those
it'll bring up this is a
authorization that was provided
to the office of the state
engineer actually last year for
fifteen million dollars to
support the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district with a
voluntary family program that
would allow for increased
deliveries into all future rests
for now in the speed to this
year there is an amendment to
sum up a language that allows
for some maintenance work on the
local committee staff the state
engineer mentioned because as a
Mr Thompson indicated if you're
reducing water use up above it
comes to silent auction
diversion dam if you have a
driver channel hello that and
your long a water passed is that
right in the system and we don't
get the the delivery we're
looking for so the amendment
that is proposed issue with.
That issue we also have a ten
million dollar requests which is
generally for looking at the
river channel itself it since
nineteen fifties
the I see as work with the
bureau of reclamation for
maintaining the river channel
right grant actually for a large
Mexico to provide down and and
we put a lot of money into that
every year of what we know that
some of culture reach issues
there are not working for any of
the the the values that are in
place we are it's a water
delivery settlement at Rio
Grande so right now it's not
working for any we we can do
better and we want to do that
please so that's what that
request is that and then there
is a bill that is in the Senate
right now as the three thirty
seven which is the really a
regional planning related bill
that if successful.
Dollars that city should be to
that would help us yeah we
really focus on additional
planning and outreach
importation which is actually a
big part of the house Morris
seeks leave that's those for.
But using.
The staff.
The requested the
levels of.
At the outset thinkers Fund The
memorandum and over stressing
that with the Senate finance
there's two based on what what
Waterville's started acts of
there's some issues with that
safety matters need to be
addressed the specifics so our
Sorensen you like I said we're
in the mix right now.
We're.
At the end of the session yes
worth that now is I this month
he's.
Madam chair
Thank you for thank you for
those answers I.
Without.
Level funding you need
wondering.
What impact this memorial we
have in terms of.
Doing what we would like.
Madam chair said Matthews the
memorial is of course more.
So what you know it's it's part
of for the purpose of having the
moral staff this discussion.
and and bring awareness and of
course it's more over the past
four of the you know there's
distribution of memorial two
couple of water agencies and in
the office it's just it's just
part of the ongoing
conversation.
Of thank you thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair
I think that's all the questions
okay and representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
got back just in time.
And my bill passed anyway thank
you madam chair R. I just want
to.
Stand basically in opposition of
the memorial mainly because.
a lot of this is the area that
that are you Representative all
through the lens to County Down
to Sapporo two tier C. A. Ezzell
all my district.
I have worked madam chair with
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district since being
in office.
Now we know who sets the state
engineers office madam chair.
And I believe that they have
done a fabulous job in doing
their best I why wanted to we
try to get more money into to
pay farmers for following when
not that that's what I want to
do but we want the option madam
chair.
The.
The emergency has reduced its
average annual.
I have read annual diversions to
a fraction of what they once
were.
Scanning you better possibly
they're trying madam chair
they're doing their best of the
it's now a forty three percent
of reduction in diversions
emergency the works hard to
match its diversions to meet
your nation demand and keep
water in the river.
When it's not needed for
irrigation.
But there's a fine line madam
chair of being able to to.
Do what the farmers need to DO
and conservation and in watering
their their fields and meeting
the Rio Grande compact.
in twenty twenty one they
shorten the irrigation season
and agree to hear to reduce
demand curve twenty twenty two
emergency do not divert more
than half of the available
inflows to the middle Rio Grande
while the river channel was
connected twenty twenty three
emergency do has.
Committed to adhere to the
reduced demand for for
irrigation season and Margie CDC
can convey water to Santa casa
diversion dam down relevantly
effectively but B. low Santa
casa in losses are significant
and middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district is not has
no maintenance authority and
that we all know madam chair
that there's a there's a problem
between Santa costs yet or San
Antonio area And elephant Butte
also needs the only.
The only.
Area in the state that has no
minimum pool.
And they take almost a full
deficits if there is a deficit.
and so you know they're trying
to spread that deficit out down
the river.
We need I of course we need to
do something and conservation of
course we need to do something
but I believe madam chair that
that this memorial
is just telling them to do what
they've already been doing.
And they're down there working
really hard to to do that so I
don't really have any questions
but I I do have full faith in
the bureau of reclamation the
Interstate Stream Commission and
the state engineer thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative represented the
seller.
Madam chair thank you very much
Representative McQueen and your
expert witness here.
There's been a problem in the
middle Rio Grande for quite some
time and that it Madam chair
Representative McQueen and I
just had my addresses questions
of the state engineer or the
Interstate Stream Commission
that would be appreciated madam
chair.
I'm sorry yes here to set up and
sep Representative McQueen.
I'm sorry what you said I'm
sorry I need to direct a
question to the state in our
office okay madam chair and
director Hammons.
Either at I don't care which one
of y'all.
How much of the water of going
through the middle Rio Grande.
Is judicata so far.
That makes everybody support.
Sure Representative Ezzell.
This process.
For a number of years and that
and that's the you're kidding
why there corporations creation
of some water and that are in
the system and then there's the
reclaimed water rates that fall
under the Conservancy act that
that are home Ingle of of co
mingling of water that was
actually reclaimed by the funds
Miller and Conservancy district
by consolidating seventy seven
different agencies and drains
inside or out and and that's
that's that's the the water
right that's held on behalf of
the entire district through over
six twenty which is for
immersion points of to meet the
needs of the fire so there's
there's two blocks of water some
of it's the new kid case by case
and then we have this will
prevent that the support benefit
of the entire about.
Mr madam chair and state
engineer I do appreciate that
this has been an ongoing problem
since I've been up here and I am
very excited to tell you the
number years but nothing has
really changed in my.
As far as education process
people sometimes want to drag
their feet of the judicial
process because our pride
pluggable much to what they
actually do own or what they are
able to here again and there's a
big difference so I do
understand that it's it's going
to be.
It's much needed it's going to
take forever and a day to get.
Of.
Whenever we're talking about the
control whenever that water does
get to elephant Butte does
control the gates Madam chair
representative for state
engineer or in or Mr off
Petersen.
madam chair members obligates
elf in New Mexico that's your
recognition okay under his madam
chair under his authority.
With the state of Texas or the
state of New Mexico or.
Of the new of the chair
representative so there there's
there's the real grant project
that has contracts with two
major nation districts one of
the Mexico and one in Texas and
those.
There there's a call on the.
But districts reclamation is
located under those contracts to
reduce water under those calls.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair and representative.
Well one of the things is.
Mr rove.
Peterson is here.
I'm glad to hear you said that
there's no point in putting
water into a dry river bed that
makes no sense we've seen that
happen over the thanks for
percent and it was the exercise
in futility.
In every major tort teach.
So that was just a waste water
wipe waste of energy the list
goes on and I was upset about
it.
Anyway madam chair back to the
bill Representative on page
three you feel.
Can you explain to the people
that led to this the starting
online line.
Be it further resolved that
subject only to the extension of
tribal rights and uses of water
can you make that explanation to
some of the people that may not
have up all that into you.
Madam chair representative so
tribal rights are prior and
paramount and they're not
educated so
they have the right to use the
water we really don't know how
much.
And madam chair.
Representative DC that might be
a little bit of concern to the
down stream use.
Centered in the Representative
as well.
Thank you for that madam chair
also on page three.
Representative McQueen.
Can you explain what it means
online twenty five Interstate
Stream Commission be requested
to incentivize.
Participation.
Madam chair Representative
Ezzell that to me is is similar
to the program there are re
engaging in the the voluntary
following program and there's
money in the budget in order to
pursue that that is the of all.
incentive program.
Okay madam chair I did not read
it that way Representative
agency called the queen I
thought maybe that might be to
incentivize.
Participation by maybe selling
water rights to help help that
flow going down I wasn't sure
what to do about that as far as
is.
Session of that
We see here a couple more of
your these.
The FIR non assuming that you do
have that.
I was made to complicate matters
significant issues.
Litigation between CYFD Texas
New Mexico's been problem for
many many years not just on the
right hand side but on the
server side.
And is states here second line
is second paragraph second let
down the HSD hopes that through
innovation investments and
ongoing collaboration with
industry.
Smalls.
Eminent people who make use the
water from the Rio Grande that
they can help improve New Mexico
Preseli dire water situation can
you talk to me about what.
That fire means that and I'm
just surmising here in this talk
to me about investment.
The chairs of the cell in some
ways is because back to our
participation about water it's.
The committee
the way I view it we have a
decreasing surface flow in
decreasing grandma because we've
been all right so we're we're in
a situation where we're fully
appropriated we had increasing
demands with some population
growth different things like
that but the literally
decreasing supply because of
those reasons and that is the
process and very difficult
position and I believe that in
order to address this it's it's
you know Paul is on the.
all tools in the toolbox so I
mean this is just sort of a list
of the various things that we
we're largely already doing but
we need to you know keep pushing
on because we are far from out
of the woods yet even with the
proposed settlement of Texas he
the Texas V. New Mexico lawsuit
that came up behind this is a
good thing but then there would
still be compliance with you
know whatever that final some of
this so there's a lot of work
yet to be done and all this
Morales doing in just
highlighting the fact that we
are working on it we continue to
do so.
Madam chair representative that
appreciate that explained that.
State that you just may because
we all have been working on this
and I would suggest to everybody
that's listening and sitting him
where this.
This nail does keep up
especially at the Colorado.
Not only helps what side of the
state it's going to help the
that we.
Madam chair and representative.
It seems to me and this is just
me this is just maybe is like we
are hitting one certain area of
Rio Grande water users harder
than we are those may be to the
north this and my reading this
wrong.
It seems like we're putting the
burden on those that are in this
one particular section Madam
chair representative Zell I I I
would first say I don't think
we're hitting or putting the
burden on any I think this
memorial as a memorial is
focusing on the positions in the
mill mill Rio Grande I think.
We're not in the need to K.
state state I think we we may
have a better handle on some of
the Water Rights north of the
Mullery or Conde in arguably
south of Miller Grande but
because there are so many
unknowns currently in the
military Friday.
Just bring that to talk Madam
chair representative I do know
that I got I if you email us not
of falls because my parents are
being answered that
There seems to be some.
Division in our state first
northern farmers versus other
pharmacist seven farmers or sent
water uses of side you know
thank you more than we do.
You're not sometimes agree with
that I really do the same what
they have done in my particular
group which I see is.
The possibility of on the
western side of the state that
Interstate Stream Commission
state engineers office will be
by to get viable form.
So one of those lands are taken
out of production of taking out
the tax base of the counties
nerve thank everybody suffers
from that we've seen then that
most of the Interstate Stream
Commission managing these lands
as well as several years ago
there was a bill care
professionals to work myself
that if you do decide to sell
your your gated land the ticket
could not come back and
subdivide that laid it out
unless you take some of those
water rights or had a different
area for those water rights came
into.
And the.
If you decided to sell your land
at that time their state water
rights at that time madam chair
supposedly at that time and this
is for the dysfunctional to
Interstate Stream Commission
came and apply those lessons
response to be planned back with
the cover crop.
Existed there was other farmers
around the area lots of farmers
around the area that were
impacted whenever the rains
finally did hit with a group of
weeds growing anywhere from six
to ten feet high that was
impacting crops that those other
farmers so Interstate Stream
Commission Stream Commission is
job is to deal with water.
Not to deal with the late that
is not there for today.
We get one track here I know
that I am that I I I see that.
That the possibility that I have
the number on the west side I
don't see that did these water
right users at C. one extent to
my particular it is not a good
good thank but then it goes back
to.
What is the Interstate Stream
Commission the office of the
state engineer doing that here
in this agreement with that's my
concern Madam chair
representative McQuaid Madam
chair representative Ezzell this
isn't a memorial expresses
disappointment this is a
memorial expressed concern.
and and.
Doing doing more you know I
think I think.
There's been generally
Again here Senator we're talking
about not that long at this
function in their state Stream
Commission
I don't see that anymore I I see
progress being made on settling
in Texas to New Mexico which is
huge I see a diversity of
efforts to.
Address our water was
individually comply with
whatever the some stuff you can
just go into can apply with with
our compact obligations not just
on the ground they could offer
officials so I think there's
good work being done
what this memorial is intend to
do is is to continue that
conversation and to encourage
the continuation of those
efforts and I know Mr Wesley's
chopping at the bit to the
timing.
Please mistress.
Thank you Representative
McQueen.
Madam chair representative.
We've heard today about how much
the state engineer and the
Interstate Stream Commission.
At the Conservancy district been
doing that's absolutely true.
No question about.
And they've been doing the.
a marvelous job.
We have results that are not
sufficient.
And one of the things that
explicitly stated.
What is implied isn't there a
whole lot of other water users
between the Los Alamos highway
in Elton.
The affecting our usage.
Of the we had originally in the
draft.
This of.
I think with about a dozen
municipalities.
And they're they're pumping.
Drains the river.
And so they have a role in
contributing.
To our contact problems and the
the main stimulus.
For this memorial.
Was presumably without pointing
fingers.
To remind those people that they
do have that role.
And and and
I think what we're trying to
encourage is a collaboration
that involves the state engineer
the Interstate Stream Commission
The Conservancy district at the
municipality.
And and.
Is intended to be a
Reminder maybe it's too so.
Both of.
We have.
There is municipalities the seem
to feel that how much water we
can pop we're going to do it.
We'll.
I'm exaggerating a little bit.
We don't care how much it
affects the compact.
And and this is intended to
remind those folks the state to
have a roll.
In collaborating.
To to to make the state whole.
The state can afford to blow the
compact.
Thank you.
The madam chair appreciate your
comments you're exactly right.
Representative McQueen I do have
a question no thank you said
that we cannot pay to if they if
they're sent under delivery of
water.
We cannot pay taxes back with
money it has to be what water.
What is the repercussions if
this does fall handful of that
besides litigation department.
Madam chair representative so I
I would be happy for one of the
experts and members time and
answer.
Second for.
Of I guess relating to the state
engineer from either.
Well.
The.
The issue I heard one of
Mexico's that is so strong hello
two thousand nineteen fifties
sixties and certain parts that.
And there were there was of the
of this photo ID Texas to
address that
did not in the states as a
indispensable for that so that
that was all but I would assume
if the.
They were dropped below two
hundred thousand again that the
process would come forward and
the United States would have to
engage
Along with.
His public efforts thank you
very much for that and madam
chair.
Representative if we could
propose any bill and get it
passed unanimously would be one
that we would be able to
legislative.
Legislative right that would be
the one that I would everybody
would be in favor of that
particular field when and where
we need.
Unfortunately we can't do that
and the.
State for your spokes that's
all.
All I can do thank you very much
thank you.
I would just like to make a few
comments in the in the in the
middle Rio Grande area act.
We don't have any the idea we
don't have a middle Rio Grande
Conservancy
you know we have to cities you
know and and I know measure
water for the city you know we
can tell what city.
But we have unincorporated rural
areas you don't even know how
much I.
How much there is an the
operator of surface waters hard
to we we just don't have an
agency that measures so there's
a reason I put two hundred and
seventy five thousand dollars of
my junior money to New Mexico
tech to hire hydrates
hydrogeology is to come at the
start mentioning these rural
communities what is there what
are they saying that we we can't
measure but it takes money it
takes sophisticated.
Money to be able to do that so
it's it's just a start and we're
talking about.
Realizing the whole north so
that we even have a place to
begin but but it it it all
really ties together and I I I'm
here I just want to say that's
why we started out with that
recommendation from the water
task force and representative
Armstrong and I was there at
that meeting with me going to
interim I hope we review that
again as water committee and and
keep examining these issues and
how we're going to bring policy
that matches recommendations to
the department so I just I just
wanted to say that from my
perspective
you know the water flows through
my district but it all goes
south that's kind of how it
works and so we really really do
need to be looking at all these
policies and all these
recommendations and you know we
have good people in technology
improves.
You know that I.
Expect the worst and hope for
the best and like when you go to
the that I don't know any of the
chair will entertain a motion
and proceed to bring this did
you want to reference it Madam
if if I may just briefly so I I
just wanna say we're all in this
together right I mean this is a
Mexican.
Mexico property you know it we
all we all need to solve this I
think there's good working the
cooperation happening when we we
heard from the public in
completing their Senate from MRG
CD I did not take that as
opposition you know just getting
knowledge ment of the work that
is ongoing and what this
memorial is trying to do is is
basically just say we have more
work to do we need to keep
working the need to you need to
keep going as I said before we
are not out of the woods and we
are facing increasing scares.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members thank you and I I will
entertain a motion from the
committee then to put for the
rest of the other discuss second
but that's better than the
Matthews a second by
Representative indicates
But.
Representative Lundstrom now for
the next one nation.
Representative is yes.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Representative wealth is.
Representative yes.
The passenger has been line.
Representative and with the the
calm thank you madam chair you
know
it's like the chairman said we
work hard to be part of the
fifty year water plant and I
think we've got several of those
we've got several options in
place and I just don't think
that this memorial was.
And I think that.
Legislation.
And what.
I think they're doing a great
job I know this one thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Okay.
We have Senator.
Senator Hemphill in
Representative acted out.
Senate bill seventy.
I'm gonna have current practice
and provide that.
They're about vote on the bill
there thank you madam chair for
this opportunity to introduce
Senate bill seventy what this
bill does is it provides our
local southwest cog six hundred
thousand dollars to be
distributed over four years in
order to hire somebody who will
provide technical assistance
project management and project
coordination for water projects
to be funded out of the unit
funds so currently we have a
little over a hundred million
dollars capacity in the unit
fund but there's a pretty
technical application process
that we sent to the water trust
board they will fast for those
applications and then seven
minutes the application to the
I. S. C. who has also made a
thirty over of for.
Thank B. I. S. C. has over two
Thorgy over approving water
projects to be funded out of the
unified and so this is just to
improve increase the capacity of
the local **** said that can
provide that assistance in the
district.
And then I have my co sponsor
representative Louise and that
office and public safety works
as well and we also have our
executive director facility
Santo online.
And Schardin take a lot of time
to to go to the committee but I
am and obviously this is a great
project for a free bill for us.
The needs of in order for us to
Mexico and so Senator Campos
worked very hard on this and so
has our car and so I really
appreciate all your support
thank you Mr thank you will go
to the audience and anybody in
favor of this stuff all my gosh
okay let's start with the
Representative.
They have a they I just I just
see excuse me.
Members of the committee Senator
Representative.
I have a however I do here's the
today who is our of our
relations manager we talk about
how important this bill goes
towards implementing projects
from the New Mexico if you and
with the I will not go into all
of the details of it except to
say that I think it's all to do
that and.
Thank you yes.
Madam chair my name is alley I
do yeah this is
your receipt yes the staff the
support of this bill we believe
that we'll still
will provides for the gas for
two two hundred that was passed
by the legislature.
One there in terms of
implementation of that in the
past two years there have been.
The ability to pass the
resources issues identified.
That is eligible for those
guests I expanding global
capacity as well as helping
workforce for and the
application process that we've
also vision for the New Mexico
or system.
Thank you and there are others
yes Sir in the back.
Thank you good morning committee
member secretary and founded Is
normalization a lot of our work
is focused on stream iterations
a lot of that work rural New
Mexico for more that work is.
Please do that were do we really
seen this process needs fees
passes the for resource I think
this is a problem that we really
the state I but in particular on
the faces work at southwest New
Mexico and we do the situation
where we are how funny have used
in and around I think this
little bit capacity is gonna
make a difference to spend that
money in really meaningful ways
inside we we think this is a
strategy for southwestern Mexico
we heard you all this.
How do you address.
Thank you thank you.
Yes
To the yes I'm sorry.
Okay go ahead chair of the
committee was going to with this
chapter of the thirty five
thousand members in New Mexico.
Yes we support this legislation
rural entities in southwestern
Mexico and mission and like
resources and capacity to
develop successful water supply
projects
funding for technical assistance
needed to facilitate and
expedite planning design and
implementation of projects the
bill water supply resilience and
southwestern.
the sentence from support.
Yes.
Again madam chair members of the
committee my name is so we
Parker and high and water
systems conservation voters New
Mexico
again it's very brief I support
this bill for all the right
reasons mentioned and you think
that it's really good that it'll
benefit community members in
otherwise technical pieces to be
considered for New Mexico thank
you for letting me speak thank
you didn't miss anybody.
I think we should turn to
process is set up.
Was one person I'm sorry there's
another person online that is
Allison hello see what.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Allison civic executive director
of the Hilo conservation
coalition and we've been
involved with the Arizona water
settlements Act planning process
since two thousand and four and
we're fully supportive of Senate
bill seventy that will provide
technical assistance for water
projects in southwestern New
Mexico that are eligible for
funding from the New Mexico unit
fund we have a huge need for
these dedicated resources
they're more than a hundred and
fifty million dollars in
priority water projects in
southwest New Mexico that could
be funded with the New Mexico
unit fund and as you've heard
many small entities in the
region do not have the capacity
to develop.
infrastructure capital
improvement plans and ensure
compliance with requirements for
state funding or to even plan
design and implement their water
project so
SB seventy I just wanna make
this Madam asks for general fund
dollars since the New Mexico
unit funds can't be used for
technical support or for cat the
capacity building however we
believe that this is an
excellent investment as funding
for technical assistance
provided through SB seventy will
be critical to getting these
water projects shovel ready for
New Mexico unit funding so we
urge you to vote yes for SB
seventy thank you thank you and
now the
process is set
up to the well good morning
Representative and and and
members of the committee I think
the one Ellen that really likes
Verde whether even if I'm not
with you today and I'm currently
working on about ten point is
application for my region but I
still want to just reiterate I'm
just a little bit about what's
happening are you due to some of
the body we've been working with
about an additional thirty
seconds and trying to get the
water flowing and these these
and I can tell you a great
majority of the thank you that
was and the last of the really
didn't have any of the
compliance regards to executive
order and really understanding
over.
I've been doing that for a long
time and I think everyday of the
content and make sure I'm
keeping up with all the
requirements of the law for
somebody that's not used to
doing that I just say any
support that you can get me and
regards to helping me do this in
my region is of just great
importance as we continue to
deal with emergency issues water
issues and all kinds of other
water issues in the complaints
of water and your support to my
region would be great use it as
they continue to do this work
and hopefully also for the
involvement that I that with the
New Mexico Water ambassadors
into the water policy to really
strive for really showing how
important it is to build
capacity in these rural
communities and and
making sure that our basic needs
are met thank you for the
opportunity to do that happy to
answer any questions we have.
Thank you.
I'm saying no more not expected
special care to the committee
Representative Ezzell thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair up to off load go we
passed bill out of this
committee.
And
I can't build number.
Anyway this bill is asking for
six hundred thousand dollars
appropriated from the general
fund.
Madam chair representative does
that money come before the house
science committee Madam chair
representative is out yes ma'am
it's already in the budget it is
already in the budget that miss
madam chair and representative.
Couple weeks ago we passed out
House Bill to ninety eight.
In in that particular bill even
though some of it did re it was
in regards to water five million
dollars of that would monuments.
This meant that money could have
been used to help.
Your bill is that correct madam
chair I don't know the answer
that question all that of our
products for fitness answer that
but then chair you don't need to
because that's exactly what
happened
The water just for the NMFA of
the season because that is the
right arm of the water transport
okay and they with their
position that particular bill I
did not have any problems with
water aspect of that that
particular bill but whenever
they threw in the monuments part
of it I could not see have that
this relating to water and I did
not support that bill at all six
hundred thousand dollars miss
madam chair and representative
this what you're asking for
through this legislation and I'm
reading here correct me if I'm
wrong that this is for the
current is that correct.
Suppose you madam chair that
believes that they're asking for
recurring.
It could become recurring I
think it's a one time
deal right madam chair Madam
chair representative according
to what I'm reading on the F. I.
R. that it is a recurring
expense to the general fund
Madam chair of Representative.
In regard to there's
Act yes I.
This money will be able to help
those people of the on the
western part of the state not
believe there's four counties
involved is that correct Mr
restricted Mr chair okay and
Madam chair of the money's
origin.
If the money is already been.
Authorized through the finance
if it's already in the budget
and everything I don't see a
problem with this.
We're also is that
I really substantive coherent do
need an explanation Madam chair
representative fifty can explain
it on the FIR under other
substantive issues.
So the of the office of the
state engineer provided the
following.
Two thousand twenty one April
sixth
two twenty was passed by the New
Mexico legislature signed into
law by the governor.
The house bill two hundred
declared that the water trust
board should be the successor to
the southwest New Mexico water
study.
It's the national that madam
chair.
I wonder if that transition is
taking place Madam chair
representative all the resources
to serve my expert witness and
to that okay and we have members
from the financer that I was
clear answer for you I would
Madam chair representative mess.
All right I think we'll take the
XPS fifteen.
Chair representative is
in the two thousand words of our
settlements Act there's a
section that specifies the
rules from the unit funds out of
the I decision there's a second
chance in consultations with the
group identified as southwest
water study.
Not specify one group it was
that was a group that was
established at this office that
group over time essentially
passed the talk with different
local groups on so two thousand
twenty one the legislature
through H. P. two hundred this
is a native water transport as
the successor.
Requests can walk.
Okay thanks Megan that
clarification.
Madam chair that's all I have.
And I think Representative I'm
sure yes thank you madam chair
and and how much money is in
that
that fund right now he was in
the in the what Madam chair
representative you mean in the
water transport the one that was
strands are the one those
structure Senator around a
hundred million dollars.
And the the only real
problem I have with this bill
Madam chair representative is
that it doesn't go across the
state.
That's my problem with the bill
but I understand what you're
trying to do and I appreciate
what you're doing but you know
every every quarter of the state
needs help and
Sell the Cerro whose online is
one of my favorite people in the
whole world and do pretty much
anything for her so I want to
help this district I want to
help this area but I think the
whole state needs help in this
area but I I do I'm for this
bill and and happily will
support it thank you madam chair
thank you.
Anybody else I too would like to
add that.
Facility seven taught me
everything I started to know
about **** and that's why we
have done so much legislation
around parks because of her
leadership she really is a state
treasure I I just want the
record to show that thank you
Priscilla and death with that
chair will entertain questions
we would be passed on the second
okay we have a due pass by
Representative of our service.
Representative Ezzell is there
any opposition to this.
Seeing that you you have just
