The joint session.
Of the house and Senate will
come to order what is the
pleasure of the joint session.
Madam chair chair recognizes
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair I ask unanimous
consent that we resolve
ourselves into a committee of
the whole house and Senate for
the purpose of hearing speakers
and presentations in honor of
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day if
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Committee of the whole house and
Senate will come to order.
In recognition of Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian day here in New Mexico
at the state legislature the
speaker and I have the honor of
recognizing Representative Rina
should pan ski to preside over
two days joint session.
Members and guests please stand
for the pledge of allegiance led
by Representative Jim now Indian
nor New.
And please remain standing while
Representative Anthony Allison
leads the salute to the New
Mexico flag.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Our.
I salute.
You may be seated.
Good morning welcome senators
and representatives and honored
guests to the first joint
session celebrating Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian day in New
Mexico namaskar that is the
formal greeting in my first
language Malayalam yes of one of
over two thousand languages
spoken in Asia and the Pacific
islands this is a day years in
the making a recognition of the
histories the cultures and the
contributions of our brilliant
and diverse New Mexican Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian communities I'd
like to thank our Senate and
house leadership for passing the
gavel to for me to preside over
take today's session as the
first Asian American in New
Mexico legislative leadership
organizing this celebration with
our amazing community partners
has meant a lot to me and I I
want to think of pro tem Stewart
former senator Tim Keller and so
many others who have supported
our Asian American community
over the years.
We're here to honor the routes
that our communities have set
down the families that they have
nourished from the state of New
Mexico soil that all of our
families have drawn strength
from and to celebrate the many
ways that they have made the
state a more vibrant and
prosperous home.
New Mexico is fortunate to have
leaders of Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian heritage in every
industry at the highest levels
of government and in every
corner of our state and so I
would like to start by
recognizing a number of the
guests with us today leaders in
our communities and dignitaries
that are joining us for our
special day.
I am so pleased to introduce our
secretary of state Maggie
Toulouse Oliver.
Honorable justice Judith
Nakamura former Chief Justice of
the New Mexico Supreme Court.
The honorable Linda van the
professor of law unimodular
merge chief judge of the New
Mexico court of appeals.
Cerita Neier secretary of New
Mexico workforce solutions and
former C. A. over the City of
Albuquerque.
Our dears former speaker of the
house Brian Egolf.
Well as Lujan McCoy executive
director of the New Mexico
developmental disabilities
council former secretary of New
Mexico aging and long term
Services Department and Asian
families board member.
Our dear former state
representative Katie Kay
Bounkeua New Mexico deputy
director of the wilderness
society.
Davis Sally chair of the New
Mexico State University board of
regents and former president of
the community foundation of
Southern New Mexico.
Arsenio Romero superintendent of
Los Lunas schools.
Nandini polite keen it be well
exchange board of directors
member and her husband would be
keen.
Edward Talbot to vero state
director for senator Martin
Heinrich.
Social compass Biggs district
director for congressman Leger
Fernandez.
Rebecca touching and tribal
liaison and constituent services
representative for congressman
Gabe Vasquez.
Lands in a policy director for
the center for civic policy of
former Albuquerque city
councilor.
Such you what to say executive
director of the New Mexico Asian
families.
Crystal C. R. as a founder of
Sears a digital in the Asian
business collaborative and her
son Jonathan see ours that.
Sandra Rooney executive director
of emerging Mexico and our son
AJ Andrews.
State your Yamada president of
Kaduna strategies and former
executive director of government
and public affairs for PNM
resources and her mother sue
echo Yamada.
A new sheen director and adviser
UNM UNM's Asian American Pacific
Islander resource center.
Fe yellow national
representative of the Chinese
American citizens alliance.
Myrna Sampson president of the
Filipino American foundation of
New Mexico.
Shelly to committee board member
of the New Mexico chapter of the
Japanese American citizens
league.
Wing faith hurts executive
director of New Mexico
mathematics engineering and
science achievement and Asian
families board member.
Can turn on faculty at the UNM
college of nursing certified
nurse midwife in Asian Asian
families board member.
Who on new way you and community
engagement director for the New
Mexico Asian families.
Saudi weighing operations
coordinator for the Asian
business collaborative.
Students in New Mexico sports
hall of fame inductee and
wrestling coach at Aztec high
school and his wife Terry
Stinson.
San Miguel with conservation
voters New Mexico.
Raise licensed independent
social worker.
Carrols is Yuki UNM professor of
law and board president of the
New Mexico Asian families.
Karen could tear and director of
the UNM community engagement
center and board vice president
of the New Mexico Asian
families.
Lauren be allowed that director
of advancement and New Mexico C.
A. and child advocacy network.
And finally a little bit later
in this program I'd like I'm
gonna read a list of names of
the ally and dancers that we
have with us today and they're
coming to us from the von Hahn
line dance team their names are
Linda Tran Anthony ho toerana ho
Aaron Tang can Tran and surely
Jack Lew Daddy long Tory long
Tommy long Phu Duong alien hello
Nathan Hoad jaded ho Billy new
and and Jackie Health these are
middle high school and college
students all from Albuquerque
that will be dancing later
today.
And finally in the gallery today
we have Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian
community members from across
the state with heritage is
spanning the globe so with the
members of the following
communities please stand and be
recognized the members of our
Afghan community.
Members of our in Palestinian
community.
Members of the Chinese
community.
The Filipino community.
The Japanese community.
My own south Asian community.
The Taiwanese community.
In the Vietnamese community.
And now the chair will recognize
such you want to say the
executive director of the New
Mexico Asian families to give
remarks to our distinguished
guests this organization has
grown from the vision of six New
Mexico women to an organization
that could fill the gaps that so
many immigrant communities
navigate when arriving in New
Mexico and generations after the
New Mexico Asian families is
tackling a longstanding lack of
cultural and linguistic services
for New Mexico's pan Asian
community by offering critical
services like financial
workshops counseling and legal
services civic engagement
organizing in more this is the
kind of space that makes a real
difference in the success and
safety of our immigrant
communities in addition to her
leadership at the New Mexico
Asian families such as a
Fulbright scholar and a member
of the New Mexico women of color
leadership initiative we are so
fortunate to have such as
leadership and the work of the
amazing team at the New Mexico
Asian families making our state
a more welcoming and supportive
place every day welcome such a.
Hello and thank you madam pro
tem Mr speaker legislative
leadership and members of the
legislature my name is such you
want to say and I am a member of
the Japanese American Community
in Albuquerque local and the
executive director of the New
Mexico Asian families I'm
honored to be able to address
all the members of this
legislature whom I know that our
terrace Lee volunteering your
time and energy and many
sleepless nights right now serve
our state of the leaders slide
I'm standing here with
of the API community who have
paved the way for for us and who
are here today the staff members
and members of the various Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian organizations
and the community members
themselves
who are here to share their
voices.
Back in two thousand six The New
Mexico Asian families was
founded due to recognition that
culturally and linguistically
accessible.
Direct social services for Asian
Pacific Islander and native
plant communities in New Mexico
were non existent and that this
population had been historically
underserved within the state and
now nearly seventeen years later
we continue to be the largest
and widest reaching social
service agency in the state
providing in language direct
services tailored to the Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian community.
We're an organization rooted in
the community working hard to
advance the visibility rights
and equitable access to services
of Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian
families across the state.
Mexico's and families is
committed to supporting the
multi generational families of
New Mexico through providing
holistic resources programs and
services necessary to build
power and selfsufficiency
throughout our communities and
beyond.
This work is extremely personal
to me I grew up in Albuquerque's
house district nineteen but left
New Mexico for educational and
economic opportunities outside
of the state and country without
the intention to come back I
didn't see myself in the
landscape of New Mexico.
From a very young age I learned
through my environment and
Albuquerque public schools that
New Mexico is a place made up of
three cultures indigenous Latino
and white.
I remember repeating this idea
all the way into college proudly
sharing just as my mentors had
that these three groups make up
New Mexico's interracial
community.
I had internalized this concept
so deeply that I hadn't even
realized it excluded me.
Instead I learned that my
culture was one noticed was only
noticed as a means of
consumption and exotic vacation
having teachers announce to the
whole cafeteria that that
students should come and check
out my bento box for show and
tell.
I did not exist in an
environment where my heritage
was authentically welcome this
try cultural math is how I
learned that I didn't belong
here.
After seeking belonging all over
the world the pandemic and an
opportunity at the New Mexico is
families brought me back to New
Mexico ten years later.
I grappled with the decision to
come back but soon realized the
significance of working in the
case in the community that I was
raised in for the Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian organizations that have
programming I wish had existed
for me when I was growing up.
I am now committed to combating
it is widely accepted
misconception to try cultural
agency about the racial makeup
of New Mexico and not that not
only ignores the current and
historical disparities that
indigenous in Latino communities
experience systemically but also
inherently removes plaque and
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native point.
Goals from the narrative
entirely and overlooks.
The increasing needs of our
communities.
We hope to build authentic and
meaningful visibility of an
investment in.
The communities impacted by this
because the New Mexico is in
families works with the unique
intersection of communities here
in New Mexico including
survivors of sexual assault
domestic violence immigrants
refugees elders people living in
poverty and people who speak
languages other than English
with in many different cultures
and ethnic groups we see the
pockets of the community across
New Mexico.
As our populations are growing
rapidly we will continue to
celebrate and I'm let's uplift
our diverse cultures languages
foods histories roots and
stories.
The state Asian American Pacific
Islander need to find a aims to
ensure we get closer to
increasing our multicultural
state and formally recognizing
and honoring all the Mexican
communities given the continued
assaults against these
communities it is be on time for
the state to formally recognize
and honor.
On on just.
The last two years have revealed
increasingly dangerous threats
to the communities we serve
including the vast and continual
effects of the COVID nineteen
pandemic increase in anti Asian
hate crimes and threats for
community safety including
locally here the murder of three
Chinese women and for south
Asian man last year an influx of
us fit us families without
resettling in Albuquerque with
little infrastructure to support
the transition.
Communities across New Mexico
have been experiencing
unimaginable levels of distress
sadness and fear social and
community support systems were
already strained that's a
limited available resources
continue to be in higher demand.
Well our communities are dealing
with loss economic challenges
and ongoing violence we ask
those representing us to commit
to building a state that truly
sees us every member here has
eight Asian American Pacific
Islander and native plants in
your districts and we encourage
you to get to know them listen
to their needs and trust them in
their power and wisdom.
We commit to this work together
to be one step closer to seeing
reality in which authentic
belonging each and every New
Mexican is a given.
I know I now know the
multiracial vibrancy that.
That make up the intricate
unique and dynamic fabric of our
state I'm fortunate to be woven
into this surrounded by leaders
visionaries builders and
supporters within our
communities the ones here with
us today the ones who could not
make it the ones who have
departed the ones whose work was
never seen or acknowledged the
ones who have challenged us and
pushed us to be the best we can
and once you get to come.
And for those of us that are
standing here now.
We are learning how to walk on
the foundations laid for us we
get to continue on and further
involved the courageous path
that our predecessors and
ancestors left us it is our duty
to keep listening and learning
and building so that our future
generations can do the same in
hopes that one day our children
will be born into a world
without the effort in.
Thank you so much for being here
today to acknowledge and
celebrate all of this.
Thank you Sakshi.
The chair will now recognize
another incredible New Mexican
leader and community about
builder crystal C. R. sat
founder of the Asian business
collaborative we know that in
New Mexico are small businesses
are the heart beats of our main
streets in the foundation of our
local economies and the picture
of New Mexico small businesses
will never be complete without
recognizing the many Asian owned
businesses that contribute to
all of our communities the ABC
is providing critical
professional support and
connections to business owners
and entrepreneurs a resource
that had been missing for far
too long this is an area that
crystal know as well she is a
successful entrepreneur based in
Albuquerque she runs one of New
Mexicos most respected
communications firms and she
puts her decade plus of
experience to work now but the
Asian business collaborative
helping other businesses around
the state succeed and connect
please help me welcome crystal
C. R. is that.
Thank you for that.
M. pro tem Mr speaker
legislative leadership.
And members of the legislature.
My name is crystal C. R. the CEO
of C. R..
A public relations and
advertising agency and my other
job is a volunteer executive
director of the Asian business
collaborative and most
importantly I move very very
proud Filipina.
I was born and raised in San
Francisco and our family was
courted to New Mexico in two
thousand and one because of
economic development is one of
the first five families to help
move the gap incorporated in New
Mexico.
I took a lot of pride being
involved in my Asian community
especially as they help me get
grounded to a new state and in
fact some of my first moments
representing the community was
actually being here in the New
Mexico roundhouses a teenager
during Asian American day and
mentor some of you may know that
we had more allies several years
back and the Delhi.
And in the daily really pave the
way for myself Representative
copier.
Should be the way for us the
Filipino community.
My make up.
So.
In the intersection of civic
engagement economic development
and social justice is the reason
why I'm honored to be here for
the first ever joint session of
API in each state and thank you
all to the house and also to the
Senate for unanimously unit has
been used to mislead voting for
a house bill two seventy four
recognizing the first Tuesday of
February every odd year for API
and each day.
This is such an important day in
our history is of the
communities so thanks
representatives could Penske
land The New Mexico Asian
families reformer Representative
uncle for making the state
possible and for those of you
that have paved the way for us
to get here.
Many of you do work with the
economic development entities
and associations working in the
best interests of the business
community but I'd like to take a
second and ask an important
question and let's think
collectively.
Which one of those economic
development entity serves Asian
business community.
Which one of those serves Asian
immigrants that looked for New
Mexico as their vision for the
need for the American dream.
Which of our chambers has
Vietnamese Mandarin hi and other
language interpreters available
to transit and translate the
basics of Business.
And which of the business
community has had to deal with
anti Asian sentiment of the
pandemic yeah and the economic
challenges of COVID in such a
short amount of time.
And that's why the Asian
business collaborative was born.
Before the pandemic there was
never concept like this even
though some of us had tried to
form a chamber many many years
ago but the Asian and Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian
community was just always left
out of the conversation when it
came to business that's why ABC
has three pillars number one
this is case management we
handle special cases that are
related to individual businesses
and my colleague Jesse weighing
is here and she works very
tirelessly for the small
businesses on a plethora of
different issues no issue is
ever the same.
Advocacy.
Our organization advocates for
issues preventing the API and
age businesses from being
successful and eliminates the
roadblocks for making it
difficult to do business here in
New Mexico and most importantly
education we curate special
workshops with some of the
departments that are here in the
state of New Mexico on the
federal level and even on the
municipal level we carry these
workshops to prove to be helpful
and educational for Asian
businesses in their native
languages.
So now our organization has
bridge that gap for many API
businesses including helping
businesses who needed language
access to environmental health
forms legal advice on their
lease with the difficult
landlord and even twenty
thousand dollars in grant
funding simply from the New
Mexico finance authority and we
just held their head and spoke
to them in Chinese about their
application.
Here's an example of the work
that we did Senator APA
businesses were affected by
repeated shoplifters and and
vandalism.
And unfortunately these open the
door to escalate into two
burglaries one of Asian business
owner that resulted in death.
We work behind the scenes with
the New Mexico Asian families
and leaders in our community to
help the business provide
resources and assistance and
that and our caseload became
very focus on safety and
security for businesses
especially the API owned ones in
fact we pressured our local law
enforcement agencies to protect
our APA NH businesses by state
keep our owners keep our owners
and employees safe we should not
be here that our employees could
be killed well they're trying to
provide for their families.
So that's forty two thousand and
twenty three couple weeks ago I
got a call from the chief of
police in Albuquerque and he's
all like we all did the
unfortunate murders in Monterey
park California during the lunar
new year and that reignited
fear.
But like them the local law
enforcement they came to our
community celebrations that
exact weekend they came to the
businesses and they went to the
temples and they recognize the
local law enforcement recognizes
the we we needed them.
So that's where we need to push
for business safety and security
legislation that comes up the
session that increases increases
the prosecution of criminals who
shoplift from those businesses
because the taxes have worked
with us to say that these petty
crimes actually open doors into
the businesses which led to the
deaths in the API in each
business community.
So I'll be around house for a
little bit sometime today
showing my son around.
and I invite you all to have a
conversation about the needs of
the API in age business
community but remember and in
closing we are the Asian
business community we are here
we clearly have an economic
impact power with hundreds of
businesses across the state that
our API image owned and operated
in your districts we will not
tolerate the broken glass you
see from a terrible act of
vandalism at our Asian owned
businesses we will not tolerate
a racial slur well we received
working under establishments we
won't be issued by the look of
our eyes are the acts that we
might have in our voice or the
color of our skin.
We will not fear that our
businesses will be shut down
because of money because of
crime and because of racism so
please continue to support your
Asian business community and pay
attention.
We're here.
But I mean Madam.
Thank you.
And now for another first in New
Mexico provided history I am so
pleased to introduce to you
Albuquerque's fund Lujan lion
dance team this diverse group of
New Mexicans are feeding our
state's cultural roots from
through the traditional art of
lion dancing a performance from
China and other Asian countries
most common around the lunar new
year approaches observe just a
few weeks ago flying dancing is
about spreading joy and good
fortune.
Line dancers traditionally visit
businesses accepting red
envelopes of money or wishes and
bringing good luck to their
hosts in return and I think many
of you may have received a red
envelope to give to the lion
dancers as they come by we are
very fortunate to have this
visit in the round house today
and we ask the line dancers to
accept these red envelopes of
good wishes for a productive
legislative session please help
me welcome the von Hahn lion
dancers.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I want to thank my legislative
colleagues for recognizing the
importance of our Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian communities in New
Mexico through this historic
joint session in New Mexico we
are one people of many origins
we're at our best when we work
together towards progress and
shared prosperity when we stand
together against ignorance and
intolerance and when we envision
a future with space for all of
us.
It's days like today that
reaffirm that this is who we are
as New Mexicans today we make
sure our community is no they're
seen we make sure communities
know that we are at their
service and that we are grateful
for their contributions and that
we are committed to building a
home for all every day that we
serve in this legislative body.
So with that I'll conclude our
celebration of Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian day and I'll return the
gavel to our pro tem Mimi
Stewart.
Madam chair.
Chair recognizes Representative
Chasey.
I ask unanimous consent that the
whole house and Senate rise and
report progress.
The joint session of the house
and Senate will come to order.
Madam chair chair recognizes
Representative Chasey.
Chair I ask unanimous consent
that the joint session of the
house and Senate being out of
San.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered help me in the state
king are on final Representative
range of Penske for presiding
over the joint session today.
Thank you to all of our honored
guests here today we appreciate
you spending the morning with us
as a liberation.
Of today.
The house.
Related.
Mr speaker
I move that order of business
introduction of legislation
objection it is so ordered.
Click to read.
House Bill three fifty three and
it is by Representative Hochman
Vigil have you had Martinez
Thompson to the cruise and Dixon
and act relating to finance
authorizing the issuance of
bonds secured by a state gross
receipts tax increments for the
south campus tax increment
development district declaring
an emergency House Bill three
fifty three introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
this Martinez Thompson done of
cruise and Dixon House Bill
three fifty three amended twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Judiciary
Committee events the house
taxation and revenue committee.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker of the house stand in
recess until eleven AM tomorrow
see no objection the house was
in recess until.
Eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
thank you members have a great
afternoon.
