Roll call.
This.
Closed
We
have
A
Quorum
Please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentle
lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker and
members of the body.
I would like to pray 1
Corinthians 13 over the House of
Representatives today.
And this is the apostle Paul
speaking. He says, I will show
you the most excellent way.
His first point is that love is
the greatest gift.
If I speak in the tongues of men
and of angels but have not love.
I am only a resounding gong or a
clinging clinging cymbal.
If I have the gift of prophecy
and can fathom all mysteries and
all knowledge, and if I have a
faith that can move mountains
but have not love I am nothing.
If I give all I possess to the
poor and surrender my body to
the flames but have not love.
I gain nothing.
And now Paul speaks of the
qualities of love.
Love is patient.
Love is kind
It does not envy, it does not
boast. It is not proud.
It is not rude. It is not
self-seeking.
It is not easily angered. It
keeps no record of wrongs.
Love does not delight in evil
but rejoices with the truth.
It always protects, always
trusts, always hopes.
Always perseveres. Love never
fails.
And Paul concludes by saying
that.
In the end, 3 things remain, and
they are faith, hope, and love,
but the greatest of these is
love.
Mr. Speaker, I just pray today
that we will do all that we do
here in the legislature out of
love for you, Father God, and
for our fellow man, please bless
us today and help us to do what
is right in your sight and again
out of love. Amen. It's from Ber
Le Parajon with the Pledge of
Allegiance.
The lady from Valencia with the
pledge to New Mexico flag.
They
The lady from Berlin set of
Hochman Hill.
Mr. Speaker, I now move to go to
the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
an objection is so ordered. Good
morning members.
Uh, before I continue with the
announcements, I'm gonna go back
to introduction because we have
to introduce a memorial for this
morning and then I'll come back
to announcements generated from
Berlio Mr. Speaker, I now move
we go to the next order of
business, introduction of
legislation.
clerk to read.
House Memorial 26, introduced by
Representative Torres Velasquez,
a memorial declaring February
17, 2025, Viola Flores Tiger day
in the House of Representatives,
House Memorial 26.
As Memorial 26 by title is
ordered, not printed and placed
on the speaker's table.
Gentle lady from Berne Leo.
Mr. Speaker, and now when we go
to the next door to business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Berle Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Mr. Speaker, I ask Juana's
consent that House Memorial 26
be removed from the speaker's
table and be made the next order
of business. It is so ordered
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Memorial 26 on final
passage has been taken. It is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the gentle lady
to explain the memorial.
Mr. Speaker,
Our Secretary of Higher
Education, Doctor Viola Flores
passed away on January 21st and
this memorial is in tribute and
in honor of her life and
celebration of her life and the
many accomplishments, in
particular, her family, which
was her greatest pride and joy,
and her work across New Mexico
as a um very strong education
advocate, uh, Mr. Speaker, would
you?
Um
Read the memorial.
We will have our
Fabulous reader read the
memorial. Clerk to read.
House Memorial 26, introduced by
Representative Torres Velasquez,
a memorial declaring February
17, 2025, Viola Flores tee in
the House of Representatives,
whereas Viola Florestige, the
former former secretary of
higher education and a titan in
the field of education in New
Mexico, died in Albuquerque on
January 21, 2025. And whereas
the was born in Bloomfield on
July 30th, 1947, 1 of 12
children born to Jose Merced
Flores.
And Florence Hancock Flores.
And whereas the received a
bachelor's degree from Fort
Lewis College and went on to
receive a master's degree in
education from the University of
Colorado, and whereas after
several years of teaching in
elementary and middle schools,
Vee received a Doctor of
Education in curriculum and
instruction from Texas A&M
University, Kingsville.
And whereas the joined the
faculty of Texas A&M University,
where she received the
outstanding new faculty award in
1985 and the distinguished
Teaching Award in 1987 and
whereas after serving as interim
dean and acting vice president
of Texas A&M University, we
returned to New Mexico in 1997
to teach at the University of
New Mexico.
And whereas at the University of
New Mexico, she was the dean of
the College of Education from
1997 until 2008, served twice as
provost, held the PNM endowed
chair in 2009 and was named Dean
Emerida in 2019 and whereas in
2008, V was appointed Secretary
of Higher Education by Governor
Bill Richardson and served until
2010 and whereas the was a
mentor and advocate for
countless students, faculty, and
employees of the University of
New Mexico.
And served as the first Latina
provost in the state and whereas
these served as a member of the
board of directors of the
University of New Mexico Retiree
Association and chaired its
legislative committee, securing
the rights.
Of all to pension and retirement
benefits.
And whereas the was a member of
the Hispanic Women's Council
from 2006 until 2021, serving as
president in 2014 and receiving
the last primera Award in 2008,
and the Estrella Briante Award
in 2015 and whereas the received
numerous awards during her
storied career, including the
University of New Mexico alumni
lobo Award in 2007 and the New
Mexico Distinguished Public
Service Award in 2008.
And whereas held a lifelong
passion for education, and her
contributions to the field,
including numerous publications.
have left a lasting legacy
through the state and whereas
the enjoyed gardening and
spending time with her
grandchildren, and whereas the
was preceded in death by her
father, Jose Merced Flores and
her brother, Reverend Mark
Flores, and whereas the is
survived by her husband of 44
years, Gerard Ty, her children,
Catherine Ramsey and partner
Matthew and Joseph Tea and
partner Veronica. Her mother,
Florence Flores, her
grandchildren, Dominic, Cecilia,
Michael, and Nicholas, and
siblings, Steve Flores and
partner Dolores.
Luella Flores Evans and partner
Jesse Frank Flores, and partner
Gloria Katrina Flores fit and
partner Jeff, Bill Flores and
partner, Abby Kenneth Lores, and
partner, Joanna.
Korean Flores, Susan Flores
Chavez and partner. Ken Robert
Flores and partner, Cherise and
Carmen Flores Manzi and partner
Tom. Now therefore be it
resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico, the February 17,
2025 be declared viola flores
florestige in recognition of her
distinguished career and
innumerable contributions to
higher education in New Mexico
and be it further resolved the
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to Catherine Ramsey
and the Board of Regents of the
University of New.
Mexico.
Is there a debate on the
memorial.
Gentle lady, I'm gonna go back
to you so that you can introduce
your guests on the rostrum, and
then we'll keep moving with the
bait.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I was told that
you would be introducing them
and you had a list, you would
not mind
folks, if you are in the gallery
or in the rostrum, I'm gonna
have you rise and be recognized.
We've got Frank and Gloria
Flores, brother and
sister-in-law Bill and Abby
Flores, brother and
sister-in-law, Robert and
Cherise Flores, brother and
sister-in-law, Ken Flores's
brother Lou Evans and Jesse
Evans.
and brother-in-law Susan and Ken
Chavez, sister and
brother-in-law Carmen Flores
Manzi and Tom Mancy's sister and
brother-in-law.
We've got Connie, uh, I'm sorry,
Corine Trujillo, sister.
Nicole and Brooke, Nicole, niece
and husband, Florence and Matt
Martin, niece and husband.
Veronica Evans Lee nes.
Tina Sabable niece Russell and
Amy Flores, nephew and wife.
Jessica and Rick Rodarte
extended family.
We've got Marjorie Krebs,
college professor. I'm sorry,
colleague and professor at UNM
Catherine Bornhurst colleague
Karen Demas colleague Steve
Flores, Dolores Flores, Rocky
Martinez, as well as Mia Sosa
Provencio and Gerardo Martinez,
uh, miosa provencio professor at
UNM as well and colleague and
Gerardo Martinez, uh, long time
friend of Doctor Flores, um,
please, uh, thank you for being
here, um, and it is a wonderful
celebration.
for a wonderful human being. I
got to know Doctor Flores long
before I came into this
roundhouse, and she was truly a
change maker and advocate in
academic.
A leader in our community as it
came to building our
educational, uh, infrastructure
and the opportunities for young
people as many of us have said,
education is a great equalizer
and, and she certainly worked,
uh, her entire life to make sure
that that was the case. Thank
you and welcome to the house.
Gentle lady, I'm gonna go back
to you and then open it up to
debate. And Mr. Speaker, I was
told that you also had the guest
list for the people on the
rostrum.
I do not have that list, but
we'll get that list.
Is there a debate on the
memorial?
Young lady from earlier Senator
Mannaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
I yield, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to
rise in support of this memorial
today, um, I too knew, uh,
Doctor Val Flores, um, as a
young person, she was one of the
folks who watched me grow up in
the Hispanic Women's Council,
um, but she is also a colleague
to one of my adopted mamas, um,
Doctor Leila Flores Duenass and
through her I learned a lot
about what Doctor Flores has
done for um the College of
Education and for our community
as a whole.
And for strong Latina women and
so I just wanted to rise and
support Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. Is there
a further debate on the
memorial, gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Representative
Borego. Thank you. uh, Mr.
Speaker, and um I asked my
gentle lady if she would yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yielded.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
I met Doctor Flores when I was a
member of the Hispanic Women's
Council, many, many years ago.
And um I just rise in support of
her recognition today. Um, I'm
also a graduate of the College
of Education.
And probably met her sometime
before, but I don't recall that,
but um, you know,
um, Doctor Torres and also um
Doctor Flores.
Um, I just want to thank them as
my mom was a substitute teacher
for like 15 years when I was
growing up.
Um, if it hadn't been for some
of these women and these strong
leaders, uh, we wouldn't be
here. I wouldn't be here, that's
for sure, but um, I truly
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
Is there further debate on the
memo, on the memorial.
Uh, folks, I do have, uh, a list
of our guests for this memorial
on the rostrum. I'm gonna have
you rise and we're gonna
recognize you. We've got, um,
Doctor Flores is, uh, uh,
surviving husband, her husband,
um.
Uh, and I, I hope I get the name
right.
Gerard Ty, welcome to the house.
We also have Joseph and
Veronicay. Welcome to the house.
That was son and
daughter-in-law. We also have
Katherine, Matt Dominic Ramsey,
daughter, son-in-law and
grandson. Welcome to the house.
We have Dean Christopher
Goodridge, UNM College of
Education and Human Sciences.
Welcome to the house.
We have Doctor Laura Hannaford,
chair of the Department of
Teacher Education, Educational
leadership and policy. Welcome
to the house.
And we have
Doctor Rebecca Sanchez,
associate dean, equity and
inclusion and faculty affairs.
Welcome to the house.
Any more debate on the memorial?
Seeing none, the gentle lady to
close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Memorial 26 do now pass.
And you ask unanimous consent to
the House that the record show
that uh the role has been called
and all members present have
voted in the affirmative.
There's been a motion to show
all members of the House present
and voting in the affirmative
see no objection. It is so
ordered.
We are a final passage of House
Memorial 26, the vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How Memorial 26
has really passed this house,
Godspeed Doctor by Flores.
She was a giant among the rest
of us, and, and she was a small
person.
In physical stature, but she was
A giant when it came to
education in New Mexico.
Gentle lady, anything else?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, point of
order.
Um, I believe that when we
passed our first memorial, you
ask us to sing that that is
actually that you're right, um.
But I guess that would be a
point of order.
What do you think, Vincent,
Point of order.
Gentle lady to sing.
And Mr. Speaker, I would like to
invite my colleague from
Bernardo County, Representative
Anaya, to please join me by my
side.
Not too many people know that
when she was in high school and
college, she was a member
singing with Las Flores del
Valle, and she's highly
musically talented.
Mr. Speaker, point of order,
this is not my first pill.
I'm, I'm just kidding, Mr.
Speaker, I'd happily join the
general, it's OK. You can help
me out here's prerogative, lady
from Ber Leo to sing with the
other gentle lady from Bern Leo
and Mr. Speaker.
Um, there should be a copy of
the song Las Mananitas on the
desk of every legislator.
This
was the favorite song of uh
Doctor Flores, Secretary Flores,
and we would like to sing it in
her honor with the help of my
dear friends, Mr. Chuy Martinez
and Ricardo Garcia.
So
the
Bye
Despite all the legislators to
join us, please.
Thank you.
Generally from Dona Anna with
some very special guests to
introduce.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, members of the house, I
have 4 special guests joining me
this morning. Xavier Martinez is
a senior at Valencia High
School. If you would please uh
that he is standing there he is.
Marshall Scanlon, he's a 4th
grade. He's in 4th grade at
Bossy Farms Elementary School.
Hudson Scanlon is joining us in
the house for the first time.
There he is.
And Noah Scanlon is the dad of
these three boys. He's also an
award winning chef and owner of
Noah's Table. You may re.
Yeah.
You may recognize her last name
as a friend of mine and yours,
so please join me in welcoming,
welcoming the Scanlon men to the
House of Representatives.
Welcome to the house.
Is, is that your grandpa down
there?
Is that Grandpa?
You're looking for grandpa.
Which one of you is the All-Star
baseball player? Raise your
hand.
There you are. A special round
of applause to our all-star
baseball player.
State champs, I believe, is that
right, Dad?
District champs district champs
last year, which if, if, if your
kid or grandkid plays Little
League baseball, you know how
hard it is to even get to
district to actually have won it
is a huge accomplishment.
Congratulations, buddy. Welcome
to the house.
Announcements, introductions,
young lady from
Torrent in San Miguel
Representative Gonzalez. Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanna take uh a minute to
introduce my shadow for the day.
Um, I want to introduce Ms.
Angelica Viel. Angelica Vijil is
a native of Las Vegas, New
Mexico, and she is here with us
today as part of the New Mexico
Highlands University legislative
leadership Fellowship program,
so she will be shadowing me the
entire day. She is a junior
political science major, um, and
if you are from Las Vegas, um,
her grandfather
um, was the late Judge Matthew
Sandoval, who was a 4th judicial
district judge and had over 50
years, a very distinguished
legal career, um, and she's
hoping to continue his legacy.
We're talking earlier and she
said, you knew my grandpa, and
it was almost like, who doesn't
know your grandpa?
But um she is here with us today
doing great things at the
university 4.0 student involved
in the community and just again
hoping to continue on that
legacy and one day get into
politics, law, and all of the
above. Please welcome Ms.
Angelica Villjo. Welcome to the
house.
The lady from Bernalillo
presented Anaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
would like to introduce uh my
shadow for the day. This is Jay
Butcher and can we give Javier a
quick round of applause.
Yeah.
So I actually met Harvey before
I met Jay, um, actually I was
reached out to by Jay very, you
know, uh, early on before the
session began, Jay actually
sought me out. Not only is
Javier a constituent of mine,
but Javi was like, hey, can I go
up and be your shadow or can I
be your intern, um, Jay reached
out to me and as you know, Mr.
Speaker, we have 10,000 emails
that flood in right before
session begins and poor hobby's
email got
in that. So I reply, Mr.
Speaker, and I say, oh my gosh,
Javier, I'm so sorry. I'm just
seeing this, um, but at that
point Javier had already found
an internship and I thought,
ding it.
How you spent an internship. But
Mr. Speaker, he has found an
internship here and he is
working on some of the most
incredible issues in this
roundhouse, Mr. Speaker, can we
all give Javi one more round of
applause. Thank you for being
here, Jay. Welcome to the house.
folks have a very special guest
on the rostrum today with us,
uh, a dear friend and and mentor
of many years of mine and I know
of many of you as well. Former
lieutenant Governor Diane
Dennis. Welcome to the house.
You cannot talk about early
childhood education or pre-care
or child care and not talk about
lieutenant Governor Dennis, um,
you were doing all that work
long before many of us were even
around this building. So thank
you for all that work and uh I'm
glad we're now seeing the fruits
of a lot of that work. Thank you
for being here.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Katrin.
From Dona Ana Sierra and Socorro
Representative Doo. It used to
be Catrin back in the day
though.
Mr. Speaker, I've never had
Katherine, but I think you're
referring to uh Representative
Armstrong, who does have
Catherine. Um, I used to have
Grant County, um, I still claim
them, and I still vote according
to their values. But anyways,
I'm standing to make sure that
everybody in the body knows that
New Mexico Tech is in the
rotunda today. New Mexico Tech
has a lot of research and
development for the state of New
Mexico. Um, I think folks think
about very large array and the
Magdalene Observatory, but
there's
So much more than that. They
blow up cool stuff every
Wednesday. I mean, it's really
cool. They've been on
MythBusters and, but it has a
lot of very important roles.
It's not just fun and games out
there. Um, if, if you guys want
to go learn more about it,
everything from, we got a lot of
conversation about AI. They're
studying that. They do our maps
of our water and our water
reserves and our um aquifers,
they institute for Complex
Additive System Analysis, they
do studies on produced water.
Petroleum recovery. Anyways,
there's a lot of displays in
there if you want to learn about
high tech stuff going on and
meet some of our graduate
students are vice president of
research is there as well as the
president, they'll be there till
3 today. Thank you, Victor.
Members take note. Have you seen
the new, uh, and improved
antenna for the very large.
Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen that
yet, but they do have a, a drone
that's shaped disguised like a
turkey in there if you want to
see that.
Very cool. If any of you nerd
out on black holes and all that
good stuff, uh, check out what
the, what tech and the, uh, the
VLA are doing down there in that
community, uh, next generation.
Uh, satellite dishes, I guess
for lack of a better phrase to
go and figure out the origin.
Of black holes. Science is such
a cool thing. I love science,
um, I miss, uh, Harper cause we
could have had a connection
right now. Harper and I over
black holes.
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I'd like, uh, to
introduce some special uh
shadows I have here today.
I have Bailey and Riley
Mascarenes, and they go to uh
turquoise trail charter school
here in in Santa Fe.
And
Riley loves soccer and arts and
Bailey loves ballet and
Volleyball, but she has a very
special interest in history.
And today, my shadows were
asking me, well what does it
mean to shadow and how is that
relatable to the history that
They are part of.
Because they're, they're
Great grandpa
was Speaker Ben Luhan.
So they have a lot of, there's a
lot of relevance to the history
that they, they are related to
here in this very chamber, Mr.
Speaker.
And
If Mr. Speaker, you wanted to
add to any of that historical
value of what it means to be a
Speaker of the House.
Bailey and Riley would love to
know more about it as well as
the rest of us who are, are here
making laws, passing laws, and
doing all the the fundamental
things I'm working for.
All of our New Mexicans across
the state.
And I just want to say thank
you, Riley and Bailey for being
here today and thank you for
participating in the history of
New Mexico.
One of the most one of the, one
of the fun facts that they told
me about um was that their great
grandfather was uh responsible
for the state question and do we
know what the state question is,
Mr. Speaker? Red or green,
gentle lady? Red or green, that
is right. So, as we, we have
them as our, as I have them here
today as my shadows and they are
walking amongst us today. Please
feel free to share with them any
memories you have or any
information you'd like to share
about.
The significance of history that
they have here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome
to the house.
And Jesse you guys know and
maybe you do know your great
grandpa was a giant in this
building and I hope that before
you leave today, I know, I know
you're, um, I guess, great
uncle, um, US Senator Ben Ray
Luan will be here a little
later, um, I fully expect that
the representative from Santa Fe
will take you to the office to
your great grandpa's office.
Um, and they will get you to,
um, two very special pins that I
hope you take and you cherish,
um, forever because.
Uh, the office of the Speaker is
a very special, special place,
and every day I sit in there, I
think of the greats that came
before me, uh, and of course a
great grandpa is uh always on
the top, so, uh, thank you for
being here and I hope you are
very proud of your great grandpa
speaker Ben Luhan.
Other announcements the
gentleman from Brittany or
Presentative de la Cruz. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. I think there
is a new state word and it's a
question and I don't think it's
really green anymore.
It is now when are you gonna fix
the roads?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, I'm glad you're gonna fix
the road, sir. No pressure.
Uh, any other announcements, uh,
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Cerrato. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I just wanted to take a moment
this morning um to uh remember a
friend of mine and many of us in
the room, uh, today was ladies
in Blue Day and one of our
ladies was missing. Uh,
Claudette Dubois passed this
weekend and she was a true
advocate for children. She was a
true advocate for teachers, and
she would always make sure that,
uh, to encourage us to do
important and bold things for
our kids and make sure they
weren't held last. She's gonna
be missed by a lot of folks that
knew her and loved her, uh, but
also by a lot of.
that didn't know her. She was
just behind the scenes, always
putting together the pieces,
making sure everybody ate,
making sure everybody had that
drink of water they needed
before a parade. And so I just
wanted to take a moment to
honor, um, Claudette Dubois and
all her wonderful work that she
gave to our community. Thank
you. Thank you gentle lady. A
round of applause.
Other announcements.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business Committee
reports. It is so ordered.
Clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 76.
Has had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house consumer
and Public Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 76 do
pass respectfully submitted
Joanne for RE chair.
Mr. Speaker moved to adopt.
For an adoption of an
unfavorable community report and
how it was 76, but a favorable
committee report in House
consumerublic Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 76.
All those in favor, saying if I
but saying aye.
Bo's name.
The AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 250
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari, chair.
Mr. Speaker moved to adopt a
favorable community report and
how you 250 of those if you ever
ever seen anybody but say no.
Po's name, yes, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee team
has been referred. House Bill
253 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrari,
chair.
Move to a
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
253. All those in favor signify
by saying I.
Of the supposed name.
SAA committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 255
has had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair.
Mr. Speaker moved to adopt
committee report in House Bill
255. All those in favor signify
by saying I.
All the supposed nay.
The ISA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred House Bill 82 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
adoption of a favorable
community report and House Bill
82. All those in favor signified
by saying a.
I suppose, nay, the I have the
IAA community reported up.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling in
an engrossing committee team has
been referred House Memorial 11.
House Memorial 19.
House Memorial 21, House
Memorial 22, House Memorial 25
has had them under consideration
in reports that samehabidui
enrolled in a gross preparatory
designing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Anita Gonzalez, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We are adoption of favorable
committee reports on how
memorials 11 1921, 22, and 25,
all those in favor and if I say
a.
Although suppose nay.
Yeah Savit committee reports are
adopted.
That the record reflect that the
duly enrolled and engrossed
copies of House Memorials 1119,
21, 22, and 25 were signed by
officers of the house in open
session.
Gentle lady from.
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business is so ordered.
Gentle lady from Sierra Socorro
and Dona Anna Representative
Doo. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I
would like to introduce my page
for my shadow for today. She's
gonna, she's, she's gonna stand
up on the chair here.
She really got the, the uh red
carpet treatment on the Senate
side. So I don't know what we're
going to do, but I'm going to at
least introduce her here.
Mr. Speaker, I have a pen for
you.
All right. Sounds good. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. This is Pearl
Guterres. She is 6 almost 7, OK?
Almost 7. We'll just round it
up. She's a first grader at
Sunset Mesa Elementary in
Albuquerque, where she's already
a math and spelling whiz. When
she is not acing her studies,
she's dominating after school
activities like tennis,
gymnastics, keyboarding and
soccer. In the winter, she swaps
her sneakers for skis heading up
to Taos every weekend where she
shreds the slopes with the other
shredders.
Her dream, and this touches my
heart, is to own a daycare
center because I share Holowitz
would say, it's like totally a
win-win.
So Mr. Speaker, it is my
privilege to introduce Pearl
Gotentas to the floor today.
Welcome to the house, Pearl
Gutierrez.
And the house is way cooler than
the Senate.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez with
guest.
He stepped out of the, he
stepped out of the chamber, but
he's coming back to introduce
his shadows for the day.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. First
thing I hear is oh no.
So these are my daughters. This
is Bridget and Bailey. They are
my pages and my shadows today.
You guys need to stand up.
Welcome to the house.
And wasn't there, wasn't there a
cheer competition they were at
recently? Yeah. Uh, Bailey had a
cheer competition and Bailey had
a or sorry, backwards, Bailey
had cheer, Bridget had dance,
uh, they both took 4th place in
their respective competitions
this weekend. Very cool.
Congratulations.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Gentlemen from gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
p.m. I moved the house stand in
recess until 12:01.
The House will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
The House will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
Business Committee.
House will come to order.
Welcome to Legislative day 7.
Good morning members.
That, that was weak.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I
don't know that that that we go
to the next order of business,
introduction of legislation.
It's an objection. It is so
ordered.
Blurked Reed.
House Bill 427 introduced by
Representative Cadena, an act
relating to water, amending the
water project Finance Act to
promote the use of real-time
monitoring data to track and
monitor the quality of New
Mexico's drinking water. House
Bill 427.
42. House 427 have been there
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house,
agricultural assegas and water
Resources Committee, thence the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 428 introduced by
Representative Cardena, an act
relating to rulemaking, amending
the definition of rule in the
administrative Procedures Act
and the State Rules Act
regarding the rules concerning
the release of inmates of penal
or correctional institutions
requiring the corrections
department to provide for notice
of adoption of rules pertaining
to inmates.
Probationers and parolees,
requiring the corrections
department to provide for public
comment and publish a notice of
adoption of rules in certain
news outlets. House Bill 428.
House Bill 428 hadn't been read
to us by tilers or are printed
and referred to house government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 429 introduced by
Representative Cardena, an act
relating to public records
requiring disclosure of the
names of finalists for a point
of executive positions,
providing for the collection of
certain demographic data for
applicants and candidates for
appointed executive positions,
providing an exemption to the
inspection of Public Records
Act, repealing Section 21-1-16.1
NMSA 1978, being laws 2011,
Chapter 134, Section 23, House
Bill 4.
29. House Bill 429 have been
read to us by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 430 introduced by
Representative Sareana, Anaya,
Thompson, and Ferrari, an act
relating to privacy, enacting
the Health Data Privacy Act,
providing definitions, providing
duties for regulated entities,
providing for enforcement and
penalties. House Bill 430.
Yes.
House Bill 4:30.
Have been read by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 431, introduced by
Representatives Doo and
Armstrong, an act relating to
conservation, amending the
watershed District Act,
providing for appointment of
watershed boards of directors
instead of election of the
boards. House Bill 431. House
Bill 431 haven't been written to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the house
agriculture seas and we water
resources committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 432 introduced by
representatives Terrasas.
Ree
Brown
Nicole Chavez
And Henry, an act relating to
public schools, enhancing and
expanding enforcement provisions
to reduce excessive absenteeism,
making it a crime for a parent
of an excessively absent student
to allow that student to
continue being absent from
school, providing penalties.
House Bill 432.
I 432 have been have been have
been read twice by title.
I ordered, printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee.
Thence the house judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 433 introduced by
Representatives Gonzalez,
Garrett, and Dixon.
An act relating to education,
providing for the higher
education department in
collaboration with the public
education department, the
Workforce solutions department
and the legislative education
Study Committee to conduct a
comprehensive study regarding
the availability of career and
technical education courses and
course instructors and the
salaries and compensation
packages for career and
technical education instructors
requiring a report and
recommendations making an
appropriation, House Bill 433.
House 433 haven't been read to
us by toddlers or reprinted and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 434 introduced by
Representative Joseph Sanchez,
an act relating to children,
expanding the mandatory
supervised release time frame
frame to up to 180 days for an
ad.
Educated delinquent child, house
434.
OK.
House Bill 434 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 435 introduced by
Representative McQueen and
Senator Stephanics, an act
relating to renewable energy,
requiring the public regulation
commission to promulgate and
implement rules governing the
sighting of renewable energy
generation, storage, and
intrastate transmission
facilities. House Bill 435.
House Bill 435.
Haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the house energy environment
and natural resources committee,
then the House Government
Elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 436 introduced by
representatives Montoya and
Senna Cortez, an act relating to
public emergencies requiring
that rules, orders of other
directors, other directives
issued by government entities
pursuant to the all hazard
emergency Management Act, the
Public Health Emergency Response
Act, the riot Control Act, or
the Energy Emergency Powers Act
that closed certain businesses
or facilities and that include
exemptions for some businesses
or facilities shall also include
exemption.
for facilities operated by
religious organizations that are
exempt from taxation pursuant to
federal law, amending repealing
and enacting sections of the
NMSA 1978.
House House Bill 436.
I was 436. I've been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 437 introduced by
Representatives Duncan.
Lord
Henry and Brown.
An act relating to taxation,
creating the qualifying foster
care organization Income Tax
Credit. House Bill 437 437
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 438 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to employee benefits
requiring employees of the state
and political subdivisions of
the state to be paid for unused
compensatory time at the end of
each calendar year. House bill
438. 438 haven't been written
twice by titles or the printed
and referred to house labor
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee, thence the House.
Government
Elections.
An Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 439 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to emergency medicine,
requiring public safety
telephone line telecommunicators
to be trained in high quality
telecommunicator cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. House Bill 439.
Is 439.
Haven't been written to us by
title.
His order printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House government elections and
the Indian Affairs Committee.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered.
Members, we will have a joint
session here shortly with the
Senate to hear from our
distinguished guests are United
States senators, Martin Heinrich
and Ben Ray Lujan as well as
congresswoman Teresa Leger
Fernandez.
Uh, the plan is to after the
joint session, reconvene, uh, in
regular session and take up a
little bit more introduction and
then some 3rd reading.
With that, the gentle lady from.
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the speaker appoint
a committee to invite the
honorable Lieutenant Governor
and the honorable members of the
Senate to meet in joint session
with the house in this chamber
for the purpose of being
addressed by United States
Senators Martin Heinrich and Ben
Ben Ray Lujan and the
congresswoman from the 3rd
Congressional District of the
state of New Mexico, the
Honorable Teresa Leger
Fernandez.
If there's an objection, the
chair will appoint
representatives onion Arnu,
Gurola, and Henry to invite the
honorable lieutenant Governor
and the honorable members of the
Senate to meet in joint session
with the house for the purpose
of being addressed by our
distinguished guests.
Mr. Speaker,
Which I recognize is
Representative Supanski. I ask
unanimous consent that the House
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair and that the
rules be suspended to allow the
seating of guests in the chamber
during the joint session.
If there's an objection, the
House will stand in recess.
Subject to the call of the
chair.
Yeah
Oh my God
Right.
I
It's, it's, yeah.
I
I
Yeah
It's
Yeah
I gave you yours.
Thank you.
Thank you.
One more.
uh
telling me that
is
I, I don't know if you've ever
seen the ban.
Mr. Speaker, the sergeant at
arms. The Honorable lieutenant
Governor.
And the honorable members of the
Senate.
Well, the sergeant at arms
please escort the Honorable
Lieutenant Governor and the
You may be seated.
concession of the House and
Senate will come to order. What
is the pleasure of the joint
session,
Mr. Chair recognizes
Representative Svansky. I ask
unanimous consent that we
resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole House and
Senate to be addressed by United
States senators Martin Heinrich
and Ben Ray Lujan and the
congresswoman from the 3rd
Congressional District of the
state of New Mexico, Teresa
Leger Fernandez. There is no
objection.
It is so honored the committee
of the whole House and Senate.
We'll come to order.
Mr. Chairman, Chair recognizes
Representative Hochman Vijil.
I ask unanimous consent that the
chair appoint a committee of 6
to escort Senators Heinrich and
Lujan and Congresswoman Ledger
Hernandez to the House chambers.
If there is no objection, the
Senate, the chair will appoint
Senator Michael Padilla.
Senator Antoinette Cedillo Lopez
and Senator Anthony Thornton.
Representative Christina
Parajon.
Representative Raymundo Lara and
rep and representative.
Jones to escort Senator
Heinrich, Senator Lujan, and
Congresswoman Ledger Fernandez
to the House chamber.
We're waiting for our
congressional delegation to come
in. It is my honor to introduce
some of our guests who are
joining us.
On behalf of the senators and
congresswomen.
Wife of Senator Martin Heinrich,
Julie Heinrich.
From Senator Heinrich's staff,
Edward Tabet Cubero.
Any Quintana.
The director of New Mexico
Coalition of sexual assault
Programs, Alejandra Taylor.
Apprentice with the UA locally
for 12 plumbers and pipefitters
Orlando Mira Montes.
Next 3 intern at Christa Saint
Vincent Hospital, Sandy Juarez.
Executive director of New Mexico
Wild Mark Ellison.
Policy manager, Western resource
advocates Brittany Fallon.
Joining us on the benches on
with Senator Heinrich, Northern
Regional director, Rita
O'Connell.
Senator Heinrich Field
Representative Aurora Valdez.
Senator Heinrich, press
secretary Luis Soriano.
The executive director of New
Mexico Wildlife Federation,
Jesse Dubell.
founder and board member of
Somas unas Pueblo Unido Maria
Cristina Lopez.
Student with Albuquerque Sign
Language Academy, Honey Badger
conservative to Reuben Napoaka.
Joined also from Albuquerque,
the Albuquerque School's
Albuquerque teacher, Rachel
Macias.
And the ASL interpreter, Gabby
Cravens.
Joining us is guests of Senator
Lujan. We have our guests on the
Ron Strasstrum. He won, the
only.
Carmen Luhan.
Sister to Senator Lujan, Jackie
Valdez.
Senator Lujan's brother-in-law
Marvin Valdez.
Don Peay.
Jerome Luhan.
Very special constituent Mr. Leo
Mays.
And another very special
constituent, Miss Maria Mariaia
Solano.
Guests joining Senator Lujan on
the floor on a Romero.
One beta.
Brian Lee.
Carmela Quintana.
Eric Chavez.
Melanie Goodman.
Constance Williams.
Jeff Lopez.
Desiree shorter.
Sophia Allred.
Gerald Solano.
Nora Solano.
Barbara Mays.
And joining us as guest of
Congresswoman Ledger Fernandez,
we have staff member Trish
Dominguez.
Staff member Victoria Martinez.
Guest of the congresswoman,
Geneva Martinez.
Diego Lopez.
Eric Vasquez.
Thomas H. Begay.
And RC bega. Ladies and
gentlemen, one big round of
applause for all of our guests
joining the congresswoman and
the senators.
Sergeant at Arms.
The Honorable Martin Heinrich.
The United States senator.
The Honorable Benre Lujan.
United States senator and the
honorable Teresa Ledger
Fernandez, congresswoman of the
3rd Congressional District of
New Mexico.
Ladies and gentle for the New
Mexican legislature, help us
welcome.
Senator Lujan, Senator Heinrich
and Congresswoman Teresa Ledger
Fernandez.
We'd like to welcome our first
guest speaker.
Senator Martin Heinrich.
Speaker Martinez.
Senate president pro tempore
Stewart.
Lieutenant Governor Morales,
members of the New Mexico Senate
and House of Representatives.
It is an absolute honor to be
with you here this afternoon.
I am very pleased to be joined
by my wife Julie.
I have several honored guests
who I will introduce throughout,
uh, throughout this, uh, but I'm
also so happy to be here with
two of my incredible colleagues
and, and friends from the New
Mexico delegation, uh, Senator
Ben Ray Lujan and Congresswoman
Tra Traca Ledger Fernandez.
I stand with you.
Before you today.
At the start of my 3rd term in
the United States Senate.
And serving you.
And representing this amazing
state in the halls of our
nation's capital is a privilege
that I will never take for
granted.
The same goes for the mandate
that New Mexicans entrusted me
with this last election.
To deliver for the people and
the places of our incredible
state.
To fight for the freedoms, the
safety.
The opportunities and dreams of
our families, our communities
and our country.
I will never shrink from that
work.
And make no mistake.
Republican leadership in the
White House and the United
States House and Senate will
have very real impacts on our
state and on individual New
Mexicans. Some of you will agree
with us.
Others won't agree with any of
them. The same is probably true.
Of many of our constituents.
Still, I have always been struck
by New Mexicans acute
understanding of what it means.
To put individual differences
aside in service of the greater
good.
In our most challenging times,
New Mexicans look out for each
other.
From the darkest days of the
Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon fire to
last year's flooding in Roswell
from north to south and east to
west, New Mexicans understand
our shared commitment to one
another.
So let me be clear.
My commitment
My only commitment.
It is to you, New Mexico.
And I will lift up your voices
in the most powerful halls of
the republic.
Whether you are marked from
Albuquerque at polio survivor
who wrote me.
About the life and death
consequences of vaccines.
Or Gary, a retired Air Force
intelligence officer in
Tularosa.
who wrote to me about the
importance of defending our
national security.
Or Ashley from Truth or
Consequences, a school social
worker who called my office with
deep concerns about how cuts at
the Department of Education
would impact her students.
I will elevate New Mexicans'
voices and demand action,
accountability,
And the future that our kids
deserve.
And I will work day and night to
defend the programs, the
funding, the resources, the
public lands that our
communities, local economies and
families rely on.
Because as elected leaders we
serve all of our constituents.
From our neighbors.
Closest family members to those
in our community, we've never
met or even who disagree with us
on nearly every issue.
All of these New Mexicans are
counting on us here in this room
to lead, to give a damn, to keep
our communities safe.
Simply put, they're counting on
us to deliver.
And that requires grappling with
difficult decisions.
And it requires solving real
problems that impact real
people.
And it requires us
To bridge the gap between what
is.
And what is possible.
Always with New Mexicans front
and center.
You know, we live in an era of
loyalty pledges.
From the right and the left,
frankly, from presidents to rank
and file activists.
And from one elected leader to
another.
I want to implore you not to
sign pledges, but to solve
problems.
Our only loyalty pledge should
be to this incredible state and
to this country and the
incredible people who call it
home.
Whether it's to protect our
nation from foreign terrorist
threats or just to provide the
support our kids need learning
to read.
Whether it's fixing roads that
countless New Mexicans drive on
every day or cutting crime in
our communities. New Mexicans
expect us to put them first, and
we must.
They should be able to count on
us at the federal, state, and
local level.
To ensure that their roads,
their kids, their food, their
water, their air are safe.
And that includes ensuring that
the agencies that are charged
with doing this work are
staffed.
Funded and functional.
Whether that's at New Mexico's
Child, Youth and Families
department.
Or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
Here in the land of enchantment,
we want our kids to be happy and
healthy with a fair shot at
success, no matter what bathroom
they use or how they dress or
what their color of their hair
is or whether they have an IEP.
We want New Mexico women to know
that we trust them to make their
own healthcare decisions and we
will work with them.
To get quality health care that
they deserve in their own
communities.
We want New Mexico's immigrant
families to know that we see
them.
We value them. We will not turn
our backs on them.
And we want hardworking folks.
To know that lowering costs.
Creating jobs, growing the
middle class aren't just
campaign slogans. They require
action. These are the pledges
that we must work to deliver on.
So let's talk a little bit about
what it means to put New
Mexicans first.
Your work
Your work to stand up permanent
funds that generate revenues now
and into the future from the
early childhood trust fund to
the land of enchantment Legacy
Fund. These put New Mexicans
first.
Your work to make communities
safer.
Increase access to mental health
care and tackle substance abuse,
puts New Mexicans first.
When it comes to public safety,
my own strategy has been
straightforward.
Solve crimes.
Support survivors.
Hold criminals accountable.
But too many of our law
enforcement agencies don't have
the basic tools that they need
to solve crimes.
And when crimes go unsolved,
those who commit them.
keep committing them.
Since joining the Senate
Appropriations Committee, I have
worked to deliver federal
resources to our partners in law
enforcement.
I've been able to appropriate
funds for new ballistics testing
machines in Las Cruces and
Farmington and Gallop and
Roswell, so we can solve the
first gun crime before a 2nd 1
is committed.
I've helped our local law
enforcement purchase technology
that detects gunshots and runs
rapid DNA checks. This
technology can mean solving a
crime before it's too late.
In some cases this may even be
the difference between life and
death for the victims of gun
crimes.
And I've helped local law
enforcement purchase equipment
to detect fentanyl and other
illegal drugs, so they can hold
drug traffickers accountable and
get this poison out of our
communities.
But we all know much more is
needed.
If your car is stolen, the
person who stole it should be
found and held held accountable.
Your home's broken into. The
person who did it should be
found and held accountable. If
your daughter is assaulted, the
person who did it should be
found and held accountable.
It's simple, it's
straightforward, but it's not
happening in too many cases.
And we can all do better on this
front.
I would urge all of you to use
your leadership to deliver
strong public safety legislation
that will make this happen.
As many of you recognize, it
does not.
Have to be a choice between
improving public safety and
supporting our community's
mental health care.
We can walk and chew gum at the
same time. And I'm speaking with
a little bit of experience here,
you know, uh, after the horrific
mass shooting in Uvalde.
I sat down with colleagues on
both sides of the aisle, and we
crafted the bipartisan Safer
Communities Act in the, in the
Senate.
That legislation tackled firearm
safety, not an easy issue here
or ever in DC with increased
criminal penalties on things
like gun trafficking offenses
and also by providing federal
investments in community and
school-based mental health
services.
Silver Consolidated Schools was
the first school district in New
Mexico to receive a $6 million
school-based mental health
services grant.
Under that law
These federal resources help the
district higher psychologists,
counselors, and other mental
health professionals at all of
their schools. These types of
school-based mental health
services are an essential piece
of our overall behavioral health
puzzle.
And if we can find a bipartisan
pathway to improve public safety
and mental health, the federal
level.
I have every faith that you can
do it right here.
And after last week's vote,
votes on behavioral health in
the Senate and the crime package
in the house, you have created
much needed momentum. Thank you.
I applaud the Senate for your
work to resource and restructure
our state's behavioral health uh
system.
We all know it's a lot easier to
tear something down over the
course of a couple of years than
to build that infrastructure
back up.
And I applaud the House for
negotiating and passing a crime
package that takes on issues in
our communities from fentanyl to
auto theft to gun crimes. Let's
keep this momentum going.
There is so much more that can
and must be done at the state
and federal levels to support
the victims of crime and to
support law enforcement as they
work to hold accountable the
perpetrators of crime.
Because when it comes to making
our community safer, supporting
victims, solving crime is a
common ground that we should all
be able to support.
And in fact, it's one of our
communities are depending on us
to get right.
We all want New Mexico.
To be the best possible place
for our kids to grow up, for
them to raise families and to
build careers and families in
their home communities.
And that means not only taking
our crime epidemic seriously,
but it also means investing in
our kids from cradle to career.
The investments that this
legislature, a New Mexico voters
unlocked two years ago.
are helping our state lead the
nation in making high quality
early childhood education and
childcare accessible to all our
families.
In the last few years you have
given our public school
educators, the pay raises that
they have long deserved.
And we are scaling up a
statewide network of full
service community schools.
Now all of these investments are
already beginning to deliver
results.
When you account for the state
and federal investments in our
kids from Medicaid to the child
tax credit. We don't rank 50th
in poverty. We ranked 17th,
better than the national
average, not good enough, but we
are far from finished.
And I applaud all of you for
looking to increase the child
tax credit. This money will put
resources back into the pockets
of New Mexican families who will
invest it in their children's
future. We should be expanding
apprenticeships and paid
internships as early as high
school.
That's how we will prepare the
next generation of New Mexicans
for career success.
Here with me are not Arnaldo
Miramontes and Sandy Juarez, two
shining examples, two young
people who have found their
career paths. Thanks to highly
successful programs in our
state.
While in high school, Sandy had
a paid internship at Christa
Saint Vincent Hospital through
future focused education.
She got hands-on experience in
phlebotomy.
And now she's preparing at Santa
Fe Community College for a
career in healthcare.
Or Arnaldo is in his 5th and
final year as an apprentice.
At the UA Local 412.
And on his way to an incredible
career with licenses in both
plumbing and pipe fitting.
Both will be meeting demands in
high needs industries right here
at home.
And I encourage all of us to
continue investing in career and
technical education, paid
internships and apprenticeships
and work-based learning
opportunities for our young
people.
As I work to pass my
apprenticeship pathways Act in
the Senate. I hope that you will
continue to identify targeted,
sustained funding at the state
level.
We should look at everything
from offering credit to
restructuring our school days to
help students get more hands-on
experience in the workplace.
This is critical to successful,
successfully building the
workforce of the future.
Finally, I hope you'll continue
to grow our state's outdoor
equity fund and the
opportunities that it is
unlocked for so many young New
Mexicans.
I am so proud that New Mexico is
grounding more kids in the
incredible lands that are their
American birthright.
You know, before I was ever an
elected official. I was a guide
and an educator.
And I saw time and again over
and over, the remarkable
difference it makes when
children and teens spend time in
the outdoors.
I've invited as my guest today,
Reuben Apodaca, a 12th grader
with the Honey Badger
Conservation Crew.
At the Albuquerque Sign Language
Academy.
I visited their beekeeping and
honey harvesting operation last
year, which is receiving
critical support from the
outdoor equity fund.
And students who are deaf, hard
of hearing, and with
disabilities are managing their
own beehives, bringing honey
products from those hives to
market and getting this kind of
incredible hands-on experience.
I strongly encourage you to
continue making transformational
opportunities like this possible
by scaling up the outdoor equity
fund.
Finally, as we invest in the
people of this great state.
We also need to invest in the
lands and waters and wildlife
that are the fabric that we
build our identities upon.
Most of you have heard that the
Supreme Court has stripped
federal protections from 90% of
New Mexico's surface waters.
Most my uh, my guest Mark
Allison from New Mexico Wild.
is one of the folks here
advocating for two bills that
would establish essential state
level protection of these waters
that are now void of federal
stewardship.
I'm also encouraged by the
proposals that are moving
forward to reform our state's
outdated and underfunded
Department of Game and Fish.
And game commission
Brittany Fallon from the Western
Resource Advocates and Jesse
Dubell from the New Mexico
Wildlife Federation are here
with me today, and they're
advocating for reforms that will
ensure that wildlife management
decisions are based on biology,
not on politics.
These reforms, they account for
the voices of farmers and
ranchers and hunters and anglers
and biologists and wildlife
conservationists.
And they also include the
sustainable funding needed to
help our game and fish
department effectively do their
work.
There is nothing in the world
that I enjoy more than packing
into a spy camp during auk
season.
Our wild game has literally been
the primary protein on my
family's plate for over 20
years. So I know full well the
importance of the work needed to
manage New Mexico's wildlife.
But we need a 21st century
wildlife conservation approach
that leverages resources to
manage all of our wildlife, not
just game animals, but all of
it. And we need to make sure
that our game commission is more
representative and more
accountable.
We need to make sure that we are
leveraging the biology and
resources to protect fish and
wildlife so that they never
become listed as threatened or
endangered.
Now what we address all of these
needs for our community.
We must stay focused on a real
North Star.
Working together, that is our
kids.
That should be our North Star
for the future.
And working together we can
deliver the future that those
kids deserve.
We can fight for their freedoms.
The freedom to grow up and make
their own healthcare decisions,
the freedom to marry who they
love, the freedom to be who they
are.
For goodness' sakes, the freedom
to feel safe in their own
classrooms.
And the freedom to pursue a fair
shot at success.
So
So let's all keep working to
protect our kids, clean air,
clean water, public lands that
will sustain their communities,
economies and sense of identity
as New Mexicans.
We can uphold this democracy.
Recommit to the republic set out
in our Constitution and comply
with our oaths of service to put
we the people first.
That doesn't mean.
That will always agree on how to
get it done.
In fact, I'm pretty confident
we'll always be able to find
something to disagree on, even
if it's just red or green.
But if we always put, we the
people first.
If we always pledge our loyalty
to the people that we serve
above all else.
We'll be able to deliver the
future that our kids deserve.
Thank you.
Senator Martin Heinrich.
Once again, one more round of
applause for Senator Martin
Heinrich.
It is now my honor, ladies and
gentlemen of the New Mexico
legislature, all those guests in
attendance to welcome.
Senator Ben Ray Leon.
I want to say good morning.
Because that's when y'all got
started.
But good afternoon everyone.
It's an honor to be here with.
Each and every one of you.
As I often.
have started in the past. This
is a very special day for
Myself and my family.
Especially when mom receives the
kind of reception.
That you're always so gracious
in giving her.
Thank you.
You can clap with that.
You know, I was honored as we
got started today to sit in the
Speaker's office for a bit with
The family
Yeah, to be able to watch.
Mom
Hold court in that office, Mr.
Speaker.
It brought back some good
memories.
They brought me back to times
where the lessons that I learned
right here.
Watching my father work with so
many of you.
Or you've served together.
For those that he didn't have
the honor to serve with, he
worked with you.
In one capacity or another.
And I want to thank you all for
sharing those incredible stories
to me because
Sitting in those offices, those
of you who served with my father
served in this incredible house
is incredible legislature, you
reminded me that sometimes when
you go into those rooms, the
passions would be shared with
each other, but in the end, it
was our values as New Mexicans
that always held strong because
we want to make things better.
We want to help kids. We want to
help our communities sometimes
we have a different path to get
there.
But you need to talk. You need
to come together to do what's
right, and we also need to
listen in our heart.
Because oftentimes it's in our
heart of hearts when we know
what's right.
And what's wrong?
But I'm more convinced than
ever.
That as New Mexicans, as we've
proven in the past, we can stand
strong against whatever
headwinds there are, and we're
going to come out stronger,
right?
Now
Since I've been elected to the
United States Senate.
I want to thank every one of you
who has welcomed me into the
community.
I'm very proud that I visited
all 33 New Mexico counties.
I'm very proud that I've been
able to help fight and secure
funding for a project in every
single county across New Mexico
as we all know.
There there's nothing like
hitting the road here at home.
Being able to visit our small
towns.
Our small churches.
We all have our favorite gas
station tacos.
We all have our favorite gas
stations for coffee, whatever it
may be, we know where we're
going to stop. We get to know
who's working there.
And they often tell us what's
happening in the community.
Whether you're getting a shoe
shine or you're getting your
hair cut.
Or you're getting a cup
Talking to those who serve our
constituents every day.
As wait staff, as barbers.
As hairdressers.
Sometimes I'm reminded that the
best lessons we can get as I was
given by Senator Heinrich
earlier today.
It's just by
Listening a whole lot more.
But then doing something and
acting with what we're learning
about to help make a difference
in people's lives. That's why I
was so proud when I visited
with.
A mayor out in Clayton, some of
you know Mayor Chavez, some of
you know Ernie.
It was a priority of the friends
up in Clay to make sure we got
this port to planes adopted,
which would open up corridors in
a part of New Mexico that
doesn't seem the kind of
economic activity that we should
realize in every corner of our
state, but transforming the way
we would move from Texas through
New Mexico up to the northern
part of America is going to make
an exceptional difference that's
going to drive dollars and jobs
into that home. I want to thank
Ernie and Mayor Chavez and every
one of you for the work you've
done in that space.
Now
The honor of bringing cabinet
secretaries.
To visit here in New Mexico as
well.
To hear exactly what's happening
on the grounds here in New
Mexico, getting lessons that
they may never receive because
of the parts of the country that
they are from or just where they
grew up. It's a little different
here at home.
Down in Deming.
We were able to secure
additional agricultural funding
and we got to get some
secretaries to fall in love with
New Mexico's chili.
I think that specialty crop is
one that we all agree should be
protected, right?
When I was in the House of
Representatives.
I prioritize New Mexico's
economy, and I still continue to
do that today, whether it's
supporting our national labs and
innovation, public lands, and
access, looking at agriculture
where our food is produced and
we feed America and we sometimes
feed brothers and sisters in
other parts of the world. It
creates jobs. It's the right
thing to do. And we do it here
in New Mexico. It's why I'm so
proud to continue this work as a
member of the Ad committee.
In the United States Senate.
Would you all agree we should
land a farm bill and get it done
soon.
Now I want to congratulate many
of you for a debate you were
recently a part of one that
deserves our attention, not just
here in New Mexico.
But has been receiving.
More attention across America.
One of my proudest moments on
the Senate floor was working
with Democratic and Republican
colleagues working with the New
Mexico delegation to pass the
radiation exposure compensation
Act in the United States Senate.
Now, we didn't just pass it
once, we passed it twice, but
unfortunately this bill was not
given a vote on the House floor.
And this is where we need every
one of our colleagues and
constituents as well because
it's because of constituents,
the more Democrats and more
Republicans are not now just
voting for this bill, but our
co-sponsors of this bill. Some
of you know Tina Cordova down in
Ortero County.
Some of you know Phil Harrison
in the Navajo Nation and
countless others.
Some of you have loved ones
who've been diagnosed with
cancer.
Or some chronic illness.
It's not right when we see them
suffer.
When we see them suffer without
any help.
Especially to a group of
Americans who were doing their
job for national security. This
should be easy.
And I think my friends in
Missouri, Josh Hawley, one of
the most conservative members of
the of the United States Senate.
For finding a way where we could
advocate for constituents in
Saint Louis and constituents in
New Mexico and in Ohio, um, in
Pennsylvania, out in Arizona in
Montana in Idaho, it's endless.
We're seeing more and more
concern of contamination all
across America, and it's not
just from those that worked
where there was.
Downwind testing.
It's also where all this stuff
has been stored.
There's gotta be a better way in
America and I know we're on the
same team here.
Now, on infrastructure.
I know you all are busy with
your capital outlay bills.
It's because you believe in
investment in your communities.
You believe in making a
difference when a mutual
domestic water system, which is
run by volunteers in the
community to deliver water to a
whole group of folks needs help.
When a fire takes out an Osea
and fills it up with silt, we
have to protect that because
this is generation after
generation, centuries of
tradition in this beautiful
state that we have to protect
our way of life. The one area I
want to ask your help on.
is as the chairman of the
commerce subcommittee, which
oversees broadband.
In America
I was proud to fight and work
with the New Mexico delegation
to help secure $675 million to
expand high-speed internet
across New Mexico.
Now, what I'm gonna say is it's
time for the state to start
investing these dollars.
If you don't believe me, just go
back and chat with the folks
back at home and take time to
travel down that long dirt road
to that one farm where you know
the family, but you know there's
no connectivity.
Do like I did. Go down to
reserve and visit with the fire
chief.
Some of you know where he lives?
Some of you have driven those
canyons and you, I, I'm seeing
here, you know when you drive
those canyons.
There's no connectivity. What
happens if a fire breaks out?
How do we keep people safe?
We can change this paradigm in
New Mexico. Not only can we have
more veterans and more seniors,
we can connect more families,
but we can help the police
officers and the firefighters
and EMS every day, if we can
just connect New Mexico. Can I
count on your help?
Now, one area that I'm very
proud of is how we all work
together.
I'm proud to have gone to know
so many of you.
Personally
When these floods devastated
communities when these fires
devastated communities.
I remember reading with George
Munoz and Pic Campos,
representative small.
You came out
Representative Chatfield was
there.
And this was a conversation
about what was happening on the
ground as we were looking at it.
And there was agreement that we
could work together at the state
level and at the federal level
to be able to secure the funding
and the policy necessary to make
sure that communities would not
get left behind in New Mexico.
Democrats and Republicans
working together from every
corner of New Mexico for the
good of New Mexico citizens.
Visiting with Thora Walsh, the
president of Mescalero.
We do some Marilyn Crawford,
Roswell Mayor Tim Jennings, and
Dexter Mayor Mitch Daubert to
assess the damage.
Our responsibilities require us
to go to see what's happening in
people's lives.
Because we've committed to make
a difference.
for them.
I'm very proud that we've been
able to secure almost $6 billion
to help.
The families that were impacted
by the Cap Canyon and Herman's
Peak Fire. A fire, by the way,
that was started by the federal
government.
The federal government has full
liability in this case.
One of my frustrations is one
that I've learned from the
families here at home whether
we're talking about the folks up
north that we're visiting with
our brothers and sisters down
and Riodoso.
In Roswell
These FEMA dollars are not
flowing the way that they
should.
And with your advocacy in every
corner of New Mexico, please use
your voices when you're visiting
with these folks to make sure
they understand the pain of the
families that they're working
for.
And we'll wake them up.
Now we've accomplished some good
together as I've been talking
about rural water system,
supporting farmers and veterans,
lowering prescription drug
prices and protecting jobs.
Looking over our national labs
and our bases.
Seeing strength and industries
like Intel and.
Growth and opportunities in
Valencia County.
In every corner of New Mexico,
our brothers and sisters down in
Santa Teresa.
There's an area of concern that
I have though.
And many of you know me.
I'm willing to work with anyone
any day.
When it comes to making a
positive difference here in New
Mexico.
And I think we all share that.
I know that we are all concerned
about these illegal federal
funding freezes.
And the reason I say illegal is
because the courts have had to
weigh in already. This isn't me
speaking.
The courts are weigh in in
America we have checks and
balances. We, we have.
Rule of law
The Constitution requires it. It
prescribes it. It's why we've
thrived.
And as I stated earlier when I
said I will work with anyone any
day when it comes to New Mexico,
and I've heard this from every
one of you as well.
Martin, when we were out there,
we had that round table on the
farm bill. Your advocacy was for
the people at home even though
we had some disagreements, but
it was about making a difference
for the people at home and
standing strong.
When there have been base
closures threatened in the state
of New Mexico. Do we sit idly by
and say, let it happen?
No
We come together strong.
Democrats, Republicans, leaders
from industry, from
Educational institutions from
every corner of the state and we
stop it from happening.
So why is it so quiet when
people across New Mexico are
being fired every day from these
federal agencies that help our
farmers and our ranchers that
are jeopardizing infrastructure
that are taking away money from
farmers and from a secus we've
got to speak up.
This is New Mexico.
And as New Mexican told me stop
the closure of those bases, we
can hold back what's happening
to the closure of these
programs.
I get a little passionate.
I credit my mom and dad for
that.
Now
Family matters to me.
And I'm very blessed today.
To be surrounded by family, not
just this New Mexico legislative
family, but my mom, who you've
already recognized.
My brother Jerome's here and my
sister Jackie, my brother-in-law
Marvin, my partner, my
girlfriend Dan is here with us
today. By the way, thank you,
Don.
My niece Miranda's here.
Bailey and Riley are here.
I've got a cousin Paul up there
in Colton as well.
This is a New Mexico story,
right?
Well, come on now this is a New
Mexico story.
Stanley has a family matters.
I want to close with this about
constituent services and
casework.
Former congressman Manuel Lujan
set the bar high for us in New
Mexico.
He committed his office to
constituent services and
casework.
Because Manuel knew then what we
all know now. Well, sometimes
it's challenging to pass a piece
of legislation.
We can make a positive
difference in a family's life or
in its constituent's life, one
case at a time.
It's been an honor to get to
know you and working with human
space. Now many of you know my
staff.
And they know you. If I could
just ask them to stand up and be
recognized here as well.
My office recently received a
number of calls from some
constituents about a problem
that was happening here in the
state of New Mexico.
And what was going on as a
family who had done everything
to care for one of their kids.
was being blocked by an
insurance company to be able to
get access to cancer.
Treatments
Once I found out about this,
many of us got to work and got
together. Again, the state, the
federal government working
together to do what was right
here.
Mariah Solano from Santa Fe is
here, Mariah, if you don't mind
standing.
Mariah is now getting those life
saving treatments and she's here
with us today.
But this fight is not going to
stop. We're going to need your
help going forward to make sure
she can get those life saving
cancer treatments.
Mayor Greg Hall from Rio Rancho
gave me a call one weekend and
he was very concerned because he
heard from one of his doctors
that there was a report that
insurers were denying claims for
behavioral telehealth services a
few years back.
After working with Greg, we got
to work. We were able to work
with the superintendent of
insurance. We're able to work
with CMS, Health and Human
Services at the federal level,
and we were able to stop this
before it became a problem.
Listening to constituents,
picking up the phone when we're
getting called.
Having those conversations, I
often say not during church but
after church is OK.
But at the grocery store at the
ball game.
The health and safety of New
Mexicans is paramount no matter
where we are in the world.
When Leo Mays.
Uh, beloved New Mexican
musician.
Was traveling abroad and had a
medical emergency.
While visiting the Vatican.
Because of this injury,
He was left paralyzed.
Now this family has angels all
over.
So many of us got to work and we
made sure the translators were
going to be there at those
Italian facilities to get him
the care he needed, but the
family knew they needed to get
him back to New Mexico.
I want to thank the University
of New Mexico Hospital as well.
Because everyone worked to make
sure that there was space for
him and that he would have the
care that he needed. Mr. Mays,
please stand up.
Because of the medical
professionals here in New
Mexico.
Because of your prayers.
Mr. Mays is well and strong and
thank God he is doing well.
This is how we work together as
a family.
There's going to be some
agreements along the way. I
respect that. I respect you.
What you're doing is not easy.
But you're here because you
care.
I learned from you all every
day.
We as New Mexicans depend on
you.
Your experiences and those
conversations you have day in
and day out. My father with some
of the last words he shared with
this body, he shared with all of
the members in the state of New
Mexico, something that he taught
us as kids.
One of the greatest gifts in
life that we have is our ability
to use what God gave us.
To help make this world a better
place.
When it comes to New Mexico, we
stand up for New Mexico.
We put differences aside.
It's not about left, not about
right.
It's about right and wrong.
That also taught me.
You worked until the job is
done.
Now New Mexico, I'll fight for
you today.
Tomorrow
And for the years to come.
I thank you all for your prayers
and for your words of advice. 3
years ago, I had this enormous
healthcare that I've shared with
many of you about.
There's a scar on the back of my
head that reminds me about it
every day.
This is what a stroke survivor
looks like.
Now God works in mysterious
ways.
Sometimes we get a second
chance, and then we have to make
a decision what we're gonna do
with it, everyone.
It's hard to say goodbye and
it's hard to close. I respect
this institution so much.
This is a tough time for people
all across New Mexico and all
across America right now.
Reflect
Think about the difference of
right and wrong.
Let's find those places we can
work together.
And let's find those places
where there may be a little bit
of disagreement.
Because if we just listen to
each other.
We'll find a path forward. We
can get this done, everyone.
God bless each and every one of
you and keep you safe and may
God bless to Mexico and may God
bless America, everyone. Thanks
for having me.
Ladies and gentlemen, once
again, big round of applause for
Senator Ben Ray Lujan.
It is now my honor to recognize
and to welcome to the New Mexico
State legislature.
Congresswoman Teresa Ledger
Fernandez.
Muchisimas gracias muchisimas
gracias and thank you so much to
our amazing New Mexico senators
for their speeches and their
inspiration today. uh, good
afternoon, madam Pro Tem. Mr.
Speaker, leaders of the House,
the Senate legislators sennares,
and Miss Amigos. I wanna thank
my guests for joining me on the
dais today, including Matt and,
my fiancee, news for everybody.
Yeah
So, like, everybody's guests
here today, we needed to decide
what did we want to do and bring
and highlight because we have so
many people doing so many
impressive things across our
state.
Mine represents the programs
that are uplifting opportunities
for communities across my
district.
Especially
With an emphasis on the cultural
because I think in this moment
when we are indeed so worried.
The beauty that we have where we
are in our cultuan or er or
diversity is so very important.
So I want to thank Diego Lopez
and Eric Vasquez for the work
they do in their art and in the
Rio Grande natural resource
because we need to remember our
history, our culture, and we
need to spend time celebrating
it in our beautiful outdoors.
I want to thank Geneva Martinez,
who is herself a breast cancer
survivor, but it's not letting
that beater and it's making sure
that everybody finds joy in life
and communicates. Thank you for
coming up from Roswell, New
Mexico.
And now
If I had more time, I would
singlas Maranitas, uh, to our
Navajo code talker because he
just turned 100 in February.
Thomas Begay.
His service to our nation is
indeed a reminder.
Of the importance.
Of celebrating that diversity,
that diversity of languages that
we have in New Mexico where we
could take a language that is
spoken here in Arizona by the
Navajos and turn it into a code
that was never broken. This is
what patriotism looks like, and
we are so glad he is here today
and we
Sure, we need to make
Sure that we
the
It's where the museum and the
you
Ma
And honor
our
talkers.
As many of you might know, we
buried my beloved brother Steve
yesterday.
This weekend, Saturday. He was
not only the soundtrack of my
family's life, but his trumpet
sound was heard throughout
northern New Mexico.
You know her.
Leo
Leo played in Cascari with
Steve.
That church, Our Lady of Sos if
you've ever been there, it's
huge. It was packed. It was
overflowing with loss and love.
Outside in the winter sun.
People came up to me to share
the pessame.
C
Me and they told me the stories
of how he bought joy to their
lives and to their community
through his music.
And then they said, I am so
sorry.
I know this is not the right
time to raise this.
But I want you to know how
scared I am.
About what is happening to our
country.
I had
You know
My family is from the eastern
side of the state. I have dear
cousins for Republicans.
Have people we had people who
came from Colorado from Las
Vegas, from Utah, from Oregon,
the other Las Vegas, the wrong
one, you know, and they all
wanted to share.
Both their love of Steve.
But interestingly,
The concern
They were teachers.
Who knew that their school.
Received federal funding.
And were they gonna lose their
job?
They
Or one of their dear friends.
Was a federal employee.
I was losing
Or had lost
Their job.
We heard
From a farmer
Who was supposed to get.
Funding
It was frozen
Because I was in Vegas.
You know, they asked me.
What about the FEMA funding?
What about Hermit's Peak?
What's going to happen?
It was surreal morning my
brother as deeply as you know, I
would have.
But also this morning, the
sadness and this fear of what
was happening.
For our country.
Because we know that these
federal services and programs
the same as the state programs
and what we do for our
communities across the state.
North, south, east, west, and
every corner.
They're important
In our communities rely on them.
State local
Federal we all serve.
Because we know how important it
is to provide government
services to our communities.
There is a place for everything.
Oh my God, we read that time
for, you know, we had the time
there was a time, there is a
season.
But there is also a role that we
each must play whether it is in
private.
Entrepreneurs or ranchers or
farms, but also our government.
And we are all connected.
So perhaps it wasn't the right
time.
And perhaps this is not the
right time for me to be sharing
with you this, but in New
Mexico, we are all connected all
of our stories are connected and
we are connected to each other
in place in a way that other
states are not.
And I am so proud of that fact.
In New Mexico, we understand
that diversity is not to be
purged as Trump is doing.
But what we celebrate just as we
did earlier today when we held
our hand and looked at that flag
and said about the importance of
cultural diversity. We believe
that it makes us stronger. We
believe that equity.
The idea that everyone should be
treated fairly and justly.
It's something we should
celebrate. It is a goal, and we
in New Mexico will always fight
discrimination.
Sadly,
Sadly, we're at the door of a
constitutional crisis, and I'm
going to say it because I'm
emotional. I know some of the
guys were a little nicer friends
like I'm saying it, guys, we're
at the door of a constitutional
crisis when profiteering
billionaires who were not
elected and did not believe in
fairness.
just
cannot
Our federal government
To give
To get
Breaks to the wealthiest
corporations and individuals.
the Trump administration and
Republicans in Congress are now
seeking to cut the programs that
one of our communities and
families rely on.
This is in sharp contrast to
what we discussed last time. I
stood before you in the several
times before that when we were
sharing news about the
incredible investments coming
out of Washington. Democrats
were providing, but so were
Republicans and Democrats in our
bipartisan bipartisan
infrastructure law when we
believe that bipartisanship is
the way to do things.
To get
To get as much of that fun
from the bipartisan
infrastructure law and every
other bill that we passed in
those first two glorious years I
served in Congress. Oh my God, I
thought it was always going to
be like that too. It's like, oh,
this is great, but we knew that
there was a lot of federal
funding, and it would stay and
DC and not flow into our pipes
in our street, in our streets,
in our roads, unless we had
matching funds.
And in our rural communities. I
represent one of the largest
rural districts in America. I
love my world district because I
am from rural New Mexico and I
love those big expanses.
But
Take a lot of roads.
Right and their small
communities, and they don't have
the ability to put up those
matching funds.
So I have stood before you and I
said, please set up a fund so
that our small communities will
have those matching funds, and
you did.
And thank you for it. Thank you
for that $75 million.
He's going to turn into 750.
Million dollars because of the
work that you did.
With federal and state dollars.
We also secured $17.4 billion.
That's a lot of money, $17
billion in public and private
investments and clean energy and
infrastructure and
manufacturing, right? That's
great. That is us working
together just like Senator Luhan
said, just like Senator Heinrich
talked about, right? as co-chair
of the World Broadband Caucus,
which was amazing when we said
to New Mexico $1.6 billion.
And federal funds and you have
the matching funds for it. Yes,
let's get into the ground
because we can't just have
broadband in the big house. We
need it in the adobe house. We
need it in the ranch house. We
need it.
Every house in New Mexico and
every canyon.
We also focused on the problems
families face every day.
I funded the home of your own
pilot program to provide down
payment assistance and our
families in Santa Fe Cochiti
Roswell, Espanola, Las Vegas,
and more are coming, have
purchased homes and won't see
their rents rise again, and I
know this is a priority to you.
Let's make sure everybody has a
home of their own. Can we do
that stay in New Mexico.
We fought for healthcare finally
empowering Medicare to negotiate
drug prices. Imagine we're like
one of the only countries that
never negotiated with a drug
price. Why? That's crazy. But
now, 24,000 new Mexicans on
Medicare using medications to
prevent blood clots. I'm not
gonna say those names of those
drugs because we can never say
them, right? But what we do know
60% reduction.
And their monthly payment.
60% reduction. So for somebody.
Somebody who is facing those
rising cuts and on a fixed
income.
$300 that you don't have to put
out for your medications every
month. That's a big deal and it
is amazing and
Thanks to house, and this is
something we had to do
ourselves. But thanks to House
and Senate Democrats and the
Biden Harris White House, none
of the 459,000 Medicare
beneficiaries in New Mexico will
pay more than $2000 a year for
their prescriptions. That is
something to celebrate.
The problem is
The problem is that while we are
celebrating these things we did.
We know
That in just a few short weeks.
The Trump administration has
turned its back on New Mexicans
and working families across the
country.
They froze money that should be
flowing to New Mexicans. It is
creating chaos, uncertainty, and
inflation.
They gutted federal agency
firing workers are a national
labs that then they had to
rehire doctors and nurses at the
Indian Health Service,
firefighters at the Forest
Service, and let's be clear,
these chaotic cuts won't save
money, but they will destroy
government services that
Americans deserve and rely on.
want to
I want to
her again.
I want to honor again Thomas
Begay.
Not just for his service to our
country.
As a code talker.
But do you know that he served?
And worked for the federal
government.
For 40 years.
For 40 years.
He retired
She inspired me. I got to be
with him, uh, uh, last year, was
it 2 years ago? Oh my God, it's
like, can I always be around Mr.
McK because he's always so
inspiring. But you know, he
worked, right? So they're trying
to demonize our federal
employees.
Well, Chris.
30% of our federal employees are
like Mr. Begay.
They are veterans. So first they
served us in the military and
now they are serving us in
government. We must honor,
respect them and respect them
and not demonize them. We must
thank them for their service,
then and now.
And the White House isn't being
honest when it says it's funding
freezes and executive orders
won't directly impact farmers.
The environmental quality
incentives program, we all know
it as EIP, and anybody who lives
in a rural area and knows it
very well because our ranchers
and farmers use it a lot.
There were $133.4 million
expected to come to New Mexico
farmers.
But now
Many of those funds are frozen.
We've received notification and
we are doing an investigation.
But there's no really
explanation for why other than
this.
It has environment in its title,
right? Trump's absurd attack on
programs that conserve water,
energy, and the environment have
left farmers who sh shelled out
money expecting these grants and
loans worried about how will
they afford the planting season.
I am headed to Tucum Kerry Roy
and Moscato Duma.
The wind farms that we've helped
build in the eastern part of my
district are providing over $3
million a year in tax revenues
to Lincoln County, and money
directly into ranchers'
pocketbooks because Trump
illegally froze wind energy
funding that Congress
appropriated new wind farms that
could benefit Quay and other
counties might not come into
existence. The students who
could make $65,000.
immediately after this
certification from training at
Messin's College win program
might not find a job since wind
energy is one of the cheapest
forms of electricity. The family
that could pay lower utility
costs might be stuck with rising
energy bills.
Trump is abandoning the very
people who trusted him.
No matter who your constituents
voted for this hurts, this hurts
one of our communities and now
as I mentioned earlier, there is
the Republican budget bill. It
will come for Medicaid, our
education funding, nutrition
programs that touch every single
one of your communities in this
chamber.
Hungry children and over 700,000
New Mexicans on Medicaid.
700,000 New Mexicans receive
Medicaid.
When those cuts come, if we
cannot defeat them and we are
going to fight like hell to
defeat them, but if they come,
Why?
It's to extend the Trump tax
cuts which benefit the wealthy
and will drive up that deficit.
And what are we going to say,
how, no, we're gonna fight like
hell to keep those cuts from
happening.
I'm chair
I'm chair of the Democratic
Women's Caucus, which welcomed a
historic 96 women this year.
It's pretty neat, not as good as
the not as good as the state of
New Mexico, you know, where the
majority of women, but yeah,
you're breaking those turquoise
glass ceilings, but as chair and
as a woman, I'm especially
concerned about the attack on
women's reproductive healthcare
rights because Republicans are
passing bills that would
undermine the freedom to access
healthcare, that New Mexico.
has promised to woman.
We don't get health care, we
die.
The White House may have
abandoned our people.
But New Mexico has the power to
fight back.
First, I need your help. I need
you to let me know whenever any
of those federal grants aren't
coming to your community, so we
can raise the flag, we can find
out what happened. So will you
do it, make sure you reach out
to my amazing staff stand up and
make sure you let us know
because we need to know.
We need to know.
You know, cause especially.
For our world communities.
These federal grants mean a lot.
Title I means a lot.
To every single school almost in
my district.
I have 3 schools.
That are not Title one in my
district.
Special ed.
Bilingual education.
Just help.
I know the state is doing so
much.
But I need
I need my Republicans in the
audience.
I need you to join us and
saying, we might
What certain things, but we
don't want our schools to hurt.
We want our health care.
We want our citizens to be able
to get Medicaid.
Those world health clinics.
You know how essential they are.
They're on the chopping block.
I have Republicans who have
already committed to me that
they'll help me save Head Start.
So I need to make sure we reach
out and try to save a lot more
of these programs that are
communities rely on and so I
need us all to say we value our
rural communities more.
than any fealty to any.
Other idea it's our communities
that we have been sent here to
serve.
Second
We must take steps to prepare
for potential wins. And you know
what, I think we can have
friends. Last year with the
Republican-led House, I secured,
together with the senators, an
additional 1.5 billion for
Hermit's peak and an additional
authorization of 770 million for
the Navajo Gallup water supply
project. Yeah, thank you, Patty
likes that one.
This is working on a bipartisan
basis, right? in the Senate was
Democrat, but in the House we
had Republican leadership and I
went and I explained why it was
also important and it is that
building those relationships
that will help us get through
this.
This year we are working on 5
critical Indian water rights
settlements bills. They're worth
for my district $3.6 billion for
12 tribes and they're non-Indian
water rights neighbors, all
those small towns and villages
are going to benefit. Last year
under Republican leadership, I
was able to secure full hearings
for all of the New Mexico bills,
and I intend to make more
progress this session, but I
need the state to continue to
allocate the funds.
So that when those bills get
passed, we can make them a
reality. When I show up and I
say the state of New Mexico is
already setting aside the funds
we need for the water rights
settlements. It makes my job a
lot, a lot easier. So please
help me out, will you?
The state must also act to
protect our Medicaid programs to
that new Mexicans don't lose
their health care overnight and
for so many of these things that
we're gonna be calling upon you
to do because the state is going
to lead. We don't know exactly
what's gonna happen because we
are getting pushback. I need to
tell you, the phones are, the
system is closing down because
Americans are across the country
are calling in to the Democratic
representatives, the Republican
representatives saying we don't
want this. Why is that man doing
with our social
We want these programs. We need
these programs. So we don't know
what we will be able to say, but
what you need to do is
anticipate so that you can step
in when
can come.
So it's going to have to be a
flexibility that perhaps we're
not used to.
But New Mexicans.
relying on you.
And let's think together about
how we can continue successful
pilot programs, programs with
state funding the home of your
own program is proving that down
payment assistance work. Let's
build on it.
I'm incredibly proud of you
state of New Mexico. You know
how to lead and face of chaos,
you know that investments cradle
to career education, deliver a
higher return than tax cuts for
billionaires.
You've seen, you've seen the
devastation. You've seen the
devastation of climate-driven
droughts and fires. You were
debating and hopefully passing
laws to protect our water and
air because investing billions
now will save Min more later.
Actually investing now will save
buildings later. That's the way
it goes, right? Yes, yes.
Invest.
You understand that immigrants
provide the labor that is
essential for a dairy farms or
oil fields in our nursing homes,
which is why we treat all our
workers with dignity and trust.
as we legislate to improve
safety, fight fentanyl, protect
our children from gun violence.
We can do it all.
We can
And we must
You are investing in science and
the economic development it
creates even as a vaccine
skeptic takes over HHS and Trump
cut research funding to New
Mexico universities and that
research funding cut is going to
hurt everybody from Socorro to
Highlands to Portales to
Mesalans College across the
boards. We need to protect our
colleges and universities.
In the darkest hours of the
American Revolution.
When we were fighting.
Against the rule of a tyrant.
Thomas Paine said those famous
words.
To rally the cause.
These are the times that try
men's souls.
But he rallied the cause.
And he said the time has found
us.
I believe the times have found
us today to protect New Mexicans
from the darkness.
That we see
Repose the sea of troubles with
the reservoir of kindness.
Hope
And New Mexico values.
I stand before you as your
partner in this cause. We have
done great things together and
we will even.
2 more
We'll do greater things in the
future.
Because we know why we are here.
We know why we are served. We
know that service is an act of
love.
And we have true love for every
single one of our communities.
I.
Please join me for one more
round of applause for Senator
Martin Heinrich. Senator Ben Ray
Lujan, and Congresswoman Teresa
Ledger Fernandez.
You may be seated.
Mr. Chairman, the chair
recognizes representatives,
representative Savansky. As
unanimous consent that the whole
House and Senate rise in report
progress. The joint session of
the House and Senate will come
to order.
Mr. Chairman, recognizes
representative Spanky ask
unanimous consent that the joint
session of the House and Senate
now be dissolved. There is no
objection.
It is so ordered.
The session has been dissolved.
Yes says if we're doing.
14 days.
I
I
No
just
right.
protecting our children.
that
Um
I
Members, please stay close to
the chambers, we will resume
floor session shortly.
Members, please come into the
chambers. We will begin shortly.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
the next order of business,
introduction of legislation. It
is so ordered.
Cooked to read.
House Bill 440 introduced by
Representative Lujan and
Representative Maestas, an act
relating to property,
restricting homeowners
associations from foreclosing
liens that are less than 12
months delinquent, less than
$5000 or for assessments
consisting solely of fines,
House Bill 440.
I was about 440 haven't been
read to as my title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee.
The House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 441, introduced by
Representative Armstrong,
Representative Thompson,
Representative Jones, and
Representative Dow, an act
relating to intergovernmental
agreements and acting the
dentist and dental hygienist
interstate Compact. House Bill
441.
House 441 have been read to us
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 442, introduced by
Representative Matthews, an act
relating to mobile homes,
amending definitions, providing
rent, stabilization, revising
and expanding private remedies,
prescribing civil penalties.
House Bill 442.
House 442 have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, the
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 443 introduced by
Representative De la Cruz and
Representative Maestas, an act
relating to liquor control,
amending sections of the Liquor
Control Act to allow persons at
least 18 years of age to deliver
in stock package alcohol
beverages. House Bill 443.
Has 443 have been to us by
toddlers that were printed and
referred to the House government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 444, introduced by
Representative de la Cruz and
Representative Maestas, an act
relating to athletic
competition, transferring New
Mexico Athletic Commission
Authority to the regulation and
licensing department, expanding
the number of commission members
changing commission compositions
permitting the formation of
committees requiring the
creation of a medical advisory
committee, eliminating the
medical advisory board, adding
licenses and categories,
amending the types of fees
dedicated to the athletic
Commission fund repealing
of the NMSA 1978, making an
appropriation. House Bill 444.
How's 44,400 by titles or
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 445 introduced by
Representative Chavez and
Representative Maestas, an act
relating to victims of crimes,
expanding the application of the
victim of Crime Act, removing
the definition and the
references to criminal offense,
redefining victim to include
persons directly and proximally
harmed by all crimes resulting
in bodily harm or loss of or
damage to personal property,
defining offenders, redefining
formally charged to include the
filing of criminal complaint.
Providing that victims' rights
include the right to notice of
an offender's release pre and
post-conviction, providing that
the rights and duties of law
enforcement agencies take effect
when a victim reports a criminal
offense, providing that law
enforcement investigations of
criminal offense against a
victim shall treat the victim
with fairness and respect. The
victim's dignity and privacy and
shall take responsible steps to
provide for the victims
protection, requiring the
director of the administration
offices of the courts, the
corrections.
department and each board of
county commissioners to
establish and maintain
electronic notification systems
for victims in accordance with
the Victims of Crimes Act,
making conforming amendments,
making appropriations. House
Bill 445445 been read to us by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
It is Nicole Chavez on 4:45, not
Eleanor Chavez. Representative
Nicole Chavez.
OK.
House Bill 446 introduced by
Representative Doo,
Representative Armstrong,
Representative Terazas,
Representative Mejia and
Representative Jones, an act
relating to employment, amending
the Early childhood education
and care fund to allow
appropriations for parental
leave compensation, enacting the
paid parental Leave Act,
creating the supplement paid
parental leave fund, providing
for the paid parental leave
program and the supplement paid
parental leave program to pay an
eligible applicant a percentage
of the employee's wage to allow
the applicant to
with a new child, limiting time
allowed for paid parental leave
excepting certain employees
providing for administration of
the program by the workforce
Solution department, preempting
similar programs, creating a
temporary advisory committee.
House Bill 44 have been read to
us by titles or are printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee, apologies
health how health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 447 introduced by
Representative Vincent,
Representative Doreen Gallegos,
representative block,
Representative Paul and
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to taxation providing a
temporary gaming tax exemption
for gaming operator licensed
located in an area declared as a
disaster area due to a wildfire,
providing a delayed repeal,
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 447.
447. Haven't been there, haven't
been read twice by title is auto
print and refers to the House of
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then our
taxation and revenue Committee.
How's House Bill 448 introduced
by Representative Dixon,
Representative Arnornu and
Representative Parajon, an act
relating to state government
creating the Office of Housing,
Planning and Production provides
providing powers and duties,
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 448.
Is 4:48 have been read twice by
titles or are printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 449 introduced by
Representative Lite, an act
relating to capital improvement,
creating the higher education
major projects funds specifying
eligibility use of the fund
providing criteria for funding
specifying requirements
requiring the higher education
department to adopt space and
design standards, allowing the
legislature to waive waive match
requirements. House Bill 449.
I was 4:49. I haven't been read
twice. My title is or are
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 450 introduced by
Representative Lion, an act
relating to capital
expenditures authorizing the
issuance of severance tax
bonding, making appropriations
from the general fund and other
state funds, establishing
conditions for the issuance of
severance tax bonds, and the
expenditures of severance tax
bond proceeds, requiring
certifications to the Department
of Finance and Administration,
establishing conditions for the
reversion of expended balances
making appropriate.
ations declaring an emergency.
House Bill 4500 have been read
to us. My title is auto printed
and referred to the House
taxation and Revenue Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we go
to the next order of business,
3rd reading of legislation.
You know, objection, it is so
ordered.
Gentlemen from Colfax Mora Rio
Riva, San Miguel and Taos.
Are you ready?
On
I
Number 2. Speaker, will you get
me to that point that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
6 on final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, uh, House Bill 6
ensures that projects
incentivized by industrial
revenue bonds are subject to the
public works minimum wage Act
ultimately this bill is about
fairness. These projects are
selected for IRBs because they
promise economic development
benefits for their local area.
Well House Bill 6 ensures us
that are highly trained New
Mexico trades and crafts people
who are working on these
benefits for the entire state
are not left behind during
construction and development
processes.
This bill ensures that these
workers are paid if you're.
Wage infringe benefits this bill
is also about ensuring our
future workforce because public
works manage minimum wage act
not only insurers fair wages,
but it also ensures training and
career advancement to workers
through the use of
apprenticeships, establishing
clear career pathways that we
should be expanding in our
states.
Mr. Speaker and um I just want
to mention also that I'm excited
to co-sponsor this with our uh
majority leader because House
Bill 6 really strengthens real
economies.
Supports all workers by
requiring these wages.
Insures public incentives
creating lasting benefits for
workers, their families, and
communities across New Mexico,
Mr. Speaker, and I, I now stand
for questions.
There is a beat. The gentle lady
from Burnley Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from uh.
Colfax modern house and the
other counties yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, can you explain
the mechanics of this bill
specifically what section of the
law you're proposing to change.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
This law, uh.
It's not uh retroactive. It
applies to IRB projects, so it's
already uh expanding the laws in
the books it just expands us to
IRBs.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, uh, and gentlemen
is the
The section of law that is to be
amended Section 13411 of NMSA.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, yes.
Mr. Speaker, and uh.
Gentlemen, why is this bill
necessary? What, what is your
rationale for bringing this
forward?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
again, uh, like I said, uh, what
this bill does is it strengthens
rural economies, it supports all
workers by requiring a fair
prevailing wages. It also
ensures that public incentives,
creative, create lasting
benefits for workers, their
families, and communities across
New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, what
is the prevailing wage?
So a prevailing wage is uh a
wage that uh makes sure we
ensure that uh the contractors
we get in place that they're uh
workers uh we make sure they're
they're paid fairly and that uh
we make sure they get the
training and uh.
Uh, experience they need to to
do jobs uh efficiently, uh,
safely, and in a timely manner.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you've already said that this
law does not apply retroactively
to uh existing contracts, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, this
legislation is not retroactive.
It will only apply to IRB
projects approved after the bill
takes effect in June 2025. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
So what is the exact date when
the bill will take effect.
Mr. Speaker, uh, it will be
after, uh, June 2025 if enacted
this bill does not it does not
contain an effective day as a
result, it would go in effect 90
days after the legislative
session adjourns.
June 20th, 2025 if enacted.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as
many members of this body know I
um I strongly support the
development of our state, uh,
specifically to ensure that
young people have good jobs when
they come back here. Does this,
um, do IRBs incentivize
development.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
they, they do incentivize
development, uh, in fact they
benefit the local areas because
like I said, uh, by paying these
workers from those communities,
higher wages that money goes
straight to those economies
helping helping those areas.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, um,
how exactly does it um does it
incentivize the development? Is
there an exemption when you get
an IRB for any kinds of taxes,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, an IRB is
treated differently, so uh the
project doesn't get charged
taxes because it's uh treated
like a government entity.
Um, that's one benefit, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady Sard cut.
Mr. Speaker, and uh gentlemen.
That is really great to hear. I,
I know, especially for
construction projects, grocer
receipts tax can be really um
costly on the amount of those
projects and sitting on the tax
committee I see how much revenue
comes in from grocer seats and
construction, um, so that's
really great to hear, um, that
we are going to be incentivized
incentivizing that Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, does this bill
Require only union workers to be
used for industrial revenue bond
projects. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, no, this does not require
a specific type of union versus
nonunion of contractor employer
or worker that is employed so it
benefits both unionized and
non-union craft workers.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, those are all my
questions.
There is further debate, the
gentle lady from
Catherine Sierrasto Valencia
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the
gentleman from Colfax Mora Rio
Riba, San Miguel, and Tayield.
I yield, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but I'd like to uh
introduce my experts real
briefly, uh, Mr. Conduit and
also Kelly O'Donnell, thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, um, so why, um,
Why bring this bill, uh,
amending this bill.
To be paid prevailing wage.
Other than you said.
It creates fairness.
And
Workers that are highly skilled.
An apprenticeship is there.
Is there local
contractors that could do this
work.
And just because they're paid
prevailing wage makes them
qualified.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess I would argue it, it
increases the odds of getting
somebody that's more qualified
and uh.
That we're getting better
quality work. I know we have
people that uh might not be paid
these wages that do have that
skill set, so I'm not gonna
argue that uh it's not there,
but I think this increases the
odds of getting.
Uh, a better product, uh,
ensuring that we get people
that, uh, have gone through
apprenticeships and uh.
Have a safety tracker and such.
So Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
so are, are you saying that only
if they're paid prevailing wage,
they would be that?
Mr. Speaker, General lady, no,
that's not what I just said, uh,
like I said, it increases the
odds. I, uh, I think studies
have shown in the past that, uh,
Projects that pay prevailing
wage that uh they go more
efficient, uh, they have better
safety track records, at least
in my experience, that's what
I've seen in the past, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, so, um, if they're
with these, what is an IRB? Can
you tell me what an IRB is?
So, Mr. Speaker, uh, IRBs are
industrial revenue bonds,
they're importantly and widely
used in economic development
tools for cities and counties in
New Mexico, local governments
use IRBs to support new
relocating and expanding
businesses they believe will
create jobs, projects that uh
receive IRBs remained under
control of their private sectors
owners but are treated like
government property for purposes
of taxation, which means they
are exempt from property tax as
well as compensating and grocery
seats taxes on.
in IRB projects can include
land, buildings, equipment, and
improvements used by businesses
including those engaged in
manufacturing.
Agricultural processing
warehousing and distribution
services, water distribution and
electricity generating.
And transmission.
So, uh,
I guess tied to that, uh, you're
our IRBs uh financing mechanism
despite their name, IRBs are
generally not financing tools
instead they are mechanisms for
abating state and local taxes,
including property taxes,
grocery seat taxes, compensating
taxes each year state and local
governments give up millions in
tax revenue to support IRB
projects generally.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was
a, a very good um uh analogy of
what an IRB is. I, I'm, I'm
impressed with that. So I, my,
my next question, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, is, uh, would
this hurt the local government,
uh, with the GRT exemption on
paying.
Paying grocery receipts tax on
the labor, paying gross receipts
tax on all of the things that a
normal entity would pay gross
receipts tax, going back to your
local communities, Mr. Speaker,
lady, I would argue, uh, it
might take from one place, but
you're gonna get it back in the
wages that are paid that are
gonna be spent in that
community, so it it goes both
ways.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, unless the
contractor's not from that local
community, uh, if they're
brought in from an, from another
community, they're gonna take
that money back, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, to where they
live, work and play. They're
gonna be paying electric bills
where they live. They're gonna
be banning groceries where they
live and so I, I have, uh, an
issue with my local entities
losing some of that GRT, um, how
many existing projects are
across New Mexico right now in
IRB.
In, in this type of work.
Mr. Speaker, uh,
It appears there's hundreds,
these things last over 30 years,
so there's many that have been
going on for many years, so at
least 100s.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and what happens to
those that are in the bid
process right now and get.
get approved and then this bill
passes in that interim, uh, no
place space. What happens to
those? does it automatically go
into the bill and on the 20 in
2025 or what happens to, uh, is
there, is there dead space
anywhere where some of these
projects may not fall under
this, Mr. Speaker, this does not
take effect until after the bill
goes into effect, so anything in
process right now would not be
affected by the bill.
So Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
it would be after the bill goes
into effect, anything being bid
after that. Is that correct?
Anything that's been approved.
By the local community.
would not be affected.
Mr. Speaker.
And Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
do you, can you tell me how many
Well, you said around 100
projects. Can you give us an
example, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, of the kind of
project, um, uh, I would think
maybe the wind turbines might be
one of the projects. Is that
one, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman?
Mr. Speaker, Amazon.
Intel, Netflix, those are all
examples of IRBs.
Madam, Mr. Speaker, uh.
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and so, um, what's
the, what is prevailing wage
right now, um, on say the wind
turbine. I know that there'll be
different categories, but the
wind turbines going across the
state of New Mexico, um, that
have already been in the vetted
and, and let.
What kind of wage are those, uh.
Kind of entities making,
Mr. Speaker generally, it
depends on the position, but,
uh, let me see if I can get you
some examples of the craft, so,
uh, one second.
For example, uh,
Let me get you some electrical
workers.
So for example, a ground man
makes $27.95 and equipment
operator.
4011 linemen or technician,
5054, a cable Spicer 5550.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and so my, um,
So it's just about paying the
prevailing wage when, can you
explain to me if a contractor is
a non-union.
And they bid this job and
receive it. What is the process
that they have to go through and
how are they regulated.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, if
they did the job, that just
means they have to pay at least
that wage so they get the job
just like anybody else, but they
got to make sure they pay that.
That wage
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and so, um, my
curiosity has gotten me to see
What kind of?
Cost
Is this going to be for
The project
Um, it, do you, in your opinion,
do you think this is going to
raise the cost of the projects.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
think many, uh, studies were
referenced in the committee, uh,
hearings earlier that, uh, these
types of uh projects they've
been showing that they don't
trace the cost and I think a lot
has to do that, uh, like I said,
you're increasing the odds that
this workforce is uh
Has, uh, the training, uh, they
have the safety training they
have uh all the background
that's gonna go into effect and
again, I'm not seeing that the.
Some contractors don't have
this, but you're increasing the
odds, and I, uh, like I said,
there's been studies that show
that, uh.
Uh, prevailing wage on these
projects doesn't increase the
cost.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen. Um, I wasn't in the
committee hearing and so I'm
curious, um, I, I'd like to know
some of those studies that were
referenced because it's obvious
that prevailing wage will raise
the cost of the project. Um, we
have that in the state, uh,
procurement code where, uh, when
we bid a project and it's
anything to do with the state,
you have to pay prevailing wage
and so I would disagree that it
doesn't raise the cost of the
project.
I would also disagree that, um,
The GRT is going to be spent in
those communities and I also,
uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman.
How is this going to be
monitored?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, to
your first question, for
example, the Amazons, the uh
Netflix, a lot of these workers,
uh, live in those regions or
those communities and they spend
the money, uh, Facebook, uh,
Los Luna says.
Where this is going on, uh, I
have firsthand knowledge. I know
about 10 people that are working
there they've moved to Los Lunas
to work that project.
So I know first time that those
people are spending the money in
those areas, uh, as far as the
studies that have shown um.
Uh, I think the, the workforce
costs in terms of a project is
about 23%, so, um.
When you put in the
efficiencies, the safety track
records, you don't have concerns
as much as you would normally
because they they have the the
required safety training.
It, it ends up balancing amount
on that 23% of the cost from the
workforce, so, uh, when I say uh
it doesn't increase the cost,
that's what factors into that
and the other states have run
numerous studies that that that
show what I just said, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, and uh
What was your second question?
I'm sorry.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
I, I was curious, um,
About the GRT really about the
GRT not going into those
communities. And, and I hear
that you are, you know, telling
me that I, I know a lot of
people that worked at the
Facebook, Mr. Speaker, the
Amazon, um, I also know that
there was deals made with the
governor at the time, one being
one governor, one being another,
uh, about special things
happening, uh, to even to bring
those projects to New Mexico,
uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
I'm, I'm concerned about this.
Um, the $60,000 I'm, this says
it's new material and being
revised to say so can you tell
me if on page, well, it's on the
first page, Mr. Speaker, under
A.
Every contract for or project in
excess of $60,000.
Is that new language or is that
existing language?
Mr. Speaker, generally that's
existing law.
So Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
you're telling me that anything
$60,000 or more.
Spent uh conducted through an
IRB would have to be done being
prevailing wage.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I, I appreciate that.
I just think that um.
In in
In all fairness of being fair to
our local.
Entities to.
Being able to save money across
the state of New Mexico, uh, in
small rural.
Um, districts that this is a bad
way to, um,
Decide to spend those dollars.
Uh, the GRT not going back to
our local communities, um, uh,
indicating, not saying you
indicated directly but
indicating that because they
don't get paid prevailing wage,
they're not as high quality.
Uh, of a worker and that being
paid prevailing wage makes them
higher quality. A lot of those,
uh, entities that.
Do not, uh, our, our, I'll just
say non-union, um.
Have the same skill set, the
same quality, and the same, uh,
merit as, as others and so Mr.
Speaker, I will stand in
opposition of your bill because
I talk about fairness. I talk
about rural New Mexico and I
talk about, uh, what are we
doing with.
Money in our local districts.
To make sure that we are getting
the biggest bang for our buck.
And uh
I appreciate the, the comments
and um I will be in opposition.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Mr.
Speaker, can I respond real
quick? Sorry.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh,
there is further debate, the
gentle lady from
San Miguel in Torrance
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does
the gentleman from Colfax Mora
Rio Riva, San Miguel and Taos
yields Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady. Um, um, thank
you so much for some of those
explanations, um, this is the
first time I've had the
opportunity to, to, to hear this
bill presented and specifically
some of this content area, um,
so I just have some follow up
questions, um.
First off, uh, Mr. Speaker,
first off, gentlemen, I wanna
thank you for your, uh,
description of what IRBs are,
um, and how they function, uh,
but can you give some background
just to get a scope of this bill
as to what the history of IRBs
are in our state.
So Mr. Speaker, I just wanna add
it in statehood, New Mexico like
most US states has had a
constitutional provision
commonly known as the
anti-Donation clause that
broadly prohibits all forms of
subsidies to private individuals
and businesses.
industrial revenue bond acted
first enacted in the 50s was
purposely designed to operate in
a convoluted manner in order to
disguise the subsidy purposely
and therefore circumvented the
anti-donation clause over the
last two decades, more than 40
New Mexico local governments
from big cities like Albuquerque
to rural communities like Luna
have issued tens of billions of
dollars in IRBs to businesses
like Facebook, Intel, Walmart,
Larino Foods, Stormberg
Investments as well as numerous.
projects including wind and
solar farms in rural New Mexico.
Interesting enough, one of the
largest IRB projects issued
included the requirement for
paying payment of various
standard wages and uh benefits
exactly like what HB 6 will
require.
Thank you, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, um, just one kind of
follow up question to that is,
um, again, thank you for the
history, thank you for the
background, um, but again, um,
I'm very interested in hearing,
um, maybe some of those indirect
benefits that aren't directly
explained. um, what are some of
the indirect benefits of House
Bill 6 and specifically how do
they impact workers and you
know, the work environment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, uh, workers that are
paid better wages are less
likely to experience financial
stress, improving their mental
and physical health. This can
lead to safer work environments
and fewer workplace accidents.
Thank you so much, uh, gentlemen
from all those counties for your
elaboration and thank you so
much, Mr. Speaker. That's all I
have.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I've worked on a, um,
On projects that have.
the court minimum wages on it
for over 30 years.
It's a design engineer. We put
the bid.
We put the plans together.
Mr. Speaker, we put the bids
together. We put the
specifications together.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
One of the things that this
doesn't talk about is the amount
of the back office effort it
takes to ensure certified
payrolls every month.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, can
you talk about that a little
bit?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, can
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, sorry,
it's a madhouse back here. Can
you repeat what you had to say?
I guess, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
if your question is this isn't
any different from any public
works contracts that's going on
in the state right now, so it's
uh no different than the way
they run payroll for those.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's made a perfect point for
me.
Um
These aren't public.
projects, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, these are private
investment projects where the
state of New Mexico has chosen
to use economic development
funds to entice corporations to
New Mexico or corporations
inside in New Mexico's to build.
The intent of these of, of the
way the leader and so many other
projects work was never intended
to become a public works
project, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
These are uh treated much like
public projects with their their
taxes, uh, the way they treat
taxes so I just wanna mention,
uh, in that case these are are
put into place to uh to stir up
econ
economic benefits or they are
treated in in terms of tax
benefits, so I just want to
mention that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree that there is an economic
benefit to this. But let's go
back to the point. The money
that was put together, the
funding that comes through
economic development either at
the state or at the local, and
sometimes the federal level was
never intended to make these
public projects. Would you agree
with that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, not necessarily
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
please give me an example of one
that, um,
was from the get-go approved by
county.
As a public works project.
Mr. Speaker, an example, uh,
gentlemen, our wind farms funded
by the federal government.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, wind
farms set underneath the federal
law because it has federal
funding inside of it and then
the Mexico.
Public works minimum wage Act
would not be relative.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, with
this bill, it would.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
Davis Bacon Act would be the
controlling wage inside of that
prior to this piece of
legislation.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
sorry, uh, I know you're making
comments and uh uh if you can
just ask me a direct question
that way I don't, I'm sure what
you're asking now you can make
it clear what you're asking me
because I know you're making
comments.
No worries on that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Let's, let's just
agree that up until this point
in time, any project that has
federal funds in it is
controlled by
The Davis-Bacon Act. This
legislation would change that.
And require the New Mexico
Minimum Wage Act to control, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
agree with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so once
again,
We, we pick and choose where we
preempt federal law.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
One of the comments in, in your
earlier debates talked about the
fact that contractors do not
have to have.
Um,
being within a labor union.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, would
you agree with me that
To
Comply with a project under
this.
any contractor that bid on the
work would have to have an
approved apprenticeship program
through Workforce Solutions.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
Mister Speaker, gentlemen, once
again we have a bureaucracy
determining how contractors
train their own people.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm, I'm
hopeful that some people are
realizing the fact that we have
contractors out there. We have
processes out there, heavy
highway construction, you name
it, lots of different things
where we have
Training programs in place that
far exceed the state of New
Mexico and some labor unions
training program. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen,
Would you agree that if any
aspect inside of a project cost
were to increase.
It would have a potential.
On the ROI of, of the private
company.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
taking that to the next step.
If the company were to come in
and have to comply with these
regulations, would it not be
possible, Mister Speaker and
gentlemen, that the amount of
pit.
Payment in lieu of taxes to that
county that issues the IRB may
be reduced in proportion.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, like
I mentioned earlier, what this
does is it increases the odds of
jobs getting done, uh, more
efficiently and, uh, done in a
safer.
We and uh Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I know you've run an
overseeing projects where uh a
safety issue can put a job to a
stop or uh if people aren't
trained properly, that will put
a job to a stop. So what this
does is it helps improve the
odds of something.
Be done uh more efficiently, uh,
more safely and, uh, that's why
I mentioned, uh, there's been
studies that show that this does
not increase the cost, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
appreciate you reiterating some
things you said in earlier
debate, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that did not answer
my question.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, like I
said, uh,
Uh, I tried to answer that with
what I responded.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
happy to rephrase the question
for you if necessary. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, from what I
understand, counties can still
negotiate tilts.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I agree
counties get to, to do this, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, there's
the whole discussion on RRBs
that we should leave alone
because it's not inside of this
legislation, but with respect to
that, if the company knows that
their return on investment is
going to be reduced.
If you were the owner of that
company, would that reduce the
amount of money that you pay in
the county and, and payment for
that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, like I
said, no, uh, what, what you're
getting here is you're
increasing the odds of
something, uh, getting done more
efficiently and safety, more
safely.
And uh that's already been shown
uh through studies.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand the studies that
you've, uh, referred to, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I'm gonna
move along and I asked the same
question twice and didn't get
any worse, so we're gonna leave
that one alone. Um.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
happens?
When
A project like this was to take
as defined in here.
And the union company which has
never been in that rural area.
is successful in that.
What happens to the local
contractors, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen that have the same
skill sets just don't have the
union tag behind their name.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, that
company would have the right to
bid that job just like anybody
else. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think you and I both seen over
the years how that plays out for
the local contractors.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
will say very clearly this will
have a negative impact on the
pill.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, with
respect to that, would you agree
that most of
IRBs.
Work through the construction
phase of the project, and can be
an in effect up until 30 years.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
When that happens, and there's
an IRB placed out there, who has
a first right on the lien?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
most IRBs are self-purchased.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
gonna answer the question for
you. The private contractor, the
owner of the, of the project has
the first right on the lie.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'll
talk about that a little bit.
We had a cheese plant in
Lovington, New Mexico, where the
IRB was issued in 1990,
Mossinos.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
cheese plant closed.
10 years after the contract was
up in accordance with
What they could do in their
contract.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we
could do nothing with that
property for the next 20 years.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
legislation would not affect
that at all.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, does
not, but I think it is important
for people that don't understand
the concepts behind IRBs, how
this legislative body is
contemplating raising costs.
On projects
Raising costs to all entities
involved, that's going to be the
economic development arm that's
going to be the county that's
gonna be the, the owner that's
gonna be the contractor.
All of these things, Mister
Speaker and gentlemen lay into
the fact
That those costs.
Have a
Have an impact. This will
increase the cost of projects.
This will make it more difficult
for projects that are not
successful, Mister Speaker and
gentlemen talked very highly of
some of the, some of the uh pill
or some of the IRB projects
that, uh, Amazon and other
projects that uh Governor
Martinez started on way back
when.
But
What does, what we haven't done
is really
Really acknowledged the total
impact that this has in the push
from the labor companies.
Within and what what we're
looking at today, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, while I agree that,
that well-trained people make
safer projects, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that does not mean
they have to have certification
approved by the Department of
Workforce Solutions.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
appreciate your time today. I
cannot support this.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Bernalillo,
representative of de la Cruz.
Mr. Speaker. Does a gentleman
from Colfax, Mora Rio Riva San
Miguel and Taos by the way of
alcalde yield. Speaker.
I yield to my, my friend
Laureno.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
In another life, uh, I was
fairly familiar with ROBs, but
I'd like to ask this for the
body as well as the edification
of the viewing audience.
Let me phrase it this way, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, let's assume
I'm a business and I want to
build or expand my business
somehow.
What is the process for me to
get an industrial bond support.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
first the business must retain
bond council to structure the
deal.
Because of the administrative
complexity of IRB deals. IRBs
are not cost effective for
projects valued at less than 4
million.
Local governments then adopt a
bond ordinance in issues
industrial revenue bonds on the
company's behalf, typically a
corporate affiliate of the
company that receives IRBs buys
the bonds.
The company receiving the IRB
deeds, all the property that is
included in the RB project to
the city or county that issues
there be but retains control of
the project, the project remains
under the control of the private
company.
But becomes the property of the
government entity issued by the
IRBs for the term of the bonds
up to 30 years.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
That's a lot.
Let's, let me ask this.
Maybe it'll help expand a little
bit. Why such a complicated
arrangement.
If the objective of IRBs is to
offer companies a simple tax
abatement.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, because
the New Mexico constitution
makes it really hard for
governments to give money to
private companies or
individuals.
Without receiving something of
equal value in return.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thank
you, thank you for that.
To me this is
Mr. Speaker, uh, a different
form of the divas Beacon Act.
And I applaud that act.
I think it's good for workers. I
think it's good for the economy.
I think it's, it's, it's good
for New Mexico.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
To me, the way I view this.
It's, it's a form of a tax cut
because it's an increase in your
pay that you might not otherwise
have.
Using a vehicle that the state
has has approved.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. I have
no more further questions.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from
Otero Representative block.
Already at me, Mister Speaker.
Would my kind friend from, let
me get your counting correctly,
Mr. Speaker.
Colfax, Mota.
Ririba, San Miguel, and Taos,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend whose family is
originally from the Norte.
Yes, sir, Mr. Speaker, it's it's
hard to read upside down, so
sorry for being so slow about
your counties, but it's, it's
not the slowness down south
where I live, but my family is
from up there, so it's good to
see you. You're probably a primo
from way back, Mr. Speaker.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I do
have some questions for you.
And let me just get everything
ready here.
Oh no, Mr. Speaker, be scared.
But Mr. Speaker, I was listening
to the debate and I was
wondering, Mr. Speaker, I heard,
I think the general lady from
Bernalillo asked what the
prevailing wage was, and I kind
of got a little bit of it, but
can you tell me in practice what
it would look like. So for
example, if a, if a business had
Different job classes, I believe
that's kind of how it goes,
different job classes, so let's
just say an electrician, an
engineer, uh, any kind of
contractor, etc. They each have
their job class and then from
there, could you tell me how
that wage is set with within
those, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
like we mentioned earlier, these
are, uh, wages set for different
positions within different job
classifications.
Uh, these are typically set.
Annually, so they're updated
every year.
And Mr. Speaker, this is
determined by the state who uh
does a study getting input from
various entities.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you for that answer. So
I'm wondering, they, they get
input from the entities and they
change it every year. Can you
tell me how that wage is set? Is
it just like a minimum wage, you
get $15 an hour and you have to
go by that or is it, does it
include anything else with that,
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, they take input
from different entities and uh
it is kind of like a minimum
wage but what this ensures that
people are trained and that
they're qualified.
To do the work, so they, they
take input from all these
entities and that's when they
determine determined this
number.
And uh like I mentioned, that's,
that's uh done here on an annual
basis.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So these entities.
Which entities are we, are we
looking at when it comes to
getting input? Do we, do just
the IRB projects or is it just
the wage in general across the
entire sector, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, uh, the inputs received
from a contractors with their
union, non-union and just public
comment in general so from
various entities.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So.
Is it something that's from the
like the federal, I know there's
a jobs report, the small
Business Administration or any
other federal report. I mean,
I'm just wondering who collects
the data to make that
determination in the state, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, uh, the Department
of Workforce Solutions are the
ones that take this input from
these various entities.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So I'm guessing they,
they just survey in a certain
area. So for example, in my
county, it's Otero County, they
would just see that job class
and all the other, let's just
say it's plumbers, for example,
I don't know if they're even
included, but let's just say a
plumber.
In Otero County, they would get
all the data that they have just
from tax returns or things like
that. See what the wage is
currently and then from that
they would set it? Is it by
county? Is it by municipality?
So Alamogordo, for example, they
would have a different wage than
the county. Can you just give me
a little more info on, on how
that's determined on the local
level.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's a
statewide.
amount, so it's not by county,
it's, it's statewide.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
So
Could there be a potential for
then if all the counties are
lumped together, and there are
projects in Otero County.
There's projects in Lincoln and
Bernalillo and Donnie Anna, all
of those are are they averaged
that the wage, or is it a, a
mean, is it a median, what,
where do we get that figure from
looking across the entire state
at all those folks that do the
same type job.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again
they do an analysis, so they
take input, they look at data,
they take all of this
information and uh that's where
they come up with this just like
any business, uh.
I myself run a business and I
get salary surveys and they
themselves do studies where they
get input from the same similar
agencies so uh.
In this case, it's workforce
solutions that's coming up with
that number versus me.
Paying for some uh entity to
come up with uh amount.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So
I guess a question of mine would
be regarding rural versus urban
since there's different cost of
living in different places, so
I'm sure and I well I know for
certain an apartment up in Santa
Fe costs a lot more than an
apartment does in Alamogordo. So
how do we reconcile that with
the workforce data.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
uh, this is one number for the
for the whole state but from
what I've seen, uh, in my
experiences, uh.
To me this probably benefits the
rural areas because uh.
If my business what I see is I'm
located next to uh the city of
Santa Fe. I'm located near Los
Almos labs.
And uh my business compared to
other businesses in the same uh
sectors we're having to compete
with those entities.
So we're having to uh raise that
amount so.
What happens here is that amount
statewide, so this, this should
be, this should be benefited in
the the rural areas because that
uh that wage is uh rolled out
across.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. OK, I, I kind of
understand that, that, that
makes some sense to me, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and then I
had a question about the wage
cause I was trying to Google it.
I don't know how, how good
Google is, so apologies, Mr.
Speaker, the workforce solutions
department gets it better, but
it kind of gave me an example of
a wage requirement prevailing
wage, and what it kind of told
me, Mr. Speaker, from what I
looked up real quick was, let me
read it. It says if a prevailing
wage for a construction laborer
in the state.
It's 30 bucks an hour plus $10
in benefits.
The employer either has a choice
to pay either $40 an hour in
total compensation or 30 bucks
in wages and then $10 in
benefits like healthcare
insurance, pensions, etc. Mr.
Speaker, is that kind of what
our definitions of, of
prevailing wage are, and could
you just give me uh a little bit
of insight if that's incorrect,
just cause I know robots on
Google are not as good as you,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Speaker, uh, the compensation
has to be uh equivalent.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so,
so the benefits plus the
compensation must at least.
Be equal to if they just give
them the lump sum in
compensation from what I'm
understanding, no benefits,
nothing like that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen gentlemen, uh,
Mr. Speaker, yes.
OK, got it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Now I kind of
understand what, what that
means. Yes, we got through one
definition. Heck yeah, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I appreciate
it. So I'll continue on here.
Now I know what a prevailing
wage means.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
guess from what I heard earlier
in the debate, and I was trying
to listen as close as as as
possible.
We mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that
Amazon, Intel, and Netflix were
examples of industrial revenue
bond projects. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you tell me how
many of these projects that are
our IRBs are smaller, like like
small businesses that may
utilize an IRB versus Amazon,
Netflix or something
multibillion.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, like
I mentioned earlier, uh, it
doesn't make sense, uh, for an
IRB to occur unless they're, uh,
I think the number I said
earlier was 40 million.
4, I'm sorry, 4 million.
OK, OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, because I, I try to
look it up myself as well, and I
think it did tell me that it
could include
It could include smaller
businesses.
And that could include
manufacturing and industrial
businesses, so those businesses
engaged in production. I saw
something else, Mr. Speaker,
about tech companies, startups.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, does
it necessarily depend on the
amount of capital that that
business has or is it the
valuation of what that business
could become, for example, a
tech company has 23 programmers
now, but they could be at a
valuation of multi-million, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
again, uh, it doesn't make sense
until the unless the total
project costs are over $4
million so, uh.
Uh, independent of what the
company value is if the total
projects that they're working on
isn't over $4 million. It
doesn't make financial sense to
do an IRB.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So the whole project
cost, so that could even mean
they don't have necessarily $4
million but they, they have that
and what they could borrow to
start up the project. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, just the
total amount of the project, how
are we counting what is included
in what an IRB gets. Does it
have to have a specific $4
million or more intangible
assets, or is it something that
could also be leveraging other
income sources to, to finance
it, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
What they the the break even
point where they're looking at
where you're not, where it's
worth it is 4 million on a total
project cost, so that's what
design construction, everything
that goes into uh the project so
uh.
Anything, uh, that's less than
that doesn't make it, uh.
A good, uh, decision to do an
IRB unless it's over $4 million.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Understood. I, I still think
that maybe we could include some
if it means leveraging that
project, but I, I think that
could be something just to
consider, uh, continuing here,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Do these projects usually with
IRBs also leverage industrial
revenue bonds, I mean, sorry,
industrial payment in lieu of
taxes. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker.
I'm getting my acronyms and my,
my PILTs and my IRB is confused,
so do they also leverage the
payments in lieu of taxes.
Usually, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they could.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
we have an example of, of one
that's used both in the state
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
it sounds like, uh, most of the
jobs in Bernalillo County
include both.
Uh, including, uh,
Amazon.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
what Intel and Netflix, do they
as well did, did, did they also
do that as well?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And how many millions
of dollars are each of those
projects and are they, how, how
far above the $4 million are we
looking at, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, these
are projects in the hundreds of
millions of dollars. Amazon,
Netflix, etc.
Intel especially.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I understand that
because especially during COVID,
there were the whole, the whole
idea with microchips and that
was a big problem that we had in
the state and in the whole
country and the, the nation and
the world. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I understand that
with that, so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
I think you mentioned different
studies and I forget what study
that was that said that this
could actually this would not
hurt economic development.
With the implementation of such.
Such a prevailing wage laws, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, could you
please tell me what those
studies were. I just love to
look for my own constituents to
check those out.
Mr. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
many states with uh prevailing
wage acts have done these
studies and uh our expert here
can get you some of those
studies.
Uh, here pretty soon after.
Uh, we don't have them now, but
we'll get them to you.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I'm just interested
in that cause I, cause I, I've
only seen studies that I've
looked for, and they actually
We're the opposite effect, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, but it looks like you have
something in your hand. It's
very shiny and it looks like
something that might be on our
desks, maybe? Could you share
with this, this with me, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, uh, they
mentioned that, uh, some of
those studies are referenced on
this sheet if you have it.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
might have put it in my desk
here. Let me.
We fish around Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, sorry to interrupt,
uh, they're in the footnotes,
uh.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
I got LASIK and I, I think I
might need it again.
Mr. Speaker, um.
It's really tiny.
OK, Duncan in 2021. OK, so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I see that
there's a few studies here. I
also found some studies myself.
One was a report from the Empire
Center for Public Policy, Mr.
Speaker, and that one found that
wage requirements, inflated
costs of publicly funded
construction projects in New
York by 13% to 25%. Mr. Speaker,
where did you look at those that
study as well to determine
whether this would be.
Financially and economically
beneficial to our state.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, many
studies were done that had mixed
results, but the majority showed
that it did not have a negative
impact.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, for
that information and, and that,
that helps me a little bit. And
on balance, I did look at all
the other studies. I don't know
if they were these ones that
were here, but I did find one
from Ohio, which is a bit
smaller than New York.
And that's a Beacon Hill
Institute study finding that
Construction projects in Ohio.
With prevailing wage mandates,
experience costs up to 20%
higher compared to
non-prevailing wage projects, so
I would just leave those to the
body as well as whatever the,
the other ones that you have in
this prevailing wage report, and
I certainly will be looking at
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
but I would certainly want to
look at those otherwise because
it's very important to, to just
look all across the country,
right? And, and see what's
happening, what's working,
what's not working. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so.
What is
IRBs, can you tell me what other
benefits they may have for
individual businesses when it
comes to taxes because I know we
talk about tax incentives. Can
you tell me what kinds of tax
incentives are included. Does
that mean things like uh
property tax, GRT, lower
financial costs, financing
costs, etc. What, what else
could that include in an IRB
project.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the big
ones are, uh, property taxes and
uh GRT on equipment purchases.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And the property
taxes, I, to be honest with you,
I'm not very well versed in
property tax was included in
that.
It's usually counties and
cities, does the state get any
portion of that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, in a property tax,
and, and if they do, is there
anything that's, is the state
like held harmless, for
instance, from the local IRB and
the state still gets their
property tax, for example.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, it's
not a huge revenue source.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but
it is on the state level we do
collect something. Is that what
I understand? Speaker,
gentlemen, it's very little.
From what I understand.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that, that helps me a lot. And
then when it comes to GRT, how
does that work? Because I know
that's split up between
different counties, cities,
municipalities, etc. How, how is
the GRT function of an IRB
project work, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, the
GFT split between the state and
local government, so the.
A lot of that is waived.
All of it's waived, uh, let's
say you're gonna do a data
center and they're gonna buy uh
equipment the GRT is waived on
that, that equipment. That's an
example.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. That helps
me a little bit when it comes to
the taxation.
And then what about financing
costs, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
how are those leveraged to bring
IRBs to our state when it comes
to these projects, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
most, uh, developers buy their
own bonds.
And so it's not a a big deal.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So they, they buy their own
bonds, OK.
Interesting, huh, OK, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, sorry to
interrupt again, self-financing.
OK, Mr. Speaker, that sounds
good, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So
self-financing mostly, but is
there any kind of incentive,
because when I was looking, it
said that that could potentially
be part of it. Would it be
leveraging local banks or
something or, or any kind of
other funding streams, maybe
even just like a.
Local tax incentives of any
kind.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, we
could, but it's, it's not a
guarantee.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
then can you tell me how this
would work with LIDA funds, the
local economic development Act
grants, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this has
no impact on the current LEDA
program.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, does this have any
impact on the New Mexico small
business Investment Corporation
NMSBIC uh loans or projects, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
no right, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to be thorough.
What about Small Business
Administration loans if they're
in local communities, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
OK, thank you, thank you for the
clarity, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
That helps me a little bit on
that, so going back to the
businesses that are included in
these grants or in these IRBs,
Mr. Speaker.
So we talked a little bit about
the small businesses.
And
Can like, are there small
businesses that could
potentially fall into it. I
mean, with the the SBA
definition of small business,
what is that included in Mr.
Speaker, could they potentially
be $4 million small businesses,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I think $4 million
for a small business isn't a lot
of money, uh, let's say you have
a small business, uh, a lot of
times your assets or your
employees and uh.
Your actual physical assets and
that can add up pretty quick, so
a small business to take out uh
over a $4 million loan is is not
a big deal.
I'm not, it is a big deal to
that business, but I'm saying
financially, uh, that's not
gonna be uncommon.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
I, and I bring that up because I
find, especially in our state
where we are now, where there's
a lot of folks who are hurting
financially, and I've been one
person in this legislature at
least as long as the 3 years,
3rd year right now as I've been
here to support small businesses
as much as they can to help,
help them get off their feet and
not have to deal with these
kinds of things such as this
prevailing wage. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do have an
amendment that I have prepared
for you, and I'd
love to bring it forward, Mr.
Speaker.
Gentlemen, can you give us the
number on the bottom left hand
of the document.
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the
number on the bottom of the
document is 0.230967.1.
Right, we'll get that passed out
to the members.
And we'll also get this on
online.
And Mr. Speaker, could I please
have a roll call vote on that
one.
You got a roll call
Thank you, sir.
Has the amendment been passed
And it looks like the
amendment's been passed out
except that I don't have one.
Can I get a copy, please?
All right, the amendments been
passed out and it's now online.
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendment. Speaker. I was up all
night contemplating what
amendment might be good to help
me vote on this bill.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
I came up with early this
morning. I'm sorry drafters, I
apologize to the 4th floor, but
what I came up with, Mr.
Speaker, was a carveout and what
this amendment will do, Mr.
Speaker, to this legislation
we'll just do very simple.
Opt out for some.
Uh, so a contractor,
subcontractor, or an employee
classified as a small business
under the federal Small Business
Administration standards, they
may apply for an exemption from
the prevailing wage and fringe
benefit requirements established
in this section if compliance
would create an undue financial
burden, and they would have to
prove that, Mr. Speaker. So the
workforce solutions department,
they'll promulgate rules for
granting exemptions and so those
folks will, will ensure that as
well. They're they're the ones
who've done.
all the studies so they will
know what that will mean and
they'll promulgate the rules
granting exemptions, and that
will include a process for
businesses to submit financial
documentation, demonstrating
that hardship, Mr. Speaker. So
as well, it'll have exemptions
that shall be granted for the
period of up to 5 years and may
be renewed upon further
demonstration of financial
hardship, and we're also, Mr.
Speaker, just putting a little,
little semicolon providing for
an exemption in the title to.
tweak that a little bit, Mr.
Speaker, so it's consistent and
then just restructuring the
numbers of the lines, Mr.
Speaker, and that, that's pretty
much what the amendment does.
sponsor of the bill. Is this a
friendly amendment?
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately not,
so no.
OK, is there is debate on the
amendment. I've got the gentle
lady from Santa Fe, Los Alamos,
and Sandoval, Representative
Chandler.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
a gentleman from Otero County,
is that right?
So, um, perhaps you could help
enlighten us a little bit, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. What is a
um small business under the
federal small Business
Administration. Can you tell us
what the threshold for that is,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, a gentlewoman, pardon
me, I apologize, gentle lady
from.
Los Alamos, Santa Fe, and.
Sandoval
Uh, Mr. Speaker, let me get that
real quick for you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
the, the SBA, they, they do
this, I believe it's annually
and so these numbers that I have
here, let me pull it up in my
document is to indicate what a
small business threshold is so.
According to what I have here,
Mr. Speaker.
And it could be incorrect
because I may have the the not
the latest numbers.
One moment, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
what I have here general
building and heavy construction
is 45 million specialty trade
contractors, 19 million Highway
Street and bridge contractors,
45 million engineering services
and architectural services, 25
million, and there are others
that are broken down typically
under 45 million in annual
revenue, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
from Otero I guess maybe I
wasn't clear when I'm talking
about a small business I'm
wondering what the size of the
business is, Mr. Speaker, do
they not have a
threshold in terms of size, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen from
Montero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Great question. Uh,
I would have to continue looking
at the SBA's uh sheet that I
have here, but I believe, Mr.
Speaker, that the SBA primarily
does it based on annual revenue.
But a number of employees is
also something that is
considered, so I would have to
continue looking at that
further, but what I see here,
Mr. Speaker, is mainly based on
revenue.
Speaker, gentlemen, could you
repeat those revenues again?
You bet you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So, uh, general building
and heavy construction, $45
million in annual revenue.
Specialty trade contractors such
as electricians, plumbers, HVAC,
carpentry, painting, 19 million
in annual revenue, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Highway, street and bridge
construction, that number is 45
million in annual revenue that's
capped at 45 million engineering
services and architectural
services, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, are, are at 25.5 million
in annual revenue, and then Mr.
Speaker, General lady, it does
give one for manufacturing and
manufacturing could be
fabricated building or metal
fabrication for public projects,
etc. that's 500 to 1500.
employees, depending on specific
subcontractor. Mr. Speaker, I
hope that helped.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you for that information.
So, uh, under your proposed
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you're, you're
referring to businesses that
have revenues of 45 million, 19
million 45 million, 25 million
and we think maybe employee size
somewhere between 500 and 1500
employees and you think this
applies to New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I apologize if I, if I did
not.
Adequately convey what those
numbers meant. That means
they're capped at that. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that would
be capped at those numbers 45
million.
Around for these projects. So
for example, Mr. Speaker, as we
heard a little bit earlier in
the debate.
It's quite easy, according to
the gentleman from all those
counties to leverage of $4
million project and that could
include manufacturing, and that
would be a small business. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
would be what I would answer to
that. Thank you. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
I apologize if I'm not
understanding you, but capped
out what what's being capped the
revenues are being capped a
business I'm, I'm very confused,
Mr. Speaker. What, what's this
cap we're now talking about, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So, uh, so.
Maybe I, I didn't
Correctly convey what the SBA's.
Standards are. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, according to the
Federal Small Business
Administration standards.
The cap for revenue.
Or, or I'm sorry, for yeah, for
annual revenue for a project.
So that would be for businesses
and that would include general
building and heavy construction
specialty trade, etc. So Mr.
Speaker, it would be the cap. So
if they're making less, less
than that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, they would be included,
they would not be included if it
was, it was a higher cap. So for
example, it's $46 million on
that project, then that would
not be something that would be
included in this amendment,
those folks would not be uh
subject to a potential exemption
and the exemption, Mr.
Speaker general lady would come
from Workforce Solutions, and
they may actually further
restrict that, so I would also
defer to whatever that
rulemaking may be when workforce
solutions does make the rules.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen
from Otero.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Actually, uh, I have a really
awesome answer for the gentle
lady. I just got word from the
very smart individual from all
those counties that my
definition of a small business,
which I thought sounded high,
actually was high. So could I,
could I revise what I told you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, of course we're all
here to get enlightened with
accurate information, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I did not envision
this question in my dreams last
night while I was writing this
in the dreams, but what it is is
500.
500 folks or less, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady employed.
And then it would be 7.5
million.
Or less in gross receipts. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess what I was reading from
the small Business
Administration.
could have been something that
was not included, so I apologize
for that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Hopefully that helped.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
how many businesses in the
state, um.
Who work on these projects exist
with 500 employees.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I do not have a number
for you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but I would guess some are
less than 500 employees, so they
could definitely, uh, be
leveraging this.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
if a contractor has um 10
employees, Mr. Speaker, would
this small business exemption
apply to them?
Potentially thank you Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so from my
understanding from the gentleman
who brought the bill forward.
That would be very unlikely for
them to have an IRB project if
they have smaller than 10
employees, but if they did fall
under this definition, less than
7.5 million in grocery receipts
and less than 5 or less than 500
employees, which would include
less than 10, they could
potentially be included,
although it sounds to me like it
could be rare.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
So it, how many businesses in
the state have 500 employees,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, let me find that
number for you.
It'll just be one moment.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So,
According to Department of
Workforce Solutions. This is
just what I'm getting from them.
They said as of 2012, so this
might be a little dated, but
they said about 90% of all
business establishments in New
Mexico employed fewer than 500
employees.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
said 90, how much percent?
Uh, let me, let me see, Mr.
Speaker, General. So I see here
it says 98.4% of all businesses
in New Mexico employed fewer
than 500 employees, but that is
including all businesses and
we're just talking about IRBs,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when
we're talking about IRBs, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we're
talking about a project that
involves the use of an IRB.
As a tool and those businesses
that work on those, we're not
talking about.
Businesses that are IRB, so help
me understand it's a project
that's funded through the IRB
process, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, is that not right
what we're about. Yes, correct.
So these would be projects
utilizing IRBs and their their
businesses that would be
utilizing them that would have
500 or fewer employees or less
than $7.5 million in annual
gross receipts.
OK, so how many businesses, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen from Otero
have um.
fewer than
What was the number
how how much grocery receipts 7
million?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady was
7.5. 7.5. How many businesses in
the state, um, let's say for
this past year, have um gross
receipts at less than 7.5
million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, are you asking
specifically of the projects
that have received IRBs or just
businesses across the entire
state in general. I would say in
general because we don't know
what businesses, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen are gonna be working
on these projects.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I would say
that's a very, very good
question because it's a question
that we need to be answering as
lawmakers when we're making
policies, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I don't have the
most recent years reporting, I
believe, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I may have the 2022
reporting and let me see what
that says for me and I can get
you an answer in one moment.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
according to what I have here
and I just pulled up the 2024
report from the Small Business
Administration Office of
Advocacy. The report says that
there are, according to them and
their, their definition of a
small business with 7.5 million
and less than 500 employees is
166,301 small businesses, which
is approximately 90 99% of New
Mexico's small businesses, and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
also includes 322,000 small
business employees and that's
about half of New Mexico's
employees.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, maybe if we can put this
together, um, so we learned, Mr.
Speaker, I think that you shared
with us that 98% of businesses
in the state have fewer than 500
employees, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is that right?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, according to the Small
Business Administration and the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, you'd be correct.
Over 100,000.
businesses have revenues that
are um 7 7.5 million or less, is
that right?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, General
lady, yes, according to the
Small Business Administration.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
we know what percentage of these
over 100,000 businesses, um,
what percentage that is of the
number of businesses in the
state, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, could you repeat the
question for me?
Sure. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd be
happy to, gentlemen from Otero.
You gave me an a a number of
over 100,000 businesses in the
state, Mr. Speaker, have gross
receipts that are less than $7.5
million Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, yes, and what
percentage of all the businesses
in the state, Mr. Speaker, does
that over 100,000 businesses
represent Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe we already covered that.
About 98% according to DWS
Department of Workforce
Solutions. OK, Mr. Speaker, so,
um, Mr. Spiegel, would you agree
with this statement, gentlemen?
Would you agree with the
statement? this.
Exception potential pretty much
subsumes the rule.
Meaning this.
Exception could apply to nearly
every business in the state, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, at least
98%, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
would not be correct, since 98%
of the businesses in the state
do not get benefits of IRBs.
OK, so could we then conclude
that of those businesses that
work on projects that are funded
by IRBs.
Virtually every one of them
would could qualify for this
exception, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I don't.
Believe so because Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the way we're
talking about this legislation,
we're looking at these large
investments in the state that
are leveraging these tax and
economic drivers such as IRBs
included in the bill, who also
utilize Pilts, etc. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we're
talking about multi-million
dollar projects from large
corporations such as Netflix,
which would not be a small
business. Amazon would not be a
small business. Sunzia would not
be a small business pattern.
would not be a small business,
so no, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that would not be correct.
Speaker, gentlemen,
my understanding and maybe you
can correct me on this, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the, the,
um, those companies that are
seeking these IRBs to advance a
construction project that
they're working on, they use, do
they not, Mr. Speaker,
businesses in the state to
perform those tasks, do they
not, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So they, Mr.
Speaker, generally, I cannot
speak for all every single
business in the state, so I, I
would hate to opine on that.
What I do know, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is they do indeed
employ folks in the community,
so individual people who are not
businesses, they also may, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, employ
certain contractors or
subcontractors who could
potentially fall into this, such
as maintenance folks or any kind
of other specialized field that
is not directly.
upon the business which could be
ancillary work around the
business, so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I would hate to speak for
those businesses, but if I was
an IRB and I was coming to the
state, I could potentially
utilize those services, although
I would hate to give a definite
answer because I just, I'm not
someone who has an IRB.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, IRBs
don't come to the state, Mr.
Speaker. Do, do we agree on
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so the IRB is something that
local authorities utilize for
tax incentive purposes for
businesses as we previously
stated. Correct then I maybe I
didn't hear you speak when you
said when the IRB comes to the
state, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so.
I, I mean, maybe we need to go
back to first principles, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, let's say
Amazon is building something and
they work with their local
community.
And that local community chooses
to support an IRB.
And that IRB then allows um
certain taxes to be waived or
not paid. Is that, is that your
understanding, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, of how the process
works.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, that's correct from
my understanding on on some
projects, although Mr. Speaker,
General Way, there are other
projects that have been indeed
brokered through the executive
branch, such as our governor or
our previous governor as well as
mayors of large cities like
Albuquerque or small cities like
Los Luna, smaller cities like
Los Luna, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so local governments do
indeed utilize these tax
incentives to attempt to bring
businesses to their communities.
For economic development
purposes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and Mr. Speaker, and the
and gentlemen, and you would
agree it it usually involves
some sort of construction of
something like wind farms or um
generating stations or um
facilities, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. It could, it could also
mean retrofitting already
developed land or or buildings
to the needs of that particular
business. It does not
necessarily need to be a new
construction, although that is
very common from my
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Great and who, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, are
performing the tasks to either
retrofit, as you pointed out,
Mr. Speaker, or build these wind
farms or
generating station, Mr. Speaker,
or, um, who, who's doing that
work?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That's a very
interesting question, and I
would love to, to, to get back
into that because Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when I, when I talk
about economic development, we
hear about these businesses that
are building multibillion dollar
projects in the state, for
example, we have some, some
solar and wind projects up in
the northern part of the state,
those businesses utilize
one-time contractors or folks
who, who build those projects
and then it's a one-time
expense. So these are not long
term employees, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it could
also go out for bids. So for
example, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we could have a bid on
those projects and maybe someone
in Texas wins that bid. It could
be someone in New Mexico. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
hate to say in certain terms
that every single contract's bid
to retrofit a business or create
a new wind farm would be in the
state. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's why I hesitate to
give a definite on that answer.
However, I would say it could
potentially be a possibility,
although I have not seen the
statistical.
numbers on which ones those are.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
did I hear just hear you say
that you this um exemption would
then perhaps give an exemption
to some Texas company that's
coming in to do some work on an
IRB project. Is that so in a
Texas company might be able to
be exempted under this, is that
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Uh, that's an interesting
question. No, I, I don't believe
that's what I said, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what I said is
usually these individual
companies bid on these projects
and when they do it on those
projects, that is when this
kicks in for an individual or a
business that is a small
business and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I do also want to
clarify many of these businesses
that are coming to the state who
are getting these tax
exemptions, multimillion dollar
IRB help from these local
communities.
are from out of state such as
Netflix and Amazon. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if you're
trying to allude to a point that
we're gonna be trying to exempt
Texas companies, I would say
that if that were the case, then
the very idea of an IRB is to
help alleviate the tax burden of
an out of state company, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
The, the, the focus here is a
contractor and in your, I'm
looking at your proposed
amendment, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, contractor
subcontractor, and employee
classified as a small business
is the, um, your focus and um
your focus is on those companies
who've been hired.
Um, to work on the construction,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen of the
actual project, is that not
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So as it says in the in
the amendment, I'd love to read
it again actually. Uh, if you
look at the third line.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
says, uh, so small business
under the federal Small Business
Administration standards may
apply.
For an exemption from the
prevailing wage and fringe
benefit requirement. So Mr.
Speaker, General lady, I can't
tell you in certain or uncertain
terms, who would apply to this
because as we've put in the in
the amendment, the Department of
Workforce Solutions, which is
very capable of finding what
certifications are needed would
be making that determination. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would say I cannot comment on
that.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
um, from Otara, you're telling
me you can't comment on um an
amendment that you're proposing
as to who you expected to apply
to Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Montero, you don't know who it
applies to Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is not what I said,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I said
it would apply to who whomever
the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
Believes may be worthy of the
exemption. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if it's an out of
state business, that's what the
Department of Workforce
Solutions would promulgate if it
was just New Mexico businesses,
it would promulgate rules that
made such effects into their
rules. So Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, it could apply, it could
not apply, but what I'm saying
the intention of the of the
amendment is for small
businesses in general and that
could be utilized for just New
Mexico businesses or it could
extend.
to neighboring states that may
get contracts, although like I
said before, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I do not know how many of
those contractors are from
Texas, Arizona, Oklahoma, etc.
So I would just hate to comment
on which ones would be affected,
although Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the intention of the
amendment is indeed to have it,
it targeted towards small
businesses.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, who,
who are you referring to when
you, in your amendment, uh,
under K. Who are you referring
to a contractor, a
subcontractor, or employer
classified as a small business.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So according to
the the the small business
administration, they have
different definitions for for
what those are and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think we went
over those a little while ago.
So the contractor would could be
Mr. Speaker, General lady, a
small business. So if I was
building a business, a building
in New Mexico.
Utilizing an IRB.
And I decided that I needed a
service or I needed somebody to
help me build something, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that
contractor
Or that employer.
Or that small business that we
are utilizing to do that work
would need to fall under the
guidelines are of a small
business administration which we
previously went over in the
beginning of this debate, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady. Mr.
Speaker to remind everyone
because we've had a bit of um
interesting conversation here,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
under we we found out that 98%
of businesses in the state.
qualify as a small business
under the definition.
So, um, and over 100,000 have
revenues that are less than 7.5
million, which is also a
criteria, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is that not right?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we have determined that
during this debate, correct.
According to the Small Business
Administration and the
Department of Workforce
Solutions. Speaker and
gentlemen, any contract or
subcontractor employer who's
working on an IRB project.
Um, is likely to be deemed a
small business. I think we can
agree to that since 98% of all
businesses in the state under
the information we just received
on the floor today, Mr. Speaker,
qualify as small businesses.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, so as we've just, as
we've just concluded, we're
helping small businesses as this
amendment intends. You're,
you're totally 100% correct. Um,
actually, we are exempting Mr.
Speaker, just about every
business in the state, um,
contractor subcontractor, Mr.
Speaker, because we know based
on the information shared with
us, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
from Otero that 98% of all
businesses are fewer than 500.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, um,
I yield the floor.
There is further the debate on
the amendment, the gentle lady
from tourists and Bern
representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, my
friend from Montero County,
please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I will.
Speaking of dreams and
nightmares.
I will not be having nightmares
about IRB because I've learned
far more about it than I ever
knew in my lifetime.
So I did, I was looking at some
stuff, so I was trying to, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I was
trying to look up the numbers
and um.
When we're looking at how, what
constitutes a small business,
and I followed about 20 links
while I was standing here and
never came to a number, so I
understand the frustrating
trying to find that, but I
understand what you're trying to
get is this our small businesses
correct in New Mexico, right?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Yes, and so.
I guess, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the way that we're looking
at it is just a very central
figure. So for example, we have
the Small Business
Administration. They collect
this data annually. This is very
widely and
Commonly utilized data, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and so.
We could have.
Set a certain number of
businesses we could have said,
uh, business that has 100
employees, 500 employees, 3
employees, 20 employees, it
could be any kind of factor, but
Mr. Speaker, general lady, for
the purposes of this amendment
were intending to target small
businesses in a general sense,
we're not trying to be
exclusive. We don't want to
exclude anybody from being able
to utilize this potential
exemption, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I just do want to
make sure that people understand
when it comes to this exemption,
it is something they can.
Apply for. And Mr. Speaker,
General later, we're not saying
every single small business, 98%
or whatever some odd number of
uh small businesses that have so
many employees are going to
automatically be exempt, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this would
utilize another tax benefit to
help those small businesses by
allowing them a potential carve
out. And so that's what this
amendment would do, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I hope I answered
that question.
Thank you, you did, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and gentleman from
Montero County, so if I
understand what you're saying,
there are still exemptions. This
isn't guaranteed, right? So
they're a small business they
apply still has to go through
rules, filling out forms, etc.
reviewed. Is that correct?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that would be 100%
correct.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so I did actually look up on
Amazon, uh, the company that
built it is from Phoenix, uh, it
is BH Deb Corp, a $6 billion
company, um, but when I worked
in construction, which I did a
long time ago, doing drywall
muddy taping.
There's a lot of subcontracting
that that I have found in
construction, meaning a big
company may come in and they may
not qualify that, but the
subcontours would, right, the
small people, the small
businesses, the New Mexicans,
they would definitely be
applicable to this is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you're correct. So for
example, like I said earlier, we
could say just ancillary work or
people who are actually helping
build the building.
But there are small businesses
in the state or out of the
state. They're small businesses
regardless and right now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've come
out of a period of great
tribulation after the COVID-19
pandemic and all the lockdowns
and all the, the havoc that we
had in the past, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and so when it
comes to rebuilding our small
businesses and then also making
New Mexico a destination to put
your business and ensure that
your business can thrive in our
state, Mr. Speaker, General
lady, we want those small
businesses in the state to be
able to utilize contract.
for large projects such as
Amazon, such as Intel, such as
Sunzia, such as pattern energy,
etc. And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when we're trying to
utilize these funds and trying
to utilize whatever tax taxable
entities and taxable tools that
we have in our toolbox. I think
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it's
probably in our best interest as
a state to be more inclusive
rather than exclusive when it
comes to the little guy, which
is the small business that's
doing the hard work that, you
know, less than 7.
$5 million in gross receipts,
it's not a lot. That's not a
lot, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And so this is giving
opportunity to those small
businesses that we all are so
fond of, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, in our communities across
our state across, across all of
our, our state, you know, it's
very different, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, for example, Otero
County is much smaller and more
different than a company or a
place such as Albuquerque, where
they have lots of companies. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, we don't
have much manufacturing, but Mr.
Speaker,
gentle lady, if we're able to
utilize an IRB to bring a
business then that business
would have the potential to have
an exemption to higher
subcontractors who would also be
able to do it at a very fair
rate. And so with that rate, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we can
build upon what we're starting
to build in small communities
and larger communities like in
Los Lunas area and then we want
smaller communities like mine in
Alamogorda, we have about 30,000
people to be able to, to utilize
whatever tax benefits are
available. And so we definitely
want that for our state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker and Jonathan
County, I think that's why you
put in here the workforce
solution departmentall, uh, make
the rules for granting the
exceptions because it's not cut
and dry necessarily. It's gonna
be a big company could come in,
may not be eligible,
subcontractors come in and they
still have to apply and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, you
have in here exceptions shall be
granted for a period of up to 5
years, is that, uh, did you get
that from another state or where
did the five years come from?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Good question. So
that 5-year period, Mr. Speaker.
I guess I, I, I have dreams like
I said, I have, I have dreams,
Mr. Speaker, and I want these
businesses to grow and, and get
out of that class, right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so these
businesses while they're they're
building their economic benefits
by being able to contract
subcontract, work on projects in
the state. I want them to be
able to grow far exceeding $7.5
million. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this is kind of a, uh, a
period that I, I, I would like
it to be of all time, the whole
time.
They wouldn't be able to do it,
but it would just be for 5
years, and I think that that's a
fair number, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
do appreciate that you went with
standards that are already set
up for what a small business is
because I mean if somebody has
issues with it, I guess they
could amend your amendment, uh,
saying, well, I want to be X, Y,
Z, but you're starting with the
starting point to say there,
there needs to be exceptions in
this, and I understand why you
brought that forward, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, so I
understand what you're trying to
say and I know there was a lot
of numbers and statistics thrown
around, but when you actually
throw in who's actually going to
get the IRB that changes a lot
of the statistics too as well.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is
there anything that you wanted
to add because I, I was gonna
ask you another question quickly
after this.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Yeah, so I guess I
just want to reaffirm the, the
point.
That this is for folks who have
small businesses in the state
could be out of state. That's
dependent on the workforce
solutions department, but that
would include people who are
doing work.
In, in the program, they could
be working in the actual company
as a contractor, they could just
be doing services for the
contractor, but this doesn't
exclude them from being able to
be utilized in this process. And
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
fear and the, the core of the
actual bill would be that it
could really repel a lot of
these larger corporations like
Amazon, for example, from
utilizing local workers and
local businesses to instead just
bring them in-house.
are already under the IRB, they
can, they can probably absorb it
because they're a multibillion
dollar corporation, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but it would
exclude those folks, many mom
and pop shops that have these,
these services such as the
cleaning, such as plumbing, etc.
when you have a a plumbing.
Fiasco, for example, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, maybe
Amazon has an in-house
contractor plumber who works for
Amazon instead of having someone
from the outside, from the local
community who was working at a
mom and pop institution. And so,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
is kind of trying to be
inclusive to those folks and
those businesses that are local
that are, that are hopefully
benefiting from the economic
benefit of the business being
there and so we just compound
those already baked in tax
incentives on the I.
Kerby to ensure that we're
building upon what we've had and
not just have a one-off, uh, tax
incentive program for a large
business that's coming to the
state, but also to benefit
smaller businesses who may want
to be included in the economic
benefits that may be.
In that project, it could be
Amazon, it could be, it could be
someone else, Mr. Speaker,
General. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, what your amendment does it
changes the dynamics because of
a company comes in it's a giant
corporation and they bring in
another giant corporation. What
I'm seeing is they may reassess
that and go with a local mom and
pop smaller businesses to
actually complete the job rather
than bringing in their giant
team from out of state. Would
you agree with that, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you're, you're completely
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. As we've seen in some
projects, I know, for example,
we have some projects that are
Uh
Like a studio
Right? They're, they're making
films, they're making TV shows
and it would be a lot easier for
them, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
to just absorb the cost of
whatever this bill would entail
in its full unamended form
rather than utilizing what we
have in our communities, which
is small businesses. These are
folks that have the passion,
they have the resources, they
have the knowledge and the local
know-how on what we can do to
improve our communities, and I
find those people to have a seat
at the table is important, and I
feel like that is something we
cannot
We cannot underestimate when it
comes to lawmaking in this body,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
was the core of the issue that I
was getting at with this whole
thing is you're trying to set
something up that a big
corporation doesn't come in with
their big team of people, but
instead they're gonna go, you
know, we may want to use some of
these local people, some of the
smaller companies and um.
And I think that's what you're
trying to say with this bill,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I, that's totally it. This
amendment, I hoped it would be
very simple when I awoke myself
last night, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, to have this epiphany, and
I thought this would be good
lawmaking. I thought that this
would be something that we could
do to have a compromise when it
comes to ensuring that these
folks who, you know, for
example,
If I, if I have a local plumbing
business, I want my plumbing
business to have business all
across the the the city, you
know, and I know a lot of my
folks who I've called for
plumbing emergencies were local
businesses, and I want more of
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I want all these other
contractors such as contractors
on, on
For example, we have businesses
that may need someone punched a
hole in the drywall or something
and and Apple because I don't
know, someone was angry, for
example, and we want those kinds
of companies to come here,
utilize local services on the
ground that are already there,
already benefiting the community
and just give them a little bit
of of help when it comes to tax
purposes so that when they come
to New Mexico to build their
vision as a large company like
Apple, like, like Amazon, like
Intel, they can make.
Sir, that the fabric of our
communities are interwoven in
that tapestry of greatness that
they're trying to build in our
beautiful state.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. That's
all the questions I have, but
thank you for trying to support
our small business. There is the
gentle lady from Bernalillo on
the amendment, Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Otero yield?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
I gladly yield to my friend from
Bernalillo County.
Wonderful thank you um so I was
particularly interested in the,
the initial conversation, uh,
Mr. Speaker, about, um, revenue
uh for small businesses and I
have a couple of clarifying
questions, um, if it's OK.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, how does a company know if
it is classified as a small
business, uh, through the SBA.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and if you haven't answer
this question, correct me if I'm
wrong, but what I've seen is
it's their last tax statements
from the previous years, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, so my
research indicates that it's
actually um that companies need
to apply, uh, they need to go
through a process of
self-certification and, uh.
They use the last, the average
of the last 3 years of their
revenue, um, does that sound,
uh.
Probable
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, yes, that's
correct from my understanding of
what the, the short introduction
I had to the small Business
Administration's report of the
previous year, that is correct
as of last year, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So given that um
the SBA uses the average of 3
years, um, I, I don't think that
5 years, um, as you are
proposing in your amendment
makes sense. Um, I think given
that the SBA, uh, does an
average of 3 years, I think, uh,
perhaps, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, modifying that to 3 years
might be more appropriate, um,
however, I do have a couple of
other questions, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Um
How are we defining the term
undue financial burden.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, great question. I was
hoping someone would actually
answer that or ask that because
I do have an answer, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I hate
to be a broken record, but
we're, we're utilizing the
Department of Workforce
Solutions or I think it's
Workforce connection. I believe
that's what they're rebranding
themselves to, but that
department, Mr. Speaker, uh, of
Workforce Solutions would indeed
be a promulgating rules and so I
believe whatever that financial
burden could be, would have to
be pled in front of the
Department of Workforce
Solutions during the
ation process to see if they
were indeed needing these funds.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
would all, it would kind of be a
two-tiered approach. We're going
to have number one, they're a
small business under the SBA
that would include that average
of 3 years and then another
prong would be having to ask
for.
undue financial burden if
they're under that undue
financial burden with
implementing this, they could
have that exemption. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if there
would be do two different paths.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um.
You know, I do, uh, worry a
little bit about um
Allowing our agencies to sort of
make their own definitions, um,
and, you know, not provide
sufficient guidance when we're
requesting rules. So that, that
gives me a little bit of pause,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um.
And then the other question,
could you define uh financial
hardship.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, that's another
interesting question that I was
looking forward to. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when we're
talking about financial
hardship.
It would have to be in a
A circumstance where they, they
found themselves in.
An unfortunate situation as a
small business where they, they
had a hardship and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they would
have to prove to the department
that there was some kind of
barrier from them being able to
be included if they were indeed
going to try to get some
contract, for example, on a, on
a project with Amazon or with
Intel. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this would just give them
another option to give them a
kind of a leg up and helping
these small businesses that are
hurting to be
To be included. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we're not
talking about multi-billion
million dollar businesses, these
are small businesses that have
financial hardship, and so we're
not gonna be saying, oh, you can
make millions and millions of
dollars annually. These are
people who are are hurting.
They're in the community. They
want to be part of the project,
but this would give them an
avenue to be, to have a seat at
the table like we established
earlier, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady from Bernalio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, um.
Hypothetically could a company,
uh, have settled a lawsuit.
And wiped out their finances and
then apply for financial
hardship.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it would be dependent on
the situation, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Theoretically, maybe.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I believe that that kind of
litigation is on the rarer side
and it could also be even in the
more rare side when it comes to
the small businesses so I know
that Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
large companies have lawsuits
flying in the air all the time,
every day, pretty much all the
time. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it might not apply to many
of these small businesses, but
that could be considered, and
I'm sure that that would have to
be included in their packet
because Mr. Speaker, General
lady, as I'm sure you you
believe and you agree with me,
Department of Workforce
Solutions.
does their due diligence and
rulemaking processes, they're
not going to, they have a
fiduciary responsibility to not
make, to not make bad decisions.
So Mr. Speaker gentle lady, I'm
sure that they would take that
into consideration.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um,
thank you, gentlemen. Um, just
a, a few more quick questions,
um.
Have you added uh an, an
appropriation by chance, uh, for
the Department of Workforce
Solutions to hire additional
staff, uh, to promulgate these
rules and to oversee this
process?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So according to the FIR on
the original bill, they will
already be absorbing costs and
that would just be lumped in
with the other costs that are
incurred, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, with the rulemaking that
they'd already be having to do,
this would just be additional
rulemaking in that same process
regarding these IRBs, so it
would be included in the same
stream.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It's a little
bit of an unfunded mandate.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would not use that term, but I
would say that the current bill
is an unfunded mandate.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen. Um, I, I
did wanna circle back, uh, to
the, the beginning of the
discussion about this amendment,
um.
When we were talking about.
Businesses that uh could be
classified as a small business
under um the SBA.
I think, am I correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that the
revenue limit you were looking
at was around $7 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, according to the data
that I was provided by one of my
colleagues from the SBA which I
did have a a chance to look at,
did say that or 500 employees or
less, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
according to their, their
metrics.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, I also took
some time to, to research that,
um, and I actually found that
the revenue limits are
substantially higher than $7
million and actually it depends
more on the specific type of
company. So for instance, um, if
you, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
are a, um, heavy construction
company and your revenue, uh,
the limit, the cap for the
revenue is $39.5 million.
That's quite a bit more than 7,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
also found that
For specialty trades, uh, and
this was lower, um, the limit
was 16.5 million.
So that is substantially higher
than 7 million. So it just, it
does make me wonder about how
expansive, uh, and what types of
businesses might actually be
able to qualify, um, under this.
I think well intentioned but
very broad, um, amendment, uh,
so in addition to those items
and the fact that I think 3
years, uh, would be more
appropriate, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I am sorry that I
won't be able to support the
amendment.
There is for the debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
Katrin Grant and Hidalgo
representative Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would
the gentlemen please yield?
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my friend from, let me get your
counties right, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Katherine Grant and
Hidalgo. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
So, um, you know, the, the whole
intent and it's a little
complicated uh for.
Um,
and I'm not gonna.
Consider myself perfectly well
versed on IRBs, but the, the
whole intent of IRBs were
basically to help reduce the
cost of projects that are
viable, especially for rural
communities, you know, they're
in a lot of these projects are
for renewable energy projects.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, as I mentioned
earlier, I, I just had a couple
as examples, pattern, energy,
and then I think it was Sunzia.
They had multiple projects that
were utilizing such funds and so
yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
am not sure of any large
solar or wind project that has
not utilized such tax incentives
in the state.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I'm only saying that because
what, what is happening here is
by putting this um minimum wage,
uh, prevailing wage situation it
increases the cost of the
project. Let's just, I'm just
gonna keep it simple, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it's gonna
increase the cost of the
project.
And we're we're trying to do
here what I think you're trying
to do here is balance it out a
little bit so that.
Because this would in this
situation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what would happen is
mostly union companies would
take advantage of these
construction projects.
And so
That being said, this would kind
of balance out for this little
guy we're always trying to fight
for the little guy, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and so the little guy
would then have an opportunity
to also.
Uh, uh, bid some of these
projects and be a part of the
construction. This is what we're
talking about construction.
And so you know.
Um
I like your amendment because
it, it, it balances out, it
doesn't have to be only union.
It would also allow the small
business person to or or entity
to bid and and they're under the
500 employee mark.
If they follow that 3 year rule
and their and their average.
Revenues are less than of of
grocery seats are less than $7.5
million.
Then they fall under that
category. If they don't fall
under that, so they could fall
out of that out of compliance
even though you have it up to 5
years, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
They could fall out of
compliance of the next year
their their revenues exceed that
they automatically fall out of
compliance. I don't wanna make
it complicated, so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, the other,
the other thing is the whole
idea was to bring uh jobs and
bring economic development to to
rural areas that was the intent
of of um IRBs.
And so when we're increasing the
cost of projects what is
basically happening is it's
gonna negatively impact the
pilot payments back to local
governments.
And so you know this is even in
some instances even local school
districts, so you know I, I like
your amendment.
I, I, I know that we, we kind of
get seem to have gotten into the
weeds, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
but the bottom line is this the
the whole idea of IRBs is to
reduce the cost of projects so
that we can bring people to
invest into New Mexico a lot of
this is in rural New Mexico and
at the end of the day if we're,
if we're pressing this, uh,
minimum of the prevailing wage,
that's fine so long as we have a
balance and we're able to allow
some small business to at least
compete in some of these uh.
Some of the um uh to bid into
the to for these projects and
not force them that they have to
be uh uh uh unionized and so
that's just basically what what
it is it's just a way for me,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's a
way to balance it. I think it's
a great amendment. It basically
you fall out of compliance the
way I read it if you exceed your
employees or you exceed that
revenue.
Hasta la vista, you're out of
this deal you're, you're your
abatement's gone, your or your
excuse me, your exemption's gone
and that takes care of that. So
thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you from Bernalillo.
Mr. Speaker, I moved the table
house floor amendment number 1
to House Bill 6.
We are on a motion to Table
House floor amendment number 1
to House Bill 6. There is a roll
call vote, a vote of yes, and
the amendment is tabled.
A vote of no and we are back on
the amendment.
The vote
is now
Open
The boat is about.
To close.
The vote is now closed.
Did everybody vote?
Baca, how do you wish to vote?
Remember Chatfield?
The vote is now closed by about
40 in the affirmative, 25 in the
negative.
House for Amendment number 1 to
House Bill 6 has been tabled.
Gentlemen from Montero, you
still have the floor.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and general, uh, gentleman in
body for that that discussion, I
found it quite interesting and
like, like the rest of the body,
I'm learning a lot about IRBs,
Mr. Speaker, and so I think it's
very interesting. So, Mr.
Speaker, uh, I'm just gonna ask
the gentleman from Colfax Motari
Riba, San Miguel and tell us a
few more questions for a while.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
My, my next question, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, regarding
these.
This
Tax incentives with IRBs.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
tell me?
Regarding other states around
the country, how competitive our
New Mexico's IRB.
Incentives versus states around
the country.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, IRB
programs are very hard to
compare. They're so different
the way they're implemented.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. They are, however,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, have we
seen?
Large amounts of companies going
to different states for
different reasons because of
their IRBs. So for example, we
have large tax incentives in
certain places in California for
tech companies, for example, we
have others that have migrated
to, for example, we have uh
banking laws in states like
Delaware, where there are very
nice laws that help bring more
banking businesses to those
states. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
regarding just IRBs in general.
How is New Mexico a player
versus other states regarding
these tax incentives.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, IRBs
are one tiny form of tax
incentives, so it's hard to
compare. There's so many
different types of tax
incentives.
OK, thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I agree with you.
I think that there are
definitely
There's something to be said
about what our, our IRBs are
versus.
Other tax incentives and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I would go
into a whole screed about how
our tax structure needs to
change and we need to implement
better tax incentives because I
know, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
some other states they have
just, they've they've
Personal income tax that's just
gone. They have no personal
income tax in Texas, for
example, and they have many
businesses that have located to
Texas, such as large companies
like Apple, I think even
there's, there's some
manufacturing companies that
have gone there, uh.
I think Tesla might have a, a, a
new place there. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I would just say we,
we have a lot to do when it
comes to our tax incentives in
the state. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
I would like to propose another
friendly, very, I'm being very
friendly, Mr. Speaker. I'm very
friendly amendment. And so, Mr.
Speaker, I will give you my
biggest grin to maybe get some
friendliness up in this house,
so I have another amendment, Mr.
Speaker, to be as extremely
friendly as I can be.
Gentlemen, we will get the
amendment passed out. What is
that number on the roll call
vote, Mr. Speaker, and I will
give you the the number right
after we get that.
You got the roll call. Thank
you, sir.
Uh, the one that I have is
0230968.1.
All right, let's get it passed
out in online and then we'll
we'll resume with the beat.
As he passed out. It has.
And I believe it is also online,
the gentleman to explain the
amendment. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I did not.
Get up way early in the morning
with an epiphany for this
amendment, but the amendment I
can describe it to you, Mr.
Speaker.
Which will begin on
The top line on page 1 line 15,
which says providing for a
waiver.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
purpose of this amendment is to
make New Mexico competitive with
other states that have similar
tax incentive structures that do
not have prevailing wage
mandates.
On these projects. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this
legislation would certainly be
Enhanced in such a large way by
putting forward this amendment
which says a business entity
that is relocating to New Mexico
or constructing a facility
within the state and that can
demonstrate that compliance with
prevailing wage laws would make
the project uncompetitive
compared to similar projects in
other states may apply for the
waiver program from the
provisions of this section for
the period not to exceed 5
years, and that's the same.
5-year period because Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we, we wanna
make sure that it's, it's not
too overbroad, like 10 years,
but it's not too restrictive
like 3 years. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this would
be something that we would
consider and then of course the
economic development department
in consultations with Workforce
Solutions on this rulemaking,
uh, they will establish criteria
for granting these waivers, and
that would include requirements
for demonstrating economic
necessity and job creation
potential in the state. So, Mr.
Speaker,
gentlemen, this amendment would
very simply put New Mexico on
par with other states and be a
competitive with these large
projects that we intend to bring
to our great and beautiful
state, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Gentlemen, from all those
counties, this is a friendly
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, no.
Right, I see there is some
debate on the amendment. First
up is the gentle lady from Santa
Fe represent of Serrato. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentleman from Otero County
yield. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. I gladly yield to my
friend from Santa Fe County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm just a
little confused. Would this not
only apply to ERBs, but also
anyone, any, any of the possible
prevailing wage, um, uh,
mechanisms that exist?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So it's in this
legislation which is pertaining
just to IRBs, so this would only
pertain to those projects that
would be utilizing the IRB in
the state of New Mexico with the
prevailing wage law that would
be included in here, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but it
seems that where it's placed in
here would be equal to where the
IRB section would be.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so, so we see here on page 7
between 14 and 15. So 14 and 15
is just the end of the bill. So
right underneath this section
where it talks about this
prevailing wage mandate to
comply with the mandate, it
would be under K under that same
subsection which is on, Mr.
Speaker, I need to get the
section number for you. I think
it's just section one, Mr.
Speaker. So it would be
underneath that, so we would
say, OK, because
business entities relocating to
the state or building a large
project in the state and would
be utilizing these funds or
these these tax incentives and
there would be a prevailing wage
if they could do this in another
state for a more competitive
rate and they wouldn't come to
New Mexico otherwise. This would
give them a carve out to let
them come to New Mexico, not
have to be compliant with this
large wage and it would also
just be for 5 years, so there
would be another
check for 5 years from now if
they still are needing this.
If they came to the state and
are now compliant, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
for helping clarify that. And so
the other provisions within the
prevailing wage, do they also
have provisions like this within
them?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I have not been able to
do a deep dive on, on all these
states that have them, to be
honest with you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I haven't seen many
states that have such prevailing
wage laws regarding these
specific tax incentives. So what
I would say, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is the states that I have
seen that have some kind of
Prevailing wage law, there are
certain carve-outs for certain
kinds of businesses, so.
I, I, I could give you some
examples and I can find some for
you, but it would just be mainly
trying to be as competitive as
possible. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it comes to
rulemaking process, we're
looking apples to apples. We're
not doing apples to oranges. So
when Department of Workforce
Solutions and Economic
Development make the rules, they
will see those and ensure that
there is, there is equality
regarding us versus, for
example, let's just say a state
like Texas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. And when we're
utilizing IRBs, it is, it is in,
I mean, from your perspective,
how do you see this working into
the goals we're using an IRB,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I think it would be
working in congruence with the
IRB to make sure that if a
business is looking at New
Mexico they're trying to
negotiate a really good rate
with a local entity or county
or, or area of our state that
may be underserved actually that
they would want to come here
versus going out of state to
another state that could have a
workforce like ours that does
have the same kinds of.
Benefits that are needed, such
as grocery stores, hospitals,
etc. and so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this would be a holistic
approach to make sure that if we
do see a project in a state that
is giving very good benefits
that are comparable to ours, but
they do not have this provision
in their state statute that we
could have the upper hand in
trying to clinch that project to
bring it to the land of
enchantment versus something in
another state. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
You know, we have a lot of
different economic incentives
for bringing
Uh, economic-based jobs into our
state and encouraging their
growth so that we see more jobs
coming in. I'm concerned about
this because it seems to me that
we're in almost even luring in a
business, uh, and, and, and I,
and I'll be honest from my
perspective, almost preying on,
on lower wages that may exist in
New Mexico right now we know in
New Mexico through the LIDA fund
that that through the LIDA
provision in our Constitution
and that we, we, many of us in
this body really embrace. Uh,
what lead does makes us
compatible, competitive with
states like South Carolina and.
In other states. And when they
look to us, they're looking at
the skill set of our workforce
and the skill set of a workforce
is often, uh, tied to the wages
that they, that they received
that, that I would argue the
prevailing wages. I would not
want to undercut any of our
workers to achieve a short term,
uh, incentive for business to
move over and then the, the
increases happen. Uh, it seems
to me that we're gonna be losing
out a lot of those qualified
workers for those areas to
really make that happen. My
concern also, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is that this seems
like an exemption that no other
part
Of the prevailing wage, um, or
sorry, with the uh with the, the
minimum, the public works
minimum wage Act has, and while
I do understand that, you know,
it's a different system because
you have out of state entities
looking at it. I'm not
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and, and perhaps you,
I would love to hear your, your
insights on it. But why we would
give that um benefit to an out
of state organization when we
want them to build good paying
jobs in New Mexico in our rural
areas and in our urban areas,
um, just like anywhere else. And
I'm not sure I would give them
that exemption here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, very, very good
question. And so,
For just the general public to
understand. We have so many
different tax incentives that
kind of roll up on top of
themselves like pilts and we
have uh payments in lieu of
taxes with that. We have other
things that we've utilized for
zoning purposes, for example,
when it comes to where the
business is going to locate,
make it easier zoning wise for
them to not have to worry about
those kinds of restrictions. We
also have things that are to do
with the property taxes like
we've mentioned today.
that's kind of rolled in
somewhat with the IRB process
where those tax incentives would
be given, uh, grocery receipts,
taxes, that could also be
considered and so we have kind
of a smorgasbord of all kinds of
different tax incentives that we
as a state provide, but as we
see, Mr. Speaker, General.
Generally, uh, in many cases,
for example, where I live, I
live in Almogordo. It's about
half an hour, an hour and a half
away from El Paso and El Paso,
there are so many large
businesses that have moved to El
Paso because it's just better
when it comes to their, their
workforce because there's not
income taxes, for example, and
other kinds of tax incentives on
that end too when it comes to
actual workers. So, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, uh, we don't
really have apples to apples
when it comes to something like
that because our tax structure
when it comes to private income.
taxes, those are a personal
income taxes, those are
different. So we're trying to
get.
kind of a leg up on other states
when it comes to their tax
incentives and their structures
so that when it comes to these
apples to apples situations like
prevailing wage with IRBs, a
state that does not have a
prevailing wage law could
potentially see in Mexico if we
have this carve out as something
that they could start and build
a business, put their roots down
here. 5 years is a good long
time for a business to put roots
down. I'm not gonna go move to a
state for two years and just to
book it if my tax incentive uh
runs out. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
something to try to bring those
jobs long term to stay in New
Mexico and continue to build on
those economic drivers that
we've been talking about this
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, evening now, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. Now, and I, I
appreciate that. I think my
concern with that though is when
you go back to your first
statement, which is we have many
tax incentives in New Mexico
that are unique to New Mexico
that a lot of others can't
provide and, and you pointed to
a couple of them we have IRBs as
well. We have this one as well.
What would prevent a business
from considering utilizing one
of those other benefits that we
have in the state, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, from my experience, at
least from the businesses that
I've heard, so for example I've
heard biotech companies, they've
been wanting to come to New
Mexico, but we have certain
regulations that are not as, not
as favorable as some other
states, for example. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
not dealing with biotech, but I
would say when it comes to those
apples to apples comparisons to
other states, they may see New
Mexico as a driver for that
company, so we have many
incentives when it comes to
solar and wind energy, and
that's why.
They have utilized those to
compound upon the the tax
incentives we have such as pits
and so so many other tax
incentives like these IRBs, and
so they've compounded upon
compounded upon compounded upon
all those tax.
Incentives and so when we're
talking about economic
development in the general
sense, it is, it is quite
difficult, like I, like I agree
with you, to actually find
A holistic approach for Texas
versus New Mexico.
But if we can make it a little
bit easier for those businesses
to relocate here, and a lot of
these businesses, they have
money to lose, but also they
don't want to lose money because
they have shareholders, they
have people that hold them
accountable. So they have to be
as wise as possible when making
these investments, and if we
give them a great opportunity to
not have to be compliant with
these very restrictive mandates,
then this could enhance that
package that we're giving that
company to indeed come to our
state and build in New Mexico,
Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm curious, do
you have an estimate what you
think that, uh, the cost would
be the economic impact we're
having, uh, with those reduced
wages for that 1st 5 years, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I, I have not a clue,
to be honest with you. I don't
want to uh just speak out of
nowhere. I haven't gotten like a
physical impact on an amendment,
which I would love when we adopt
it after we all vote yes or no
to table on this amendment, and
we adopt it, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, then that would be lumped
in the bill and we would see the
economic impact, but I would
definitely say from who I've
spoken to many businesses from
out of state who have been
looking at our state as
potential economic.
drivers, they've come to me and
I'm sure many other legislators
and said, well, if you put this
into statute, not only are we
not going to do business here,
but many other corporations and
companies that have put roots
down in New Mexico, they could
be liable to be leaving the
state because these, cause the
way that we're, I'm seeing it
when it comes to taxes, this is
kind of midstream, mid project.
You're now going to give me a
new mandate for something
that's, that's coming forward
for the state. So if they're
planning on it, they're, they're
in the planning stage. They
haven't actually ut
the, the IRB for example, and
they're wanting to come to the
state, they could actually pull
out before actually utilizing
those tax incentives and
building with brick and mortar
here in the state for somewhere
else because you usually those
are all included in the actual
final product. So I would say,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's, that's kind of the, the
background of why this would be
useful, and I would love to see
a financial impact study on how,
how this actually could affect
New Mexico versus other states,
Mr. Speaker, General lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I, I, I, uh, uh,
kindly, I respectfully disagree
with you that I think people
would pull out. In fact, if it
would have this, you know,
terrible impact that you see. I,
if anything, I'd keep my
application in there to make
sure that uh I keep it in as it
is right now, but I, I don't
actually see it being that great
but I see it actually
circulating more money into our
local communities, which is a
huge problem because what we
want to see, especially in our
rural areas is money that's $1
that I earn goes back into the
community again and again and
again. And that's what's really
unique about this prevailing
wage is that we're able to have
uh more money.
into these rural areas when new
businesses are coming in. We're
helping to ensure that the wages
that are prevailing in the area
are, are continuing. My concern
is that if we bring in a large
um uh out of state uh place that
may double the jobs in that area
or more. A lot of times they
have so many new employees that
come in from new places. Um, my
concern is that we'd
artificially be dropping it
because it, the, this project
that's funded, you know, through
bonds and everything else in the
state would would actually drop
the wages in that sense. So my
concern is if we don't actually
pass this, we are artificial.
keeping our wages low because of
public funds that are funding
underfunding wages in these
areas that need more, um, so I
mean with that actually, that's
not a question. I'll just kind
of leave it at that, but I
appreciate the amendment and I
just have serious concerns.
Thank you so much. There is
further debate the gentle lady
from Torrance and Berton Leo
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Well, my friend
from Otero still, will you
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my red-headed friend
from Torrance and.
Curly.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, you know, I was
thinking about the.
Economic impact.
Of not being competitive.
I'm thinking about the opposite
because we talked about the
economic impact.
Because what happens if we have
to raise costs and have less
workers, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Well, good question. I
would, I was actually going to
respond that to the general lady
from Santa Fe because there's so
many studies, Mr. Speaker,
General, that showed that
certain laws such as these that
Drive up the cost of wages
actually have negative results.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, for
example, the Congressional
Budget Office indicated that
while a higher wage would
elevate earnings for some
workers, it might also result in
job losses for others, uh, other
studies, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, say such as the economic
policy Institute suggests that
rigorous studies often show that
raising the minimum wage, it
actually does lead to
significant
Job losses. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would say that
the data that I'm looking at at
least shows a very negative
impact on actual workers. So,
sure, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we may have
Wages that are, let's say $40 to
$50 an hour for a a single job
that includes the benefits as
we, as we mentioned with the
prevailing wage, but there will
be fewer of those jobs actually
getting hired. So it would be a
net loss because those fewer
jobs do not equal. One job does
not equal another job if two
jobs are cut, one person's doing
3 jobs, that means, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that we're going to
have much lower wages.
All around because only one
person will have that job and so
people are going to be
scrambling. So that, that's one
of my concerns, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, with what's
happening with the current
legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that's one of the
first things I thought of
because if we're not
competitive, we're gonna see
more rising costs, less workers,
and we want to incentivize
people to relocate to New Mexico
and spend their money here and
work on projects, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
So as I go through this
document, it says prevailing
wage laws make the uh project
and competitive compared to
similar projects and then
there's a waiver for that. Who
would oversee that? Would that
be the economic department who's
overseeing that and what would
be the uh guardrails or what
would be the questions on that
to determine if they'd be
eligible or not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, so according to the.
The amendment, which is the way
we crafted it, so we have
multiple inputs on here. I'm
kind of getting a weird
feedback. I apologize. Maybe I
should move, move this way, Mr.
Speaker.
this way.
Got it. Perfect. Right in front
of the flowers. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it would be the
economic development department
in consultation with the
workforce Solutions department.
And so, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, those two entities are
already included in the current
legislation and the
Bill, so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that would just be
something considered alongside
the current changes to this
legislation, and I, I can find
you the FIR for the bill that
shows which entities are
included, but it would mostly be
those two, and they would just
be working in conjunction to
ensure that there would be
compliance with these new
carveouts, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, is
this something they do already
where they work together in
projects like this, it would be
a new project where they would
be working together.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So it's my understanding,
and please correct me if I'm
wrong. They, they work in
conjunction when it comes to
data and rule making for certain
kinds of tax incentives from my
understanding. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, give
me one moment please to find my,
my analysis here for this
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So while my, while my uh
document is loading, I believe,
Mr. Speaker, generally, that
they do and they do work in
conjunction on many projects and
so I don't think that they may
have asked in the FIR the
Let me find the department real
quick.
I believe workforce solutions,
they did give back some
analysis, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
But
Last night at like midnight when
I checked this, I apologize, I
download all the things in
advance so they don't change on
me. I don't believe I saw
something from EDD, however, Mr.
Speaker, I do know that in many
of these economic development
projects, there are hands from
all different kinds of
departments helping facilitate
these kinds of economic
development projects that could
be IRBs, that could be
instituting tax incentives that
we have such as TIS, uh, and so
there are so many different, uh,
tax.
incentives that we have in the
state that do utilize.
To uh different departments
collaborating in many different
ways, and so I would just say
yes to that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
So Mr. Speaker, I thank you for
answering that question and then
working together. So in your
last amendment which I'm, I'm
not addressing it, but I, is
there any other criteria other
than the entities relocating to
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Very good and a good
question. And so, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, as, as the
amendment says.
The criteria would be one, the
business is relocating to New
Mexico or constructing a
facility within the state. So
that's number one, they want to
come here, they want to build
here, they want to stay here, I
hope, for a very long time,
which is what we want, but I
believe this law would make that
a little difficult without this
amendment and then 2.
It would, they would have to
show.
The state that
It would be an uncompetitive
project or relocation compared
to similar projects in other
states.
Uh, and they may apply for that
waiver for the provisions of
this section and for the period
of not more than 5 years. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
there would be multiple
different facets of this
amendment to ensure that these
entities are getting a good, a
good rate, a good deal here in
our state. And when it comes to
making a good deal in the state,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
multi-pronged approach to show
that yes, there are other states
that have way better tax
incentives, which is why we see
states like Texas.
Exploding because they have
really good tax incentives and
then we see New Mexico, we're
kind of in an island where you
have some people who are coming
here. It may not be a lot, but a
lot of them are like Netflix,
for example, we have so many
film tax credits that go right
on top of those other tax
incentives like IRBs, TIS, and
other kind of.
Incentives that we have in our
tax structure. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would just say
when it comes to that, all of
them work together, but when it
comes to manufacturing, for
example, I don't know of many
tax incentives that.
can go other than an IRB and
then some of those zoning and
maybe maybe a tid if, if we
passed it here at the
legislature. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would just say
that it's, it's very
complicated, but this system
gives those businesses a few
avenues to ensure that they can
indeed utilize this if they are
indeed compliant and do show
probable cause that it would uh
would be very
Economically disadvantageous, if
that's a word, to come to New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I just have a few
more questions. So when you're
going through the uh the
criteria, it's not just
relocating, they have to show
economic necessity and job
creation. What would the
economic um necessity look like
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so economic
necessity, so Mr. Speaker, we're
talking about the, the ease of
going to those businesses or
those businesses going to state
like Texas, for example, and so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
would have to prove that on the
same scale as New Mexico, right?
That those same tax incentives
in other states.
We're pretty much the same.
And they would go to those
states in lieu of New Mexico
because of our prevailing wage
if this becomes a statute. So
when it comes to that portion,
it just mandates that they that
they provide clarity to the
departments who are working in
consultation to get that data,
see what Texas or whoever the
other state is, Oklahoma, Utah,
etc. and then they would just
have to do an apples to apples
comparison with New Mexico and
see if that indeed was the case,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So this is a very
interesting thing that we're
doing here in New Mexico. We're
basically taking the federal
Davis Bacon that works with the
federal jobs, but we're taking
it, the local government owns
the project temporarily, but
we're doing it with
non-government projects and
that's where this becomes a
little bit different and I
understand your amendment, what
you're trying to do is say, OK,
if you're coming from out of
state, we want to make this
competitive, we want people to
come here, um, we want, uh, them
to.
prove, you know, show the
necessity that they're eligible
for this. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I applaud all your
amendments, um, and that's all
the questions I have. Thank you.
There is I think from Donana and
Otero representative Silva on
the amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you, uh, does a gentleman from
Otero yield. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I gladly yield to my
friend, my neighbor actually
from Don Anna and Otero.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I have a few
questions, uh, does the business
entity need to demonstrate
compliance before or after
relocating to New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Laing, so the word, the wording
of the amendment is, is
relocating, so is in the process
of relocating. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the way I try to,
to frame it was they're in the
process of getting, getting
documents ready, getting plans
ready, and they have an
intention to come to New Mexico.
However, if there are better tax
incentives in other states, then
they could pull those plans and
move to another state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and what sources
would they use for providing
proof that the project would
become uncompetitive compared to
other states.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Well, first of all, it
would be the, the other states
statutes and regulations when it
comes to prevailing wage. So
number one, that state would not
have the wage, and the number 2,
Mr. Speaker, they would have to
demonstrate.
That they
That it would be uncompetitive
compared to similar projects in
other states. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it would have to
look at similar projects that
they're looking to build and
see, OK, how are these doing in
states such as, and I keep on
picking on Texas, maybe I should
choose Oklahoma now, but they
would be looking at those
states, seeing what those
projects are, are looking like
in other places that do not have
a prevailing wage and so would
work in conjunction to see, OK,
let's be more competitive in New
Mexico with this carve out
versus somewhere such as Utah or
Mississippi or
Kansas or some other state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and what if there
aren't.
Projects that are comparable so
like our spaceport, there aren't
spaceports in Oklahoma, Kansas,
Mississippi, all the other
states you mentioned. So what
would happen in that case? Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's a very good
question. So in the case where
there's not a project that's
comparable, they wouldn't be
included in this carve out. So I
know that California, they do
have some space exploration in
California. I know that Florida
has some private space
exploration in Florida, so I'm
not.
exactly sure what those states'
taxes, they look like, I don't
know if they have a prevailing
wage, but Mr. Speaker,
generally, I actually do think
that California might have some
prevailing wage and that might
actually be a reason why the
spaceport came to New Mexico
because it doesn't have one and
I, I don't want to speculate on
that, but I would just say if
there's no comparable project,
then they likely would not be
any cause for utilizing this
carveout in that exemption, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so that
means that some industries would
probably not come here because
they're, they would be.
from this process if there
wasn't a comparable um business
that they could compare to in
other states.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I, I guess it would be
if it was a very niche project
like space exploration like we
talked about. However, we've,
we've established that other
states do have it, and I think
in Texas there also is some
space exploration. So I would
say that it would be unlikely
unless it was something that was
very, uh, a new, new.
Kind of project, but I know that
if they did have
Firms such as venture capital
firms, people backing them, they
usually have a pretty good
chance of finding those kind of
similar projects cause in, in
different spaces like
technology, for example, there
are different apps that have
built, built, uh.
Different kinds of facilities in
certain states that could be
comparable, may not be super
apples to apples, but I think it
would be intending for the
departments to work together to
try to at least get some kind of
comparable uh thing to look at
when it comes to going apples to
apples, finding what works in
other states, what works in our
state, and then saying, OK,
maybe, maybe this could work in
New Mexico by utilizing this for
5 years, not forever, to give
them that hand up to help them
get into New Mexico, build in
New Mexico
go and employ New Mexicans for
jobs, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and what number of
businesses do you think would
leave New Mexico in order to
qualify for this exemption and
then attempt to come back. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I'm not entirely sure how
many might leave and then come
back because that does sound
very expensive in my opinion,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
when it comes to businesses that
are already here, they could
potentially not consider ever
coming back because if I was a
businessman and I was coming to
New Mexico with a very large
multi-billion dollar corporation
and then
And I was planning on coming to
New Mexico. This was put on us
now.
With this new prevailing wage
law, then I might say, OK, no,
no way, I'm not gonna do that.
But for example, places like
Amazon and Intel, who are
already here according to the
gentleman who we, who heard from
earlier with the sponsor, it's
grandfathered in for current
projects that have already come
here and utilize the IRB. So
Amazon and Intel will be
excluded from this legislation,
so I don't think anyone would be
leaving the state.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. So I wanna come
back to one of your previous
comments so that there would
that there are a lot of smaller
New Mexico businesses that are
exempted that could be exempt
from IRB because of uh this
amendment and others you've
proposed and um and so I'm
wondering then how much, how
many of those businesses might
leave the painters, the
drywallers, electrician,
electrical companies that could.
Um, leave their business, you
know, their business status here
in New Mexico, make it in Texas
and then come back where they
don't have a physical office
space. Thank you, Speaker. Thank
you, uh, gentlemen.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's an
interesting question. So I, I
don't want to talk about the
previous amendment because it
died a very sad and fast death,
but Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, the current amendment, I
don't believe it would have any
kind of
Oversight on smaller businesses
because I don't know if a
smaller, really small tiny
business would be using an IRB
if they were utilizing IRB, I
believe that could potentially
fall into it and so I believe
that those small businesses that
we're talking about could indeed
be included if they were enough.
They, they did have what, $4
million to
To utilize whatever project they
were building, if they did get
that capital 4 million maybe
borrowed or whatever, they could
potentially, but if that's
currently in midstream right
now, if that's being built, then
that would already be here, that
would be grandfathered in if
they're looking to build, they
could potentially move to Texas.
Actually, this, this includes
both out of state and in-state,
so I believe it wouldn't really
matter.
Mr. Speaker, General lady,
sorry, I was thinking while I
was answering your question, but
I hope that helped.
A little bit. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and um I'm
wondering, I wanna talk about
the workers now that are
included so those workers who um
are employed by businesses who
would qualify for this
exemption, uh, and that also
would qualify for an IRB, um, I
would love to know first what
percentage of New Mexicans, um,
are enrolled in government
supported programs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I don't have a specific
figure for you, but I can tell
you about half the state, they
are on Medicaid, which is the
government sponsored program, so
I would say probably about half
the state, I don't know how much
of that half are excluding kids
who are not of working age or
excluding people, people who are
retired who are not working, so
I would venture to guess maybe,
and I hate to, to guess on the
floor, Mr. Speaker, but I would
say maybe no more than 30%.
Uh, general, uh, speaker, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, about 40%
of New Mexicans are on Medicaid
and about 20% are on SNAP. Do
you know how many of those, uh,
New Mexicans who are enrolled in
Medicaid or SNAP are also
laborers who would work in these
um with these construction
companies would be uh under IRB
requests and uh IRB projects. So
how many would be plumbers,
electricians, painters, dry.
concrete workers, carpenters.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. General
Lee, that's a, that's an
interesting question. I don't
have a specific figure for you,
but I could look at the FIR to
see if maybe it talks about
those individuals, but I, if you
have an answer for me, I would
love to hear it, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I don't have that
number and, and yet what I am
hearing though from this
amendment is that um the um the
use the sponsor of the amendment
and others are willing to let
New Mexicans stay on government
um supported funded programs uh
in order to, um, oh I don't know
what the intent is, but that,
you know, you're willing to uh
let workers stay on these uh
these government.
funded support programs, is that
correct Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't, I don't really understand
the question. So for, for me,
for example,
This legislation is to just
bring people to the state or
this amendment rather, pardon
me, is to bring more people to
the state to, to build their
business and utilize these tax
incentives with IRBs and then
higher.
And usually, Mr. Speaker, these
larger companies that bring
these good paying jobs are
really an economic driver when
it comes to what we've seen with
places like Amazon. I was just
driving past their, their
warehouse the other day in, in,
uh, I think it's Valencia
County. Beautiful warehouse. You
could see the jobs that were
being created there. It's a
tangible benefit. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to making sure that we
have more jobs in our
communities, I would rather have
more jobs by utilizing these tax
incentives in this.
in his amendment to build more
jobs to not be forced to be
constricted to this, this, uh,
prevailing wage.
Mandate
Verses having fewer jobs that
are in New Mexico and fewer jobs
to be promoting.
These companies because if they,
if they only hire one person
versus 3, there are 2 people who
are left in the cold, and those
people could be utilizing those
services, the social services,
because they're forced to
because they cannot find
employment in their community,
so it's, it's actually the
opposite effect, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen and how many
construction workers, laborers,
electricians, painters,
drywallers, carpenters have left
the industry in order to make
more money for themselves and
their families because their
lacks a prevailing wage. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it's all
very speculative. I, I do not
know a figure on that, but I
would say that a single tax
structure or incentive like the
prevailing wage, I have seen
studies.
from, like I said in those
states as New York and Ohio,
where it's actually had a
negative effect by increasing
the cost of projects, and that
trickles down to the bottom line
of those companies. So if the
company has less money to to.
Make because these prevailing
wage laws have been.
Implemented in the state.
Then they would be forced to cut
somewhere, and that could mean
jobs for low wage workers that
could mean other kinds of cuts
to ancillary jobs. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think it
could have a detrimental impact
by not putting forward this
amendment to help alleviate some
of that tax burden for some of
these companies that are indeed
trying to build in New Mexico,
trying to put, put roots in
Mexico to hire New Mexicans, and
I think fewer New Mexicans would
be available or
Yeah, they would be available to
have those jobs because they
would have to either move to
somewhere where the cost of
living was lower, or they would
have to be utilizing these
government benefits which we
all, I hope, agree, do not, are
not good things because we don't
want people to have to live off
the government as a job. I don't
think that that's something that
anybody wants. We want people to
be autonomous and successful in
our state, and I think this is
just one carve out to help do
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, finally, do you
No, well, first, I want to back
up. So,
I think that there are many
people that have, um, left their
construction jobs and uh other
jobs related to construction,
especially to the cannabis
industry, especially on the New
Mexico Texas state line, um, we,
I talked to so many constituents
in Otero County who have said,
you know what? I love my craft.
I love being a construction
worker. I love being a
carpenter, but it doesn't pay
enough. So now I'm working at a
cannabis store, and it's paying
enough and I can feed.
my family and I can pay for
health care and that's the kind
of dynamic that I wanted to
interrupt in uh in House
District 53 and I'm sure you
would too in Otero County and
so, um, you know, my other
question is how many uh laborers
do you think we've lost to the
cannabis industry and other
industries that do pay uh a
prevailing wage or higher. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you for the
question. So very interesting,
uh, so last time I was in Alamo.
Gordo, which was January.
Um, 19th, I think, and I was
driving down the road and it
seems like there are new
cannabis shops popping up
everywhere. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I actually have friends
who have utilized these places
of business and they tell me
that they usually pay about 1213
bucks an hour, Mr. Speaker, on
the on, on, on the higher end,
Mr. Speaker, I think a couple
months ago I saw that Dutch
brothers on White Sands
Boulevard in Almogordo was
paying about $17 an hour.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when we're talking about these
low paying jobs or the minimum
wage jobs. So these are higher
than minimum wage. They, a lot
of the time don't include
benefits because a lot of the
time these businesses are only
hiring for part time, which is
under 30 hours. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when we're talking
about a prevailing wage, I think
that the lack of a prevailing
wage actually benefits the
market because it also locks in
those benefits either on the
front end with a higher wage,
like $40 an hour versus 30.
10 bucks for benefits, so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
wouldn't venture to try to guess
how many laborers are highly
skilled workers have chosen to
work at those businesses, but I
will say that it it indeed
indicates to me that those
businesses continue to stay
open, although many of those
cannabis shops have also closed
because there's just such fierce
competition in the marketplace.
So when it comes to that kind
of, of uh
Study. I've only done my own
kind of a really just driving
around Alamogordo's study to see
what's happening, but I would
say that we are also really
looking for these highly skilled
workers in places like plumbing
where nowadays a plumber is
making a really good wage. The
other day I had my heater
checked, Mr. Speaker, and it was
like 125 bucks just to check it
after, you know, when you change
from season to season. So I
would say that those high paying
jobs are still there.
And we're still looking for
those workers, Mr. Speaker,
General lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I would disagree,
um, that, and I think the
legislative finance committee
would disagree with your
assertion that um giving uh
businesses, these sorts of
exemptions are the things that,
uh, create, uh, uh.
beneficial and bountiful
economic uh environment in New
Mexico. Do you know what the
three concerns are that anchor
all budget recommendations and
policy recommendations from the
LFC.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I do not sit on LFC
nor do I pretend to please
enlighten me. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
The three concerns are boosting
per capita income, health care
access and quality of life and
so when we talk about prevailing
wages and creating good benefits
and, and policies that help
anchor businesses and giving
workers benefits, these are the
concerns that anchor all of our
decision making in budget and.
policy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen, I yield.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
San Juan, representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Otero yield.
Mr. Speaker, I'd gladly yield to
my friend from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
You know, I think this is a a
fairly good uh amendment you
have here. I too want to keep as
many mom and pop shops open as
possible. I'm gonna come at this
from a different angle and and
just be very brief about this,
Mr. Speaker, as a person who sat
on accounting commission for 8
years and as a mayor for 10
years, I can tell you the person
that's gonna get the short end
of the stick on this is going to
be the municipality of the
county when that project goes
over and it's more than what
they thought it was gonna be,
we're the ones that have to
negotiate and
I will, I will tell you right
now those negotiations are
brutal.
But we are the ones that the
municipality or the small um uh
county is going to be the ones
that take it in the shorts in
the end.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle.
Gentlemen from Otero yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from
Bernalillo County.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
kind gentlemen, I just have a
couple of practical questions.
Um, I understand that some
companies actually already use
prevailing wage.
Contractors on the RRB financed
projects even though they're not
required to.
Uh, do you have any statistics
on like what percentage do
already do the prevailing wages
and benefits.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So from my research, I've
seen just certain companies
doing this. I, I don't know
specifically how many are
already following that, that
Davis Bacon act on the private
sector, Mr. Speaker, general
lady, I know that.
They do collect some of that on
the federal level and I, I might
be able to find you some of that
data, but private entities, I, I
don't have a figure for you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
uh.
Mr. E, kind gentleman, use
different titles, Kind gentleman
from Otero. I think it'd be
helpful to know how many
entities we're talking about. My
next question is.
And some of our neighboring
states like Arizona and Colorado
where they have prevailing
wages. Is it one prevailing wage
across the state in each trade
or is it does it vary by
counties?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is a really good
question from what I've seen, I
think in California and I
believe.
New York.
That study I was looking at
earlier, I think it was a
statewide, so I think that was
comparable to New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and kind
gentlemen, because I know in New
Mexico certain trades vary by
county, um, I looked up
bricklayer block layer
stonemasons, uh, the the base
rate is 2310.
If you're in Curry debaco Quinn
Roosevelt, but it's 2956 in Dona
Ana Otero, uh, Eddie and Lee, so
I'm concerned, Mr. Speaker and
Representative.
If companies start looking, uh,
Things vary by counties in New
Mexico. They may vary by
counties and other states. So I,
I don't like apples to oranges
because I get confused by fruit,
so I think of it as apples to
pecans. It's really hard to
compare, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, how do you deal
with that?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and like I, I
totally agree with you. I
totally agree with you. I do not
like to.
Go with Apple versus pecans.
It's versus pistachios because I
was gonna say we have the
largest pistachio nut in my
district. So we're gonna win
every single day when we're
comparing it. But Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I do think when it
comes to this data.
There are different factors we
need to look at, such as Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've
found data uh from the federal.
Uh, small business
administration, for example,
they collect data on statewide
level and I think it's on
countywide level, so there would
be ability to find that kind of
comparable wage on the local
level. I don't know when it
comes to granular effects such
as a county that has multiple
larger cities in it.
I think maybe Valencia County
could potentially be one that we
could look at such, I think the
real real communities they have
less lunes, I think Bolin is
close by, so they have multiple
different cities that could also
be microeconomic factors that we
need to look at, but I think
that when it comes to that, that
overview from the different
counties, municipalities, I
think that's all gonna be looked
at when we apply for the
exemption in this new, newly
created carve out in this
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Representative, I think my
other, another concern is the
economic development department
and consultation with this is on
the amendment.
And consultation with the
workforce solution department
shall establish criteria for
granting waivers requirements
for demonstrating economic
necessity and job creation
potential, but Mr. Speaker and
Representative, who decides on
the actual wage.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So.
Can I, I, I'm understanding when
it comes to the, the local data,
right? When it comes to the
actual wage, I think Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, since
we're doing it on a statewide
level on this bill, it would be
statewide for whatever job
category, it would not be
localized. I think that we would
probably be basing it upon that
wage because we do want to do
apples to apples comparisons.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen.
Currently, counties have
different.
Prevailing wages.
For like I already gave the
example.
So I don't see how you could do
that, but my real question that
I'm asking, Mr. Speaker and
Representative is who
decides the wage if a cement
masons base rate, and I'm taking
this from the January 1st, 2025
rates of the cement mason's base
rate is $20.52
and the fringe rate is 761.
And
You now have economic necessity
requirements.
Who's gonna decide what that
wage is, who determines the wage
in this spill according to the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so with your example, I
think you said 2052 plus 751 for
For the the benefits, right? So
a total of 2803 in that county,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
would be my understanding from
the amendment, the way it's
crafted that.
Right now with the bill it's
looking on the statewide level.
So when we're trying to compare
apples to apples, and we have an
exemption here, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we would look at
whatever that wage would be in
that entity that we are
potentially moving to because
there is this prevailing wage
statute in New Mexico so we
would be looking at whatever
that wage could be on a project
that's similar like it says
here.
In compliance with prevailing
wage laws that would project
uncompetitive compared to
similar projects, we would look
at other projects in other
states, and that would be the
wages that we would look to set
that.
Thank you
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
I don't see the who would make
the final decision.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so the final decision
would be based upon the economic
factors in the community, so.
Like you, like you stated in
that certain county, if that's
the wage, 2803 if that is
whatever the wage is, it could
be something comparable to that.
It could be something even
higher to that, but we, we, we
have no idea of knowing because
it's just also speculative at
this point, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So Mr. Speaker and
representative, the new wage
determined could actually be
higher than the prevailing wage
currently.
In statute
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
could, so when we're coming at
an entire project.
Right? There are so many
different kinds of workers that
we're including in the project,
so I, you could say some people
could be making more money. Some
people could be making the same
amount of money, it would all
depend on whatever that work
class was. So if there's a high
demand in that industry for a
certain
Let's just say a bricklayer,
then that bricklayer who's in
high demand would be making a
higher wage because of the
economic benefit of getting that
person and enticing them to work
on this project, so there could
be something that's in less
demand that requires fewer
workers, and that worker could,
could be a more uh flat wage as
opposed to other projects in the
same community. So I guess I
would say it would depend upon
whatever that individual wage
would be for that individual
job, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, I just have one
more question. Unfortunately for
you I'm an English teacher and
editor.
And so when I look at Ky.
It says a business entity that
is relocating to New Mexico or
constructing a facility within
the state and that can
demonstrate that compliance with
prevailing wage laws would make
the project uncompetitive.
Uh, compared to similar projects
may apply for a waiver.
So, you could also read that
that the business entity is
actually already constructing a
facility, so I felt that
language was very ambiguous. It
implied that a company already
doing a project would have the
right, uh, to change the
prevailing wage, uh, so I felt
that's a problem with the actual
way cha has constructed, it's
just.
ambiguous.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so the way that I'm
reading it, and I'm, I apologize
if it's different than you. It
says a business entity that is
relocating, so it doesn't mean
they have to technically be
here, but Mr. Speaker, General
lady, as we established with the
gentlemen from all those
counties earlier if you already
currently have utilized the IRB
and are building right now, it
would grandfather that project
and, and this would not apply to
it. So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it would have the same effect.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Representative, I, I still think
it's ambiguous, but with that,
uh, thank you very much and I, I
yield back to you, kind
gentleman from Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, this matter having
been under consideration for 3
hours, I moved to close debate
debate. All those in favor
signify by saying a.
All those opposing 8.
The A's have it. Debate is now
closed, gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
house floor amendment 2 to House
Bill 6.
Understood. All right, we are on
a motion to table House floor
amendment number 2 to House Bill
6. It would have, yes, and the
amendment is tabled a vote of
no, and we're back in the
amendment.
There is a 32nd vote clock, so
if you can hear me, you better
start walking and making your
way over to the chambers.
The vote
is now open.
Well, it's about to close. The
vote is not closed by a vote of
41 in the affirmative, 26 in the
negative house floor amendment
number 2 to House Bill 6 has
been tabled.
Let's go now to the gentleman
from
San Miguel Colfax Mota Ria Riva
Taos, Representative Sanchez to
close. Mr. Speaker, I move the
House Bill 6 do not pass.
We final passage of House Bill
6. The vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 41 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. House Bill 6 has
duly passed this House, gentle
lady from Bern Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go to
the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business. is ordered.
Announcements, committee
meetings, gentle lady from Santa
Fe and all those other counties
Supercept Chandler, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Your house
Judiciary Committee will start
at about 6 o'clock, um, we have
arranged to have dinner brought
in, so be ready for a full
meeting members and Mr. Speaker.
Members take note, other
announcements, gentle lady from
Santa Fe Serrato. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your rural development
land grants and cultural affairs
Committee is meeting tomorrow
morning at 9 a.m. and I believe
we have 5 bills. Thank you.
Members take note,
announcements, gentlemen from
Donana Mr. Speaker, your House
appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 6 p.m. in
room 307. We will also have
dinner.
Members take note, other
announcements, gentle lady from
Taos work this. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your house agricultural
se and water resources committee
will be meeting tomorrow morning
at 8:30.
And we will not have dinner.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
House Commerce will be meeting
in 15 minutes and we will not
have dinner.
Members take note. Tough crowd.
Any other announcements?
Gentlemen from San Juan with the
joke of the day.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Did you
hear about the uh cheese factory
that blew up in France.
I did not.
Nothing left but debris.
That was pretty good.
And I would have you all know
that he actually checks with me
ahead of time to make sure that
we're not breaking any rules, so
I appreciate that, sir. Good
work. Any other announcements?
lady from Berlin.
Mr. Speaker, I move the House
stand in recess until 10:30
tomorrow morning.
The House of Sen in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
