um
regarding our last bill from
Tuesday, um, House Bill 462, and
that was on uh increasing the um
notice for period of nonpayment
of rent.
And
Madam chair, I believe I've
moved a due pass on that before
we concluded subsequent motion
to table.
OK, well, uh, take a.
Take the boat on the motion to
table.
Representative blog.
Representative Lord,
Representative Romero.
Not a table, Representative
Thompson.
Madam Vice Chair.
to table and I'm sure no to
table.
We'll go back to the um.
Motion
For do pass. Do I have a second?
OK, in a second.
Representative Thompson, if you
take Grove, please.
Representative Locke. No, ma'am.
Representative Lord, no.
Representative Ramiro
Representative Thompson, Adam
vice chair. Yes, Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Shirley.
On the boat of 42, there is a
due pass.
For um house bill 462.
OK.
Next we'll go to um
a representative Senate Cortez.
and block for house bill 274
trafficking fentanyl is a
first-degree felony.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Good evening. My name is Elaine
Senna-Cortez and I represent the
beautiful people of House
District 62. My experts here
today are the Lee County Drug
Task Force Commander Ibarra and
Deputy commander Rayna, Rachel
Gugel is our general counsel for
our caucus. Before you is House
Bill 274 in simple terms, this
bill seeks
Life in prison for fentanyl
traffickers. After my
introductory remarks, Commander
Ubada will share his testimony
and statistics on fentanyl
overdoses. I hope that we can
all agree on 3 fundamental
premises. Number one, drug
addicts in so many respects, are
victims. #2, the people that
perpetrate the victimization of
drug addicts are the very people
that profit from their
addiction, and those are the
traffickers. Number 3, with that
understanding
we know trafficking is not a
victimless crime.
The overarching theme of this
bill is discretion, namely
prosecutorial discretion.
with the dynamic nature of
fentanyl trafficking a one size
fits all approach will not work.
Let's give prosecutors the tool
to seek the highest penalty
possible where the facts of the
case warranted.
So here's what the bill does. It
increases the maximum penalty
for trafficking fentanyl from 9
years, which is current, to 30
years, which is proposed. Here's
what the bill does not do.
It doesn't change the way
trafficking is investigated,
charge, or presented to a jury.
It is a sentencing change only.
It does not deprive a defendant
of any constitutional rights
guaranteed by the 2nd Amendment
or Article 2 Section 14 of the
New Mexico Constitution.
Currently, trafficking as a
second degree felony, which is 9
years in prison maximum.
2nd or subsequent offenses,
trafficking is a first-degree
felony, which is 18 years in
prison maximum.
So this is what we've learned.
Our current penalties have not
served as a deterrent to
trafficking activity here in New
Mexico.
With the application of good
time credit and pre-sentence
confinement credit, it's not
unusual for a convicted
trafficker to be out of prison
in less than 5 years.
Fentanyl is uniquely lethal as
Commanderbata will explain. The
Sentinel trade is a supply and
demand trade in New Mexicans are
being targeted by the Mexican
drug cartels and the Chinese
manufacturers and that's what
Sam Brigman's report said in, in
the OCC in December.
So our goal with this bill is to
deter fentanyl trafficking in
New Mexico, period.
As a byproduct, we believe this
bill will encourage low-level
traffickers to cooperate with
state and federal law
enforcement to give up their
suppliers. 9 years, um, serving
a good time at about 5 years has
proven not to be incentive
enough to cooperate, but life in
prison definitely would be.
As a final thought, some may
argue life in prison is too
harsh for a for a sentence. But
I respond for anyone that has
ever lost a loved one to a
fentanyl overdose, life in
prison. It's not a harsh enough
sentence.
And no one is required to
traffic fentanyl. Therefore, if
you don't want to spend your
life in prison, don't traffic
fentanyl in New Mexico.
If we want to get serious about
any fentanyl trafficking in New
Mexico. Why would we play games
with anything less.
And I'll close with this before
I hand it over to my expert.
Our state is in a crisis, a
crisis unlike any other. New
Mexico has one of the highest
fentanyl fatality rates and is
involved in 65% of overdose
overdose deaths, and there's no
question about it.
Fentanyl has a grip on our
state.
It's killing sons and daughters
and fathers and mothers. It's
killing family members, friends,
killing neighbors, all the while
drug traffickers profit off
their desks.
Off their deaths.
House Bill 8 was a start, but
let's hold traffickers
accountable. And I believe that
this bill does exactly that.
I'd like to turn it over to my
expert commandery but.
Good evening. Sure, uh, Madam
Chair and committee members.
Thank you for having us today.
First I wanna
break down the,
what is,
I'm pretty sure you guys hear
about uh Fenloft in here. Um, of
course, comes from China.
Makes its way to Mexico, um,
after Mexico, cartels then pass
it to United States. Uh, most of
the time they process us through
Arizona.
And then goes to New Mexico
after that.
Um
It's an opioid drug.
It's a depressing.
And it's a very dangerous drug
as of right now.
Uh, for 20245, 5 out of 10 pills
have a daily dose of about 2 mg.
I have a pamphlet a pass, um,
with some pictures.
Um
Have every winner,
uh, go to picture uh to page
number 17.
Um
And this
Make sure I have
Uh, case where we didn't in the
county.
And, um, as you could see in
that.
And that picture, there's
A lot of phenyl pills.
And there's a lot of guns.
Um, in most of our cases, about
70 to 80% of our cases that we
get in the county.
Are you gonna have firearms, and
they're gonna have
100 finals, uh, attached to
those cases.
Um
In 2023.
We got approximately 80,000
pills.
We have a community of about
100,000 people.
That's almost a pill for each
person.
That's the, that's the, that's
the amount that we actually
seized. We generally imagine the
amounts that actually passed
through.
Um
In 2024.
We got about 74,000.
78,000.
And um
The rates
with the overdoses, as we have
more drugs being seized.
More drugs are coming in.
More overdoses are correlated
with those.
And um
Deputy commander, uh, arena
would, would, uh, explain more
on that here shortly.
Um
Madam Chair and uh
representatives, um, so for the
overdoses in the state of New
Mexico, um, in Lee County, in
our county where we're, we're
from, um, we had approximately
or we had 21 fit off, uh, or
correction 21 fatal overdoses,
um, within our, our county, um,
out of those 21, 6 of those
were, uh, related to fentanyl
and the state of New Mexico, we
had 744 betal overdoses out of
those 7443.
191 were fentanyl-related. Um,
so that's more than half the
overdoses, um,
That we had in the state of New
Mexico were related to fentanyl,
um, if you can look at page 14
and 15, you can see a chart, uh,
this chart will, will show um
over the years from uh 20.
I believe it's 2020 or 2018 to
2023, you can see the spike and
overdose deaths of fentanyl, um.
And in 22, 23, we're looking at
600 overdose deaths of fentanyl
in interstate, um, and the, uh,
chart on page 15, you'll see
that the seizures are fitanyl
are pretty uh similar, these,
these charts are almost uh
identical if you're looking at
the amount of fentanyl overdoses
that we're seeing, um, within
our state and the number of uh
seizures of fitanyl in our
state. Um, so that
that goes hand in hand where
we're seeing more fentanyl, but
we're also seeing, seeing a lot
more overdoses related to
fentanyl.
Um, another thing that, um, with
the, the, the data that we show
for overdoses, um, I think a big
part of what
We, we miss out on is the
victimization of individuals,
um,
And the, the victimization side
of that is these traffickers,
um, they, they prey on
individuals that um are users
and when they do that, um,
They put those individuals in a
position to where um a lot of
times they, they are not able to
make good decisions, um, because
all they, all they can think
about is their, their next,
their next high. Um, there was a
case that, that we worked in New
Mexico or in in Lee County, um,
if you would look at page 18.
In that photo, um, there's
approximately 6000 fentanyl
pills in that photo with two
firearms. Um,
The individuals involved with
that case, it was a male that
was in his mid-thirties and a
female that was in her late
teens, early twenties at the
time. Um, they were in a
relationship, um, this team, um,
she had a promising future. Uh,
she was a basketball athlete,
um, in high school, and she
actually got a scholarship to go
play college basketball, um, and
she started attending college.
She met this, uh, this
individual, um, and prior to her
meeting him, the only drug that
she had tried, um, in her life
was, was marijuana. Um, after
she met him, he introduced her
to Fentanyl.
Um, from that point forward, he
was a, a trap, he was
trafficking fentanyl. He was
providing this, this female with
uh any amount of fentanyl pills
that she wanted. Um, so she
started out, of course, with 1
pill, 2 pills, um, to the point
where we ended up um coming in
contact with her and she was at
15 to 20 pills um a day.
Um
At the time of this incident,
we, we arrested the, the male
individual for trafficking, um,
and we didn't know at that time
that she was also involved
until, um, shortly after, once
we got information that she was
possibly involved as well. Um,
we learned that, um, his cell
phone was given to her from a
family member, and he was
instructing her on where to go
pick up uh fentanyl, um, where
to take it, where to go collect
money from individuals, um.
He had a friend provide her with
a firearm so that way she could
protect herself if she's going
to um go collect in under his
name, um, and then we made
contact with her again and we
recovered 8000 fentanyl pills at
that time with that firearm. Uh,
we didn't know at the time, um,
exactly what was going on, um,
in their relationship, um, so we
got to actually interview her
and talk to her, and that's when
she broke down and said that um
based on the amount of
all he was forgiving her, um,
all she, she, she just stayed
high the whole time that she was
with them. Um, so these
traffickers are preying on
these, these young individuals
and anybody that is um addicted
to fentanyl, these traffers are
are targeting those individuals
because they know that they're,
they're liable, um, they,
they're able to, to
You know, talk to them and tell
them whatever they need to um to
get them to come back. And
that's how addictive these,
these pills are. Um, and it's
bringing these, uh, you know,
the there's crane on, on victims
throughout our community. Um, in
a, in a separate incident, we,
we also did a report where um we
picked up an individual
trafficking fentanyl, um, and we
see this phone, um, going
through a search warrant, we
observed text messages that he
was texting um other male
individuals and
those text messages, he flat out
says that um females will do
anything for fentanyl pills,
including sleep, sleep with them
if they can't pay. Um, so these
individuals are actually
targeting females, um, to have
them come sleep with them and
they're paying them off with
fentanyl pills because they know
how addictive these pills are.
Yes.
OK, thank you. OK. If you can.
Um
Keep your comments to the bill
and
why increasing the penalties.
is important.
Yes manager.
The phenol pills, um, like, uh,
deputy commander Rena said, um,
it's they're highly addictive.
It's hardly addictive pills, um,
are used as a tool to victimize
um
Users
So we have that cases where and
and interviews where they tell
us that um the users are
Being beaten, they've been
raped.
Because they can't pay their
debt or the fentanyl pills they
got given.
A lot of these, uh, in a lot of
these cases, these um users.
They, they, they live um for
that pill.
They use 10 to 20 pills a day.
And each pill was approximately
$10.10 dollars a pill.
They can't afford that.
Sometimes the, uh, they have to
win.
get a, do I have to go steal
stuff. They have to go, uh,
steal stuff from their family.
But that's not the, the hardest,
the hardest part, the harsh part
is when you have the females
basically trafficking themselves
for this pill.
And for that reason is why we
want to hold um traffickers
accountable, and with that,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee will stand for
questions.
OK, thank you. Um, first we'll
go to the audience. Is there
anyone here in support.
on
Online
OK.
And Montoya.
Madam Chair, committee members,
good evening, Marcus Montoya
here. A judicial district
attorney and president of the
New Mexico District Attorneys
Association, thank you all for
another long and late night of
work, um, appreciate your uh
diligence during the session.
I'd like to applaud the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward
to try to address, um, what I
think hasn't been touched on yet
is the um alarming.
What.
Rate of overdose, uh, associated
with trafficking of fentanyl
specifically, fentanyl is uh not
a threshold drug. This is not a
drug that, um, let's say you mix
with cutting agents, as most
street level drugs are, um,
where if you pump out 100 pills,
mixed with cocaine or meth or um
Something like that, uh heroin
that 100 pills would be equally,
uh, have an equal uh lethal
dosage, uh, fentanyl doesn't do
that. It doesn't doesn't
distribute equally and so, um,
most of most of the pills are
worthless, filled with mostly
cutting agents, some pills will
have some sort of a high rated
fentanyl, but then the rest are
guaranteed to kill, um, and
sometimes they kill unwitting
users and so those who deal in
this industry know this and they
um are.
It's kind of a Russian roulette
of dealing, and so uh I think
that's why it's important for uh
the enhanced penalties for the
specific uh dealing of fentanyl
and so I like to apply again the
sponsors and the experts and all
of you, so I do stand in support
of this. Thank you. OK, we'll go
to the audience and is there
anyone in opposition?
How would you like to speak?
OK. We'll go to Zoom.
Courtney Montoya.
Hello, Courtney Montoya, ACLU of
New Mexico. The ACLU is in
strong opposition of HB 274.
Well, the concern for
communities impacted by fentanyl
is appreciated. Life sentences
fuel mass incarceration, and New
Mexico's incarceration rates
stand out internationally,
imposing life sentences will
strain pressure points within
our local carceral system. The
reliance on warehousing people
diminishes us all. Nearly
200,000 people nationwide are
serving.
sentences with a
disproportionate impact on
people of color. Life
imprisonment is ineffective at
deterring crime and diverts
public resources for more
effective crime prevention
policies. People are more likely
to seek treatment if they don't
fear arrest and prosecution and
when treatment programs are
adequately financed and
accessible. Our communities
deserve evidence-based solutions
that address root causes while
keeping families together. HB
274 doesn't.
achieve that. Thank you.
Diane the cash.
Good evening, chair and
committee. My name is Diane
McCash and I'm in strong
opposition to HB 274. As the
mother of a son who battled a
fulminating addiction for a lot
of years. I urge you to reject
this measure that could lead to
a life sentence for someone in
the throes of a medical tragedy
that is addiction. Fentanyl is
arguably, arguably a very
dangerous drug that is harming
our people. It is extremely
addictive, which contributes to
this terrible public health
crisis. Criminalizing people and
incarcerating
people for life, for this
devastating medical condition is
beyond the pale. People with
substance use disorder may hoard
the substance for their own use,
and yes, sometimes share or sell
part of their stash for
desperately needed cash or to
help someone else similarly
addicted who's also desperate
for the drug to ease their own
pain. I know this because my son
lived it. Let's not criminalize
the medical condition that is
addiction and this arcane
ineffective way. People
suffering with substance use
disorder should not be set up.
To be caught in the broad net
that this bill casts. Thank you.
I urge you no.
Rey Lee Chavez.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Rickie
Lee Chavez, on behalf of the Law
Office of the Public Defender,
the Office of the Public
Defender is also in opposition
to this bill. We appreciate the
work of the sponsors and the
members of this body to address
fentanyl in our communities.
However, we do oppose for the
reasons stated um by other
speakers and also because this
body did address um fentanyl
trafficking, penalty
enhancements in House Bill 8,
also the, um,
Sentence uh a life sentence is
usually reserved for um murder
and the most heinous crimes
against children in our criminal
code, and we believe it's
inappropriate to apply to apply
it in this circumstance. Thank
you for your consideration.
OK, thank you. Um, we'll go to,
did you want to say anything
else?
Yes, ma'am, if I may, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, many people have
said, you know, the war on drugs
for higher sentences for these
drug offenses, it doesn't work
and for drug users, you're
right, it doesn't work, but for
drug traffickers, that would be
different, and that's why this
bill focuses on drug
traffickers.
In December of 2024, the United
Nations human rights chief
Volker Turk stated
criminalization and prohibition
have failed to reduce drug use
and failed to deter drug-related
crime. These policies simply are
not working, and we're failing
some of the most vulnerable
groups in our societies, but 13
years prior to this in June
2011, the leadership conference
Education Fund wrote an article
that stated
The global war on drugs is a
failure and should be replaced
by decriminalization strategies
grounded in science, health,
security, and human rights. And
what we've seen in the 13 years
between these two articles is
the explosion of fentanyl right
here in New Mexico. And as a
matter of fact, I don't know how
many people even heard of
Sentinel, uh, in 2011. So we
know that a complete hands-off
approach, it doesn't work. We
also know that increasing
Punitive measures for users does
not work. However, the same
critical article goes on to
state. While the report says
certain law enforcement
strategies can help manage and
shape illicit drug markets
poorly designed ones, on the
other hand, and make matters
worse. So even this critical
report admits that we can arm
law enforcement with the tools
to disrupt the drug markets, and
I believe that this bill does
exactly that. Um, so with that,
Madam Chair members of the
committee will stand for.
questions. OK, thank you. We
have first um Representative
Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you
experts. So let's walk through.
The changes that we have in
here.
So the first thing I want to
address is I, I know when I
first came up here I thought
life in prison was life.
And life is not, ma'am Charmson,
how long is life in prison in
New Mexico?
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
30 years.
I think for me that was one of
the most shocking things I just
every other state life is life,
but here it's, it's 30. The
reason I bring that up is
because it's not necessarily a
life sentence.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, um.
The other question I had was,
Can you explain to me why you
think that increasing these
penalties would be important. I
would imagine to keep the drug
dealers off the street. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady expert.
Yes.
Metal chair
I represent the Lord. Yes,
ma'am.
And why do you think that's
important, Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady and experts to keep
the drug dealers off the
streets.
Venom chair representative Lord.
Most of the cases we have uh
with uh trafficking thousands of
phenol pills.
Um, in my area of
responsibility. We're dealing
with repeat offenders that have
already been
Arrested and prosecuted um for
drug trafficking before, um, and
our currently doing it again
after they get out.
Mr. Speaker, General, to lead
and experts, what I hear a lot
from law enforcement is that
there's a it's Madam Chair, not
Mr. Speaker.
When you could be Mr. Speaker,
you want to, sorry. Let me write
it down because it's been a long
day, madam
chair
of experts, I apologize.
It's right.
Um,
One of the things I learned from
law enforcement officers as they
tell me it's a small percentage
of people that are doing the
same crimes over and over again.
Is that correct?
The more repeat offenders is, is
what I'm trying to get at.
Man I'm representing lawyer,
that is correct. Do you have a
percentage, um,
Madam Chair.
And representative experts.
What's the percentage would you
say of people that do repeat
offenses.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lord, I don't have a percentage,
but I do know that uh a lot of
people I deal with, um, I deal
with them a lot.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I, OK, good. Is experts. I've
learned that too from a lot of
the police officer I talked to,
it's, it's picking up the same
people over and over and over
and over again.
Um, Madam Chair representative
experts, do we have
So we, we hear a lot in the
news. It seems like it's kind of
deja vu cause it was been a lot
of fentanyl talk for a lot of
years, um.
Out of people that use fentanyl,
the, the people that are dealing
fentanyl because it's that blue
pill.
Um, they know pretty much.
Mancher, Representative expert
that they're selling fentanyl,
they're not selling something
out, is that correct?
Metal chair Representative Lord.
That is correct. And Madam
Chair.
Representative expert, those
pills are blue, pretty much
everybody knows what they are.
Nobody is going, hey, I wanna
buy. I don't know, pot and
they're ending up with a a
fentanyl pill, correct? They
know exactly what they're trying
to buy. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, represented Lord,
that is correct. They know
exactly what they're buying, and
Madam Chair representative
expert that also go for the
people that are are dealing,
they're not.
pretending that they're dealing
We, they're dealing fentanyl and
they know what they're dealing.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker, gently, the expert.
Sorry, chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative Lord, that
is correct right there so I see
Madam chair, um,
man, so experts, um.
So we understand that
incarceration is to try to keep
these people off the streets. We
know that there repeat a lot of
them are repeat offenders, just
from my personal experience with
law enforcement, and I remember
doing other stats, uh, looking
at this data.
So, Madam Chair represented
expert, the goal is then to
We understand.
That there's a high rate of
people that die from using
fentanyl, cause how, how many
grains is a tiny amount, right,
tiny, tiny amount of fentanyl
can kill somebody. Is that
correct, Ma'am chubs and
experts.
Mache represented Lord. Yes,
ma'am, um, the has uh stated
that 2 mg.
As a deadly dose.
And as of 2024.
55 out of 10 pills uh contain at
least 2 mg.
So ma'am chair and uh
Representative expert, so it's a
small amount, so.
I would say.
Because there's been a
tremendous amount of talk about
this in the news. There's been a
lot of talk about it everywhere.
I wrote an op ed on it.
Uh, Medisure and
Representative expert, I would
imagine that it's no surprise to
a fentanyl dealer that people
could die from this. Would you
agree with that?
Madam chair.
Resent the Lord, that's correct.
So Madam Chair Representative.
Experts, so on your bill here on
page 2.
Walk me through this, please. It
says shall be sentenced pursuant
to 31, 1815 of the NMSA.
And so the first and subsequent
offenses when the controlled
substance is fentanyl.
Guilty of first degree felony
for trafficking. Now we're
talking about Mount Cha
representative. We're talking
about people that are
trafficking, not in possession,
is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK. So Madam Chair
representative um experts.
So someone this gives another
tool to law enforcement officers
because
When they go into a house.
Explain to me, you go into a
house or you or it's in a car.
There are large amounts,
correct, of that fentanyl. It's
not like they have little baggy
when you're when we're looking
at traffic and to find for me
how we look at trafficking
versus possession, please, Madam
Chair represent experts.
And I'm sure Representative
Lord.
Yes, um, so there's a
Because the distinguish between
users and traffickers.
When we're doing a, we're,
we're, we're charging a
trafficking case. We're gonna
look into the person actually
trafficking the fentanyl pills.
Um, the, the people that we're
talking about, um, they're
They're trafficking hundreds
thousands of pills.
Um
They're um
They have
Separate bags.
Because they're gonna be
trafficking, they're gonna
separate the phenol pills.
In 5, 1050, 100 packs. They're
gonna have uh conversations in
their cell phones saying that
they're gonna need somebody to
drop off a certain amount of
narcotics.
They're gonna be um having large
uh
Uh, bulks of cash on the,
they're gonna have weapons on
them.
Most of the people that we deal
with that are trafficking
fentanyl, uh large amounts are
gonna have guns on them.
Um
Um, excuse me, um, as with
expert, if you could keep it to
the bill and
Um, the penalties that are being
given.
Madam Chair and what I was
trying to distinguish here, it
is a question on the bill. We
talk about trafficking versus
possession. I was trying to
identify the two whose
possession is very different
from trafficking, and Madam
Chair represented experts also
when I, I've looked through
these pictures and I talked to
law enforcement and just about
every time they're saying the
traffickers also have multiple
firearms on them. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker
Representative um.
Experts, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, that is
correct.
my chair
Represent expert when I'm trying
to define in this as we're not
talking about somebody who is a
drug addict and possess him, we
are talking about somebody who
meets all the criteria of
trafficking. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker?
Uh, sorry, sorry, madam chair. I
wrote it down right there, man
here.
Madam Chair, represented Lord.
That, that is correct.
Um, we were talking here is
about people that we have
evidence that are trafficking
phenol pills. We're not talking
about the users.
Madam Cha.
Madam Chair Representative, I'd
like to add to that. So I know
people are concerned about drug
users and them having a life in
prison, but it's very different
for a drug user versus a drug
trafficker, Madam Cha
representative, which is, I
believe what what you're getting
at and given the cost of
fentanyl, which is roughly about
$10 a pill. It's truly rare for
a user to have a large quantity
on them for personal use. Um,
Madam Chairs representative, for
example, a user to have 11,000
And pills for personal use, that
means they purchase $10,000
worth of fentanyl, so it's
really unlikely, Madam Chair
representative that a user, much
less a non-user in New Mexico
could muster $10,000 for
purchase of personal use drugs,
Madam Chair representative, so
even if a person were charged
with trafficking initially, the
prosecutor does have the
discretion to amend the charges
all the way down to simple
possession if it does fit the
facts.
Madam Chair Representative, if
the prosecutor does not amend
the chain the charges, the
prosecutor can then plead the
case to a simple possession
charge, and that's Madam Chair
Representative, a 4th degree
felony, which is 18 months in
prison. Madam Chair
Representative, again, we are
not targeting drug users. We are
trapped targeting and drug
traffickers. Madam Chair
Representative, so even if the
prosecutor refused to plead down
the the case down. The jury
would
Then have the opportunity to
consider the facts and determine
if the state had proven
trafficking. If not, they could
find the defendant not guilty.
So Madam Chair Representative
alternative alternatively, if
the state has not proven
trafficking at the close of
their evidence, the court could
then grant a directed verdict
and dismissed the trafficking
charge, at which point Madam
Chair Representative, the jury
would then decide the lesser
included offense of a simple
possession, again, which is a
4th degree felony at 18 months
in prison, Madam Chair
Representative, I hope that
helps answer the question.
And thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert that was
gonna be my next question, so
ma'am Cha representative
experts, there's nothing set in
stone. It's, it's a tool
somebody has been arrested on
this charge of trafficking, but
at the end of the day, it really
comes down to plea bargaining
and and if they can prove that
in a court of law. Is that
correct? That's what you just
explained, correct? Madam Chairs
representative, and again there
is a difference on a drug user
versus a drug trafficker.
So Madam Chair Representative,
when I was looking through this
because we see this quite often,
um, in the news, and it's always
the same, and usually a lot of
it and it was just uh what I've
seen is just a simple traffic
stop where they pull them over,
especially on the highway, and
they find those things. So when
I'm looking at this, it becomes
very obvious to me there's a lot
of blue pills. There's cash,
there's firearms, I see 380s,
9/11, 1911s, I see a farm with a
scope on.
it
I see even acts even in here. I
see scales and everything, so I
think Madam Chamson is the
purpose of showing this to show
what trafficking looks like
versus like possession, is that
correct?
Madam Chair and Representative
Lord, that, that is correct.
OK. So ma'am Chap
representative, I, I think what
I'm trying to show here. I'm
sorry, I just got sidetracked by
this.
Underground drums, um, ma'am
sure representative, so the
point of all this is that what
we're looking at these
controlled substances of
fentanyl.
We know that they're often
repeat offenders. We know that
they can kill.
And I could tell you when the
saddest stories is when there's
a lot of sad stories in the
Roundhouse, unfortunately, I had
uh two moms come and talk to me
after I did op ed about fentanyl
and the dangers of fentanyl, who
came and cried, and it was
horrible that their children um
had been sold fentanyl and
taking it and they had lost
their children.
So Mount Cheruban, are you
bringing forward this bill in
hopes that keeping people
incarcerated, uh, behind bars
will keep on the street and save
more lives and stop our crying
moms and I had to look at my
chair representative experts.
And I'm chair of Representative
Lord. That is correct, um, more
people that we put in jail that
are trafficking fentanyl.
Uh the most more likely, more
lives, we say.
I mean your representative and
expert, that's, that's.
I think the whole point of your
bill that you're bringing
forward is because you have a
person that knows they're
selling fentanyl. There's no
mistake that they're selling LSD
or mushrooms or anything else,
they know that they're selling
the drug of fentanyl, and Madam
Chair representative expert on
um
One of the things I think I
noted in one of the analysis
that said the Department of
Safety is in favor of stronger
penalties for increasing pills
for fentanyl. Madam Chair
representative experts had there
been other states that have
increased the penalties for
fentanyl trafficking.
I'm sure ribs and experts if you
don't know, I represent block
has pulled up that data, so when
he asked questions, you'll have
that data cause I know that
there were other states that
have um Medicare representative
experts, um, when I was looking
at hold on I'm looking through,
there was a lot of reports in
here.
Um
The Office of the District
attorney said,
What will be the consequences
and the fentanyl crisis will
discontinue to grow as we have
the highest rates of overdose
from fentanyl in the country.
So
Madam Chair, represent an
expert.
Are you aware that we have the
highest rates of fentanyl
overdose in the United States
and do we know what those rates
are compared to other states
cause ours is always, we're
always the highest in everything
and the worst in everything. So
do you know?
how far those rates are compared
to other states cause I'm just
tell I heard that we're the
highest, Madam Chair
representative expert.
Madam Chair representative um
represented Lord.
I know that um we're averaging
approximately 100,000 overdoses
a year, as in the United States.
Um, based on our, uh, population
here.
And we're at
Approximately 700 overdoses, uh,
from 2023.
Um, and we're about 400.
Uh, for 2024.
And that is just
One is too many, you know, cause
I, I understand we have the
option, which I hope that the
behavioral health bill we
passed, ma'am and help, but at
the same time,
I want to make sure.
That we are addressing
These people that know they're
selling fentanyl and killing our
family members in New Mexico.
Amen chair and representative, I
noticed that uh corrections also
said the amendment could
possibly impact community by
increasing the consequences for
individual or trafficking.
And I go back again to um Manure
representative that.
Oh, I'm sure we're also.
Where's the highest rate in
everything bad and I, I wanna
change that.
trajectory.
Cementture represent an expert.
It says that the state's
overdose death increased 68%
because of fentanyl. Do you want
to expand on that? Do you want
to expand on how the overdose
and death rate has increased as
fentanyl, I know it's in the
study, but do you wanna talk a
little bit about that, Madam
Chair representative expert.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lord. So with the, the overdose
um with how addictive fentanyl
is, um, and those overdoses
that, um, that are occurring
within the state. Um, it's due
to the, uh, the potency of
fentanyl and the addictiveness
to fentanyl, um, and once
individuals start um using
fentanyl, they can't stop.
Um, when individuals are
starting to use fit on, they
have to go through a withdrawal
process, um, for them, um.
They don't want to do that
process. A lot of those users
would, um, usually, uh, they
would say that they would try to
overdose to get the best high,
um, and so I know that that's,
it's sad to say, and that's sad
to hear, but um those are the
things that we're being told by
individuals that are, are users
and with this bill, um.
We could, we could prevent that
if we are giving harsher
penalties on these traffickers,
um, and keeping them
incarcerated.
Thank you, Madam Chair some
experts. I, I understand your
logic in that, um, OK, here's
what you're going to get. This
is where you're gonna stay. I
look at it from the simple thing
of you were dealing a drug that,
you know, is a potential to kill
somebody, and now this is a
consequence because it always
has to be a consequence for
everything you do.
uh, actually the only thing I
want to say is I appreciate.
Um, Corey Hilton did, the
sheriff down there and put all
this data together cause I know
being close the closer you get
to the border, there's a lot
more instances and also the
sheriff that was on grants told
me constantly, they would just
do traffic stops for something
that just doesn't look right and
it ended up there would be tons
of fentanyl and drugs and, and I
know they had, there was one
arrest where there was just
boxes and boxes of cereal in the
back of someone's car and it was
filled with fentanyl or were
trapped across the street,
across the state.
So Madam Chair representative,
um, I agree with you because
there has to be consequences.
There's consequences for
everything that we do, every
bill we vote on, everything that
we do here has a consequence, so
I understand completely and
fully why you're trying to bring
this forward. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative.
Uh, next we have Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this forward.
A few questions here on this.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I heard in some testimony, I
forget who it was, they said
life sentences fuel mass
incarcerations, and they said
imposing them stems pressure
points on local car so systems,
Madam Chair Representative, do
you agree with that? Because in
my opinion, if we keep someone
who is trafficking large amounts
of highly potent deadly
substances.
That would be a good thing for
society to keep them out of
circulation, so to speak, on the
street. So Madam Chair and
Representative, I'm wondering if
you could address that for me.
I'm sure, I represented block.
That is correct.
Um
Like I said before, uh, the
people that are actually
trafficking.
The Large amounts of narcotics
and phenylpis in our area have
been previously.
Charged with trafficking.
Before.
And they're still doing it right
now so we didn't learn from it.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and experts. So,
OK, so we're saying that usually
these people are repeat
offenders. They have a they have
a record, so they're not like
these, these cute little
families that are just walking
and, and getting in trouble from
a one-off approach or something
as we've heard in many
characterizations by certain
individuals and groups. So Madam
Chair Representative,
These individuals who are
traffickers, are they a
majority, a certain kind of
population like felons or do
they have records usually and
what are those kinds of, of
records that a lot of those
traffickers who we are talking
about in this bill have, because
I'm trying to get a a better
idea of who it is we're trying
to target to stop this kind of
systematic
Murdering, in my opinion, of
people and communities with
fentanyl. So what kind of people
are these? Uh, what kind of
records do they have, Madam
Chair and Representative and
experts.
And I'm sure, Representative
Block.
The, the people that the drug
task force.
are investigating.
Are people that are
Dangerous.
Most of the people that we deal
with, um, that we conduct church
points on, are you gonna have
some some to 80% of they're
gonna have guns on them.
Um, they're gonna have guns in
their house, they're gonna have
high calorie guns like you've
seen his pictures.
Also, um,
Not only that, but uh the the
way they they talk about the
users.
They are preying on the users.
The, um
Raise the prices on the users
that they know the user, it
needs the pill.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, so it
seems these individuals are
predatory individuals. These
people are hardened criminals in
my opinion, from what I've
heard. And so when it comes to
the crimes that these people
have committed. It's usually,
and please correct me if I'm
wrong, it's not just
The trafficking. It also can
include things like
Indentured servitude and and
reasons such as sexual favors
for pills or things such as uh a
work that they have to do for
them in order to receive their
pills. So, Madam Chair and
Representative, these people are
really preying on vulnerable
populations. Is that kind of
what I'm hearing with your
testimony, Madam Chair,
representative experts.
represented block.
That is correct. Um,
the, the traffickers.
Are, are, are preying on these,
on these, uh, vulnerable
individuals that are hooked up
and hooked on, on these drugs.
Uh, the fennel is.
50 times stronger.
And heroin.
That's saying something.
That's highly, highly addictive.
They have to take these pills
to, to
function throughout the day.
And what happens is that
One person could be
Smoking a 1 pill, 2 pills.
And in 2 years that he's gonna
be smoking 20 pills.
They can't keep up with them.
So they have to start doing
legal things. They're gonna have
to start doing burgers and I
start stealing stuff, but that's
Of course with it, what, what
I'm personally more worried
about is
The victimization of, of the
women, um, that we have seen.
Um, and a lot of these cases,
they don't get reported.
The these attempted rapes, these
rapes, these beats, they're not
gonna report it
because as an expert if you
could just answer the question,
Madam Chair, I go to other
things that aren't in this part
of the film.
Please, if you have anything
else to add on the question,
please.
Madam representative, um, again,
we're focusing on holding
criminals accountable that are
trafficking, not the drug users.
We know the drug users are
victims and that they need help.
And again, I, I've heard some
public comment and how this uh
targets minorities, those are my
people that have been impacted.
I'm, I'm a minority and I've
seen it hurt my people, and so
we wanna hold criminals
accountable, and again,
ing on the trafficker and Madame
Chair Representative 3 ways to
prove trafficking fentanyl in
New Mexico is the manufacturing
of fentanyl, number one, which
is the person making it number
2, it's the distribution of
fentanyl, which is a person
caught selling it or giving it
away in high doses, 3,
possession with intent to
distribute fentanyl,
madam chair representative, and
that's a person that has a large
enough quantity in their
possession that is
likely that they will intend to
sell it, and that also requires
expert testimony with the jury,
Madam Chair Representative, I
hope that answers your question.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and experts, and
that's good to know, and it's
so, it's so horrifying and it's
so sad because Madam Chair, in
my county, for example, my, my
sheriff last year, he said he
sees 52,406 fentanyl pills and
for balance, my county has about
60,000 people. So, like your
county, that's about
1 pill per person, and so it,
it's super horrifying just to
see that's what they've gotten
from illegal instances, not only
what's on the street. And so
Madam Chair Representative, I
think this is a public health
crisis when it comes to these
fentanyl pills flooding our
streets. And so Madame Chair
Representative, when it comes to
these individuals who are
selling these, these drugs.
Are they usually
Some kind of
Are, are they usually in a, a
systematic way of doing this,
like with an organization like a
cartel, or is it many kind of
rogue individuals. So I kind of
want to know who it who it is
that we're looking for when it
comes to charging these people,
where are they really based? I'm
wondering, Madam Chair and
representative.
Most of the cases that we've
been working um in the past 2
years. They're, they're
indirectly working, um, for
these, for these cartels, um.
We have uh several cases that
are, uh, there, we know that
those people are in direct
contact with the
Um, people in Mexico, uh, that
are coordinating the dropouts,
and so we refills.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. And then when it
comes to the actual
The actual policy of increasing
these these penalties on
traffickers who, by the way, I
just want to reiterate our
selling hundreds of pills,
distributing hundreds and
hundreds of pills, not just 1 or
2.
Have we seen, could we see this
as a deterrent to the cartel and
to entities that aim to harm
people by peddling these.
These uh horrible drugs that are
killing people. Do we see this
as something that can indeed
deter this kind of
This kind of a relationship that
they have with our state.
Madamarian representatives,
experts.
Madam Chair representative
block.
100%.
Good answer, Madam Chair,
representative. I, I think
that's super important to, to
note because what I hear from
individuals in my county and
around the state is New Mexico
is.
Prime for cartel entities to
come here because our our laws
are very lax in many ways and
specifically to this fentanyl
pedaling and trafficking. So
when it comes to that, Madam
Chair Representative, I want to
be very clear that this
legislation is not aiming to try
to round up a bunch of poor
little drug users. This is
intended to harm, and I hope it
harms with hard time, the most
most heinous individuals who are
indeed peddling these drugs in
these
communities. These people are
hardened criminals we're talking
about, Madam Chair, according to
the testimony I've seen. And so
I really hope this committee
understands that when we're
increasing these penalties,
yeah, if this person has a
family, I wouldn't want a drug
trafficker to be in a family.
I wouldn't want them to have
hundreds of fentanyl pills
laying around for their kids, so
sure, it may tear apart some
families, but it probably will
save lives, Madam Chair
Representative, with the
responses from this, they're put
away for 30 years. Hopefully, I
wish it was longer. I wish you
could, you could probably give
double sentences for certain,
certain amounts of fentanyl, I
would suppose so, Madam Chair
Representative, when it comes to
that, can we double these life
sentences for some of these
people, like instead of just 130
year sentence, could we double
it to 60, depending on the
ounces of.
Fentanyl that they are peddling
that could be detrimental to the
whole state.
Is that something we could
possibly do or, or a prosecutor
could do? Is that even possible
with your legislation?
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't know quite know the answer
to that, but the goal is, is
that we want to increase prison
time as a deterrent if people
feel like business is closed in
New Mexico for fentanyl and
hopefully it'll drop down the
the cases and the pills that are
being sold and and if the demand
goes down, then people don't
have access to buy fentanyl and
at the end of the day, I know
that this this seemed extreme,
but we
We want to protect our families.
We want to protect our moms and
our dads and our brothers and
our sisters and our neighbors
and our friends that this is
impacting, and
Like I, like I said, that the
public comment talked about
people of color. It has targeted
people of color and
We want to keep them safe, and
we want to provide a deterrent
at the end of the day, that's
what this bill is about.
We want to show that New Mexico
is closed for business when it
comes to trafficking fentanyl.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I would
correct you in my opinion. I
don't think this is extreme.
Honestly, I don't think this
could even go as far as far
enough in my opinion and uh
For me, I would like to see
these people never seeing the
light of day outside of a prison
cell ever again, not just 30
years, but that's, that's
another conversation for another
day, but Madam Chair
Representative, I do want to
protect the very vulnerable
people in our state, and I feel
like this policy is something
that absolutely will do that,
and I sure hope that this passes
because in my community, we have
had so many people who have died
because of fentanyl being
overdosed by, by these horrible
cartels that have targeted the
most.
vulnerable people who are in
the, the probably the worst
times in their lives, and they
have made their situations
worse, even ending their lives.
And so Madam Chair
Representative, I don't think
there's anything we could do as
a body that could be a
recompense for such horrific
destruction, horrors, murder in
our community by these fentanyl
traffickers, and I find this to
be even the least.
Amount that we could possibly do
to hold these people accountable
because New Mexico should be
closed for fentanyl, should be
closed for business for
trafficking any drugs, but this
sends a message. This sends a
message to the cartel, get the
heck out of our state. We don't
want you here. We don't want to
see you. We don't want to see
your pills. We want you to go
back with your Chinese-made
fentanyl and never come here
ever again. And I think that
would make a perfect message by
putting these disgusting cartel
members who are peddling this in
prison for at least 30 years,
and I
She was longer, but I do support
your bill because I do believe
that victims deserve justice,
and this is a tiny piece to
getting to that justice. So
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you so much Representative
experts and uh thank you for
being here and I appreciate your
very thoughtful and awesome,
Bill.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Romero.
Madam Chair, um, thank you, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez,
welcome to our committee, um,
and thank you for the experts.
This is really impressive,
honestly, that we, I wish we
would have had something like
this in our summer, um,
quartzarks and and justice,
honestly, the data that's that
we're actually looking at for
targeting some of these crimes
is among the best I've ever
seen. Um, I would really hope
that we can see, um,
A lot of this, uh, in the, in
the interim and and study, I
think a lot of these trends that
that we can really truly help,
um.
What's going on in the county
and I really wanna appreciate
you for, for presenting us with
this. Honestly, it's a, it's
very impressive and I really
appreciate you doing that. Um,
what's not in here,
unfortunately, is the connection
between
The increase in penalties that
we're suggesting today in this
bill.
And how that connects to
decreasing the crimes that we're
reading about in your report.
And that's what I'd love to see
the correlation for, um, when we
look at some of the analysis on
the expense for this. There's no
um
Appropriation attached to this
bill, and more than anything,
how it will prevent these crimes
from actually happening and our
community has been absolutely
ravaged by fentanyl. In fact,
we've been ravaged by heroin,
um, we have tried to be really
creative about how to stop it
and including pill mills in our
community with um everything
from OxyContin to other legal
opioids, and I saw some stuff
about how um pills are being
trafficked.
here as well.
Um
Some of the data that I think
conflicts with a lot of the
narrative is that on page 25,
the start of your um
Uh, data talks about how
We don't even know how many
overdoses were due to fentanyl.
In Lee County, um,
We are also seeing the the
trafficking of various drugs in
this report, methamphetamines
continue to be higher than uh
fentanyl, they're seeing these
shifts. We're also seeing shifts
in um how we're tracking these
fentanyl pills and the five-year
trend I see really dips at the
end of the report on page 21 by
weight, and we're looking at,
you know, how it is that we're
tracking this and it sounds like
we're doing better databasing
and data management.
Um
But I'd really love to figure
out how we study what you've
been, what you've presented
before us, which I think is
again really compelling, um, and
being able to understand, you
know, what are we, how are we
being strategic about um
targeting these types of things
and page 44 really struck me.
When we look at um some of the
big take homes in the emerging
trends that and I'm not familiar
with the HIDTA.
Uh
Data collectors here, but on the
3rd bullet point, it says
oftentimes even the drug
couriers do not know that what
they are transporting according
to law enforcement reporting,
uh, when it comes to folks
perhaps carrying or um or uh
coordinating uh fentanyl
packaging um across these
various areas, um, and, and it
continues at the bottom of page
44 saying illicit drugs will
continue to be concealed in
cargo loads.
In commercial motor vehicles,
deep concealment compartments
and privately owned vehicles, as
well as natural voids and
vehicles. So again, as we're
targeting the effort to really
look at trafficking seriously.
How are we taking the
information here and being very
strategic about what we're
looking at when we're
Talking about what's in the bill
today, um.
We're not actually
distinguishing between
Hosting one pill or 2 or 4,
which I understand from this
report, folks have already been
put in life in prison for 4
pills, um, according to the
analysis that we have received
for this bill. Um,
Or if it's, you know, what we're
looking at with multiple um
kilos of high volume shipments.
There's no distinguishing that
in your bill. So I, I think
that's really problematic when
we're really trying to target
the hardened criminals that you
are all talking about and be
absolutely empathize with the
effort to do so, how we do that
here. Um, so, while I, I really
appreciate getting to know uh
Lee County and, and the, the
efforts here and I, and again, I
really hope that we can take
this information and study this
over the interim as far as being
able to have this. I don't even
think the DA's that came to
visit us and folks that were
looking at different penalties,
um, over the course of the
summer and fall, had any sort of
information like this. So this
is really critical, um.
But again, when we're looking at
increasing penalties, we need to
see how it correlates with
actually um preventing the, the
situation with which we're
trying to to
to actually target in our state
and unfortunately, I don't see
that here today, but I really
appreciate the conversation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for your
presentation. I will ditto
everything that my colleagues
said. I just, I know that this
is big money.
And so you, you lock up the, you
know, the top guys. How do you
keep
the underlings are brand new
people from coming in and just
picking it up when, when we all
know that money talks.
Madam Chair Representative, was
that a question? Yeah, I'm, I'm
just, I mean, I just see it a
never ending supply of folks who
are willing to do this because
there's a lot of money to be
made. Yes, ma'am, Madam Chair
Representative, and, and that
was the goal with this is that
it would be a deterrent if there
was life in prison, then it
would stop that. Um, do you have
anything to add to that expert?
a chair representative uh
Thompson.
Absolutely. If uh somebody is
able to be in jail for longer.
Um
Most of the people like, like I
said before, we deal with, they
have already been convicted
before.
Um, if these people, uh, were
still in jail.
I believe that we would have
less of the narcotics in my
area.
Because I know there's, they're
the ones that have the
connections that are bringing it
in.
Uh, it slowed down a lot, uh,
when we brought several people
um to, to justice.
Um, but once, uh, other people
that got out of, of jail, um,
They were at some points
trafficking other amounts, uh,
other, other substances. Now
they moved to Fentanyl. Now
they're traffickingen.
Madam Chair, I, I guess I, I
didn't quite hear what, so, I
mean, we all know that um.
Money is very attractive to
probably just about everybody,
and so I'm assuming it's not
just one guy that there's like
layers. So, uh, and I, I, as I
said, I, I agree with my
colleague, but um I just, I just
can't make the connection that
if you get the top guys, it's
gonna end because that's kind of
not how the world works, right,
Madam Chair, representative, the
goal is to make this a deterrent
and right now if people.
are getting out on good time
with 5 years in prison. They're
like, I can sell this and in 5
years I'll be out in no time,
but if they see all the top guys
going to.
To jail for life, then that was
the goal that it would become a
deterrent.
And I'm sure, do we have any
data that shows that that is um
how things work. I mean,
especially young people, they
see money and they, they're not
great at looking ahead, you
know, 5 years, 10 years, 20
years, so I, I, I, I know we
need to do something. I'm just,
I, I don't know what it is. I'm
just, I, I'm very concerned that
there are no limits. We, we do
have in one of our analysis that
someone was arrested on
trafficking for 4 pills, and
And that's not in this bill, so
I, I can't support it. Thank
you. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you and I um agree that,
you know, this is like one size
fits all, that someone, um,
You know, having
First offense and maybe for just
um
Sharing with their um friend who
also uses fentanyl, would, you
know, have these severe
consequences and that, you know,
a jury that would find them
guilty would not know.
what the penalty was, and then
Find them guilty, but then find
out it was 30 years and the
judge didn't have discretion.
Um, is there
Anything in your bill that
contra that you can say this
isn't true.
Could you repeat the last, let
me just ask it more clearly.
Your, does your bill make it so
that someone who was just
sharing, that's considered
trafficking, um, you know, a
pill or two of their own, uh,
wouldn't be considered
trafficking and could be found,
uh, guilty.
And the first defense being, you
know, 30 years.
So ultimately the judge would
determine that, but going back
to just using pills versus
distributing
share.
I mean he gave that, that's
considered trafficking, is that
right?
Yes, ma'am. OK. So a person who
Does that and is
Um
Found, you know, found guilty.
Um, they would have the same
first defense and found guilty
in being sentenced to life. The
judge doesn't have in your
bills, um, any discretion.
So the Madam Chair
Representative, the discretion
would be with the facts of the
case that would ultimately be
turned over to the jury and then
the judge would decide am I
answering that?
Yes, but I don't think that's
true.
And if they're, and right now,
um, it would be a 2nd.
A second offense is only 18
years. You're making a first
offense, life.
Is that correct?
Uh-huh.
You're correct. If Madam Chair
represented, the judge found
that they gave away drugs. Yes,
ma'am, you're correct. No matter
what the amount is.
So I think um
This is
I know you're looking and you're
doing great work trying to find,
you know, people who are.
Big drug dealers.
But this encompasses too many
people that um would be
Not
Yeah
category of person or kingpin.
So,
But that's why I can't support
your bill, but
Thank you for your work and and
the presentation that we have
and bringing this forward. Um,
what is the will of the
committee, Madam Chair, I move
to table, OK, all set.
All right. Um, we'll take roll.
OK
me and.
Representative block to table.
Representative Lord? Nope.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson, yes,
Madam Vice Chair, yes, the
table, Madam Chair, yes.
I a vote of 4 in favor and to
know your bill has been tabled
um for House Bill 274.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
kindness and the meaningful
conversation.
You're welcome. Thank you.
Next we have
House Bill 134 delinquency Act
changes representative.
And representative Chavez.
Like we always stay in health
committee Chavis and
And
and and Chavis, yes.
Yes, go ahead. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um,
Uh, this is a key piece of
legislation that um I feel we
must cast it a grip on New
Mexico's crime problem. I'm
extremely glad that this piece
of legislation is, is finally
getting the hearing it deserves,
uh, New Mexicans have been
demanding real action to address
our crime crisis, we did pass
House Bill 8, which was a start,
but that's just a start.
Everyone in the room knows we
must do more. Uh, this is a bill
that the governor Bernalillo
County District Attorney Sam
Bragman, prosecutors, law
enforcement, and victims suffer
every day is called upon us to
hold juvenile criminals
accountable. So what this bill
does after coming in front of
this committee and the concerns,
Madam Chair and committee that
um excuse me, representative,
you have a committee substitute
to consider?
um, it's should have you should.
Pass it out. It's, it's, and
it's a.231670.
Just to, um, I didn't have it
when you read the number
231670.1. Yes, ma'am. OK.
And help is gonna be fun
tomorrow.
a motion to consider the
substitute.
OK, thank you.
Thank you. Um, would you like to
go ahead and explain, yes, yes,
thank you, Madam Chair. So after
listening to the committee and
the concerns that uh the
committee had about a lot of
different parts of the bill. We
focused on, um, two areas that
I, I didn't hear a lot from the
committee of concerns on, um, we
went to section 8 of and defined
serious youthful offender, um,
and actually we lowered the age
from uh
15 to 14, and then we added 4
primes, um, it was generally
just murder in the first degree
Maam chair, and this actually is
murder in the first degree or
murder in the second degree,
voluntary manslaughter, robbery,
armed with a deadly weapon and
shooting at a dwelling or
occupied building that results
in great bodily harm to another
person or shooting at it from a
motor vehicle that results in
great bodily harm to another
person. And then we went to the
youthful fender.
Section J uh did not change the
age in that and uh this is the
section that allows for the
amenability hearing, um, which
is, is, uh, not the mandatory.
It's you're going to be treated
as an adult, but we added the
crimes, assault with intent to
commit a violent felony,
kidnapping, aggravated battery,
aggravated battery against a
household member, aggravated
battery gets a peace officer
shooting at a dwelling or
occupied building.
building that does not result in
great bodily harm to another
person or shooting at it from a
motor vehicle that does not
result in great bodily harm to
another person, dangerous use of
explosives, criminal sexual
penetration, robbery, aggravated
burglary, aggravated arson.
Abuse of a child that results in
great bodily harm or death to
the child on the side by
vehicle.
Involuntary manslaughter and
failing to stop a vehicle when
the vehicle is involved in an
accident that results in injury
or death.
And then also um we uh added the
section P on page 8, that
basically states that this, that
um the subsection, if it's not a
serious youthful offender, but
was committed with a firearm,
um, that actually is consistent
with the language and the Coi
code we passed that that could
be um something that could be
considered for a youthful
offense. We took out all the
other language, Madam Sharon.
of the committee, uh, we talked
to stakeholders, we talked to uh
the district attorney's office,
um, I will introduce my um
expert it's Troy Gray again. I
believe you met him from the uh
Bernalillo County District
Attorney's office, obviously my
co-sponsor Nicole Chavez, um, so
we tried to address the concerns
and and get it in size to the
two areas that we feel will
really address the juvenile
crime that we're seeing in
our state, um, I, I don't know
if you have any additional
comments I defer to my expert or
if you just want the question.
Madame Chair, members of the
committee, I will stand for
questions. I believe that uh
Representative Reeve is
accurately represented the
changes that have been made in
the bill.
Thank you. OK. Thank you. We'll
go to the audience. Is there
anyone in um opposition.
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Daniel Williams
policy advocate at the American
Civil Liberties Union of New
Mexico, the ACLU opposes this
bill, which represents a
backwards approach to juvenile
violent crime and ignores years
of evidence-based research,
ushering in another failed era
of over-incarceration of young
people. It will have lasting
detrimental effects. The harms
of these kinds of proposals are
not diminished by coupling
punishments with treatment and
support as we are seeing surface
in some new reform proposals. We
need to stand strong.
in our values. Children always
deserve care.
We must commit to providing
children in the carceral system
to support and services to
flourish, not simply making it
easier to incarcerate them for
longer periods of time, treat
children as adults. We all want
what is best for children and
our communities. This bill
doesn't do that for New Mexico's
communities or for our children.
Thank you. Thank you. And um
before we go further, I um don't
think we took a motion to adopt
the committee sub.
I think so moved to a second,
OK.
Thank you. Is there any
objection?
OK, so you have amended.
Our committee substitute.
OK.
Um, now let's go to zoom. Is
there anyone else in opposition.
Diane.
Yes, thank you, Chair and
committee. My master's degree is
in special education. I worked
for APS for 18 years with kids
from K through 9th grade. I'm
also a mother and a grandmother.
My son suffered since his teens
with substance use disorder and
it's attendant intersection with
the criminal legal system. What
I've learned from all my
relationships with kids over the
years is that kids need
intervention and care, not
criminalization. I'm not trying
to overlook the very real harm
that happens, but our policy
making should be
About what we know about kidney
development,
our policy should be based on
evidence and data as well as
about our humanity and
Sure, I urge you to remember
that this young grown up.
Don't go down this path to a
road um in which research says
is overwhelmingly indicates that
it is an reproductive response
to you to crying. So he's like
or you vote no on HB 134.
Stephen
Madam Chair members, my name is
Steven Taylor, executive
director of Deserving Life. I
want to express my deep concern
about HB 134 as someone who's
worked extensively with justice
involve youth is both a public
defender and through juvenile
parole reform. I've seen her
first understand how children
commit serious harm, often carry
deep wounds to their own through
de serving life's work,
implementing juvenile parole
reform under SB 64, we've seen
transformation in people who
were once deemed irredeemable.
or the worst of the worst is
teenagers. These transformative
stories show that condemning
children to prison.
Isn't just costly and
ineffective. It's profoundly
damaging to both public safety
and human potential on a
generational level.
Our state Supreme Court has told
us that electing to give up on
one of our children strikes at
the core of society's interest.
This bill would do exactly that
by automatically transferring
thousands of children.
And statewide to adult courts
based solely on their charges
without any determination of
their capacity for change. It
would strip away the children's
court's crucial discretion.
To make what the Supreme Court
calls a conscious determination
about whether a young person is
truly beyond reform.
There are children um
I will, I'm done. I'll finish.
There are children, I repeat,
there are, they're all our
children.
Don't elect to give up on them.
Instead, let's pour all our
energy and resources into
healing our children in
communities and address the root
causes of why children cause
harm in the first place and
embrace the child's powerful
capacity to heal and give back
to their community.
Please don't elect
give up on them. Thank you.
Is there anyone else?
OK.
Mica
And one minute, please.
Yes, hello members, um, chair
members of the committee. My
name is Mikea Betzini. Bold
Futures, New Mexico, um, for all
the reasons that were stated
before, and also from the
standpoint of working with
directly impacted youth by the
child welfare system. Um, we
know that crossover youth, those
involved in Bo child welfare and
juvenile justice systems
represent a significant portion
of juvenile justice populations,
um, and nationally studies
indicate that at least 50% of
youth in juvenile justice have
some contact with child welfare.
systems, and so we strongly
oppose this bill. We, we look to
resources and um providing
raparound support, um,
especially as children are
removed and separated from their
family, they are already
compounded by um the harmful
systems, and we continue to see
the um damaging connections
between CYFD and the juvenile
justice system. We oppose HB
134. Thank you.
Vanessa.
Hi, yes, can you hear me?
Yes.
Hi, um, I'm Vanessa Holliger,
uh, founder of Stronger Together
Never Alone. Um, studies have
shown that harsher punishments
such as longer incarceration
periods do not effectively deter
juvenile crime. Instead, they
can lead to higher rates of
recidivism. Juveniles who are
subjected to severe penalties
are often placed in environments
that do not support
rehabilitation, but rather
expose them to further criminal
behavior. This can create a
cycle of crime that is um
difficult to break. Um, the
youth
future of our community, it's
essential to recognize that they
are not the root cause of the
current um societal issues, but
rather a group that needs
guidance, support, and
opportunities to thrive by
investing in their development
and rehabilitation. We can help
them become positive
contributors to our society and
break the cycle of crime and
punishment. This approach not
only benefits individuals but
also strengthens community as a
whole. I strong strongly urge
you to oppose.
This bill. Thank you.
Brandy.
Hm
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Brandy Sidillo. I'm a
member of Stronger Together
Never Alone, and I strongly
oppose HB 134. I am an impacted
mother. My child is incarcerated
at the age of 15 years old. Um,
and I believe every child is
amenable to treatment.
Um
I just, I just wanted to get on
so strongly oppose it. Thank
you.
You
Is, um, anyone in the audience
in support of this bill.
OK.
manager, members of the
committee. My name is Amanda
Guterres, and I am a major with
the New Mexico State Police, uh,
Mexico has seen a recent
increase in crimes committed by
juveniles.
This increase requires an
amendment to laws that will give
courts more flexibility and the
challenge that youthful
offenders impose on the courts
and various services and as this
amendment has been presented
today, uh, it is focusing
strictly on violent crimes and
offenders, uh, therefore, DPS
does believe this bill could
assist in dealing with those
issues.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, for
your time and.
Thank you. Um, is there anyone
on Zoom and support?
too? OK, go ahead.
Montoya
Madam Chair, committee members
Marcus Montoya, a judicial
district attorney and president
of Mexico District Attorneys
Association. And I think what's
been lost here is the impact
that these violent offenders
have on the rest of the
community, um, if any of you
have spoken with your local
students, teachers, parents, um,
neighborhoods, um, these
students, these folks are uh
petrified of the um serious, uh,
Growing violence amongst
juveniles, especially gun
violence, and so the changes in
this bill again are not
targeting uh uh criminal damage
to property, do drinking, doing
drugs, uh, those aren't what's
really being contemplated here.
It's, uh, you know, you want to
be treated as an adult for when
you take a life, a very serious
robbery or guns or shooting and
taking attempts at taking lives
or taking lives. And so I, I
think for the um voice of
The kids who are scared to
return to school and try to live
and and appreciate learning and
sports and, and a whole bit of a
better future, uh, separation
from those kids who are harmful
and violent is not a bad thing,
um, and this isn't a single
piece of legislation that is
going to be a single bullet
solution to any type of crime,
but it's one facet, and I think
it needs to be appreciated for,
for what it does offer and for
that I thank you and stand in
support.
Thank you.
Andrea
Uh, good evening, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, Adrian Gomez from the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, speaking in support of
HB 134.
Reform of the juvenile justice
system is much needed and long
overdue.
Our state tragically has one of
the highest youth homicide rates
in the United States. Homicide
ranks as the 2nd leading cause
of death among those aged 15 to
24 with firearms involved in 79%
of cases, with rising juvenile
justice, we have to do better
for the safety of our
communities and the well-being
of the youthful offenders
themselves. Please vote yes on
HB 134.
Thank you.
Andrea again.
Go ahead, Andrea.
Were you in support, Andrea?
If so, unmute yourself.
Maybe she didn't need.
OK. And that was it.
That
All right.
Um, did you have anything you'd
like to close? I, I would, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Again, I would just
um remind the committee that
We are targeting the worst of
the worst kids, um.
I hear a lot on the comments,
evidence based, but we need to
be reality based about where we
are right now in New Mexico and
the violence that we're dealing
with, uh, reminding the
committee that the majority of
the crimes listed, they do get
an amenability hearing, so if
they are amenable to treatment,
they will have that option. It's
just the serious violent
offenders, the ones that are
killing people that may not have
that option. So I, I would just
say for too long we've been
Kicking this can down the road.
We've made promises to the
people of New Mexico to take
action on crime, and I believe
now it's time to deliver,
experts, victims, stakeholders,
we work together to craft this
bill carefully. I would even
state that the expert that um
Representative Thompson had last
night Nick's son, he worked with
us on this bill and never, never
said he was opposed to these
listed crimes when we worked
with him, um, in drafting this
bill.
Uh, with just over 2 weeks left
in the session, um, on a
pre-filed bill, uh, the clock is
ticking, um, Mexicans are
waiting, and I think it's time
to get us to act. And so with
that we would stand for
questions.
OK, thank you. We first have
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives and
experts. I'm surprised that Sam
Bergman isn't here tonight.
I, I was heard he had an
emergency family situation he
had to deal with,
I, I fear it because I know that
he's been a big proponent for
changing the children's code,
and I was also looking at an
article on here that was just
recently in KOAT that said, uh,
on Friday, the governor
discussed various issues
surrounding crime in New Mexico
and two have Lujan Grisham's
biggest priorities were updating
the Children's code. So Madam
Chair representative, um,
I'm sure you're aware that she's
been wanting to make changes to
the Children code. Is that
correct?
Me chair and representatives,
yes, we have received, I've
talked to the governor's office
and obviously read everything
and even seen the the crime
passage of HB 8 where she wants
more. She wants juvenile crime
to be addressed, DA Bregman was
at that conference, um, I think
this is something that's been
very well known to uh the state
of New Mexico, that this is
something she and many others
want to dress, Madam Chair
Representative. And thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. I
know it's something I've been
hearing about.
or 5 years or longer and there's
been no change.
Uh, so you, you introduced a
substitute, and these are
changes based on feedback from
um.
In terms of expert, uh, Madam
Chair represented, well, I first
tried to go to different members
of the committee and um see if
these would be changes that they
wanted to address, if you recall
that, I think that's just the
3rd time both bill was rolled
twice before, um, and I was, I,
I felt that we addressed the
issues that were brought up the
first time we had committee. I
don't recall anyone really even
bringing up the issues of the,
the different crimes um for
serious and youth.
Defender, um, but the
stakeholders obviously were
district attorneys, um, uh, the
individual that testified last
night JPO's, um.
And I, I know that we've been in
constant contact with other DAs
and um
I don't you know who else you.
I'll pass it all different.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord. We also had meetings with
Other representatives of this
Augustus buddy, when we met with
him in Albuquerque to discuss
with the City of Albuquerque,
the Albuquerque Public schools,
um.
Once again, members of this.
representative body.
And um law enforcement.
Uh, as well as CYSD as
represented through their
juvenile probation office. We
have met with all the
stakeholders that we could.
Thank you, ma'am sheriffs and
experts cause it's always find
it super important when we get a
bill that comes and it's got the
approval and been discussed with
the stakeholders.
Um, and especially in Burnley
County cause that's part of my
county and we have extremely
high rate of juvenile offenders
and juveniles doing
A lot of things and repeating on
those offenses, Manches and I
won't belabor all the changes
that we have made and they're
just on the crime issues. I'm
trying to see if there's
Is there anything that you want
to talk about about that's a
significant change in some of
the things starting on page 5
through.
7
By the way, I do appreciate.
I like when the weight of a bill
goes down.
dramatically, um, is there
anything that you want to
highlight, um, in this about.
the changes that are being made
or the things that we're adding.
Into Boing harm or any of these
crimes are being committed, is
there anything you want to
highlight on that my
representative, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I'll first say a
few words and then defer to my
expert, um, I just think it's
important to note that Sears
youthful offender was always
just first-degree murder and
manage representative we're not
in that position anymore in this
day and age and the reality that
we're facing that everybody I
believe in this room knows
what's happening with juil
crime. We have 13 year olds
committing murder. So we felt it
was important to lower that age.
just for that serious violent
events from Fort uh from 1415
down to 14 and then list the
four what we believe were the
four most violent crimes, um.
First 1st and 2nd degree murder
of voluntary manslaughter
obviously results in death, um,
robbery with a deadly weapon,
which we feel is extremely
dangerous. And then when you're
drive-by shootings are occurring
and you're shooting into
somebody's house or you're
shooting into somebody's car,
and we, we, we limited it to the
ones that caused great bodily
injury, um, and those are the
only ones and all these other
ones that are listed, which are
very serious crimes. I would, I
would think to everybody in
here, they're in this, they're
in the
Youthful offender statute where
they will get the right to an
amenability hearing to say we're
giving up on our kids so that
we're not giving them the help
we need. That is not the case.
They will have an amenability
hearing, they will go through
the factors, the judge will
decide whether they're amenable
to treatment, evaluations will
be conducted, um, but, uh, a big
hearing will be held on this to
determine um if they are
amenable to treatment, so Madam
Chair representative work, we
are not giving up on kids, and I
would defer to my expert, um,
who can actually provide more
information for you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madame Chair,
Representative Lord, uh, I do
have some statistics reflecting
the year 2023 to 2024 in Burling
County.
Uh, we had a total referral of
1,542 cases.
Of those 24 were for murder.
Another 52 were for armed
robbery.
another 73 as it relates to the
amended.
filled with the revised bill for
shooting out from a loaded
vehicle or at a dwelling.
So even if you look at the
proportion.
It is vastly in favor of the
type of intervention that we're
going to be giving the young
people that we see.
Um, I will also note that
approximately 471 of our
referrals.
Uh, involved a handgun.
So
It is
A crime crisis for juvenile
offenders.
Um, we had a 57% increase of
cases between 2022 and 2023.
And in
2024, we had 160 film and felony
juvenile crimes.
Involving firearms.
Now
As noted by Representative Reed,
the majority of those
individuals won't even
necessarily see.
An offense that would require
them to even go through
amenability.
Under current New Mexico law,
which is not going to be changed
unlawful possession of a handgun
by a child under 19.
is a misdemeanor offense.
That means that the maximum
penalty
is 2 years.
jurisdiction.
Yeah, and I think it's important
to note that nothing that we
have promulgated says
incarceration.
That discretion is still within.
The jurisdiction of the court.
The court still gets to make the
determination.
provided that we get the upper
amount of jurisdiction were
properly handle children.
That's one of the things that's
important in terms of
reading some of these offenders
as adults.
It gives us the flexibility of
time.
time that we would not have if
they remained as juveniles.
Because once they turn 21,
The jurisdiction is over.
And we leave them then to their
own devices. So whether they're
rehabilitated,
much more likely not
rehabilitated.
We're sending them back to our
community, whether they were on
probation or incarcerated in the
facility managed by CYFD.
then go
then make a determination of how
they should live their lives.
We want the flexibility of time.
This provides us.
Thank you, Medicare
representative expert. Thank you
for explaining that, um, cause I
know in in New Mexico we have a
different way of doing the
juveniles and a lot of has to do
with, it was a bill that passed
through about connecting them
into services and programs, so
there's a lot more programs for
them. It's not just throwing
them behind bars. It's trying to
make a difference, and I know in
Albuquerque we had uh I think
it's been a couple of months and
I'm losing track of time since
being up here since we never see
the light of day or anything.
We're just inside all the time.
That the those children that
were involved in that shooting,
it was on copper and tramway, I
think one was as young as 11.
And it's just amazing um
adventures. I know there was
like 1314, 11, and they're using
firearms and they're shooting at
people. It's just absolutely
ridiculous and I know.
In my district, um.
Fortunately, in the East
Mountains, we see less of that,
however, we're starting to see
more of it up there, more of an
Edgewood, a lot in Edgewood, and
in my district down, I know
people are absolutely sick of
what is happening and people
want more done, so I actually
will agree with the governor for
the first time ever in my life
and probably maybe the only time
in my life that something does
need to be done, and I
appreciate that it's been very
bipartisan and they've checked
with all the stakeholders, and I
think this bill is more the will
of the people.
Because it keeps coming back and
it keeps coming back and it's
time to just get it done, and I
do agree that it's time that we
address this issue instead of
sweeping on the rug, so I
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives and I
won't belabor the points that
representative uh.
Lord had, but I, I do want to
just know, at least in my
community, there has been an
increase in violent crime for
for youngsters, they, there,
there's so many news reports, a
17 year old was involved in a
double homicide in Bows Acres,
which is in the southern part of
my district, there was a
conviction of youth involving
other serious crimes, there was
another shooting death of the 17
year old by an Ontario County,
another 17 year old. There was
so much else that happened in my
district regarding these
youthful.
offenders, and it's really
horrifying to to see the
consequences of this in our
community. So it's not, it's not
just in Albuquerque, it's all
over the place, including in
Alaagorda where I live and I
represent.
And so Madam Chaps when I, when
I come to legislating, and you
probably heard this on the floor
as well today.
I like to look at data and I
like to look at.
Actual data that's been peer
reviewed, so not just some, some
study that someone can buy and
manipulate, but I looked at the
data and I found a study from
the University of Chicago, and
it was the Journal of Political
Economy and it showed a huge,
very strong evidence between
harsher juvenile sentences that
and and deterring crime,
particularly if juveniles face
stricter consequences upon
turning 18, so Madam Chair and
representatives, do you see that
this could be helpful and.
Mexico when it comes to this.
And I do see that there's data
behind it. So can you give me a
little more information when it
comes to that, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Block.
Uh, I think of deterrences in
terms of incapacitation.
Uh, certainly
A certain number of these young
people are in fact incarcerated.
They will not be able to shoot
out of a vehicle.
They will not be able to shoot
at a residence, it will not be
able to kill anyone or harm
anyone or rob anyone.
Um
Uh, I choose to believe.
That children speak with each
other?
Young people, especially in peer
groups, especially through
social media.
They're very aware of what
happens to their peers.
Um, they communicate that.
Uh, I've seen a number of social
media where they're saying free
so and so. Um, they're
communicating about
The
Outcomes.
Associated with offenses.
Does that
Resulting deterrence, I would
hope so.
I can't say that with an
absolute certainty.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative, and I appreciate
that answer. And I think when it
comes to New Mexico, we also
have to look at our New Mexico
data and when it comes to this
next generation, even after my
generation, I'm Gen Z, and I
don't know what even comes after
me, but these kids are so smart
and they are so so good at
communicating with their peers
that I think that if some, if
this
bill does indeed pass.
And there are higher
consequences for things like
murdering people, raping people.
I mean, the worst crimes that I
can think of.
I'm pretty sure, madam Chair
Representative, those things are
going to trickle down to the
school levels, to the the friend
group levels, and I think it
could indeed help deter some
crime, because after all, word
travels fast, especially for
these kids with, with cell
phones and TikTok and so I, I
barely got a TikTok account
myself, so I don't know what
they're doing, but I can say,
madam to representative, that
these are intelligent kids, and
I think the higher penalties for
harming one another.
Specifically, or anyone in our
society. I think that could
definitely help, and I really
appreciate it and I also
appreciate that there's, there's
significant data out there that
proves this very point, so, and
if you have anything to add,
please go ahead, ma'am to your
representative. Yeah. Thank you,
uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um, I just want to point
out that I do work a lot of work
at at YDC for the juveniles
incarcerated and I have talked
to one of my son's murderers,
um, in detail so.
times and I just want to point
out that a lot of times these
juvenile offenders come from
generational crime, um,
generational drug dealers may be
generational gangs, and they
don't see another way, um, until
they get incarcerated and they
have supervisors there at YDC in
the juvenile facilities that
work with them, they get
behavioral health counseling,
um,
They get their GEDs, they move
on and take college courses, um,
they get sober and a lot of
times that does not happen and
will not happen until they are
incarcerated and get the care
and the services that they need
because they don't get that at
home. So I just wanted to point
that out.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, and thank
you for your work in that, and
I'm so sorry about your, your
son, and I think that is just a
testament that someone who is a
victim, who has seen.
I mean the immediate impact in
your own family can look at
solution-based approaches that
are backed in science, backed in
statistics, and I think that
that's super important. And I
really think both of you for
working with sponsors and and
other people around the, the
state, including in Albuquerque
with the district attorney to
find a solution that everyone
can get get behind. So I really
appreciate it. Thank you for the
thoughtful lawmaking, and I, I
truly appreciate this and I, I
hope this passes. Thank you,
Madam Chair, representatives.
Thank you, Representative
Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you for being here so late, all
of you. Um,
So I just wanna get back to the
bill. I know he there was
discussion about some of the
crimes that aren't even required
in this building, um, some of my
colleagues. So I just want to
clarify what we're actually
talking about cause we're
talking about the Children's
code.
Tonight we're talking about the
fact that we don't incarcerate
children. We're talking about
detaining and committing
children. We're talking about
the fact that children in
particular, um,
Should they be in the situation
of committing these types of
crimes or delinquent acts
rather, um, or serious
delinquent acts that the
rehabilitation rate for many of
these children is very high, um,
and so I just wanna get back to
the reality because I do think
evidence is really important for
the decisions that we're making,
which is also a reality. Um, so
I want that to be coupled
together as we, as we discussed
that, um.
So when we look at
Um
What's in the bill and we're,
we're really, and I'm, I'm still
familiarizing with the
children's court, and I know we,
we really started a lot of that
conversation over the summer in
CCJ and talking about some of
this, so
When I'm looking at um what's in
the bill right now and, and
what's stayed in. I'm just,
first, let's just start with um
When we're adding
Crimes, um, under this serious
youthful offender, and we're
enumerating these new crimes
now, and I know that we've seen
this recently and how judiciary.
What does it mean now when we
now start listing these out for
these children in this
circumstance. What happens to
them if, should they commit one
of these enumerated crimes as a
serious youthful offender.
Madame Chair, Representative
Romero.
The process will still be the
same as it exists now.
We can't automatically leap to
these particular fences. They
have to have a probable cause
determination, whether it's a
preliminary hearing or the grand
jury.
Once they are bound over or
indicted on these offenses, then
their subject to adult.
Consequences, adult penalties.
Uh, and as I indicated, that
gives us the flexibility of time
because as I stated before, once
they're turned 21.
out of jurisdiction.
As you're aware.
court cannot impose any greater
penalty for a juvenile than they
can for an adult.
Um, and that includes a 5-year
maximum probationary term.
So when you're talking about the
ability to be rehabilitate.
That still exists, but what it
does is it doesn't.
Permanently and our ability to
deal with young people that are
committing some of the most
horrendous crimes just because
they turned 21.
So Madam Chair, representative
and expert.
What we're saying is that
If there's a 14 year old or 15
year old, whatever they,
whatever age they are, if they
commit uh the crime of shooting
at a dwelling.
That's one of the enumerated
here.
Um
They are now subject to criminal
penalties after the age of 21.
Is that what I'm hearing?
Madame Chair, Representative
Romero, to be clear, it would
have to be a shooting at a
dwelling that results in great
bodily harm, not just shooting
at a dwelling.
It would actually have to harm
someone grievously.
can see that if I'm reading each
of the enumerated crimes. So if
I commit one of the enumerated
crimes here. What happens after,
um,
Uh, now that I'm subject to to
this.
Um
Violent offense as a, as a
child.
Then what happens?
Then the court would have
discretion to apply a sentence
consistent with an adult sense.
So, Madam Chair,
Representative experts. So what
I'm hearing is if I'm 15 years
old and I commit one of these
crimes.
One of the enumerated, I now am
subject to crimess essentially I
have a criminal record going.
It's not sealed any longer
because it reopens essentially
as I turn 18 through 21, and
then perhaps get subject to a
longer criminal penalty, um, at
that point. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, representative for
Maryland, that is correct.
OK.
Um
I'm just gonna keep going, so
that.
That just gives me pause already
with understanding that
Again, when we're talking about
the, the children's code and the
ability to rehabilitate.
And the fact that we're now
pushing this out to adulthood.
Where does the rehabilitation
take place in that?
That time frame when you said
the, the what we're looking for
is time.
What I'm hearing is time is just
time incarcerated. Now
criminalizing that child into
adulthood. Now they have a
criminal record as an adult.
They may be under longer
probationary periods, but where
is that time to actually look at
them as a child and rehabilitate
them as a child.
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero.
We do relocation for adults.
And so we can do the same for.
juveniles that have an adult
sense.
In addition, we're we're talking
about offenses that
Significantly impact victims'
lives.
The rehabilitation that we can
do.
We will do, uh, and we want that
because we want to form.
Good, upstanding citizens
despite their worst.
A
However
There has to be some
accountability.
And to just say, you're now 21.
And we can't do anything with
you anymore if you did your
crime at 16 or 17 or even 15 or
14.
And you're not rehabilitated.
What good have we done for
society and what good have we
done for that individual?
I hear you, madam chair, and I,
and I hear about having that
time.
But once you are a felon under
this law, and once we're
enumerating each of these crimes
as adults now, and we're
felonizing this child at the age
of
14 or 15 for whatever crime they
may have committed.
We're essentially committing
them to that life of
felonization of criminal
penalty, their their life is now
based on that decision at 14 or
15, we're not giving a chance
for rehabilitation for that
sealed record any longer. We're
now saying we can keep
enumerating crimes here under
the serious violent offender,
and as we continue to to to
create this list and promulgate
this list, we're essentially
deciding for which.
crimes we, you know, my
colleague to the left had just
talked about rape. That's not in
this bill. Um,
You know,
What we're looking at the, the
crimes that we're committing
folks for life.
To that sort of penalty.
I don't see the distinction
between the child who commits
that crime and the adult who
commits that crime, because
essentially, if you commit one
of the crimes on the list,
you're committed into a lifetime
of that decision.
That's the distinction under
the, the Children's code today
is that we act, if we need more
time to rehabilitate the child,
Madam Chair representative. I
don't see that here. What we're
saying is we're criminalizing
them at that point and we're
keeping all of the rest behind
that the same.
So I don't see how the
rehabilitated part or
rehabilitative opportunity is
now distinguished because
they're a child. Do you, do you
understand what I'm asking or
where I'm going with this, Madam
Chair, a representative Romero.
I'm not sure that I do
understand because as I
indicated, we do our level best
to rehabilitate adult offenders,
people that are adult to begin
with, and that is in and outside
of facilities, the same would
apply for.
these juveniles.
I hear you, Madam Chair,
represent uh representative, but
I don't hear the difference in
what that handoff looks like if
I'm now was committed a crime
under the Children's code, and
now I'm being subject as an
adult thereafter. There's no
difference whether I commit a
crime as a child or as an adult
under this change. Is that
correct?
Uh
my name Chair Representative
Romero, there is a difference.
There is because if they would
have committed these offenses as
adults.
The penalties are automatic.
Um, in terms of what the court
can do.
As a juvenile, there's still
flexibility and discretion given
to the court that wouldn't
necessarily apply for adults.
Madam chair and represented I
can also add the, these aren't
like mandatory sentences
necessarily. I mean, when the
library shooter closes, you
know, killed all those people
and wounded all those people,
um, there's case law out there
that you have to give them a
chance to get out of jail and
and have a chance to
rehabilitate or whatever, so
these can be
You know, past 21, and correct
me if I'm wrong, maybe we're
gonna put him until they're 25
or 30, and then we're gonna put
them out on probation, and we're
gonna get, you know, the
treatment and things that they
need or maybe are recommended. I
understand that because there's
no, even if it's first degree
murder, I don't believe that the
mandatory sentence for a
juvenile like it is an adult,
but I'll differ in my expert.
But I'm sure um representative
Romero, that's accurate. And in
fact, this legislative body has
already put in other.
roadblocks to ensure that
Even on first murder or a child
convicted as an adult that they
can only spend so much time in
prison before they're subject to
a parole review. The idea being
that if they have maintained.
Good behavior and have
rehabilitated, but they can get
out, whereas for an adult that
had committed a similar offense,
they would not be subject to a
parole review, let alone a
parole at all.
So for me, Madam Chair, that
would be the starting point for
what we would want to fix. I
don't see how that handoff at
this point.
changes that situation. If we're
just saying at the end of the
day, they're still going to be
subject to that same parole, the
same amount of time, whether
you're a child coming from. I, I
know I'm, I'm repeating myself,
so I'll, I'll move on, but if I
can just say I think Madam Chair
representative what we're what
we're really talking about in
these, we're talking about the
worst of the worst kids who are
killing people. Madam Chair,
what is the universe of that
look like? Because of the data
that we received on
What the crimes that are most
often committed in this
delinquent referral or battery
battery against a household
member or possession of
cannabis, public fighting and
resisting or evading an officer.
So when we're limiting the
universe to this enumerated
list. This is in the FIR about
fiscal year 2023.
Um, about which juveniles are
referred to juvenile justice
services, and the, the decrease
in that number from 19 to
present day.
And so when I'm looking, when
we're looking at the universe of
these violent offenders that now
fall under this enumerated list
who were treating as adults.
What does that look like?
I mean, I'm sure Representative
Romero.
Uh, I think that's what actually
is important about the
enumerated bills. These
represent the worst, the worst
offenders. This
is a small.
Population. The majority of the
juveniles that we see are, well,
the ones that we see in the
district attorney's office have
committed felony offenses, the
majority of the crimes that
you've just listed were
misdemeanors that were referred
to the juvenile probation
services and it's unlikely that
we ever saw them because they
were properly diverted.
Um, by the juvenile probation
office.
generally only see felonies and
only on rare occasions do we see
misdemeanor offenses, but those
things are all handled as
juvenile fences, juvenile
delinquents. This.
Represents the worst type of
behavior, the worst type of
conduct, and it is.
Significantly lower than you
would expect from the majority
of the offenses. Um, I think
that's true for the adult
population as well.
Most people are not murderers.
It's a small population.
Most people may commit property
crimes. The same holds true for.
So let me get this straight, if
I'm the scheme though that we're
going for, if the universe is
small enough that we can perhaps
deal with this very violent
population.
And the data that we understand
about what allows folks to
rehabilitate even in the most
violent situations. If they're a
manageable population. We're now
choosing to incarcerate them
longer, rather than look at a
situation where we could
actually work with these
individuals and rehabilitate
them at a younger age. Is that
what I'm understanding about
this manageable but small
population, a very violent
offenders, we may actually be
able to work with.
And sort of figure that out in
this universe of of of
juveniles, is that what I'm
hearing?
Yeah, Madame Chair,
representative Romero, I, I
think you're speaking about two
different populations. Uh, I, I
really do believe that because
once again, even with the small
population that we may be
dealing with, time runs out at
21.
And if they're not
rehabilitated, they are capable
and frequently unfortunately do,
continued commit violent
offenses as adults.
So we still see them. The only
difference is that they've been
able to continue to harm rather
than us having some ability to
be able to manage them, whether
they're in or out of the
facility. Once again,
incarceration is a tool. It's
not the only tool, and it's not
something that we need to use
unless it is necessary.
I, I hear that and I, I guess
I'm
trying to wrap my head around
the idea that
The proposal today for a
universe that we can, we can
understand, we know who this
population is, you're saying to
me, it's a, it's a small amount,
the the vast majority when we
look at the reality and the
data, the folks that aren't
targeted by this bill, um.
As serious youthful offenders.
You know, they're gonna get to
21, they can move on, but the
folks that were proposing for
this segment, um, and again,
we're, we're talking about a
small segment of the population.
The solution that you're
providing here without the data.
is to just incarcerate them past
adulthood.
And that's, that's my concern,
right? We're saying let's take
this very specific violent
offense.
And
Rather than look at a more
intense rehabilitation program
after 21 and have a handoff.
In the incarceration and
felonization until adulthood is
what you're prescribing here.
Madame Chair, representative for
Mary.
It, to be clear, it is small by
compa of the overall juvenile
justice system.
But 2 murders and 20 victims of
murder is not small. It's not
insignificant.
30 or 40 shootings that result
in somebody being grievously
harmed is not small or
insignificant.
Um, so although the population
compared to all of juvenile
justice may be small for the
individual victims and for the
individual that committed that
offense, it is not a small
thing.
And I think that I think that we
can address.
Those particular
Individuals much more readily
through this system where, yes,
they will be treated as adults
than juveniles.
Yeah, now I'm sure, I think
we're just
In a divergent path of, of
solutions to
How we manage that, those 20
that situation of 20 or whatever
the data is with those violent
offenders and what it is that
we're thinking about from from a
a child's perspective when we're
talking about kids.
You know, yes, and, you know,
and I, and I'm just, I'm trying
to wrap my head around when
we're looking at solutions for
how to manage a population that
has wreaked havoc on our
community. We're talking about
Bernalo County, I think
specifically, as the county that
has seen the only increase in
violent crime, while the rest of
the state has actually decreased
5%. That's what our, our, um,
and representative. I just like
to say like I'm from a town of
Clovis, we've seen 150% increase
in juvenile shootings and
murders. So this is I'm reading
from FIR about violent crimes.
So, I'm try again, I'm trying to
piece this together and
understand the proposal before
us.
Um
Going to youthful offender on
page 6.
When we look at, again, the
enumerated crimes that are now
um.
Being listed or in addition to
the.
What had already been listed.
Um
Homicide by vehicle. Why, why is
that added.
Madame Chair, Representative
Romero right now, a drunk
juvenile that plows into a
vehicle or into a person and
kills them, gets the same
penalty, the same jurisdiction
as someone who did felony
shopping for.
2 years. That's the maximum
jurisdiction that they currently
exists under New Mexico law.
I think that
Legislative body of the state of
New Mexico is deemed DWIs to be
a serious offense, and yet when
it comes to juvenile.
It's almost insignificant. On
that point, excuse me, um, would
it also someone who uh youthful
offender that um wasn't.
Um, under the influence, still
have that same two year if it
was reckless.
And I'm sure that is accurate,
whether it's by reckless or by
drunk driving as somebody kills
another human being, and they
are juvenile. The penalty is no
greater than that.
Probab
So, um, um, representative and
expert.
Um, just making a mistake, um.
Driving and as a youthful person
for, uh, you know, 15 or 16.
They would have 2 years that
they could have to serve.
Ma I'm sure again this is just,
this is in the youthful
offender, so this is one of
those situations that I don't
believe the DA has to choose to
pursue the youthful offender if
they choose not to, and then
again they would have the
amenability hearing that would
decide whether they would be
treated as an adult or a
juvenile, but reckless, I've had
reckless um homicides where um
Adults and kids have driven down
the wrong side of the road for 5
miles and had alcohol in them
and maybe not be enough, Madam
chair to pursue a DWI DWI on
them, but the fact that they are
drinking alcohol adds to the
fact that they're being reckless
and so there's a lot that goes
into stake when you're just
talking about.
Running to stop sign or speeding
or drag racing or whatever it
might be, if that answers your
question here.
I think you answered it before.
Thank you. And uh excuse the
interruption.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
think that those are excellent,
um.
Uh
Questions to follow up with
again an enumerated list that
encumbers now.
Accidents, I mean.
We know texting and driving is
ubiquitous, whether it be an
adult or a child, and now we're
If the homicide by vehicles in
here. They're now subject to,
you said 2 years of penalty no
matter what, is
that right, Madam Chair,
representative fromro, the
jurisdiction is 2 years, um, as
it exists now, and I would add
that the criteria for vehicular
homicide requires either
intoxication or reckless
behavior, not careless, careless
does not qualify.
Um, that would still not be a
vehicular homicide in New Mexico
law.
And, and
What's more is
has paid by
Representative Reed, it would
still go through the ability
process, the court could still
determine that.
It was more of an accident than
an intentional act.
And getting intoxicated and then
get behind the wheel.
And then, of course,
The court still has the ability
to place them on probation and
supervise them to deal with
that.
What could very well be an
addiction, they're wrestling
with.
But this
Adresses the harm. Someone has
been killed.
I, I hear you, Madam Chair, and
again, as we
Empathize and try to target how
to prevent that from happening.
We're, we're really focusing on
the penalties right now, right?
That's what this bill is about,
um.
I, I think I'm, I don't, I'm, I
mean, just adding this list for
youthful offender too, I think
is um.
When we look at again, what's
encumbered in this, it can be,
it is troubling to think of
those that may be.
Sort of depending on.
Um, who they're in front of
making that designation for what
their penalty would be.
How that would be derived um for
something that, again, was an
accident, um, and again we're
talking about children.
Um
What what they would be subject
to, um.
Madam Cherry, I, as I continue
to read through, I, I.
And I'm very uncomfortable. Um,
with
How it is that we decide.
What rehabilitation is for
children and what we would
subject them to immediately.
Into adulthood.
Um
And my discomfort with that is
just in looking at
How we want to propose what is
possible for what we understand
in this population to be among
the greatest sort of opportunity
to rehabilitate.
When we're talking about
children and
My
My biggest reservation is not in
having, having the opportunity
to understand that these are
very serious situations that I
absolutely agree with, um, and
that perhaps the more time that
we have to help.
Um, understand the gravity of
what decisions were made, and
whether you're 14 or 25.
that these are very serious.
But what I'm not
connecting with is how we do
better.
With this. And I'm
I'm, I will continue to listen
to the debate, um.
But at this point, Madam Cherry,
I can't support this type of um.
position and how we move forward
with this.
And Madam Chair, representative
I would also add in that, I know
you mentioned you were concerned
about it being on somebody's
record for the rest of their
life, they, they do have the
ability to move for expungement
in the adult realm, you know, we
have that ability, records are
sealed as juveniles, but, um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
you can move to expunge, um.
You can expunge, uh, move to
expunge anything, um, except I
believe a DWI and a couple other
but maybe embezzlement crimes,
but you always have the option
to move to a sponge, um, so I
wanted to make that clear, chair
representative.
Um, next we have Representative
Thompson. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just wanted to um clear
something up. So, um,
Representative you, you.
At least to me, and it may not
have been the way you, you meant
it, but that you stated that
Nick Costeas didn't push back
and that you implied that that
was an endorsement. So I have a
quote from him that came from
the last time we heard this
bill, and it is this bill is not
tough on crime, it's tough on
kids. The bill doesn't address
the small group of repeat
offenders, it widens the net to
gather kids that just need
additional services.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and to respond
I'm sorry there wasn't a
question she was just making a
statement.
Thank you. Um,
And I appreciate all that you've
done to, you know, try and
consider the things that we had
mentioned, but there were other
things, I guess, that we hadn't
been concerns and um
One of mine is that um CYFD has
said that this is
Changing the fundamental
fundamental um ways that we um
Handle juvenile offenders by
increasing pathways for youth to
be charged as adults. And this
shift, um, away from
rehabilitation and toward a
punitive adult-oriented model,
um, is what this is doing rather
than addressing juvenile crime
through prevention,
rehabilitation and reintegration
and the focus on punitive
measures, um, ignore the
developmental.
um
Science and the proven
rehabilitation approaches, and
with that I agree um that um
this is something that is is
broader instead of being focused
on just those um who are the
really serious offenders.
Um,
May respond by, yes, uh, well, I
would first just say it is by no
means trying to get away with um
not trying to rehabilitate
juveniles that is probably 90%
of what we do in the Children's
code is try to rehabilitate
juvenile offenders, um, I'm
skeptical that CYMD is saying
that considering all the issues
CYFD is having and the fact that
They aren't really doing what
they need to be doing to protect
kids, and we're trying to
protect everybody with this
bill, so, um,
In that sense, I, you know, I
don't put a ton of weight and
CYMD's recommendation, but I can
tell you we're going after the
worst of the worst, and it's,
it's very easy to sit here,
maybe about a chair and say, I'm
worried we're not rehabilitating
kids, but talk to someone who's
been killed.
Talk to a family member who's
been killed by a a juvenile, um,
and then say we want to
rehabilitate them, uh, talk to
my people in Clovis, New Mexico,
where 4 people were shot and 2
people were killed by someone
who came in and did a mass
shooting. I mean, these are the
things that New Mexico wants
addressed and we baby these kids
so much.
A mountain chair that they laugh
at us, they laugh at the DA's
office that nothing's gonna
happen
to them because I just thought
you were gonna respond to what I
said, but thank you. Um, and,
uh, since it is almost 10
o'clock, we are not going to do
any more second round since
everyone did get a chance to
debate.
OK.
I'm sure I move it do pass.
I,
second
my second.
OK.
Excuse me, there's not supposed
to be any uh superfluous
comments.
think or.
Remarks that way too.
Um
We have a motion to table and
we'll take a roll.
Representative Block not a table
with an explanation, please.
Represent,
with an explanation, please.
Where percentage of Romero.
Yes to take Representative
Thompson, Madam Vice Chair, yes,
the table.
Madam Chair, yes to table.
I know both of 4 to 2 on your um
bill has been tabled. This is
for House Bill 134, um,
I'm sorry.
Committee substitute for House
Bill 134. Thank you.
It's
representative and to um explain
your vote.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I don't.
I'm just, I don't know. I, we
come to Santa Fe to come fix the
crime issue, please stay.
And when we do that, Madam
Chair.
We don't pass bills that
actually can fix crime we pass
weak sauce, sad excuses for
legislation, such as something
that passed already. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I find
this to be just disheartening
for those victims. I find it to
be shameful for this body and
for this, this committee, and
it's sad that this bill was even
sent to this committee because
it was dead on arrival, and it's
a shame, because some people
would rather just see the, the
problem continue while other
people want actually solve it,
and I appreciate all of you for
actually trying to solve it, and
I'm
Sorry you were cut off so rudely
by so many members of this
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Lord to explain
your vote.
Thank you Madam chair, another
sad day in New Mexico. We had an
opportunity to actually do
something and we failed yet
again. So, you came to the death
committee,
but here it is and I'm
apologize,
I apologize to you for someone
who's had, who has been
influenced by this and I
understand why you're here in
your passion, and I'm very sorry
that this seems to never go
through. We don't want to do a
damn thing about juvenile
offenders. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and
Um, representative Lord, you are
not to use profanity while
you're on the profanity Point of
order.
