from members of that are
recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong I'm here
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong is here Representative
Gail Armstrong.
Representative Baca.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative black.
Representative.
Yes Representative boom guys
here Representative Brown.
Representative Cadena.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler is here
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Representative dela Cruz
Representative Cruz is here
Representative Dow.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Ferrary.
Here Representative Ferrary is
here Representative Gallegos
Representative Gallegos is here
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Center Representative Miguel
Garcia is here Representative in
on this.
Representative at a.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Your Representative Lara is here
Representative Lord.
Representative Madrid.
Your Representative Madrid is
here Representative Martinez
Representative Martinez is here
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews is here
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Here Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Nibert.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
There Representative G. Andrés
Romero is here Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative Strickler.
Representative off the.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Trujillo.
Here Representative Trujillo is
here Representative Zamora.
Rule because close we have a
quorum.
Just earlier.
We go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation.
No objections so ordered.
Member.
We're going to go to item number
twelve.
Gentlelady from Osama C. right
and I don't.
Yes Mr speaker will you get me
to that point the record reflect
all action necessary for the
Senate Bill endorsed amended on
final passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the bill
Senate bill four as amended
amends the public minimum wage
act to provide that when an
appeal of a wage rate
determination is made a state of
the ways right determination may
occur upon the issuance of an
order of the court.
There is debate the gentleman
for someone.
Thank you madam speaker our
minimum Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes a yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady heard the introduction
but we did not receive.
vests notice of this bill being
heard so I haven't had a chance
to look to read the bill so
could you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Could you
spend a little bit more time
explaining of what this bill
does.
And a lot more detail.
Mr speaker gentleman yes I can
what the bill does not jump
someone just as a point of order
this listed go out this morning
at eleven thirty so every member
of the house receiving email
eleven thirty with the bills
that we intended to take of this
morning and to take up this
evening.
Mr speaker is that the list that
we're going to continue with
this evening yes.
Thank you Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan what the bill does is
clarifies that when there is an
appeal of a wage rate
determination of that appeal
will not automatically State the
implementation of the ways of
termination and provides that
the interested party may seek
such a court order in court.
Thank you Mr speaker of civility
I'm sorry I was a little
distracted kids can I have you
repeat all of that.
I'm sorry there was a there was
a side conversation going on if
I.
If I could have you briefly
explain again.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I'm happy to repeat
myself.
What the bill provides is that
when there is a wage rate
determination made by the
department of workforce
solutions and there is an appeal
of that wage rate determination
that appeal will not
automatically state the
implementation of the new wage
rates instead the interested
party must seek an order of
state through the courts.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady so I'm not meaning
to be.
A knowledgeable about this but I
really am so Mister speaker and
gentle lady when I see the
policy prevailing wage here I
think of you wages
And that being said usually
through a
some sort of a negotiation is
that not what staff put this is
here Mister speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentleman under
the prevailing wage act.
Every year the department of
workforce solutions.
Determines what the appropriate
wages for particular area for
those projects that are public
project construction projects.
And all employers on public
construction projects must pay
the prevailing wage as
determined the reason for this
bill is
there have been some
contractors without good cause
or perhaps even arguably good
faith that I won't go there have
appealed to the wage rate
determination there by stalling
the implementation of the wage
rate that was determined to be
appropriate by the department of
workforce solutions thereby
denying.
Excuse me.
Hundreds if not thousands of
employees working on public
projects there appropriate wage
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
Mr gentle lady so how does the
secretary of the department of
workforce solutions make this
determination what what input is
does he take our does the
secretary take to come up with
that determination for each job.
Mr speaker gentleman I cannot
speak to that point in detail
and this amendment does not
address how that is done it's
simply addresses what happens Mr
speaker and gentleman after it
is done.
Thank you Mr leader so that
determination is made and this
is to.
Event the appeals for what what
exactly are we looking to
prevent.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan what it prevents is an
automatic stay when a party
files an appeal that party still
has the opportunity to appeal
but they must go to court and so
I would imagine good because
before the court would issue
such a state.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I currently have if if
Someone files an appeal.
And there's a there's a state
but when.
If it's determined that they
have to to to make those
payments are made or make that
wage
isn't that pay with that pay be
retroactive Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Would they not be required to go
back and pay.
Of wages that had not been
Rate of properly Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
like to refer to my experts on
that question and I will ask him
to come in.
Okay.
Mr speaker gentleman what we're
getting our my expertise chair
my expertise saying youths.
An attorney practicing in
Albuquerque.
Mr speaker gentleman there is no
retroactive provision.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so that is the purpose for
this than just to a I believe
what you're saying is that.
some.
Companies have been using this
provision.
four yield to not have to pay.
the wages and then when the
until.
Is settled if they are required
to pay those.
Availing wage then.
If the clock starts at that
point is that what you're saying
to speak on that later Mr
speaker gentleman from San Juan
I think that generally
characterizes what's going on
there have been instances where
in some non union contractors
have objected to a new wage one
in particular seem to
particularly egregious because
they challenged a twenty nine
days versus a thirty day notice
period.
M. as our as a result they filed
an appeal on that basis they did
not feel the actual weight wage
determination and as a result
many and many many workers in
the state for denied the
prevailing wage for a fairly
long period of time I would also
note Mr speaker gentleman.
That in addition to.
Organized labor in the state
supporting this bill associate
general counsel contractors does
as does the department of work
so for solutions.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady does this only apply to
state agencies Mr speaker
gentlelady or does this what
this apply to
counties or cities or anywhere
where there state dollars Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan it applies to
contractors who have contracts
to perform on public.
Public projects public projects
are projects done on behalf of
state municipal and county
governments Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr and gentle lady so
the when there is a
Contract awarded when this
happens with a I am it seems to
me if the speaker gentle lady
the next time a of a job or a
project would go out to bid that
these contractors who were
problematic would be.
That would they be placed on a a
list where they.
would not.
Further get
state project jobs is that is
that happening currently.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
It is not happening currently.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I.
I would hope that that would be
it seems to me miss madam
speaker gentle lady that's
responsibility of whatever.
state subdivision.
that's awarding these contracts
would be responsible for that
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
I thank you for answering my
questions do I.
I will listen to debate to
determine Madam speaker and
gentle lady how I'm going to
proceed with my vote thank you.
Next we have the gentleman from
curry Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady please yield.
Madam speaker and gentleman
from.
Don't know what one of those
counties yes I yield.
Thank you gentle lady from Los
Alamos through the Santa in
Santa Fe
I appreciate the delay I notice
on page two.
Of your bill that you've amended
in online twenty three and
twenty five the.
Process will start no later than
October first in the rates to
take effect January first Madam
speaker gentle lady.
What how how is this process
handled prior to amending those
two dates into this bill have
how did they go about
establishing the range.
Mr speaker gentleman the rates
are.
evaluated during the summer and
they are issued by the
rule making process Mister
speaker gentleman.
So Mr gentle lady I I understand
that
The the common practices I guess
what I would call it for lack of
a date did you're not amending
update and replacing with the
new day you're just establishing
today and so I would assume that
for historical purposes for a
long period of time you've
always kind of just work through
the process in the summer and
the fall you establish it and
then have effective somewhere
around the first year and and
you're just codifying that into
the bill at this point is that
correct Madam speaker gentle
lady Madam speaker gentleman
from curry that's correct is it
add some certainty to the
process madam speaker
gentleman's thank you gentle
lady gentle lady I I guess my.
Primary question would be what
was that process not working is
that is that what cost you to
want to amend this bill or I'm
trying to find the the motive
behind why the amendments to the
bill.
Okay Mr speaker gentleman from
curry.
what was happening is that
contractors were filing appeals
without good basically and as a
consequence madam speaker they
were utilizing the automatic
stay provisions to support the
implementation of a preventive
appropriate prevailing wage for
all workers on particular.
Public projects Mr speaker and
gentleman I mean Madam speaker
into.
Thank you Julie thank you madam
speaker Representative the
gentle lady I would assume that
that they were trying to
forestall an increase if there
were declined or something of
that nature that it's not
something they would have drug
their feet and and stall the
process so four is there a
fairly consistent history of an
increase annually or bi annually
or something.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry you're correct it would.
Contractors have not been
appealing way determinations
that have lowered the weights
and Mr speaker gentleman from
curry in fact the generally
wages have gone up.
Over from year to year basis
thank you gentle lady I
appreciate that I I think I kind
of understand part now I was a
contractor for forty six years
but I was not part of the labor
process we were independent so I
wasn't sure I thought I knew but
I wasn't sure how that happened
so the gentle lady on page four.
Online eight the talks about a
final written decision by the
labor industrial commission I'm
not familiar with who that group
is can you help me understand
who the labor.
An industrial commission is work
where they established or they
in Albuquerque or were they
meet.
Mr speaker I mean Madam speaker
gentleman from curry.
They the commission is
established by the department of
workforce solutions and I'm told
that they generally meet in
Albuquerque.
I'm sorry madam speaker July
second here the very last part.
My apologies madam speaker
gentleman's they generally meet
in Albuquerque okay in in house
the the.
He said that this this to their
established by the work
department workforce solutions
so they're not a state agency or
a piece of the government there
and independent labor force
established by workforce
solutions.
Madam speaker and gentleman I a
lot of fun I answer a bit the
commissioners are appointed by
the governor and they are
considered an official
governmental body Madam speaker
gentleman thank you Joe I doubt
I don't know that I've ever seen
that group in the list of all
the governor's appointees and
everything so it's good to know
that that's there and it says
that they can this commission
can make a decision is binding
for the final judgment of the
District Court.
The this the court step in if
there's an appeal against the
commission for it at what point
does that come together.
Madam speaker gentleman.
My understanding is that your
first level of appeal is to the
a commission if you're appealing
a way to ways to termination and
if you're not satisfied Madam
speaker and gentleman with that
determination you can appeal it
to the District Court.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady and gentle lady if if
they're not satisfied with the
ruling of the District Court can
they appeal that up to a higher
court or is it is there a cap at
the District Court level.
Madam speaker gentleman they may
utilize the appeal process
through the appellate court
process as well.
Thank you gentle lady okay and
could you the last question and
on line twelve this is a fund
good because.
Can you give me some examples of
good calls that are shown as a
state of implementation.
District Court may grant up on
good cause shown.
Madam speaker gentleman from
curry good because it means that
the appealing party would have
to show some basis in law or
regulation that justifies the
implementation of the state
Madam speaker gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I I thought good cause
could be a.
Something that was going on they
were on of of confirm bid
process and and the.
Rajendra stalled out because of
COVID and they had to come in
later and it was gonna because
of if there's a new rate it
would cause them to have a loss
of their business gentle lady
and if the project were stalled
out because of a.
Act Goddard unforeseen accident
would that be considered good
because gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman my
understanding is that the focus
of the either the commission of
the District Court would be.
Was there some problem and how
the wage determination was done.
That there was not adequate
basis for the wage determination
or that some process was not
properly followed.
That makes sense gentlelady
administrative garages was
trying to understand if if it
were a unforeseen circumstance
that the cost of project to last
a lot longer and they were
caught with an increase in the
middle of that project and they
were appealing because of the
for the stalling out would that
be a good because of it I think
I hear you say no that's not
really a good because it's it's
there are other reasons besides
that so madam speaker gentle
lady thank you for that I
appreciate it I just need to
understand a little better thank
you.
Next we have the lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval in Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos Rio
Arriba Sandoval in Santa Fe
please yield.
Madam speaker I will be able to
the kind lady.
Thank you I have some questions
about this bill excuse me I'm
gonna.
And over here to look at my
computer again.
In that opening paragraph on
page of the first page it talks
about fringe benefit right can
you explain to me what is a
fringe benefit what would be a
good example of fringe benefits.
Madam speaker gentle lady could
you direct me where in the bill
you're referring I'm sorry.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
it's on.
First page I'm looking at the
amended version and it's on.
It's an opening paragraph it's a
second sentences and prevailing
fringe benefit rates.
Prince benefits madam speaker
and gentle lady are things like
health insurance.
Pension benefits.
Trying to think of other things
that I think that kind of gives
you a feel Madam speaker gentle
lady so madam speaker LA like if
the anything they would receive
on the side outside of their
wages health insurance dental
insurance any kind of benefits
sick leave if they got a car
okay I think I got a good
understanding and what that
means and madam speaker and
gentle lady
When I was looking at there was
something that was brought up
and I I believe the other
representative brought up and I
didn't have clarification on it.
I was talking with the technical
issues it says the term good
because it's not really defined
and addition good because
determination is not an
appropriate standard so how it
made a recommendation for
changing it to NMRA one dash
zero seven four associate still
say.
Good because a man is good
because this is that a a legal
term that could be used or or
how we defining good because I
know that was just Taos by
didn't quite understand that
Madam speaker and Representative
gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady good
because is a term that's been
defined through the courts.
Madam speaker Representative can
you give me example like what
would be a good because because
that is one of the issues they
brought up that was a technical
issue that there would have been
another way to word it but what
would be an example of a of a
good because because it's it's
very confusing and per the
analysts also said that this was
confusing so could you can you
get example of that.
Madam speaker gentle lady an
example might be if the
determination was not based on
based on you wage rates but
rather other wage rates that
were not appropriate for
consideration Madam speaker
gentle lady thank you madam
speaker gentle lady
yeah it's it's I know they had
made a recommendation on there
to make it more solidified a and
that definition that might have
been something good to add into
that this the amendment
Madam speaker and.
Generated can you it's schism
FIR the costs.
Our.
Minimal what what what would be
a range of minimal for this
bill.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
I did not write the FIR and
minimal I think means common
understanding of minimal thank
you madam speaker Representative
well I I've learned in politics
not to take anything for granted
because my idea of of minimal
and other people's example of
what they think is okay for
taxpayers to pay is is is vastly
different
Madam speaker and Representative
died it said that there were
some unions that supported this
did the contractors you
specifically support this or any
contractors you support this.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think we need to separate things
out there are unions and then
there are contractors.
Associated general contractors
of New Mexico supports this
bill.
The mechanical contractors of
New Mexico supports the bill The
New Mexico chapter of the
national electrical contractors
association supports the bill.
This sheet metal and air
conditioner contractors of New
Mexico supports the bill.
Then speaker and the gentle lady
so on the amendment portion in
there so we just get to real
quick.
Madam speaker and representative
can additionally can you explain
to me the.
What was the reasoning for the
re wording.
of this.
Change to the amendment of the
regional bell to the bill we're
seeing now.
Madam speaker gentle lady are
you referring to this Senate.
Judiciary Committee amendment
yes mentor speaker and gentle
lady on page four
the change it was in there what
what did that change doing what
was the reason for the change in
the wording.
Madam speaker gentle lady it
really does not constitute a
substantive change from the
original bill
if one has ever presented in
from the Senate Judiciary it is
not unusual Madam speaker gentle
lady for them to offer up their
put their view of what is better
and more precise language.
thank you madam chair and gentle
lady of that's that's very true
these bills move through they
have a tendency to make quite a
bit of changes as they go
through and sometimes start in
one direction and in another
direction that's why I was just
asking about the significance of
the change in their
but I think that is all the
questions that I have for
tonight in this phone thank you
madam speaker.
Seeing further debate the
gentleman from Lee County.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentle lady from Los Alamos Rio
Arriba and Sandoval field.
Adams speaker gentleman from Lee
County S. I yelled.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and the gentle
lady
Can you do me a favor and
define.
The state of implement
implementation what does that
mean in legal terms.
I'm sorry I didn't hear you with
my with expert did you said what
does a state of implementation
mean.
Madam speaker gentleman it just
means that the process is
stopped until the appeal the
appeal of the determination is
resolved.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you.
Currently for the the answer.
You know this is something madam
speaker currently that I've
never experienced some of that.
Forty five years and.
Construction business building
roads and so.
Been speaker and kind lady.
I'm curious is this issue has
ever.
The.
Come to fruition.
On the highway were where maybe
a couple hours a day we have
some money.
In a motor grader.
And then a couple hours a couple
of hours a day we have them in a
front end loader.
And.
Maybe later on in the day.
service survey and sudden blue
tops to second grade and is any
of this part Madam speaker and
kind lady have to do with with
contractors debating with
workforce solutions on on pay
rates as a as a worker goes
through the day.
Madam speaker gentleman.
Not really what this bill is
focused on is how the wage rate
process is implemented.
And what right wage rate is
determined annually and what
happens Madam speaker gentleman
when a wage rate determination
is challenged.
The only that then that's where
I'm driving to.
With respect to this one when we
design a road.
One of the one of the aspects of
what we do is we file for away
trade decision based on for the
work is in and hello on the time
frame is going to be.
And with that.
I very seldom have I gone
through a multi mile road
project for the contractor has
not debated with workforce
solutions over the wage rates
that they're paying their person
based off the work that they're
doing throughout the day
and so I'm curious.
As part of the appeal process.
Madam speaker gentleman's no.
Thank you madam speaker
currently.
Another example that I want to
go through in speaker and kind
lady is.
As as I'm sure you're aware
different areas of the state
different cities in the state
have different wage rates for
different person.
And so I'm curious if we ever
had the contractor.
The employees.
The reason I want
and drives the person to the.
Transports the personal to
another town they perform the
work and come back deserve a
been a challenge with respect to
that in that situation.
Madam speaker gentleman This
bill relates to the process of
wage determination not what I
think you're talking about Mr
speaker and gentleman I mean
Madam speaker gentleman from Lee
the actual wage rate the
contractor chooses to pay the
individual based on the job
classification and or location.
Thank you kind lady I would
think that at any point in time
that a contractor challenges
what the wage rate is for any
given person or an entire group
of people on their on their
construction crew.
That that would be an appeal
process support challenge and
then in the bill process.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
only I'm gonna bring us back to
the bills the bill is about the
process for the annual way
prevailing wage rate
determination and how that is
appealed.
In in kind lady I I hear what
you're saying I just don't read
it that way
This is an appeal of the
prevailing wage rate or
prevailing fringe benefit rates
determined pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall
not stay the implementation of
the right unless the rate is
modified by written final
decision of the labor and
industrial commission or by a
final judgment of the District
Court in the case thank you
continue on but so when the US
decided.
And there is a debate on whether
or not that prevailing wage rate
is it belongs on this project.
I would think that would be part
of the appeal process.
Madam speaker John could you
clarifying.
The question.
This the annual wage rate is
determined annually.
The interested parties may
appeal that wage rate
determination.
Through a process this bill
clarifies that an automatic
state Madam speaker and
gentleman does not apply and
that the interested party must
apply.
For such a state.
That is the sum total Madam
speaker gentleman of this bill.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kindly you for that
clarification.
So.
Madam speaker kind lady
Four million no answers
questions.
Speaker and kind lady can you.
Tell me with your expert witness
how many.
Basis we've had of the panels
over the last.
Here with respect from this
process.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Madam speaker gentleman from
only one and madam speaker
channel gentleman from only it
was the one that I described
earlier where the contractors.
Raise a technical issue thereby
tying up the implementation of
the prevailing wage
determination for a long period
of time.
Thank you madam speaker kind
kind ladies so.
If I understand this correctly
department of workforce
solutions is wanting to.
Changes.
The statute that we have.
For one case.
Madam speaker gentleman.
Department of works for solution
supports this bill.
And one one case affects the
wages of thousands of employees
I think that Madam speaker and
gentleman from only justifies us
pursuing a remedy so that it
does not happen again Madam
speaker gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker
currently can you explain to me
in the state of New Mexico where
we could have one case that
would affect thousands of
employees.
Just on one case.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
There is a single wage rate
determination annually.
And that wage rate the term
determination affects all
prevailing wages in the state.
And as a result all prevailing
wages Madam speaker are stayed
until.
The issue is resolved this bill
will rectify that issue Madam
speaker gentleman from Lee.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generally.
For that response so.
Trying to get to the.
Madam speaker and kind lady.
The card into the department
workforce solutions under public
works prevailing wage rates.
We have type a type B. type C.
H. and then we have the
substances own an incentive pay.
On top of that we have public
works.
A couple of the pieces of that
so madam speaker kind lady.
If I understand what.
I believe was just.
The.
If we have.
A contractor in requests County.
The the challenges.
The prevailing wage rate.
For a labor one.
Then that would affect every
labor or one in the state of New
Mexico and till this is
resolved.
Madam speaker gentleman from Lee
yes.
And guy ladies and every one of
those categories or just a
single category that it's a.
Madam speaker.
From eight I had an aha moment.
In the case that we're most
concerned about and identified
for you.
Then start madam speaker and
gentleman.
The contractors.
Yield the process.
And as a result Madam speaker
and gentleman all wage rates for
all.
Affected employees for state.
To clarify that Madam speaker
and kind ladies for a.
For me.
One way trade.
State.
Thanks very wage rate state.
Madam speaker gentleman.
It can.
Because in the case that we've
identified it of the claim
related to the process in the
notice period.
It could also affect the
particular category if the
appeal related to that category.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kind lady I was.
Really just trying to was trying
to get down to how one
contractor.
The bills this process.
Could stay rates for every other
contractor in the state The New
Mexico.
That is not a billing this
process.
Madam speaker government.
I'll say it
say this politely again and that
is in the case at hand that
occurred because the claim was
the process that workforce
solutions use.
Was not.
Proper and as a result all of
the wages resulting from that
process our state because of the
complaint of the contract the
yield of the contractors so I
think that answers your question
Madam speaker gentleman firmly.
Madam speaker currently yes it
does and I do appreciate the
fact that
of politeness and decorum
reporter the house rules so with
that then the figure and kindly
I feel that.
Further debate the gentleman
from the other John from the
county.
Other gentleman from Lee County.
We generated from our.
Several other counties please
hold.
Madam speaker gentleman from Lee
I will yield to you.
Thank you.
Mr buzz.
Proposed changes so if we could.
Madam speaker gentle lady walked
me through.
A hypothetical circumstances I'm
about to develop to see how we
get from current walled to work
this proposes.
Other contractors run a job.
Workforce solutions is
determined to find wage the
contractor.
Plus.
Rather the department of
workforce.
Press
is challenged on appeal.
For.
She.
Workers being paid and one.
Madam speaker gentleman's if I
understand your current of
question correctly.
We are not talking about
specific projects.
What we are talking about is the
wage rate determination process.
And the determination of the two
of the annual prevailing wage.
And what happens if there is a
an appeal of how or what that
prevailing wage determination
is.
Speaker gentle lady so.
Would not have to involve.
Is
project put could.
Involve.
I'm going project.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
The wage rate determination is a
determined annually.
The project
involves gets a gets a wage rate
determine wage rate.
Determination and that wage rate
stays with the project Madam
speaker and gentleman until the
project is completed.
Madam speaker and gentle concern
programs so that project is.
The pressure which room for
those provide wages for
determined has been a.
Under current law.
Workers receiving wages.
Madam speaker gentleman I'm not
sure that we're communicating
well at least maybe I'm not
understanding well let me put it
that way I'm not understanding
well madam speaker gentleman's.
Years focused on a project madam
speaker and gentleman Madam
speaker.
This bill is focused on the
process determination in the
yield so I'm sorry I'm not
trying to.
Not understand but I don't
understand your question it is
not a project by project ways to
terminate.
It the annual process occurs
annually it is not a project
based determination madam
speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
The process is appealed their
whole projects going in the
state where.
What those workers.
Being paid.
Madam speaker gentleman the wage
rate that was determined at the
time the project was initiated
so if it is a little two year
project it would Madam speaker
gentleman.
Dan approximately two years ago
that wage rate it was one year
ago madam speaker and gentleman
it's approximately one year of
course that would depend on when
the project started etcetera
madam speaker gentleman's.
Speaker gentle lady many of
these projects run multiple
years or call our project on my
part of the country.
Seems like it's been going on
forever so under current law.
Workers are at a wage that was
developed.
Back soon your time is spent
thank you.
Madam speaker gentleman I
believe so because that ways
right is not stated it's the
wage rate the most recent wage
rate determination that is state
and appealed.
Madam speaker or were.
Projects for wages are being
paid for an appeal was filed.
And those wages or.
For complete goal.
As the process moves forward
Senator current law is that.
Representative.
I would say Madam speaker
gentleman that those wage rate
determinations are not subject
to the appeal Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Madam speaker gentleman I never
use the word completely legal.
Engine provided him up misspent
for last part.
Madam speaker gentleman I don't
know what you mean by completely
legal what I would say I think
what is more accurate to say is
those particular wage weight
right determinations are not
affected by the more recent
appeal.
Thank you for that.
Translational.
For the panel going for
insurance or being paid to.
For those wages so.
Show this month.
I'll come of the people.
Madam speaker gentleman now.
The press.
During this legislation.
Change.
Madam speaker gentleman it
doesn't change.
So madam speaker gentle lady.
Workers were being paid
substantially below prevailing
wage for a long period of time.
Under the old system and now
this one occur under the new
system.
Explains why there would be no
change with the system.
Madam speaker gentleman I don't
think I use the word
substantial.
With the new system madam
speaker there would not be an
automatic stay.
Instead there would need to be
an application for such a state
for good cause shown.
There by requiring the
contractors choosing to this
process to actually have to
establish the basis for their
claim.
Madam speaker gentle lady what
are the consequences of the
state with regard to the wages
being paid at the time the
appeal was filed.
Madam speaker gentleman's are
you asking what happens to
projects operating under prior
wage determinations.
No.
What I'm trying to get to.
All the consequences to wage
rates.
After the state has issued under
the old system.
System.
Madam speaker gentleman.
If a contractor applies to a
court let's remember they're
going to court.
Choirs such a state.
Then the project.
Would apply the previous years
prevailing wage.
Until such time the
determination Madam speaker and
gentleman is resolved and if the
wage rate is.
Is the one that the new wage
rate that was proposed then that
wage rate Madam speaker
gentlemen will take effect
prospectively.
General fund somewhere so.
All.
When the state inspection.
Insurance were to turn around at
some time J. Vigil until the
gentrification is complete.
Is that correct.
Yes correct although I would add
automatic state would issue.
Upon.
The yield.
Gentlelady.
This legislation becomes law.
OR of Bill process.
Drenched reply during the
approval process.
Wage rates now apply is that
accurate.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
correct unless someone goes to
court and gets the state having
shown good because.
Okay.
The service.
Jex.
For.
Address supplied during.
Plus each
page.
I'm not sure what's the
question.
Other than are we on the same
page.
Is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman.
One nine understanding your
question but
Again wage rates are now not
issued during the year wage
rates madam speaker are issued.
In January.
What we're talking about one
direction were issued in January
of perhaps one or two years
earlier forces wage rates that
were from where certainly issued
so.
This approval process it appears
to me in one circumstance.
Insurance.
Earlier.
The second circumstance the
yield implies.
Wage rates would apply.
Senator.
Madam speaker down I think we
need to break this up on the
questions of.
Projects could start two years
ago Madam speaker those projects
madam speaker gentleman's are
governed by the wage
determination that was in effect
during that period of time.
In those wages stayed with those
projects.
As you pointed out madam speaker
gentle many public projects are
multi year projects.
When the project started the
product the prevailing wage that
it affected the time follows the
project forward it could be
multiple years.
There's a new wage rate
determination let's say last
month.
If it's appealed and they.
It would be stay on the court to
to and and if this amendment is
enacted it that would state that
particular wage rate
determination for projects going
forward Madam speaker gentleman.
Are we on the same page madam
speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think I think we are.
Guess what I'm trying to get to
because I heard earlier
testimony to the for a lot of
time workers were being paid
less than they were entitled to.
So.
What I'm trying to is this
process of legislation robber
flies that circumstance so the
wages would would would always
be getting exactly what they
were entitled to.
During and after the appeal
process.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think what you're referring to
is my description Google speaker
Google questioners ago.
And in that case we pointed out
R. I. pointed out madam speaker
gentleman's that because of the
automatic stay provision in the
length of time it took to
resolve the situation those
projects that we're governed by
the appealed.
Ways right.
Affected those workers adversely
going forward.
Because last year's rates
prevailing wage weight create.
Apply to that project the long
period of time was referred to
because with the automatic
implementation of the state it's
just sitting there for months
until it's resolved under our
proposal.
A contractor would have to apply
for the state.
And so because good because that
they that such a state is
justified.
That minimizes the possibility
that workers will be adversely
affected because the contractor
would have to show at least some
good basis for the for
challenging the wage
determination.
Madam speaker.
The circumstances were able is
the not.
Contractor loses in court.
Under current law.
Agyness.
Then it's the turn the should
have been paying higher wages.
So do those workers.
Madam speaker gentleman no.
Okay.
Yes the question is what.
Legislation is.
This may.
And is successful.
What are the consequences.
To the workers wages.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman.
Was a stay in effect in your
scenario.
Jim let his ones.
Madam speaker gentleman is the
appeal was successful in the
lower wage rate stays in effect
Madam speaker and gentleman and.
The workers are deemed to be
appropriately rate Madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady now in the circumstance
four yield was successful.
Madam speaker gentleman.
The
Madam speaker gentleman in the
state there's a state scenario
as well.
Correct.
In the new prevailing wage Madam
speaker gentleman takes effect
upon the determination that the
appeal is not well founded.
Going forward madam speaker
gentleman's.
So.
Speaker gentle lady in both
cases.
Just to worker wages Senator or
post.
Commission is that correct.
Madam speaker.
Someone at actually I don't
think it's fully correct because
one if.
The yield is deemed not well
founded then going forward the
workers get the higher wage
rate.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
One of the things that.
The store is not the issue.
And the whole is successful
which would then that.
As workers were paid more than
what they should have been
during that period.
What happens the.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Lee.
If the appeal is successful in
the the wage rate has not been
stayed.
Then the wage rate would drop to
the previous years.
Prevailing wage rate Madam
speaker and gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady.
Or is just.
To compensate the contractor
Madam speaker a gentleman you
know.
Just.
Last question.
Should and let somebody else
talk.
Respect.
You'll.
Can the court costs associated
with an appeal does.
Is always liable for school.
Or if you wish to the program
workforce solutions
appropriations bills.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
The contractor who chooses to
appeal Barriss on costs hit of
its own costs Madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you for your answers.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant in
Sierra.
Thank you madam speaker with
generally please yield.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
done in those other counties yes
I yield I got on by.
I.
You got us it is some of the
stuff I you lost me and that's
why you will point down I've
been talking to some of the
gentleman on the floor trying to
understand to make sure I
understand this properly so that
I can I know how to vote and I I
was just.
Trying to and I know it's late
madam speaker gentle lady but
the the question that I had was.
I'm just trying to all try to
make this as quick as possible
just so I can catch up here
so in the beginning I've been
listening but I so you have.
In the beginning.
They calculate this wage Mr from
new with this calculator said
every January is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman every
January the issue of awakes a
termination.
Is that wage determination
because I mean I went out on
administrative region leading to
public works prevailing wage
rates of heroes trying to find
it and work in the work force
solutions and so the way three.
Right said I saw there's a type
A. B. C. and page that I could
find and I hope on.
I'm trying to understand this is
it one right for all of them
Madam speaker generally.
Madam speaker gentleman for all
of what.
I'm just reading here I mean
there's there's street highways
utilities light engineering
construction then type II is
general building type C. is
residential construction and
type H. is th heavy engineering
construction and so I'm trying
to understand the last one is.
Substances zone and incentive
pay so I'm just trying to
understand what but I think it's
those four different types of
construction so my question is
this prevailing wage rate is it
the same for every category
fantasy traditionally madam
speaker a gentleman H. craft has
their own prevailing wage and
each sub category of crafts have
different prevailing wages okay
madam speaker gentle lady so
then they have all these
different wages and so
and and madam speaker gentle
lady if you wanna let me expert
witness here I might not have to
ask many questions.
Look madam speaker gentle lady
so they have all those four
categories.
And so the determine this in
January.
And then we thank you got this
determination.
And that is what it can you give
an example for that dollar
figure was elected the twenty
twenty one.
Mr speaker gentleman there's no
one dollar figure.
Prevailing wages apply to
different categories employees
different kinds of projects
madam speaker gentleman's.
Figure generally is pretty
complicated and there's quite a
few different wages mixed in
there so there's no but can you
give me an example of one so
that I can at least follow it
and understand this man's
because only.
Madam speaker gentleman we don't
have that information with us.
Okay then figure gently is
system is doing with the a
mortician that's an accountant
and I work with dollars and and
and and I and and figures and
that's why I'm having trouble
with this because I can't follow
and understand we're starting
and we're going and understand
how it affects other of all the
other
different categories part of the
what's confusing me Madam
speaker gentle lady is that you
have mentioned that.
There have been of.
An issue between a contractor I
guess that wanted to.
I guess.
He wasn't happy with the way
just so he wanted to go to court
he went to court is that what I
understood miss madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman from
going on on the other counties
the example that I gave was
there at a wage determination
was made.
Some contractors challenged the
process.
Of that wages a termination.
An appeal the.
The wage determinations because
of what they claimed was a
defect in the process the
automatic stay to the fact Madam
speaker gentle lady there by
Stopping the implementation of
the new prevailing wages.
And as a result.
Months passed twelve
those wages were held in
abeyance Madam speaker and
gentleman so madam speaker
gentle lady soldier John is.
A handful of contractors didn't
like the the process.
With the process change
administrative regionally into
Macomb all of a sudden I mean
was this a contractor been in
business for ever and then they
also and didn't like the process
why would they question the
process if it's been year after
year after year madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman the
contractors benefited from the
automatic stay.
The wage rate did not take
effect and it is still in
litigation so the wage rates for
twenty twenty one.
That were determined by the pool
of water works department of
workforce solutions to be
applicable were not implemented
for so far an entire year.
So madam speaker gentle lady.
So by them just filing that.
The motion that that that that
brought by by appealing it or
whatever is stopped all the
states for budgets be all the
way to prevailing wages for all
the categories administrative
gently.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes.
This is where it gets confusing
administrative gradually because
you told me there's all kinds of
different categories so is it
because are the.
You said there's all kinds of
categories administrative to
gently so there's all kinds of
different not wage rates so if
if one category than affected
that because it was one I was
soon with one project how could
it affect all the others or is
it just that he was here she or
was this.
This contractor.
Having issues with the with the
process and it's and that's
what's holding up the process
itself is a they're not happy
with.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
This is not a project based
issue.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
The property the.
Issue centers on the way to to
annual wage rate determination
and the contention in this case
by those contractors that there
was a process defect Madam
speaker gentleman and that
contention stop the
implementation of the prevailing
wage for all categories of
workers for all come projects
that would have been affected by
that prevailing wage rate.
Okay madam speaker gently than
just just Lasko I don't see last
question to the question too so
that defect the process the fact
that you said what was that so I
can understand that.
Madam speaker gently madam
speaker the alleged process the
fact was that the notice period
period for the prevailing wage
issuance was twenty nine days
instead of thirty days.
Speaker gently so what your time
is.
They generally so dishonest on
this generally the like thirty
to thirty days must be obviously
because you're saying twenty
nine serve thirty th so what
you're saying is they are they
being the workforce solutions is
required to have this
information out to them thirty
days before the project starts
or thirty thirty days before the
bid how does that work.
Madam speaker gentleman's thirty
days before they issue the wage
rate determination.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I I just so I was just
trying to so.
Is it that they're upset over
the the the I mean I know it's
petty of a day I get it Madam
speaker gentle lady my question
is or do they do that so they
can so that the contractor
themselves can understand what
they're wage rate will be their
costs so that when they do their
cost figures into the next
project probably for the
following year is that why they
need that madam speaker gentle
lady.
Speaker and gentleman I'm having
some trouble you started with
the question of
why did they do that and I
cannot Madam speaker and
gentleman impute motives to why
the contractors chose to appeal
Madam speaker John.
Speaker gentle lady I guess let
me clarify this I'm again I'm
not a contractor but I if.
Would it be one of the reasons
that they although it's in my
opinion for one day as petty.
But you know to do all this
spans figure gently if you
submitted a bid.
And I'm assuming that they
needed this information before
the submitted a bid I mean this
could have been just a unique
situation the.
Order that prevailing wage was
that they had
the the the the contractor.
Turns around
calculated for the project all
of a sudden change to the next
day or whatever because sheer
she thought Hey didn't submit
anything thirty days ahead
everything's the same I'm gonna
go with those numbers I'm going
to submit my my my bid based on
those on those rates could that
be the reason I mean Madam
speaker gentle lady I mean
you're this is your bill side
I'm just trying to understand
why they would have done that.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Dona Ana and those other
counties I cannot speculate as
to why they would have done
that.
Madam speaker gently well I just
I I I'm trying to the and I'm
sorry I'm I'm I'm not trying to
make this difficult I just was
trying to figure that out first
hand why they would make such a
fuss then figure gently over one
day so the only thing I can
figure is that they based their.
Their contract of bids.
On one wage and then it
substantially changed or
something changed to where they
fit affected.
There.
the bid their final bid.
That's not a question Mr gently
because I'm trying to figure out
another way to ask which.
Anyway I.
This is just this this computer
this computer not just me but
several other legislators
answers every you don't see a
lot of figures appear so maybe
they understand it better than I
do I just was trying to figure
out why they would have done
that and.
Why the and I was trying to
figure out why the old way what
was wrong with the old way and
why we changes to the new way
so.
What you're proposing Madam
speaker gentle lady is your
change within.
Then if somebody.
Contractor.
One through this process again.
It wouldn't affect everything
that would just be isolated to
that particular project as of
what I'm understanding.
Madam speaker gentleman's this
is not a project based.
Issue this is an annual wage
rate determination issue.
Understand that madam speaker
gentle lady I'm just okay so
it's just a I'm just from even
though the wage rate issue.
They're still filing appeals or
or going to court over this that
is causing you said.
these wage rates to be
determined and finalized so I
was just trying to understand
from the figures only what your
bill would change that would
make this better.
Madam speaker gentleman what
this bill changes is the fact
that there will be no automatic
state upon an appeal but rather
the interested party the
contractors must go to court and
establish good because before
such a state can issue.
Madam speaker generally kind of
I mean it could help so I just
was wrapped up in how this is
the process you can.
I try not to be this confused
but this one was confusing to me
and it's.
As all of us know we're not
experts in every single field
and so for myself I mean I I
understand certain things and
this one was just one of those
funds figure gently that was
just because I don't understand
the entire process it was a bit
difficult for me thank you for
your patience Madam speaker
gentle lady I appreciated seeing
no further debate the gentle
lady to close thank you matters
madam speaker I now move that
Senate bill four as amended do
now pass.
On final passage of
Senate bill for the vote.
As amended.
The vote is now open.
Electronic portion of the vote
is closed the clerk to call the
members without a recorded vote
Representative upon yes
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative boom go both
yes Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey votes yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Harper.
Representative Harper votes no.
Representative at a.
Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yeah Representative Hochman
Vigil votes yes Representative
Lara.
Yes Representative lot of votes
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
I'm sorry yes.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews is
yes Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
broke votes New Representative
G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative small.
Representative small votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Representative Ferrary is yes.
Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
Now closed by a vote of forty
four in the affirmative and
twenty five in the negative
Senate bill four as amended has
duly passed the house.
Next we're going to go to item
thirteen Senate Bill.
One thirty four
Representative small are you
ready I am madam speaker would
you give me that point please.
Let the record reflect the all
action necessary for placing.
Senate bill one thirty four on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
The gentle man to explain the
bill.
Thank you madam speaker Senate
bill one thirty four dedicates
two point five percent of our
severance tax permanent fund
bonds yearly to the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority in
order to help
build rehabilitate maintain and
otherwise serve housing in New
Mexico with that I would stand
for questions.
Which.
There's debate on the bill.
Gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman yield.
Thanks fans figures a year the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman that once again that
was a quick introduction just a
little bit more of explanation
for that thank you madam speaker
gentleman from San Juan this
to dedicate its two point five
percent of the severance tax
bond capacity to the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority for
their purposes which madam
speaker gentleman's as we all
know help New Mexicans all
across the state in housing.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so we did hear this in
in committee can you just
briefly
Madam speaker and gentleman I
see you have a plan yes because
I'm and I don't know did you
introduce your your experts
thank you madam figured thank
you Jim and I have not yet I
have a Mr Izzy and Amanda's from
New Mexico morning finance
authority and Mr back of a lot
of that as well.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so this
Trust Fund.
Could you briefly talk about the
the match and how efficient
dollars that are used and
mortgage finance authority about
what the
I understand it's somewhere
between around a one two twenty
seven twenty eight percent match
thank you madam figured thank
you gentlemen while the
statutory requirement is a three
to one match of the performance
madam speaker gentleman's is it
in the twenty five to twenty six
to one match so it's really
extraordinary benefits.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentleman
this
Served on mortgage finance
authority oversight committee
of.
For six years now and madam
speaker and and and gentleman it
is really amazing what the the
staff does their to be able to
leverage the dollars that go
into a mortgage finance
authority
and and briefly for the for the
members who don't know could you
explain mortgage finance
authority is is kind of a clause
a governmental.
The department they it's it's
the state is not really involved
in lending money for providing
loans but the of course finance
authority the arrangement we
have them that with them is very
he could you explain that real
quick to the to the body.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman yes The New Mexico
mortgage finance authority is a
is it is there on independent
authority they have a a board
that oversees their purpose of
Madam speaker gentleman they
work both with state federal and
other partners in order to do
the extraordinary work that they
do building new housing
maintaining existing housing you
know things like getting more
access for seniors who want to
stay in their homes weather is
ation efficiency really all
things housing The New Mexico
mortgage finance authority is
they're both from my rental and
homeownership perspective.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentleman
so the the projects that
mortgage finance authority is
involved in
is all the way from supporting
some.
Projects that are that that
helps homeless specifically but
madam speaker and gentleman this
this Fund and and the dollars
that were looking to have go to
this fund
they would be not going
necessarily for the homeless but
for of.
For lowincome and worker housing
and for repairs.
bringing homes up to the higher
efficiency standard could you
briefly talk about a
specifically how these dollars
would be used and how they be
leveraged against these federal
funds.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker thank you John I think
you really did an excellent job
there these funds the US TV
funds would not be used brand
speaker gentleman for some of
the for instance operational
expenses of a homeless shelter
the madam speaker gentleman's
all of the uses that you outline
from accessibility to efficiency
new constructions maintenance of
existing housing units all of
those would be eligible.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so we've talked about
the the positive Madam speaker
and gentleman I I think probably
only fair for the body to know
if if there is a downside to
this Madam speaker and gentleman
it would be that the dollars
that we're going to be accessing
could affect capital outlay
dollars that we spend
but madam speaker and gentleman
those to the capital outlay
dollars that we do spend locally
are we don't have generally that
kind of match in this is that is
some sort of federal grants or
federal matching dollars but
nothing to this effect and and
could you briefly talk about the
potential and and and about that
specific aspect of this
absolutely madam speaker
gentleman so this would be just
that two point five percent of
the US TV capacity far below the
current set of size of four
point five percent for colonias
four point five percent for the
trial infrastructure fund nine
percent for water trust board
but madam speaker gentleman when
you get into this twenty plus to
one ratio for looking at being
able to put
to help leverage not put but to
help leverage many cases
hundreds of millions of dollars
a year all across the state for
one of the most important things
New Mexicans need which is
housing and again all the things
that we've gone through and so
madam speaker gentleman for a
very small portion this is
anywhere from probably seventeen
million to maybe twenty five
million at a high and to get
that very very high match rate
projects across the state is
very well worth thank you madam
speaker and and gentleman I
think one of the only things
that maybe I would be concerned
about we we we might want to
revisit this and a few years if
because then speaker John can
you talk about how these dollars
go out.
Out in the in loans many of them
but mortgage finance authority
will manage those loans as well
so some of these of these
dollars then rotate back into
the fund that then can be used
again is that correct then
speaker John Madam speaker
German you're absolutely right
Senator John so the concern is I
and I know we're putting this in
to into perpetuity
but at some point
There could be enough funds in
there and
And they would be unnecessary
for future
investment from out of out of
the severance tax fund
what happens madam speaker and
gentleman at that point if of
the dollars don't go out what
happened those dollars a sit
there for madam speaker gentle
Madam speaker gentleman it
really excellent question so
madam speaker gentleman's if the
dollars for three consecutive
years remain on spent on
dedicated from that just to be
capacity than madam speaker
gentleman's those reserves those
revert backs to the severance
tax bonds permanent fund so they
don't stay there they go back to
the permanent fund Madam speaker
and gentleman I I that's one of
my favorite provisions about
this proposal I I would like to
see us do that maybe with some
other funds because if the if
the funds are not being used
having them come back in to the
to the frontier and will allow
that fund to continue to grow I
think that's that would be a
good thing Madam speaker and
gentleman
I I.
In theory I support this I'm
gonna have my ex self excuse to
soon as I'm finished speaking
madam chair because of the
company that I work for
potentially have some business
with the MFA and and that's
going to be on record voting one
way or the other for this but I
I would like to talk a little
bit and speaker and gentleman
about the current housing crisis
and what has happened to
affordable housing thank you for
your thank you gentlemen the if
the crisis is absolutely right
madam speaker gentleman's we've
seen the median home prices and
price for renting rise over
fifteen percent Madam speaker
gentleman believe or at a
deficit of thirty two thousand
units thirty two thousand for
lowincome New Mexicans that
number Madam speaker gentleman
continues to grow Madam speaker
gentleman the.
It's on the edge of your pay and
thirty percent for for housing
you're in a kind of a a high
risk category madam speaker
gentleman's if you're paying
fifty percent for housing you're
in an extreme risk category
right now I'm Ms figure
gentleman the numbers that we
have so that there's two hundred
and seventeen thousand New
Mexican families that are in
that position which just speaks
to really live in on that edge
madam speaker gentleman's and
the fact that the housing prices
are rising rentals are rising
really show that this is
something we need to address
now.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
I was in
angel fire earlier this year
inTaos it Red River eagle's nest
everyone of those communities
better speaker and gentleman was
talking about the great need for
for.
Worker housing in particular
Madam speaker and gentleman
what's what's happened in the
real estate market the last
couple of years is as the
outflow of people leaving
California in particular with
big dollars in hand what's
happened is places like
The grand Tetons
Lake Tahoe steamboat springs
Sally ride Breckenridge of us
all of these resort areas
massacre and gentleman but folks
with really really deep pockets
have moved into those areas and
people with deep pockets who are
already living there saw the
advantage of selling their home
to make money and then they've
moved down two places like ago
springs and Durango and
angel fire and Taos and they've
come with their big dollars and
then so each market has been
affected by people selling their
homes at the upper level but
what's happened in New Mexico
madam speaker and gentleman is
those places like house of.
Of and and and angel fire our.
We'll have brought those smaller
homes with for more than the
market.
Really would there previously
and so the people that speaker
and gentleman who work in those
resort areas.
Don't have a place to live
anymore so they're commuting and
in many instances madam speaker
gentle if there is any inclement
weather or any problems in the
roads or whatever the workers
are not able to to get their
their travelling a further
distance thirty miles or or for
further so I I do see worker
housing it as an issue.
and that then speaker and
gentleman to the point of worker
housing the MFA dollars can be
used.
For new construction for for.
Individuals who are looking to
purchase a home.
And madam speaker and gentleman
to.
Developers who are looking at
building subdivisions for self
and or madam speaker and
gentleman to be able to.
for developers to build rental
properties or and could you
could you briefly go over that
Senator John thank thank you
madam speaker thank you
gentleman now again you really
the landed incredibly well madam
speaker gentleman's the the
partners on this Madam speaker
gentleman can range from
individual families going into
that single family home they can
be the for profit developers it
can be nonprofit developers
madam speaker gentleman's
gentleman partnering with local
communities in innovative and
almost entrepreneurial ways to
get more done for last with you
you know working on land deals
in the life so that's one of the
the the the things that this
body is allowed The New Mexico
mortgage finance authority to do
they do it incredibly well this
will give them that extra
capacity to do it on a much
bigger scale.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
The fund would just go for for
happy new housing but the
speaker gentleman could you talk
a little bit about the energy
efficiency programs that that
doesn't that this fund could
also
Thank thank you madam speaker
thank you Jim and yeah
absolutely so the weather is
ation and energy efficiency
which can be a very large share
of the cost burden for low and
middle income New Mexicans
absolutely part of what Madam
speaker gentleman yeah and MFA
works on now however right now
madam speaker gentleman's as I
understand it most of that work
is really funded through
federally through the department
of energy however madam speaker
gentleman that's because with
limited resources they have to
prioritize with these additional
funds madam speaker gentleman's
it'll really open up the ability
to do that weather is ation and
that efficiency work across New
Mexico
so madam speaker gentleman
that's going to range from
windows.
Reuss insulation of wide range
of things particularly to the
area that save New Mexicans
money that create jobs in the
construction and the the
renovation and our budget in New
Mexico.
Speaker and gentleman just
briefly and kind of as I finish
up here the the concern I do
have and I expressed this in
committee that as the house
migration from some of these
other areas stops happening they
stopped necessary coming into
New Mexico
concerned a little bit about a
housing bubble.
And the the
The idea that.
Maybe some foreclosures will
come when a federal assistance
stops coming in for people have
not been working for awhile and
maybe in a without a lot of the
businesses closed down the last
couple years and.
You know assessor part of our
economy is is not where it needs
to be so I am concerned that one
of us stimulus dollars when
those checks stop coming in when
where and the moratorium on of
People have rental properties
from being able to one of one if
people have gone way beyond in.
There is potential for eviction
of people are not able to get
there.
Get a job coming out of COVID
and start paying if they've not
been paying because a lot of
those a lot of those
Folks have rental units have not
been paid for for it for months
upon months now and and you know
some of them are gonna be facing
foreclosure on those properties
with because they've got loans
that have to be paid so Mr
chairman I I do believe that the
housing crisis.
That are the we've had a housing
crisis of shortage but I believe
there is potential for
additional type of housing
crisis where.
The market could correct so I do
appreciate one of the the
provision where if these dollars
not spent their revert back
that's one issue that I see
Madam speaker and gentleman the
other issue is.
For those who are in
construction.
Supply chain issues and the cost
of of materials right now is is
is sky high and the scarcity of
the the products themselves if
you it's very interesting
just looking of going on to look
into the lows or on to home
depot websites and just looking
for two by fours and trying to
order online place an order have
been delivered a lot of those
items are not available today it
is the it is scary if you think
about it so the other thing that
could cause these funds not to
be spent at least in new
construction is literally madam
speaker and gentleman the
ability of to be able to get
materials
and madam speaker and gentleman
there has been a worker shortage
in construction as well as
another issue that we're facing
so I I do like this legislation
I've in part it just really has
to go well not in part I like
this legislation because as I've
sat on the mortgage finance
Authority oversight committee
for six years now what I've seen
is amazing work there at NFA.
And of the.
How many.
I I don't know that there are
any other state programs that we
have where we get over a twenty
to one return on investment
that's just unheard of
the if the business model is
amazing at this business model
work outside of the state
government I I believe as well
so I appreciate the work that is
the and
Mr that is not everybody are
there at the end of phase does
and I I I do appreciate this
Madam speaker and gentleman I do
think the body needs to
understand that this could
affect or this will affect.
Capital outlay dollars that we
all take home
I do believe currently this is
probably the biggest crisis we
have
of infrastructure is.
House worker housing I think
that's a real problem you to in
many of our communities so I do
like this hi I am unfortunately
unable to be able to support
this legislation and I don't
believe I have a conflict of
interest but.
I'm gonna have to have a over
abundance of caution on this so
you madam speaker but if you
what I'd like to be excused.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman that from Dona Ana
yield administrative gray gladly
yield to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
All Lucia miss madam speaker
gentleman I am so thrilled to
finally see this bill on the
house floor this is been a very
long time coming into Senator
tremendous way the mortgage
finance authority advocates all
of those are who have worked so
hard to try to figure out how we
might be able to increase our
housing stock in New Mexico
I have I have finally we're in
this boom here we're we finally
have an opportunity to do this
and I just want to urge the body
to hear how critical this these
lists of minimal housing fund is
and it's not minimal because
it'll have such a tremendous
impact
madam speaker gentleman's I've
been saying having learned for
so long so
in these past several years from
the mortgage finance authority
the housing truly is the best
social program that we have
plenty of a stable home and it's
affordable you can.
Go do your job everyday and
predict where you're going to go
home your children know where
they're going to go after school
your family knows where you are
word expect do you and that
creates just the entire
ecosystem of anticipation and
reliability and having that
stable home
I understand the before the
pandemic even hit we were in a
major housing crisis that on any
given day in the state over
three thousand three hundred
people were experiencing
homelessness here and we were
hearing the cries for help on
how we could set up with housing
program that could help fund.
Are the issues in which we
needed where we needed to build
and and reinforce affordable
housing around the state and at
that time we didn't have those
resources Mr speaker gentleman
or we couldn't really figure out
how to make it work and I know
that Senator Rodriguez has
carried this bill for many many
years but unfortunately to no
avail where we couldn't really
figure it out
so Mister speaker gentleman I
was really interested to to see.
The the the the fiscal impact
report which really shed light
on the cost burdens of families
I would love to hear Mr speaker
gentleman from you.
What what it is we're trying to
solve for here when it comes to
what people are looking for and
how this fund itself I might be
able to help out when it comes
to looking for housing that is
affordable how does it go soup
to nuts for the overseas hundred
seventeen thousand six hundred
and thirteen Costabile burdened
households that are looking for
for some relief Mr speaker
gentleman thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
that madam speaker gentle lady
in certain that's is the best
way to describe it madam speaker
gentle lady this will help build
the new units that are needed to
is that we and our estimate is
thirty two thousand now for
lowincome New Mexicans another
five thousand year over year
that's being added to that the
madam speaker gentle lady
you mentioned the fiscal impact
report the inotes that forty
thousand units in New Mexico
lack complete kitchens forty
thousand three hundred and ten
units lack complete plumbing
it goes into the almost the
forty four percent of New
Mexicos housing units that were
built before nineteen eighty so
madam speaker gentle lady in
each of these areas it's going
to add additional cost burden to
New Mexicans in New Mexican
families
who who are already facing a
whole lot of of income pressures
so madam speaker gentle lady
whether this is helping build a
new unit whether it's re having
a unit that was built before
nineteen eighty Madam speaker
gentle lady whether that's
getting energy efficient heating
maybe the upgrading the cooking
the kitchen in that unit in that
home Madam speaker gentle lady
it might be actually helping
make a home accessible maybe I
care in the winter time when
it's so slippery for an elderly
New Mexico Family to be.
Able to remain in that house
those are all acceptable uses
for this and madam speaker
gentle lady
the NMFA has this really robust
experience working with really
limited resources especially
limited state resources doing
great work in all of these areas
so with these with a consistent
source of really modest funding
but having consistent funding
year over year we really see it
being transformative for new
units taking care of existing
units and making sure that those
units are lovable and and not
too expensive for New Mexicans.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
hi it's so I'm so thrilled to
see is attempting to have that
impact and and what it means for
for so many that are seeking
that relief and again with over
three thousand three hundred
people just and and twenty
twenty alone and I understand
that our homelessness throughout
the pandemic has actually
increased we actually still been
processing evictions despite a
moratorium we've actually
continued to see folks
Really struggle and perhaps even
have to face life outside of the
home because of of the
challenges financially so I I
I'm so thrilled to to actually
hear that I I know to Mr speaker
gentleman some of the questions
that we had about why the
severance tax permanent funds
why this fund and of course
you know what we're thinking
long term about what what we're
trying to build into can you
tell me Mr speaker gentleman
when will we have sufficient
housing stock is this gonna just
hold our our housing crisis
because I think so many people
in in this in my community
having trying to to figure out
how to decrease the cost burden
where many in our community are
paying thirty fifty even seventy
percent of their incomes on
their rent on their their
household right now with housing
prices skyrocketing across the
state Mr speaker gentleman when
we get there is there are
getting their points and I I
know that this is a long term
effort but what it what impact
is this going to have Mister
speaker gentleman thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady first let's is take stock
of the enormity of the challenge
that we face madam speaker
gentle lady
to reduce the housing cost
burden of renters and homeowners
with renters with incomes below
thirty five thousand dollars
that's nine hundred and two
million dollars annually madam
speaker gentle lady with the
improving two point five percent
of some standard in older homes
that's another one hundred and
thirty six million madam speaker
gentle lady now we go into the
billions whether Ising eligible
low income homes one point six
billion madam speaker gentle
lady and the new affordable
units one point oh seven billion
you at all of that Madam speaker
gentle lady and we're pushing
you know close to three billion
dollar.
There's.
As we work to maintain existing
units so madam speaker gentle
lady to your point this will
have a transformative impact
immediately in FY twenty four
when these funds are that this
money starts to go out the door
madam speaker gentle lady the
huge leverage will begin doing
this for but the work will
remain to be done it's not there
there isn't a necessary of peak
on the top of the mountain here
madam speaker gentle lady just
safer more affordable more
efficient housing for New Mexico
families.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
that is so heartening to hear
again what we've been searching
for this funding for so long
and and I think what the impact
is and I know what in my
community is we've across both
in the past two years of the
pandemic but before then I know
the City of Santa Fe employs
many people from around the
local area fifty percent of them
however have to drive in from
out of town they don't actually
live here the work here and
there are a lot of great jobs
here but unfortunately they
can't afford to live here or
there's not enough housing stock
available Mr speaker gentleman
and I know that that has a huge
an impact when it comes to how
we want to create this whole
live work play space for so many
people that we want to see
invests in our communities and
we do so much in our tax code in
our budget to try to put back
into communities but when folks
can't live in the place that
they work it creates
reverberating effects for
everything else that we have to
plan for as a state Mr speaker
gentleman and same thing goes
for the communities I think
of of over sixty percent maybe
even seventy five percent they
take data annually were Los
Alamos national lab.
People drive up every single day
up the hill and you if you're
ever on the roads here the
highways and by ways here Mister
speaker madam speaker excuse me
gentleman
It's just a it's a it's a rat
race every single day looking
for the affordable home Mr
speaker gentleman so in in our
local area again
Madam speaker gentleman we saw
thirty five percent increase in
housing prices in Santa Fe
County and I know this that
statewide it's been about five
double digits and and across the
state here the impact was so
significant where the median
home price will reach some six
hundred thousand dollars I can't
do that Mr speaker gentleman
thinking about what's going on
in the future and how our young
people how our future can afford
to live in this state in the
places that we grew up in in the
places that we love to to stay
and so Mr speaker gentleman we
think about the future and we
think about what this investment
means is this going to help
housing prices of how how are we
going to see affordability
moving forward and Mr speaker
gentleman you know when we think
about long term what we're
trying to do how is this going
to help thank you madam speaker
thank you gentle lady madam
speaker gentle lady this will
help those two hundred seventeen
thousand New Mexico families
lower their costs four and
they'll have they should have a
lower costs for their housing
madam speaker gentle lady really
in the different areas that
you've outlined Madam speaker
gentle lady there will still be
very high and homes and really
high and developments in New
Mexico which is great Madam
speaker gentle lady but for New
Mexicans who are facing these
low and middle income New
Mexicans that New Mexico
mortgage finance authority
serves that money that they were
spending on housing may be the
key to very inefficient unit or
to cool a very inefficient
home or apartment that money
instead is going to go towards
education or towards your back.
Can to their local economy in
the local small business maybe
starting their own business so
madam speaker gentle lady it
will lower their housing cost
burden free up those dollars and
that income for things that help
New Mexicans in other ways.
Request is being for the
gentleman to remove their their
jackets.
No objections to that.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen
That's again just so important
in showing how incredible this
program is is going to again
reverberate throughout the state
and and what is possible with
how we are going to start
tackling these bigger issues and
social programs again that just
pay dividends I understand Mr
speaker gentleman that the
investment that the mortgage
finance authority gets from
right now from the return on
investment of for every dollar
put into their for table housing
fund gets twenty nine dollars in
return Mr speaker John can you
explain how that works how come
we're not.
Using our general fund to do
that how come we're not putting
more money into this one the
return on investment is not only
in the dollar amount but in the
in the transform informations in
people's lives and the and the
folks that actually get to have
that safe shelter and and home
Mr speaker gentleman can expend
explained that for madam speaker
gentleman exceeding that of it
absolutely thank you Madam
speaker gentle lady I have an
example here Madam speaker
gentle lady for an example of an
eighty unit rental development
Madam speaker gentle lady and
this is in line with eighty
units madam speaker gentle lady
that NMFA is done down in Silver
City Grant County sixty units
there and and the Eddy County in
Carlsbad so it's so it's well
within what they're they're
doing throughout the state Madam
speaker gentle lady.
They make a seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar loan madam
speaker gentle lady in this
break down on a rental
development that has a total
cost of of sixteen million
dollars there's eleven point two
million an equity investment
speaker gentle lady three point
eight million in loan from a
private bank seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars madam speaker
gentle lady from the housing
trust fund and that is at a
twenty one to one leverage ratio
so we're in this really rarefied
air.
Madam speaker gentle lady where
that's the kind of return that
we're getting bringing money
into communities and madam
speaker gentle lady since its
inception back in two thousand
and I I believe were right about
twenty seven million dollars
this body has dedicated.
The return in the investment
that's been generated in our
communities has been extensive
to be looking at providing a
modest but steady because there
were a years where we did
nothing for this body was unable
to dedicate any funds fail to
have the steady consistent
source of funding will
absolutely be transformative.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman I
can see why my colleague from
San Juan might be so interested
in continuing the effort that we
have.
That we have before us Mister
speaker gentleman and an
invitation to all those
developers who are looking to
see this pencil out and how
we're trying to help with that
we've we've spoken about some
other things that we're doing
with
housing the building tax credits
and other things so this is such
a critical piece to that and and
how it all works together Mr
speaker gentleman going back a
bit to that cost burden
discussion Mr speaker John and I
understand that most people who
are renting if they could afford
it they would actually want to
buy a home they would actually
like to you know plant their
seeds and and see them grow Mr
speaker gentleman can you speak
a little bit about how it works
for if you know of a family or
you know however maybe
you know someone that wants to I
their first home or how does
this program work as a targeting
specific a we we talked about
low income individuals you know
with folks that are are just
starting out perhaps can we talk
about how do you know if I
wanted to engage in this program
how does MFA reach out to the or
how can I reach out to our
community wants this program is
or or while it's up and running
and and and move in Mr speaker
gentleman.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and gentle lady and I'm
I'm really fortunate to have Mr
non this was full are they here
Madam speaker gentle lady
there's over two hundred
partners for New Mexico mortgage
finance authority across the
state these are the nonprofit
for profit community groups the
local governments and other
stakeholders and partners all
across New Mexico madam speaker
gentle lady that help provide an
in road for the program madam
speaker gentle lady your offered
below market interest rates down
payment assistance and other
support to go all the way
through that process when you
want to purchase that first home
madam speaker and gentle lady
and really plant those routes as
you described.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
that is excellent I can't wait
to to be able to share this with
my constituents should we get
this through today I'm hopeful
that this body will pass this I
think for so many that have had
some real big struggles this
past a couple of years and and
seeing what the what can come to
fruition while we're in a bus
period in the state and how we
reinvest in our communities I'm
just so grateful for your
leadership on this and will be
supporting this every every step
of the way and and how it
continues and and how it grows
with that I'll call you thank
you Mr speaker down madam
speaker excuse me there is
further debate the gentleman
from Santa Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from Dona Ana healed
then as figure I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Rio Rancho.
Thank you madam speaker and of
all thank you for your job and
it's a great to have a
conversation with you tonight
thank you for the opportunity
to.
To speak and sure a few things
Mr children
We've heard a lot tonight about
what this fund does and the many
benefits of those fund the
leveraging of this fund the
housing crisis.
we we've heard a lot about those
items.
And Mr John.
You know I think philosophically
I perhaps have you know some
differences here you know I
really feel like between this
and all the other MFA and MFA
and others.
bills we've passed off this for
expanding.
the authority and ability I mean
I I really feel like.
you know.
Where is the limit to the
The Indian.
Many places that government
influences and start producing
into our lives speaker and
gentleman I think it's just a
difference that I really feel
that.
The greater.
The influence of government.
So less freedom to less
individuality.
And
the more
Suppression of independent order
of these kinds of things so Mr
chairman I I have some concerns
just along those lines with
should government be involved
with all these things.
Mr Chairman I'm not to talk
about that.
Mr Chairman it's even if I
agreed with everything that was
said today about how wonderful
this is we need to keep doing in
funding at.
you know I grew up with that
speaker and gentleman.
I would very much oppose this
bill because of how it is being
done.
the speaker and gentleman it's a
one time just for a moment about
what this bill is actually doing
business because on the track if
I'm wrong we're not creating
this fund this is not a new
fund.
Madam speaker gentle gentleman
that's right the the New Mexico
I mortgage finance authority
that exist as they are now
that's right madam speaker
gentle lady Mr chairman thank
you and and as mentioned by
understands because I think a
lot of the discussion was around
this fund what it does I even
find the title kind of
misleading
what the title should be is.
Distributions from the severance
tax.
And housing trust fund.
Because that's what this bill is
really doing speaker and
gentleman if this bill is doing
is creating an earmark of two
and a half percent from the
severance tax
bonding capacity to go into this
I Mr John is that correct as
figure gentleman that that's
correct two point five percent
from the severance tax permanent
fund Madam speaker gentleman
lower than the four and a half
percent they go to colonias four
and a half to tribal
infrastructure fund madam
speaker gentleman's this is that
modest yet consistent source of
funding for this fun yes and
then speaker and gentleman from
Indiana I I appreciate that I
appreciate your perspective and
obviously you in the the the
good Senator believe this is the
right thing to do but I just
want to I'm not going to drag
out debate here is lots of
questions but I just want to
talk for a minute about the
severance tax permanent fund and
our service tax dollars and why
I really believe this is not the
right mechanism.
so madam speaker and gentleman
you're familiar with severance
taxes
just talk for a minute about
what those are so I I I try not
to have a one sided conversation
speaker
side and yeah absolutely madam
speaker gentleman are severance
taxes are the the the taxes that
are paid madam speaker
gentleman's when minerals are
severed from New Mexico madam
figure gentleman believe it's
ninety eight point one percent
of that right now is within the
oil and gas industry Madam
speaker gentleman there are
escalating percentages I believe
including at three point seven
five percent roughly in there
when the price is above a
certain level Madam speaker
gentleman the price right now is
far far above that level and so
those are the severance taxes
madam speaker gentleman's
administrator and gentleman from
Dona Ana that's a great answer
really good answers thank you so
yeah these taxes or what's rate
when minerals are severed from
our public lands.
And just so everyone understands
when we don't capital every year
when we have these you know
dollars for capital outlay
what's happening is we bond
against the inflows.
The expected flows of those
severance tax dollars.
And we do that every year and we
we we make there's no bonds and
Mr chairman and how we
structure.
Those flows is actually set up
in statute.
And so if you think about high
like a pie chart for this is how
much money we can bond for the
inflows this year.
Statute says.
I believe it's fifty five
percent.
Goes to public school capital
outlay.
Mr Lee that's a result of the
losing lawsuit for the state
determined that they would start
helping to build and maintain
K. through twelve Education and
so a big chunk of the top three
four five percent goes to the
public schools it has been a
pretty successful program.
The next we have nine percent
comes off the goes to water
trust fund and the state
engineer.
We have four and a half thank
you mentioned for tribal
projects and for how for
colonias projects.
And then there's a portion that
goes to the severance tax
permanent fund.
But that can sometimes be sponge
away talk about on the second
the rest of the balance is
what's used for the executive
and legislative capital outlay
has eight roughly you know
roughly twenty five twenty seven
percent is what we use for our
capital outlay.
And so Mr chairman I guess the
first one I want to make is if
we pass this it'll be a new year
mark.
Of two point five percent.
And I think a lot of folks maybe
was understand we're not talking
about decreasing our capital
outlay by two point five percent
we're talking about decreasing
the pie by two point five
percent and when you do the mass
is largely be about a ten
percent reduction in our capital
outlay projects.
I'm speakers on it because it's
were brought twenty five point
seven percent if you take
another to have percent out.
That's roughly ten percent had
to our projects Mr chairman.
I mean clearly you understand
that and you believe that's a
good thing Mr Jones.
but I just want to show all of
us understand what we're saying
here is we're going to each of
us for go about ten percent.
And put into this fund which
will hopefully be used you know
equitably across the state
but I think just we need to
understand when we vote on this
that's what's gonna happen
master John and you have to this
represents Adams characters at
all thank you madam figured
thank you gentleman you you
described the the the
proportionality accurately madam
speaker gentleman's managing a
gentleman I would note that this
year we've contributed I believe
it's over thirty one million
dollars or roughly twenty two
million in general fund nine
million in capital that has gone
in to the New Mexico mortgage
finance authority of the portion
that to DFA sometimes figure
gentleman that he is coming out
of the ability for this body to
appropriate to other projects
Madam speaker gentleman for
helping public schools when
folks have a good and stable
homes madam speaker gentleman so
I think the the benefits of this
provides and the strong track
record the the twenty plus to
one match that New Mexico
mortgage finance authority is
proven that they generate it
should give us really excitement
that at a modest level we can
feel extremely confident that
they will bring be bringing this
economic value and the value of
of state for more affordable
more efficient housing that
makes it easier for New Mexicans
to live in rural as well as
urban areas to do the things
that they want to do.
So madam speaker and gentleman
thank you for for that and I I
understand right I I I I I.
That makes sense what you're
saying to me.
so I I think we've we've set the
table here so I can make my my
my points but Miss Vigil and I
think the first one is that.
if we feel that this is so
important that we're going to
earmark.
The.
In perpetuity
two point five percent of our
service tax bonding capacity to
this.
and we're all going to take this
head.
what's the state that we the
should do that was all of our
capital outlay dollars that we
should say well we really
believe we should have you know
three percent go to hospital
maintenance or one percent go to
help with our libraries and
You know I
you know we could go down this
road where we have no longer
have of us essentially
legislative authority over
capital outlay dollars that
would affect our districts not
all of the people in this room
the police and that's the right
way to go.
the building is bigger and and
gentleman I worry very much that
we would end up in a position
where we have basically
political bodies making
decisions that would benefit
more some districts and benefit
less others Mr Chairman I'm sure
you recall that there was
actually a time in this
legislature for members of the
majority party receive
substantially greater
legislative capital outlay
allocations to those in the
minority.
And it was a vigorous debate by
down fully on the floor of this
house saying why our children in
my district was important
children and district over there
in a very brave Democrats stood
up and said I agree and I'm
gonna give a portion of my
capital outlay to the
Republicans and that's what
finally led to equity and so
Masser gentleman I worry.
That the more that we you're
more can give away this
authority.
Where we're going on a pass for
now some folks are gonna benefit
more than others that's just a
concern.
One reason why.
Those are the other the other
really big reason is I took
many rose early on in my in my
legislative career trying to
protect the severance tax
permanent fund.
As he was dying and it is not an
exaggeration this appears on and
I'm not sure you were here the
time.
but because of a sponge bonding
which I'm like to go into the
details of that but it's
basically a mechanism where we
could make sure every single
dollar in that pie was bonded
instead of some of it going to
the severance tax permanent fund
there were several years in a
row where there are no insults
to that fund but there's a a
distribution every year of four
point six percent I believe from
that fund.
And and so at that point you're
relying on the stock market to
keep the fund alive.
And and the protections the
modeling and show that the phone
was gonna die in forty years.
That we were killing it.
Senator John and I for two years
are all carried a bill that I
can got a lot of error wasn't on
because I was squeezing this
year marks.
So that we can have more money
to go to the permanent fund to
keep it alive.
And we finally did pass that and
I just really believe strongly
that we need to have more
financial literacy we need to
understand better what these
endowment funds really are doing
the there was a gentleman from
San Juan prior to have or or web
was a Thom Taylor just a great
statesman for leaders.
And he was here we were talking
together and he said you know I
have a barn.
And the horses there.
they like to know on the posts
the whole of the roof.
He said you know I want them
they were just to those posted
us and our refer collapse and
kill us all but right to me so
that's exactly what we're doing
this of the severance tax
permanent fund because we don't
have the discretion to
discipline I mean one of the
discipline to not spend every
dollar comes in order to kill
the goose that lays the golden
egg for us.
Senator John and that's really
the reason why I oppose this
legislation I really think
that's the right way to fund
this is through the general fund
Mr Chairman did I hear you say
there's about ten million
dollars in general fund money
going into this fund this year
the budget thank you madam
speaker thank you gentleman that
actually more than that Madam
speaker gentleman
yes between ten and fifteen
million dollars twenty two
million overall in the house and
then speaker gentle self censor
gentleman that's great news
because I think I over heard you
say earlier.
Nine million I'm seeing from my
expert witness over here.
Nine million discussed.
Okay settle to twelve just
posted online at nine million
dollars.
Since our June I know that's a
lot less than what was requested
and recommended the looking at I
think you said twenty seven
million dollars over the last.
Two decades or so over this
phone has been in place maybe
fifteen years.
Madam figure gentleman yeah in
the seventeen years there's been
twenty seven million dollars
madam speaker gentleman with an
eight year stretch of zero Madam
speaker gentleman that that that
eight year stretch probably led
to some of the very significant
gaps that we see madam speaker
gentleman's yes Mr chairman yeah
and I completely get understand
why you're looking at but more
because the revenue stream so I
get it but you know still the
remains that in one year we're
going to be putting in nearly a
third of what we've seen in the
last seventeen years and if this
really is set up like a
revolving.
Fund you know where you have a.
returned.
you know I I think if we're
disciplined we can make
general fund appropriations.
The we'll get this to a place
where it's doing all the
wonderful things that folks here
talked about being grateful that
it that it's doing so Mister
John and I just.
I want to just.
All in there
but those are really the two big
reasons why I oppose this
legislation.
I want to make sure that we're
not putting our permanent fund
back on a treacherous pass.
And.
Also I really think the right
way to fund it is through.
The.
The other I would funds to the
general fund and not creeping
into
something that.
You know the legislators of the
drive to the legislature's
authority for determine what's
best for their districts
something that was long.
What's the.
Transaction for a.
inequity.
And was.
Inequity was one after much
trial.
so Mister John and thank you for
legislation thank you for the
time.
Thank you madam figured thank
you so much gentleman there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Travis county
Representative BIZZARRO.
Madam speaker thank you very
much for the gentleman from
dying in the yield please madam
speaker I gladly yield to the
gentle lady from Chavez.
Yes I am repeating the question
just tell me because I had to
step out for a while.
Madam speaker and gentleman of.
More to the Corona country and
care of can you tell me the
average cost of a single family
home that was built by MFA.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen that I'm being
told I was a hundred and eighty
thousand dollars.
Okay madam speaker and gentleman
can you also tell me of and
these are the single family
homes to are talking about that
I forgot to say that is that
correct Mr Madam speaker and
gentleman speaker gentle lady
yes okay and what is the average
square footage of the single
family homes that are caught
costing a hundred and eighty
thousand dollars.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I've been told
the average square footage would
be around thirteen hundred
square feet.
And madam speaker.
Prior to the corona Conder
yakira how many homes were built
being built to your by MFA.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady they were
financing around twenty five
hundred Madam speaker gentle
lady and that's amazing madam
speaker and gentleman that
really is and these are
communities throughout the state
of New Mexico is that right
Madam speaker gentle lady from
the very south to the the top
east and west madam speaker
gently and madam speaker and
gentleman from done in a can you
tell me.
And your expert witnesses may
not know of this I'm not real
sure how many of those homes
went to a single parent family.
And if you don't know the I
understand that's fine.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
experts are unsure but your
point is really well taking that
that the the folks The New
Mexicans of single parent
families that probably need this
the most are absolutely can be
helped by this in our.
And madam speaker gentleman I
agree with that it's a chance
for them to start to have pride
and ownership and there's a lot
to be said for pride in
ownership instead of having it
just ended too.
And I.
I believe in private ownership
on anything like that they do
take better care of their home
their.
They they understand that they
are still paying for it and it's
gonna be there's it's gonna be
years and it's very important.
Madam speaker and the gentleman.
Of.
Prior to the oil are any of
these homes in the fall right
now.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
being told that lesson that
seven percent roughly madam
speaker gentle lady very low
number.
And madam speaker and gentleman
from done and I'm assuming
whenever there is one of these
instances the seven percent
whenever there is a default.
Ending that MFA does go in there
and try to work out some sort of
delayed it for they can get
caught up and get back on track
is that correct Madam speaker
gentle lady absolutely.
And madam speaker gentleman's
of.
Earlier Representative minority
whip on toys stated there was a
twenty one twenty to one return
on investment can you expand a
little bit on that.
Absolutely madam speaker and
gentle lady that
Really at that twenty to one or
more madam speaker gentle lady
getting up as high as twenty
five and twenty six to one
that's because madam speaker
gentle lady for a very low
amount of that loan from the
housing trust fund there is a
much much higher amount of
equity there's usually a bank
loan madam speaker gentle lady
and maybe other contributions in
some cases land or other things
that all go into making that
financial transaction possible
Madam speaker gentle lady
with a very relatively a low
investment from the housing
trust fund.
Okay thank you for that
explanation
and madam speaker and gentleman
I am certain that there is a
yearly audit done ride of MFI
Madam speaker gentle lady that.
Absolutely the case an
independent audit they have the
multiple levels of oversight
madam speaker and gentle lady
including in this body.
So madam speaker and gentleman
you're saying that that money is
put to the use that it was
intended for is that correct
Madam speaker gentle lady I am
confident that it is and we can
go said about confidence it's
about seeing every single year
madam speaker generally that it
is and that the oversight is
there to confirm that.
And madam speaker another
question I have a have you ever
had any comments regarding what
MFA is doing from the New Mexico
bond counsel.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady
The men's figure thank you
gentle lady is reviewed by the
state board of fun at finance
and the the the bond counsel the
state bond counsel Madam speaker
gentle lady they're going to
tell us they'll tell the whole
world if something's amiss Madam
speaker gentle lady they have
not found anything amiss okay so
miss madam speaker and gentleman
you're saying that there are no
findings whenever the audits are
done is that correct and that's
really good to hear I appreciate
that Madam speaker and
gentleman.
The way I look at this it's a
win for communities it's a win
for those families it's a win
for those children knowing that
they to.
If they need assistance whenever
they get older.
That they have an agency that
they can turn to that helps our
school systems it helps our
local economies because these
people that are.
Getting in these homes know that
they have to work.
And to me that's a win for
everybody Madam speaker
gentleman thank you very much
thank you gentle lady seeing no
further debate the gentleman to
close thank you madam speaker I
just want to thank the body for
the truly heartfelt poignant
words the incredible work this
body is done I want to say a
special thank you to the sponsor
of this legislation Senator
Nancy Rodriguez whose continued
work on housing really stands as
a model for how this body can
work in positive ways continuing
for New Mexicans so with that
madam speaker I move that the
Senate bill one thirty four do
now pass the are on final
passage of Senate bill one
thirty four.
The vote is now.
The vote is about to close.
Electronic portion of the vote
is closed I mean the clerk to
call the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon was yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong road yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash food yes
Representative Buka.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook votes No
Representative Fajardo.
Yes Representative heart of both
yes Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Gallegos.
Representative Gallegos votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
This.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Representative Mary Helen yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative lane.
Representative Lara.
Yes Representative lot of votes
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Matthews yes
Representative Matthews votes
yes Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
It has Representative Trujillo
votes yes Representative lane.
Representative Lane votes no.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Yes Representative Chasey votes
yes.
Is now closed by a vote of fifty
one in the affirmative and
fifteen in the negative Senate
bill one thirty four has duly
passed the house.
This.
Members we are now going into
the supplemental calendar and.
On to
House Bill to nineteen.
Representative.
Pettigrew.
Are you.
Are you ready.
Thank you madam chair
This is have house government
elections in Indian Affairs
substitution.
Madam chair with that point.
Are you ready.
Let the record show.
That all action necessary for
placing House Bill to nineteen
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or said
substitution.
Thank you madam chair this is
awful to nineteen is it's a
house government and in the
elections and Indian Affairs
substitute.
For elected county officials and
the salary cap and I stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Santa and Santa
Fe Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentlemen please yield.
Apple will to the.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe I think
it is very very quick quick
questions Madam speaker so I I
thank you for bringing this
forward because I was looking
at.
The average wages for some of
these that were in there and all
the summer as a very quickly our
county commissioners make
between thirty nine and you're
going to bring up to forty for
the medium is fifty seven and
forty seven so when I looked at
all these wages that we have on
here the main point I want to
bring forward Madam speaker and
gentleman was that we are still
even with that higher range
still far below the average rate
so we're moving in the right
direction so thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Otero
Representative back.
Thank you madam speaker I'd just
need to be excused from this
vote I cannot vote on this it
actually affects my real job
thank you.
Thank you gentle lady seeing no
further debate the gentleman to
close.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you the.
Member for for considering this
vote.
As discussed this this raises
the cap for
Our elected county officials by
fifteen percent to be clear the
still has to be
Okay I'm told to move that we
passes bill.
House Bill to nineteen the vote
is now open.
Is about to close.
Election of chairman portion of
the vote is close the clerk to
call members without a recorded
vote.
Representative coin.
Yes Representative all gone
votes yes Representative Deborah
A. Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Blue Cross.
Representative Chasey.
Yes Representative Chasey both
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Fajardo.
Yes Representative part of a yes
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
The lady yes Representative
Harry Garcia votes yes
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Harper.
Representative purpose
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative Lara votes
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan both yes
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews votes
yes Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative queen both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya
vote yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
road yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo both
yes.
By a vote of sixty six in the
affirmative and zero and
negative house bill two nineteen
has duly passed the house.
I believe this is a
Representative.
First vehicle to be tested House
congratulations.
We are going back to item
eighteen on.
Senate bill forty one twice in.
And with the an emergency
clause.
Representative.
Chandler is yes are you ready
Madam speaker will you give me
to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for the scene
Senator Senate bill forty one
twice amended with with an
emergency call has
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Thank you madam speaker this
bill amends the university
research park and Economic
Development Act to ensure that
it that the greater than sixteen
employees at UNM Sandoval
regional Medical Center have the
right to organize and bargain
under the public employee under
the public employee bargaining
Act.
Thank you madam speaker with
that I'm prepared to answer
questions.
There is a debate on the for.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you
madam speaker.
Madam speaker will the gentle
lady from Los Alamos Rio Arriba
Sandoval and Santa Fe yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady from Los Alamos
so.
This concept of research park
corporation is completely for me
and you know these things exist
then speakers only for Los
Alamos can you explain to the
body what is a research park
corporation.
Madam speaker the gentleman from
San Juan it's a unique
How so I said I think it is a
not for profit organization that
is.
A private corporation for
certain purposes and a public
corporation for other purposes
Madam speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you gentlelady from Los
Alamos.
What's the purpose of of
creating the sort of special the
corporations.
Madam speaker gentleman from San
Juan I cannot answer that
question.
Speaker gentle lady from from
Los Alamos.
Because I think these the same
kind of goals to be accomplished
just as an arm of state you an
amber other research
universities
and so I do think it's important
for for the body to have some
discussion about what's the
purpose behind creating these
visit our special carve outs
they're not just a simple
nonprofit corporation or for
proper corporation would be a
need for these kind of statutes
madam speaker gently for House
almost I think actually that's
foundational to this discussion.
Why do these entities exist
Madam speaker gentle lady can
you ask your expert if you knows
why there's a special car about
for these.
Madam speaker of the gentleman
according to section twenty one
twenty eight research park
purpose to promote the public
welfare and prosperity of the
state.
Faster economic development in
New Mexico forge links between
New Mexico's educational
institutions business and
industrial communities and
government throughout the
development of research parts at
university real real property.
engage in other cooperative
ventures of innovative
technology significance.
Western digital is a lost almost
thank you for for reading that I
think that's helpful and there's
something about there is
research alright corporations
that's different than being a a
political subdivisions and
they're able to accomplish
different goals and results as a
result so so with that let me
ask I just foundational question
if if you for more these
research part corporations are
they a political subdivision of
the state of New Mexico.
For some purposes yes.
Senator generally from Los
Alamos for what purposes a
research park is deemed an
agency or other political
subdivisions of the state for
the purposes of applying
statutes and laws relating team
to the furnishing of goods and
services to the university that
operates it in this case you NM
and the risk management fund in
addition research park
corporation its officers and
directors are granted immunity.
From liability for tort under
the tort claims act.
Mr digitally from Osama so are
are these political subdivisions
or are they not.
For certain purposes they are
and for this ammendment we are
proposing that they be
considered a public employer for
the purposes of applying the
public employee bargaining Act
miss generated from Los Alamos
what what section in statute re
reading from we say in some
instances they are Madam speaker
gentleman I just read it it's
twenty one dash eight dash seven
paragraphs the.
An updated.
For you to control.
I read that provision Mr madam
speaker gentleman's.
Minister gentlelady from Los
Alamos and but there is a
subsection is they're not.
yes again as I said madam
speaker gentleman for some
purposes theme the political
subdivisions and for others it
is not and for re for other
purposes it is not seen in eight
research fire is not deemed HSD
further put for a political
subdivision at center for the
purposes of applying statutes
and law relating to personal
procurement of goods and
services meetings of the board
or directors meaning they're not
subject to the public meetings
act
gross receipts tax disposition
acquisition property capital
outlays forward per diem and
mileage inspection records so
the records are also kept
private.
Mr generated from Osama so so it
doesn't apply of means act
doesn't apply is that correct.
Yes Madam speaker and gentleman
from San Juan domestic digital
envelopes almost
it's interesting procurement.
Doesn't apply both furnishing of
goods and services does apply.
I'm sure there's something to be
flushed out there I don't know
what what the differences there
I don't know it's it's really
material to our dialogue but the
the other piece though madam
speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos is relating to personnel.
And it does use the word person
in that arena under current
statute.
These.
Research part corporations are
not.
Political subdivisions that
correct.
Madam speaker gentleman.
That's correct in terms of
personnel that is why madam
speaker and gentleman we're
proposing amendments.
Mr degenerated from Los Alamos
I.
I guess I'm not convinced that
that's actually why.
isn't there litigation that
spurned this step for change.
madam speaker I would not say
that it's quote litigation that
spurned this
Statutory change it is the need
for these employees to have an
Avenue as all of their
university hospital employees
have which is the right to.
Collectively bargain and
organized under the public
employees bargaining Act
minister General from Los Alamos
the state all other.
Did you say you and Ortiz said
public of forgive.
I said I referred to the
university New Mexico Hospital
health services system madam
speaker gentleman's Spencer to
deliver less almost thank you
because I don't want to quote
you so those are hospitals that
are owned and operated by UNM
correct Madam speaker and
gentleman and this corporation
is wholly owned by UNM Senator
generally but the other hospital
such a reference are owned by
UNM.
The other hospitals the other
hospital and referenced are
owned by UNM announcer
gentlelady from Los Alamos these
are separate corporations that
were in fact incorporated under
this research Parker alright for
permission Act correct.
Correct.
And so madam speaker generated
we're not talking apples apples
are talking apples to oranges
and so to my initial appointment
speaker I I do think the
litigation is the impetus for
this ammendment is it is that
incorrect.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
incorrect.
Mr generated can you explain to
me what I'm missing.
What you're missing is the fact
that these employees have been
denied the ability to organize.
Under the pizza they deserve
that right madam speaker
gentleman's that is why we're
presenting this ammendment Madam
speaker generated the reason why
they've been denied.
I was smitten and I I assume
you'll correct me if I'm wrong
is because Cuba is the public.
Employee bargaining Act these
are not public.
Employees these are employees of
a of a nonprofit corporation is
that correct.
Madam speaker I don't know why
the management of the hospital
has chosen to denied these
employees the right to our
bargain under people I cannot
speak to them.
Mr degenerated from Los Alamos.
The public employee bargaining
act does not apply to.
Research park corporation
and to do this because they are
not public.
We owned entities are correct.
Madam speaker gentleman that it
does not apply because the
provisions in the act does not
allow for it and I would point
out again that it's interesting
that the tort claims act has
been provided to the directors
and employees of of the hospital
also something that almost that
typically applies to public
entities.
Mr generally the Los Alamos it's
to me it's it's sexualized
stanchion that the purpose of
these corporations is develop
and extend economic activity
within the state and of course
we want them to be shielded
underneath the tort claims act I
don't think that Nestle suggests
there somehow magically now a
public in need particularly when
in paragraph it says they're
they're not when it comes to
person.
But again I we've skirted around
the issue.
There is a lawsuit filed in this
case.
And there is a Cision's stating
that in fact.
They had they had no right to
organize under the public under
the covers that correct.
Madam speaker down could you
repeat that question a master
generated from Los Alamos so
there was a there is an
underlying lawsuit prior to this
legislation being filed.
And the court ruled that.
These type of research part
corporations were not subject to
people is that correct.
madam speaker gentleman's the
District Court has ruled that
the case is on appeal.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
And gently from Los Alamos one
was that a bill I filed.
Madam speaker gentleman's I
believe the end of November.
Minister gentlelady from Los
Alamos in this legislation was
filed in January is that correct
Madam speaker gentleman that's
when we are committed to begin
to file legislation early
January.
Massacre gentlelady from Los
almost thank you for clarifying
for this I'm a freshman we're
allowed to file legislation Mr
generated from Los Alamos can
you explain the body who your
expert is.
Madam speaker my expertise seen
units an expert in labor law.
And madam speaker gentle lady
from Los Alamos's does Mr you'd
seventy rolling under got
underlying litigation Madam
speaker telling us he does and
madam speaker gentle lady can
you please disclose what that
role is to the body.
Madam speaker gentleman he is
counsel for the you.
Bastar gentlelady from Los
Alamos that you that brought
them along lawsuit.
I thank you on the line lawsuit
filed to be a counsel on the
lawsuit so yes madam speaker
gentleman's.
Yes gentlelady from Los Alamos
so.
So the body understands what's
happening here.
We have a specific statute that
says clearly.
These entities are not arms of
the state for person.
There's an underlying lawsuit
that's filed.
The result of that lawsuit madam
speaker.
Is that but you lost.
That's in November of twenty
twenty one.
Fast forward to January of
twenty twenty two.
We get legislation that's
dropped in the middle of a
pending lawsuit.
And I'm pretty sure there's some
state constitution provisions
that apply to this.
To we're now we're creating a
car about.
In the car about is by the way.
These do apply but only in the
the specific instances of.
You guessed it health care
facilities.
That are owned by these research
part corporation entities.
And now we're being asked to
pass out legislation.
That would defeat the underlying
lawsuit.
Create a special Carmel that
doesn't exist by the way for
other nonprofit corporations.
And.
The person advising.
As an expert here today in fact
has an interest in that case as
counsel of record.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
ordered the body to take note of
what's happening here.
I think it's an issue and I
would urge the body to vote no
thank you.
Further debate.
The gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does the
kind gentle lady from Los Alamos
recovery The Santa and Santa Fe
yield.
Madam speaker I yield to my dear
friend from Santa.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I I want to first
preface this by saying.
These comments are directed at
you.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
believe the only facility in the
state that is impacted by this
legislation is in my district.
Miss Bingley is that correct.
Madam speaker gentle and I think
that is correct.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
That is my understanding.
And speaker gentleman I've been
corrected apparently it also
applies to the teachers hospital
at UNM.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
thank you for the correction.
whoever represents the teachers
hospital I'm sure would feel the
same way that I do.
Being very.
Frustrated.
And upset with the slide.
That no one.
Who is a proponent of this
legislation no lobbyist who is
working on it.
Even bothered to send me an
email or a text.
The originally I learned about
this legislation yesterday when
I was doing my homework about
what bills are on the floor.
Usually.
I am furious.
The courtesy.
And say Hey Representative
Harper are you aware of this
issue and we drop the
legislation to address it.
All the state even if they
thought I was going to be not
friendly to the legislation.
Which I perhaps may have been.
That is an incredible slide.
Would any of us feel if there's
legislation that specifically
targeted a huge facility in our
district and they were even
brought attention.
Not even given the courtesy.
So I am I am very upset.
Usually and again that's not
directed at you.
Mr agility.
I.
Have a.
My in laws my brother my father
in law for members of the union
and their little trump
Republicans.
Mr Julie I have a good neighbor
who is a nurse at this facility.
And just talk to me about these
problems.
Israeli actually had to get from
her the name of the lobbyists
like a caller today.
Mr Dooley this is something that
I perhaps could have supported
or even help to work through.
Mr Julian and there's also like
there's a hundred ways to bake a
loaf of bread I think this point
another way to do this besides
what is in front of us.
Mr Lee.
There is no way I can support
this legislation the way that I
personally have been treated.
Not being able to even talk
until the day before for I'm
sorry I found out the day before
I need to talk to people about
this until today.
Senator and gentle lady I I
apologize.
Will support this.
but this isn't right I think any
of us would feel the exact same
way.
Thank you madam speaker.
Is further debate the gentle
lady from grant.
Hidalgo in Sierra Representative
thank you madam speaker will the
gentlelady yields madam speaker
I will yield to the gentle lady
from the doggo thank you madam
speaker and think it gentle lady
I I can tell you exactly how it
feels because laughter have in
my community.
And it was it took a Senate
sponsor.
Is the closest person they could
find would sign on to it for a
reason because it was the issue
that was asked of us at every
committee every debate every
town hall there is articles we
were interviewed we campaigned
on it and they couldn't find.
A member in this chamber that
lived in the district Republican
or Democrat to sign on to the
bill and to prevent it presented
to this for.
Including my good friend from
the south.
With the Democrat.
Representative of the people in
her district I know exactly what
it feels like I know what it
feels like when the vote goes
down on a party line because of
his Sanchez the bill and who's
behind it and I'll be voting no
as well.
There is there's a further
debate of the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield.
Madam speaker on debt gentleman
from Chavis absolutely I will
yield to you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady if.
Madam speaker and gentle lady we
had a lot of questions
the other day and committee I
want to go over to go through
all those because I believe the
representative from San Juan
covered quite a few of the
questions of that I would like.
What to know about this.
I think it's been established
that a research park formed
under the university research
park and Economic Development
Act of nineteen ninety nine.
Requires that these types of
entities are not agencies of the
state that are not public
into these as the we would
normally think of them.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
The university's.
Concern.
Several decades ago.
About how to protect.
Intellectual property.
How to use that intellectual
property.
To provide innovation.
How to find development of
technology.
For the benefit of.
All New Mexicans and try to use
these laboratories if you will.
To advance the economic interest
of the state.
And so I believe I can maybe I
should ask the question Madam
speaker gentle lady how many
universities have taken
advantage of this act.
Madam speaker gentleman I think
a few I think the University of
course and and us and them just
you there maybe one or two
others however I believe this is
the only hospital.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker gentle lady of yes
there would be for universities
in the state that have taken
advantage of this fact.
For those of you that are from
southern New Mexico you may be
familiar with the arrowhead
center.
For those of you from the
Albuquerque area believe
there's.
Four or more entities associated
with the university of New
Mexico of some of which are of
right there near the.
And of course this facility in
Santa Fe County which is a
hospital.
New Mexico highlands university.
I believe has taken advantage of
this act as well as a central
New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
These research parks are
providing a valuable service to
the state.
The idea of taking.
This electoral property
allowing.
To be secured allowing that the
intellectual property to
Develop.
Innovative products innovative
businesses innovative spin offs.
Has not only worked here in New
Mexico but in many other parts
of the nation and them I think
we need to be very careful.
Very careful when we start.
Thirteen.
Out of the armor that may keep
this this idea this.
Invade of planned
From advancing.
And so today we have a built.
Essentially desires for us.
To ignore the fact that.
The statute says that these are
not state entities.
And as madam speaker and as a
general it is pointed out there
are two exceptions.
That they are able to take
advantage of.
Number one.
Is that they can utilize the New
Mexico procurement code in in
procuring of.
I guess supplies equipment other
announcements.
The second is.
They can take advantage of the.
New Mexico
tort claims limitations of the
presenters.
But other than that.
These entities are treated as
private entities for all
purposes.
And so now we want to.
All certain stick our nose into.
These private entities business.
Because there's six hundred
employees at a hospital.
And if we pass this legislation.
It's not my vote.
Madam chair or madam speaker and
gentle lady.
These.
People that work in the
facilities.
They become members of the union
do they not.
Madam speaker actually that's
not correct what this bill does
is provide the employees to
determine for themselves with
whether they are wish to
organize under people or not.
Madam speaker down it does not
impose a you on the employees
they would have to organize
under the provisions of people
just to be clear Madam speaker
and gentleman from Chavis Madam
speaker gentle lady so you're
saying that there would be a
vote requirement.
Madam speaker German absolutely.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
are.
During some information that
that may not be.
Quite occurred either but we'll
move on.
Madam speaker down are you
talking about the card check
process which Madam speaker is
also a process that allows self
determination for the employees.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you'll have to explain that to
me I'm not familiar with with
the process all I know is that I
believe that one to become a
public entity the same maybe may
be of a little more.
A little more fast acting the
amendment a normal
You have for.
Madam speaker gentleman the card
check process is the ability for
employees.
To take a document and indicate
that they wish to have a you out
the facility that's what it is.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
In testimony.
In committee the statement was
made that.
Please employees.
These private employees could
not organize under the national
labor relations act do you
recall that testimony
Madam speaker gentleman actually
I made that statement and it's
based on our legal analysis that
they are not able to organize
under the and all our a.
And some madam speaker gentle
lady has anyone.
Has anyone requested an advisory
opinion from the national labor
relations board.
Madam speaker gentleman I've
been advised that they do not
issue advisory opinions.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
would advise you that they do
issues such opinions.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
I think that the we went over
the case law with the one case
involving that issue the other
night we won't do it here
tonight but we certainly
disagree on that issue.
And I believe before this body.
Thanks to the staff.
But we first have to see at
least seeking advisory opinion
if not.
If the employees are so
disposed tried to secure.
Unionization under the NLRB and
there's a process to do that.
That does several things number
one it avoids us from
interfering with an existing
court case which has pointed out
earlier is a violation of
section four four article four
section thirty four of the New
Mexico constitution.
I would also.
Point out madam speaker gentle
lady the the that process.
If
answers and the the employees
are want to unionize and our
recognizes as you.
That the people that I have
talked to the people who have
approached me.
From.
This is a.
Research for.
Have.
Assured me.
They would that they will
welcome them with open arms they
are not adverse to the employees
are organizing if that's what
the employees want to do.
And so we have a we have a
process that process is being
short circuited because it may
be easier to get legislation
through this body than it is to
Request an opinion of the
national labor relations board
and go through that process
I would hope not but the
currently it is from.
A sense of a new exists.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
I'm suggesting that we the man.
This bill and I have.
Passed out an amendment and I at
this time I would move house
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill forty one.
In the two oh two number which
should be on your desk is point
to to to.
Seven six seven point one.
Staff.
To make sure it's on the
website.
It is all on the it is on the
website and I hear.
Hear anything over from the the
gentleman.
Or can you explain the amendment
I just heard something else
coming out from the area.
Yes ma'am I'll be happy to
explain the amendment and I
would like to roll call for.
You have a roll call thank you
madam speaker.
The the amendment the madam
speaker.
The eight both of the amendments
from Senate Judiciary and Senate
floor amendment number one of
those amendments can be found in
section B. two I believe that's
on page two of the bill.
So it strikes all those
sentiments and in lieu of the
Senate amendments.
We would insert the following
language.
So after the word act there
would be a comma.
In the case of a health care
facility that is owned operated
or managed by a research park
corporation.
For the research park
corporation employees
individuals.
The majority of whom work at a
health care facility.
If and only if the national
labor relations board has
entered a final and non
appealable order determining
that the national labor
relations board lacks
jurisdiction to consider and
educated such proposed
bargaining units protections for
organization as a bargaining
unit.
And what this does it
essentially says that that.
The of the in L. R. B. process.
Is not available to these
employees.
Then they will be named for
purposes of the public employee
bargaining that
if they would be able to
organize under the public your
employer.
bargaining that and become
unionized under that act those
so which apparently by of of.
So that's the crux of the
amendment it basically.
We'll do a couple things number
one.
It'll keep us out of the
building in the middle of a
lawsuit.
Number two it will force these
folks to to first to the NLRB
process which we believe is
available to them.
And if that fails give give give
the more national labor
relations board does not permit
that process to move forward for
whatever reason.
Them but you can turn to this
legislation for purposes of
unionizing under the public
employee bargaining that better
speaker.
Before you
I just want to point out that
there's something wrong with the
board there is a fiction and
they misunderstood something.
This is a friendly amendment.
Madam speaker gentleman it is
not a friendly amendment for a
number of reasons.
One just to correct the record
this legislation does not
interfere with an existing
lawsuit.
That lawsuit will proceed under
the prior statute so first
that's a false premise a second
false promises that the
employees at issue the six
hundred at UNM medical regional
Medical Center have the ability
to organize under the NLRA and
as I have indicated earlier that
is not correct I understand the
gentleman from Travis madam
speaker please otherwise but
that is not correct so this
would be a futile exercise for
the employees and would simply
be another delay in their
ability to have the rights that
other employees that the man in
the medical system that UNM
medical system have which is the
right to organize under the bus.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentleman from.
Sandoval Representative for.
Remove the table because for
member number one.
Before the bodies to.
Is.
It's a table house for.
One one.
To Senator for your point of
order there was debate and the
tabling motion can't cut the.
There's a bit on the amendment
Representative the.
From Lee County.
The gentleman from Chavis can
you.
Madam speaker I certainly yield
to the gentleman from eight.
Service works for a labor law
could you.
Described.
To.
The difference would be.
Billeting for group of employees
to organize in a private sector
company as opposed to the public
sector.
Madam speaker and gentleman to
tell you the truth the the
expert is in the front row over
by the gentle lady from Los
Alamos
he might be better equipped to
answer that question.
Madam speaker German would you
repeat the question.
Speaker gentle lady.
Question was what is the
difference
obviously there are a number of
private sector is in operation
of the state and I'm wondering
what the differences in the
ability to organize with respect
to the private sector forces
that same ability in the public
sector.
Madam speaker
Gentleman from we.
The difference between the
rights of.
Employees organized under the
NLRA in those organized under
people are things like public
employees do not have the
ability to strike.
So for example were people to
apply to the UNM hospital Santa
Fe regional hospital.
Those employees would not be
allowed to strike if they were
organized.
At this time they are allowed to
strike because they are not
covered by people.
The right to compel dues is
something that public employers
unions cannot compel.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
employer in the private sector
can lock unemployed to strike
where is.
The employer in the public
sector cannot.
Jan ladies.
That's the three differences.
Well madam speaker gentleman I
don't know if I've covered all
the differences but those are
some of the differences madam
speaker gentleman from point.
Madam speaker gentle lady is
also those advantages accrue to
the employees in the private
sector.
So one of the sh.
Related to makes this.
The
public sector argument.
Madam speaker gentleman from Lee
because they tend not organized
under the and L. R. A..
Madam speaker gentle lady of
our.
Discussion of the private sector
as.
Your order no private sector
unions.
Portion of the state.
Madam secretary speaker
gentleman there have been
statements to that effect but
not from this side.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
This would you explain this side
of the building Madam speaker
and gentleman.
I Madam speaker and gentleman I
have not made any statement that
that has conceded that this is
not a public entity and
identified areas where it is
considered an agency or other
political subdivisions of the
state.
Including the fact that its
officers directors employees
shall be a granted immunity from
liability from toward under the
tort claims act that is
typically applied to public
entities.
So madam speaker gentle lady the
argument boils down to whether
this is a public.
Introduce or a private sector
entity cannot believe are heard
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln grant from the statute.
A research facility.
As a private sector facilitate.
Did I hear him that incorrectly.
Madam speaker gentleman I am
reading from the the statute
that relates to university
research parks.
And the review number city
research park in Development Act
section twenty one dash twenty
eight dash seven and the
language is coming directly from
that statute that talks about in
what cases it's considered a
political subdivisions and what
we are proposing is something
similar and in that it recognize
is it the facility to would be a
public employer for the purposes
of people.
Speaker thank you gentle lady.
Suppose from back to the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln now with the question is
that state correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman of.
It is very clear in the statute
that she just referenced now
I'll read it to you.
The research park corporation
shall not be deemed HSD public
body or other political
subdivision of New Mexico.
Thank goes on.
And then it.
Talks about.
It shall be deemed an agency for
other political subdivisions for
purposes of applying statutes
and laws related to the
furnishing goods and services to
the university that operates a.
And the risk management fund so
that's exception number one of
the program the the research
park corporation its officers
directors and employees shall be
granted immunity from liability
for any poor as provided in the
tort claims act.
Senate references of sections.
Talk about the committee and
chair so there are two specific.
Exceptions that the act of
nineteen eighty nine carved out
where a research park
corporation.
Can use a procurement laws.
And then have the protection
from tort liability.
Within the act and for all other
purposes.
The state of New Mexico creates
a as a non public and that the
it shall not be deemed and the
agency public body or other
political subdivisions of New
Mexico.
Thank you
for the clarification.
That does sound pretty
straightforward to me thank you
madam speaker.
Is a further debate on the
amendment.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero to choose
to debate on the bill or on the
amendment.
Thank you she's not on the
amendment is there further
debate on the amendment C. ng
and
the gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you madam speaker I move
to table house floor amendment
number one.
For the body is to table house
floor amendment number one to.
Senate bill forty one.
Vote of yes the amendment will
be tabled a vote of no and the
amendment will not be tabled.
The vote is now open.
Portion of the vote is close the
clerk to call the numbers
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong road yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash food yes
Representative will go.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Chasey.
Yes Representative Chasey both
yes Representative Cook.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes no Representative lane.
Representative labels no
Representative Lara.
Yes Representative Lara votes
yes representative Lente.
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthew votes no
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero both yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
I know of.
Thirty nine in the affirmative
and twenty six negative house
floor amendment wanted to Senate
bill forty one is tabled.
We're back on the bill.
The gentleman from Lee.
Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker Madam
speaker of the regulation for
the national labor relations
board that allows advisory
opinions is section one of two
point nine eight.
Just in case the gentle lady
wants to pursue that.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
I notice in our.
This legislation that the term
health care facility is not
defined and it seems like it
could be someone very is there a
reason that the we did and to
provide the word health care
facility.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Travis that was a floor
amendment from the Senate.
And you know I I frankly don't
think it's very.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you might have.
You have indicated that the.
There was also another facility
that may be a health care
facility that would be subject
to a research park corporation I
believe you said it was a
teachers hospital.
Did I hear that correctly madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman it is
not a hospital it's a teaching
facility that is organized under
you Peter your pizza.
Okay well I guess we heard
teachers hospital we did not
know that there was a such a
thing at UNM.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
It does seem to me that this.
The legislation.
Essentially targets.
One into the in the state.
Are there any other health care
facilities that would fall under
that umbrella.
Would be targeted by this
legislation.
Meg
Madam speaker gentleman.
There are no other the pizza.
Health care facilities.
Nor there and I would point out
also that the employees working
at this facility are the only
health care facilities.
Health care employees who are
doctor denied the opportunity to
organize under either your
People for the NLRA.
Madam speaker gentle lady keeps
saying they're denied.
You haven't even thought the.
Advisory opinion that's
available.
From the national labor
relations board.
And to my knowledge and I don't
think of brought up in the bay
if there's been no effort by the
employees to organize under the
NLRB has there been any effort
in that regard.
Madam speaker gentleman knows
their if they haven't because
they cannot and I would point
out also the management of the
facility has not section of
order such an advisory opinion
either although they continue to
maintain that is the case Madam
speaker gentleman from Travis
Madam speaker gentle lady this
could be short circuited with a
letter requesting such an
opinion could been done several
months ago probably the before
Judge of the ram to issued his
opinion of you know again.
I think that we ought to as a
body be very has of the.
To inject.
The legislative process into the
matters.
In a matter that's not only of
pending in the courts but this
legislation is so artfully
drafted so carefully drafted
targets the one institution that
is subject to that lawsuit and
so madam speaker gentle lady.
This seems to be a.
Severed.
That I believe is prohibited by
our constitution
for a couple reasons one section
four article four section thirty
four which is specific to
lawsuits and also section twenty
four for two specific to our
taking action.
That is so specific it deals
with local issues and not the
state as a whole this
legislation.
Is focused laser focused on one
facility in Santa Fe County.
And that is the only the only
facility that will be affected
by this legislation and for
those reasons madam speaker and
gentle lady I would urge this
body to carefully.
They're fully consider.
Whether it is in the best public
interest for us to be injected
ourselves into that process.
And to.
Them to upset the apple cart
with respect to these.
Research parks that are doing
very good work across the state
because once we once we do this
for them you're going to see an
avalanche of any other
successful endeavor by the
universities in growing
developing technology supply
that innovation the state needs
protecting intellectual property
and patents that are results
from the research that's
conducted there and so for that
I would for the body to vote.
No on Senate bill forty one.
There's further debate on the
bill of the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair
the
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you I just have a
question.
I emails from graduate students
at the university of New Mexico
and these are.
I find them concerning and they.
Allege that the University of
New Mexico consistently.
Refuses their right to organize
and bargain.
And I'm.
This is I listen to this debate
kind of scratching my head
trying to understand why the
university would support.
The.
Organizing rights of.
This university research park
but is not doing so.
For its graduate students
graduate student employees.
Can you tell me why that is.
It seems inconsistent to me
madam speaker gentle lady I'm
I'm not sure I understand the
question it is true that UNM has
taken an equally aggressive
position with respect to
graduate students and it ability
to organize at the university
they have challenge that right
is that not yes that's right
that's correct and it is a
contentious issue and.
I don't know why the university
seems to help seems bent.
On a on that sort of action.
But
Madam chair of the gentle lady
are you suggesting that maybe I
missed it in the in the
conversation earlier but is the
university in support of.
This bill for it just three
forty one or is it a post.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo it is definitely
opposed and it has been
Challenging the rights of these
employees at UNM hospital to
organize under people that is
correct.
I see it madam chair a gentle
lady I misunderstood that for
some reason I thought it was
supporting this and I couldn't
understand why the graduate
students were being treated
differently which I think by the
way is a real shame
that's all the questions I have
your back.
For the debate the gentle lady
to close.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you body for the debate I move
that Senate bill forty one twice
amended with an emergency clause
do now pass.
We are on final passage of.
Senate bill forty one twice and
ended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
Portion of the road is closed
the clerk to call the numbers
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash food yes
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative Google votes
yes Representative Chasey.
Yes Representative Chasey both
yes Representative Cook.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
So Representative Harry Garcia
votes no Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative lane.
Representative Lane votes no
Representative Lara.
Representative a lot of votes no
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative Lewis votes yes
Representative Madrid.
No Representative Madrid votes
no.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews votes no
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
no Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya
votes no Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero both yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative votes yes.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative and thirty two in
the negative Senate bill forty
one price amended with and.
Emergency because has now passed
the house.
Without the regional process now
pass.
Madam speaker point of order.
Thank you madam speaker is
inappropriate.
What was stated earlier in on
the yes vote.
And I would appreciate some
decorum in this house chamber
thank you madam speaker.
We are now moving on to the
concurrence calendar and item
number.
Point of order on my feet.
I call on house majority the for
your on the server R.
Representative Martinez thank
you Mr go we go to the next
order of business concurrence.
There are no objections so
ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
members of the ask you to please
turn your attention to
concurrence calendar number one
of the.
I believe this is the last item
of the evening.
Yes okay.
the we do have a tiny bit of
housekeeping that this bill last
bit of legislation.
The gentle if you are you the.
Ready to make a motion.
Yes Mr speaker I am.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with the Senate
amendments to house health
committee substitute for house
bill one thirty five as amended
with the emergency clause Jan I
just decided to those thank you.
Mr speaker
I will first explain amendments
that were made in the Senate
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee those changes
included some requests from the
administrative office of the
courts to small changes from
tribal leaders leaders and
governments some fixes to some
technical drafting areas and
finally I need a needed
amendment originally identified
by our representative Nibert to
make the definition of Indian
child less circuitous
secondly there was an amendment
made in the Senate Judiciary
Committee this amendment also
reflected concerns raised by
Representative Rader neighbor
during the house floor debate
and this clarified some
permissions of foster parents to
intervene finally Mr speaker
there was a floor amendment made
earlier today this ammendment
addressed a concern brought up
in Senate Judiciary about the
standards of evidence that take
place at a ten day legal custody
hearing as the standard is the
same for all children and based
in article four of the
children's code we did
ultimately strikes the language
that was found to be a
necessary.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady there is debate
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Dona ana county yield thank
you Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Mr speaker gentle lady do I do
the count those two floor
amendments as well and so I'm
not over right.
Absolutely Mr speaker and
gentleman.
However I can get a thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
gentlemen the challenges motion
is that the house concurrent the
Senate amendments to health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House one thirty
five as amended with an
emergency clause and the gentle
lady is urged the body to vote
yes all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Hi all the supposed may.
Come on man okay the eyes have
it the house has the house is
concurred in Senate amendments
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
for one thirty five as amended
with an emergency clause.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I will go
to the next order of business
messages no objection it is so
ordered the clerk to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate floor
substitute for Senate bill
thirty nine has been read in
full and signed by the offices
of the Senate vote session
request the signatures of the
office of the house respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk Mr chair.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
the house that the duly enrolled
in a girl's copy of Senate bill
one have been read in full and
signed by the officers of the
Senate vote session and requests
that the signatures of the
office of the house respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk.
Message of inter.
Message from the Senate I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed house bill
forty two as amended by the
house with the emergency clause
house bill fifty six house
taxation revenue committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty three with emergency
clause house bill one sixty
seven and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed house bill sixty seven as
amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate and
request the concurrence of the
house and Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill thirty seven
as amended by the house house
bill one nineteen and return
saying we're here with and the
Senate has passed house bill
sixty as amended by the house
and further amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the house and
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and I know
Senate chief clerk Mr will be
entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twelve with emergency clause
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill to
thirteen with emergency clause
and request the concurrence the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk message will be
entered.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
as passed house bill one thirty
two as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate
and request the concurrence of
the house to the Senate
amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara Senate
chief clerk message will be
entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
refused to receive from Senate
amendments to House
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill to hospitals to a three and
a point the following conferees
to confer with the house
conferees senator George K.
Munoz Senator Crystal R. diamond
Senator scea see Hemphill
respectfully submitted Lenore
and on with the chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I move to go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections sort of.
To read.
Representative Dow.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twelve an act relating to
capital expenditures authorizing
the issuance of severance tax
bonds authorizing expenditure
expenditures from certain funds
and balances clarifying
conditions for the issuance of
bonds establishing conditions
for the expenditure of severance
tax bond proceeds establishing
conditions for the reversion of
unexpended balances making
appropriations declaring an
emergency Senate finance
committee committee substitute
for Senate bill two twelve
Senate finance committee up to
percent ability to twelve having
been read twice by title is
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
thirteen and act relating to
capital expenditures re
authorizing re appropriating
balances expanding or changing
purposes extending expenditure
periods changing agencies in
establishing conditions for the
reversion or transfer of
unexpended balances of
appropriations made by the
legislature in prior years
declaring an emergency Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill Senate bill two
thirteen.
Senate finance committee subsidy
resentful to thirteen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker move the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objections ordered.
Members we have generic bill.
Who's a sponsor on two to three.
Know who's the representative's
name.
Representative Montoya Rod
Montoya Bill two to three is
order removed from the rules
committee referred to the.
Consumer public affairs
committee.
The two two numbers two two two
seven eighty point one two two
two seven eighty point one house
bill two to three is removed
from the rules order of business
committee and referred to the
consumer and public affairs
committee.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Speaker I know the hours eight
but I just want to make sure for
members I did bring ice cream
even for the folks around zoom
if you're in the DC caucus it's
in the majority whip's office in
the freezer I can't guarantee
what happens after it's out of
my position but for members are
listening I did bring us for you
and we price for the staff the
last thing Mr speaker is my
lovely wife is in the gallery
and she made each and everyone
of these ice cream and she said
up till two AM this morning
making nice thing for us so
thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Chairman Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
education committee will meet at
eight o'clock this morning thank
you Mr speaker they were saying
generated for Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker I was able
to get this in before in my the
night but just wanted to wish
hi.
Sen have yet
very very very happy twenty
first birthday thank you maybe
listening right now and
He's run the is run through the
halls here in a since he was a
little very little guy he's been
a page on the floor.
And he's analyzed policy right
is inspired me and the reason
why I get to sit here today and
and be a member of this body so
I want to say have you had I
love you with all my heart and I
wish you a very happy twenty
first birthday though I love you
so much thank you.
Thank you generally.
David Abbey Road the idea of
your.
You older than twenty one.
the generally from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato thank you
Mr speaker just a follow from
representative of the deadly
from Santa Fe I saw it with my
brother and my nephew a Happy
Birthday as well the share
birthday in either name
Valentino's and thought of that
as well thank you.
Thank you generally the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
thank you Mr speaker house
government elections in Indian
Affairs will meet at nine thirty
AM tomorrow.
Members.
Nine thirty today.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker your
consumer public affairs
committee will also meet at nine
thirty this morning.
Members take note.
Are there other announcements
the gentle lady with a very long
arm from Los Alamos.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
taxation and revenue committee
will meet at nine AM tomorrow we
do I just heard we got a couple
of additional Senate bills who
so there you go don't say do is
a capital outlay bill.
Hey.
There are other announcements.
The downturn volunteer.
Mr speaker.
What do you wear it where do bad
rainbows go from Dino gentlelady
prism.
It is good all right Mr speaker
that actually came from I
believe it was Figaro is a
husband who said that one to me.
Yes thank you.
Thank you Ralph.
The gentleman from single make
in the Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker uses of
federal Superbowl joke after the
Superbowl what is army navy.
Therefore so football team in
report don't.
John was at.
Because the train me to defend
my country not a football.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you gentlemen are.
All the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
house in recess until ten AM
tomorrow morning thank you
members have when we convene the
floor we will begin our work
with some special memorials
honoring if you members.
who are choosing to depart the
house that would be the first to
take up.
Actually no.
This
I figure I think about the
promotion I move that the house
and Mrs until nine AM tomorrow
morning is thank you for for
today's work by in the morning
we can meet in line I will
announce when the conference
committee on house bill two will
take place.
The house is in recess until
nine AM.
