Representative Andrea.
Your.
Representative Thompson here.
Representative Rubio here
Representative for our.
We have a quorum.
Eight are welcome I.
Two items and members of the
committee
Are going we have five bills to
get through today so we're going
to try to keep our.
Since direct to the bill in
order
for.
So keeping that in mind.
Yeah of course you would you
like to go and Senator.
Thank you madam chair yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee house bill twenty two.
Allows us state or local law
enforcement agencies to use
automated traffic enforcement
system.
issue citations for alleged
violations of.
Running red lights.
speed limits in residential
districts.
And traffic laws in a school
zone from seven AM to five PM on
school days.
Madam chair house bill twenty
two requires that prior to
issuing the citation the issuing
agency inspects the image video
or data recorder produced by the
system and swear that the
violation occurred in that the
system was operating correctly
at the date and time of the
alleged violation.
And madam chair also house with
twenty two updates prior
language referring to automated
traffic enforcement methods.
And madam chair and if adopted
the bill would make it easier to
issue citations to drivers who
run red lights or winding speed
limits.
In residential districts or
schools owns those avoiding
casualties and injuries and
crashes.
And madam chair.
The committee of the twenty two
like I stated allows local
governments.
It is on the that brought it to
implement these types of
systems.
so it's kind of an enabling act
and madam chair house bill
twenty two also addresses a very
serious matter within law
enforcement agencies which is
workforce issues.
You will notice madam chair that
a lot of our law enforcement
agencies have had to cut back on
their traffic patrols.
In these systems will basically
fill the void for that type of
of workforce issues within our
law enforcement agencies also
madam chair there is the safety
factor.
That it is that should be
considered in terms of
implementing these automated
traffic systems and that is that
madam chair that many of our
regular traffic stops.
Fire law enforcement turned into
violent confrontations.
And establishing the systems we
eliminate that possibility
altogether.
I'm so madam chair house bill
twenty two is tied to the motor
vehicle code.
As a penalty assessment
misdemeanor.
And so the US.
Madam chair the accumulation of
fines.
And non payment of fines
jeopardizes your driver's
license when you all.
And also has consequences on
your auto insurance.
In terms of increased premiums
for the insurance company
dropping you all together.
And madam chair.
We have a generation of deviant
and defiant traffic violators.
House will twenty two.
Owns these deviant and defiant.
Traffic violators.
Accountable and with
consequences for chronic
violations.
And madam chair has the twenty
two.
Is not only limited.
Two cameras.
But we're looking at an open
ended approach in implementing
the systems by possibly looking
at other tools like drones.
Another technology that's on the
sidelines just waiting to make
breakthroughs into these type of
important measures.
So madam chair with that I stand
for questions.
we'll go to the audience.
Those.
Our offices.
Those who.
Like to speak.
Chair members of the committee
my name's Matt Lawson from Santa
Fe County jobs I'm here because
House Bill twenty two because it
is very open ended and vague
also because we already know
that I find the system start the
lower income people more than
they do higher income people is
just an expansive expansion of
money basically funds
we don't have any ability to
face stark user here yes officer
has to sign off on what he sees
on the camera but if you want to
add to the traffic though to
make it a misdemeanor the
officer also show up in court if
you decide to take this to court
just like with the with the
By an officer there's no proper
service of the criminal citation
unless you require them to use
process servers to serve these
out when it happens you take it
that is a proper legal process
serving taking pictures of the
that the residents of the
registered owners last known
address that's an option
according to a study published
in Scientific American conduct
over a six year period in
Houston Texas automated traffic
enforcement systems did reduce
angle up to one type and
accidents the increased rear end
accidents by the same amount
plus or minus three percent the
severity of injuries and the
cost of the damage was not
impacted by changing the type of
accident happening as a
motorcyclist increasing rearing
type accidents as an extreme
objection a concern for me we
train ourselves to be hyper
vigilant crossing intersections
and we know what to prevent
angle accidents but there is
almost no training or prevention
for me rear ended a motorcycle
and sandwich accidents or one of
our worst nightmares because
we're almost helpless to prevent
the previous this last month or
so thank you.
Madam chair in this case cantor
resident of Albuquerque the City
of Albuquerque the county where
we I am in opposition to try to
for that reason
of finances I and I oppose that
bill because I would rather see
has a tax paying citizen of the
state of New Mexico I would
rather see that money spent on
live officers I
agree with that losses in some
of the points that we needed
authorization to that bill
availability legality Act and
the bill being the proposed
legislation being so dominated.
but I also believe that we are
just not.
As the two words that
Representative Garcia issues.
I into and I forget the other
word the.
Call the motor is.
I would like to see that money
spent on hiring officers to
protect and serve interact with
the community instead of having
that money spent just on
automated systems that will
monitor watches and and who
knows what else I appreciate
your time madam chair.
Yes.
Okay.
About.
Hello madam chair my name is you
know Benny I am a guest is
building should be twenty two
because I want to truck
operators and I have seen the
type of damages and instantly
and says these things have cost
in Rio Rancho when people in
front of you when you're
operating such large vehicle you
have to slam your brakes on the
vehicle and chill comes unhooked
falls on the ground and nine out
of ten times somebody is you
know very very severely.
Are damaged not just a property
damage but the rest of their
life not to mention out you have
a big accident that you have to
clean up not to mention all the
damaged areas and the insurance
rates that go up.
And that is why I do not.
Some some would you go ahead and
Thank you Mr testimony for two
minutes or less.
Hi thank you madam chair members
of the committee can you all
hear me.
It speak louder that would be
good.
Great.
My name is that by Johnny I am a
community engagement specialist
with the American civil
liberties union of New Mexico
and I'm here today to speak in
opposition to this bill and to
urge caution when considering
the use of automated traffic
enforcement
we have serious concerns when it
comes to privacy and the
constitutionality of the auto
traffic enforcement and then
also.
Are looking at the person
financial incentives that the
use of the system and create if
we invest in it then we're gonna
want to use that and potentially
overtake it and over criminalize
our communities.
Further up auto automated
traffic enforcement will could
result in more people getting
warrants for failure to pay
failure to appear and that will
not help us at all with mass
incarceration I'd like us to
consider that automated traffic
enforcement does not being too
To prevent the most reckless and
dangerous driving which are the
leading cause of pedestrian
fatalities somebody driving
through
and neighborhood at any previous
speeds or a drunk driver is not
even going to notice a automated
traffic enforcement device until
days or weeks later after the
damage has already been done I
think we can consider some other
alternatives to this I know from
personal experience what has
worked on my street is changing
it from two lanes to one so this
type of urban infrastructure
that can improve public safety
would be a better investment
or would you consider simply
lowering the speed limit or
perhaps creating a an agency of
on our.
Enforcement officers.
Specifically for.
Thank you for your time madam
chair thank you.
S. economy okay thank you okay
we'll go to those who are in
support of need to be twenty two
there anyone who would like to
speak.
In in support of the bill.
Yeah Santa Fe.
Criminal defense lawyers and
many years online no one in my
district your nose at.
Streets being.
Real dangers to people rival
legislature's predictability
about what everybody's going to
have a long tradition of the
baseline for behavior.
That walk in the our.
The money goes out the window to
becomes even more than.
If we require our officers to be
present for.
We.
Even if it's just straight with
that and yet we won't allow.
Automated requests that would be
appropriate for them.
We're.
Well off and we're.
Create
the
building that houses got some
action.
I support.
Representatives will.
Thank you anyone else in support
of the bill.
Okay we'll go to the committee.
Representative Rubio.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
One of the questions that I had
was specifically to what product
follow the report this
legislation.
Madam chair
A number of things.
You know of a the big concern is
the lack of visible traffic
police force.
And and we're seeing this across
the state.
And the and madam chair and
because of that lack of a
visible presence.
we're seeing.
and upbeat.
Red light violations speeding
violations school crossing
laminations.
And
and that's at the essence.
And of of of of a major concern
to me is also if we have.
These types of of violators.
In my community we rank at the
very top of the district
accidents.
And many because we don't have
viable infrastructure in terms
of.
Raul.
With.
Sidewalks with curving with
storm drain systems.
So
The other thing madam chair is
that this is not a random
process.
There is notice.
That you're approaching.
An automated red light cameras.
There's notice that you're
approaching an automated
speeding camera.
There's notice madam chair that
you're approaching a automated.
School crossing.
So.
So it's not like we're in the
background just waiting a hammer
down on the violators not
there's there's a call.
This is a call identification of
what's coming up next.
And so I think that's a positive
aspect of this whole program.
And in those madam chair and
representative we are centrally
some of the major things that
have caused me to kind of
Look at this and I I brought
this for back in two thousand
and five.
So so this isn't new.
The thing is that there are some
There are chair some some
programs.
in place.
That.
It's to some degree kind of
relate to what we're doing here.
But.
Our initiative is is tied to the
motor vehicle quality of code
and we're looking at a penalty
misdemeanor Cessna.
Some of these entities like the
city of up we're gonna get they
have a speeding camera.
That is not.
Madam chair a.
I don't the assessment
misdemeanor program.
That is not tied to the MBT.
The violators that that our
client with the speed cameras
and I would get to are not held
accountable in terms of their
life driver's license renewal.
Are not held accountable in
terms of their insurance they're
not even held accountable
manager in paying the fine.
Because these cameras are set up
and I will get it is basically a
civil penalty.
So they sent out the notice that
you get caught on camera
speeding I ten fifteen miles
over the speed limit and you're
being imposed a hundred dollar
fine or whatever it is hundred
fifty dollar fine.
And if you don't then it goes
the bill collector.
And if you don't pay after you
get costs under because of the
bill collector nothing happens.
There's no consequences and that
type of system.
So this system that I'm bringing
forth manager is systematic when
it comes to accountability and
consequences for the wedding.
Thank you Representative madam
chair so I think for me what I
find concerning is what folks
have raised in terms of
increased surveillance
especially in neighborhoods that
have already been very much
targeted
For a number of reasons
particularly low income
neighborhoods communities of
color where there's a high
number and
I will say that.
folks who don't know I'm I'm a
bike commuters I ride my bicycle
everywhere both recreationally
but also just to get around and
one of the things that you
stated is of course the issues
around infrastructure a lot of
these neighborhoods that's what
they lack is infrastructure my
concern is is that.
I don't really.
I don't know if these types of
mechanics could actually help
solve the issue that we're
facing because it's part of a
culture
just drivers being careless and
and as somebody who again right
my bike everywhere I have issues
with single use vehicles I think
that we prioritize on single use
vehicles way too much and if it
were up to me I would I would
reduce the number of that are
are are are in and around our
communities flight and and
increase public transportation
and as you said issues related
to track that equity but I think
for for myself I I'm not fully
convinced that this bill could
could solve all the issues that
we're we're thinking about and
and so those were some of the
questions I wanted to reason I
wanted to be sure to make these
comments because I I understand
the spirit in which you bring
for this this this legislation
but I I do I do have my concerns
so Representative madam chair
thank you thank you.
Representative Romero.
Let's.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative I also
have some kind of to kind of
just pitch to you
I'm not going to endorse the
bill the way that it's written I
hope you might be interested in
some feedback and maybe some
Just potential at its I share
concerns with my colleagues and
some of the public that spoke up
deeply on just identification of
the perpetrators that
would be potentially identified
many people in my community are
single car families they have
numerous drivers offer single
vehicle I'm concerned that when
the penalty is increase in
insurance and perhaps targeting
the person whose car that there
is under that name that they're
paying the fines and being
criminalized for things that may
be
of other persons perpetration so
I'm just worried that it might
be criminalizing the wrong
person
I don't know how this works in
other communities but we don't
define residential district in
statute so I'm concerned that
we're these will be located in
what parts of the community
maybe targeting specific
communities for penalty since we
don't sort of wrap our hands
around what that me look like
I'm also
worried about the we don't put
it in are at least in this bill
at this point doesn't talk about
the alerting system for the
driver to the possibility of
being targeted for speeding this
is that there be cameras or
sensors but it doesn't talk
about with some of the other
parts of the statute.
How the driver would know that
they were being on camera are
being identified that they were
going to be speeding there's
nothing proposed here about what
that would the government would
be accountable for for heating
not alert system.
and then just the administrative
side of okay somebody gets
caught speeding maybe it was on
a sensor or camera how does that
go through the court system how
did they get notified right now
and I heard you say maybe
through mail or something like
that but it doesn't.
So I the system with which that
penalty assessment would go
through so that the right person
was identified through that
process and then just other
questions about community
policing that we try to increase
in the building that
relationship with the police as
a sort of value proposition that
we've had through numerous
legislators legislative sessions
this kind of removes that
ability for office folks to kind
of understand the process and
know who what by lesions there
thank you know going to be.
working with to to try to
prevent but also to get to know
the police behind you know
what's going on I know that the
City of Santa Fe has tried
numerous times to have a
car that monitors
Violators through our high split
near Senator high school and
they've tried it they've stopped
it they've tried it they've
stopped it because a lot of the
confusion with the public and
and otherwise has been
difficult to to understand and
enforce and then again to
getting the wrong people so I
just love a little bit more time
to be spent on the bill and
perhaps work with you on just
kind of wrapping your hands
around some of these concerns
but at this point I I don't know
if you want to respond madam
chair just some ideas and
concerns that I have with it as
it is today thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair
I
I take to heart some of the
concerns that the Representative
Romero has raised
there is the
the options in terms of the.
The violation in terms of of
having to go before the court.
The contest and
it especially Madam station
those scenarios where Senator
daughter is driving the vehicle
that's registered under the
parents name.
So it there is that that Avenue
for individuals to make that
that appeal ideas that that the
person the record was not being
charged with a violation but was
not driving the vehicle and
and also you know on page
fifteen we do have the
administrative process of how
the ticketing happens and
but I welcome your your feedback
you know it's it's a wish of the
committee to to either pass or
not pass this bill the kind of
others elaborate on how we can
kind of strict in fact that
honestly the process as well and
and madam chair
You know the issue of our.
Of a
Of the roof the roof again for
residential districts you know
us sitting
city and county
Maps have a designated zoning
areas a dozen then as arms and
the actually the purpose of this
bill is to put these
automated systems in residential
areas so going off of.
The zoning structure of the
municipality or the county is
where we would identify which
streets are residential.
And which treats in our our
industrial industries are
commercial all right are in
these commercial districts
commercial zones so but that's
all I have to offer mention in
terms of the representatives on.
Very
Specific concerns and that I of
which I take some of those
tomorrow.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I share some of
the concerns but I also live in
Albuquerque.
When not when they were red
light cameras.
It slowed things down and once
they were gone it was like one
car now frequently five cars in
civil lines that just run the
red light so it's a state
problem I don't know the answer
but I think maybe if I if you
work on the bill a little more
and kind of taking up some of
the things where people have
concerns I I I feel better about
it but I see the need for it I
have people email me and call me
all the time we need and you
know the great if we had more
police officers it's not about
money it's about finding the
people who are willing to do it
want to do it so your be great
if we could maybe go ahead wave
a magic wand and have enough up
in the profession essentially
but we were not there so we're
going to have to couple things
together as best we can so I
would suggest that you make some
amendments and.
And then I could be in support
thank you madam chair.
Not specifically to that but it
wasn't mentioned Madam chair in
terms of
Randomly putting the systems of
possibly in.
Neighborhoods
predominantly of people of color
etcetera etcetera and the way
that the systems of an
implemented is there is data.
Behind the implementation chair
for example.
When the City of attack and went
to them and I.
Camera system and it did have a
notification.
that you are approaching a red
light camera
they did it based on data.
In terms of where they where
there were more
accidents more T. boning
accidents more rear ending more
everything type of accidents and
and and what intersections those
were located actually madam
chair the city did identify the
top five or whatever and and
that's where they implemented
the system.
So there isn't that randomness
in terms of implementing the
system there's actually kind of
a scientific approach to to
implementing these systems.
Thank you much.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Garcia you know I
I appreciate the idea behind
your bill up public safety we
can all get behind but I do have
a few questions for you and your
bill I'm reading it says here
law enforcement K. so that's
would be reviewing whatever the.
The potential ticket would be
and that doesn't specifically
say it has to be a lot force
officer or a peace peace officer
so can you give me a little more
information about that person
the review that madam chair and
Reserve block I saw that.
In the in the FIR.
And that would be one of the
first things that I would
clarify.
And and specifically state chair
that V. and a law enforcement.
Office.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so regarding that
law enforcement officers would
be reviewing this with that
officer discretion upon thank
you tickets to so for instance
if I was going to miles over the
speed limit and I this is that I
ran a red light or something I'm
going to miles over does that
give anybody discretion say well
I guess he was kind of in the
yellow or is it very Regina how
it's
To provide.
Madam chair it's a good
question.
Because our bill is taking motor
vehicle called.
So motor vehicle code when it
comes to speeding as different
categories.
For example up to and including
ten miles an hour over the speed
limit twenty five dollar fine.
This is just in the imposed fine
is not some of the other costs
that come with getting a ticket
and I have those spelled out
here.
so then there's the second
element.
From on this building from
eleven to up to and including
fifteen miles an hour over the
speed limit thirty homa funds
and on and on and on and on and
on and on.
So that's how that some of the
NMED code regarding regards it's
being violent is based on the
sides specific limits and tied
to the specific
I don't think.
Thank you madam chair
representative so regarding the
bill I believe the purpose is
to.
Given the law enforcement last.
Easy job to do right to have to
be on the street all the time
and I totally understand that
but I believe the concert was
product is the about them having
appeared in court if that ticket
is appealed to the court and I
believe that we also the card is
costs and those hours of those
bonds forced to have to be in
the community so could you just
that.
I just talk about how state.
Time and resources from those
law enforcement officers.
Madam chair that that would be
that would be the the.
The process manager
in terms of the violator you
know taking it for there's no
way around that.
No there's no way around that
but you know I think in
balancing out the equation madam
chair in terms of.
The lack of manpower.
To have.
A full bodied police department
officer out in the street.
What would definitely I think
balance out the equation.
In terms of the automated
systems dealing that Boyd.
And.
The issue of the police officer
and show up in court I think
would be kind of a minimal
impact on on the department.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I know that
the federal government this past
this infrastructure bill and I
believe Under Secretary projects
they have about one point two
billion dollars for the
infrastructure built about
seventy million dollars of that
is going efforts regarding these
red light cameras so could the
state potentially utilizing
those federal funds Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair a.
I have to admit that
We have a very aggressive.
And very pro active.
New department of transportation
and Ricky Serna.
And he's taking every advantage
possible to pull down that money
for a program such as this and
others I have another bill that
deals with the.
And educational traffic
initiative called
Break on yell stop on red.
And that federal funding that
you talked about madam chair has
exclusive funding for those
types of initiatives and and and
check and educational outreach.
So yes.
The funny would definitely roll
into into these types of
programs offsetting the cost
chair of the law enforcement
agency.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think we can
all agree that the state can
save some money as taxpayers
can all get behind some.
Well I've seen all the
statistics and this is the
national motorists association.
And they've been doing studies
in different states and many of
the conclusions from the studies
show that actually instead of
reducing.
Violations of these red lights
are people running lights
it actually increases the amount
of times it's happened many many
intersections so could you give
me some information about how
this would be different in New
Mexico Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative a lot
going on I'm not I'm not aware
of for aware of some.
At a.
And.
I I don't know in terms of
Hi Bob this is that we would
they were looking at that led to
the development of that that I.
You know so I really I really
couldn't answer that
In kind of an honest weight
I just don't have.
That information and the.
What the that what what the
study was really looking at and
and what triggered that the need
for the study manage.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and I'd be
happy to protections for you if
your bill goes forward next many
sure Representative to have on
thank you madam chair yes thank
you also considered other
legislation that regards them
these the statistics from the
American motorist Association
says that a better way to fix
these problems with folks
running red lights would be to
meet the yellow light a little
bit longer.
Would that be something you'd be
interested in in the future this
bill or do you think that this
would be a better solution to
this problem and New Mexico and
chairs and luggage only this
bill would be a better solution.
As based on what we're Madam
we're also trying to do here.
Yes change driver behavior.
That is key.
Notice that the legislation is
changing driver behavior.
And and sometimes you have to
kind of dropped the government
chair and hold people
accountable in ways that they
are not being held accountable.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
I think I comment on my points
here I personally.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker of this
is
we do need to know your
reserves.
Take it one of the Mr speaker.
Making sure madam chair.
I can't I I actually appreciate
it really do what you're doing
one of the statistics I did read
on there was that
the most common way people are
pulled over is one second into a
red.
And doing a slow roll I I would
rather see more law enforcement
honestly because I get where
you're going with as a tool to
get we're going to go see more
law enforcement out there so
that they have discretion just
say you know this person Mexico
that I'm gonna give it to get
this person didn't they wrongly
hospital they.
Just for the price of something
you know so they can use
discretion that so that's what
this party does not because of
the idea I do like to do I just
rather see it from a different
direction of see more want
Forsman out just in general so
based on just on the fact that
I've read in the same
research so thank you for
bringing forward thank you madam
chair.
Thank you for thank you
Representative for
Representative.
Suggestions that are being made
that.
Like to roll over.
That with some of these.
Sessions you're most definitely
yes okay I think the more the
the concerns in the the the and
most of the ones who were well
taken thank you so we'll have.
House Bill twenty two our.
Thank you.
You have the next still.
Thank you madam chair.
Bill seventy.
Thank you madam chair.
house bill seventy one.
The bill would create a promise
just one misdemeanor.
With a fifty dollar fine in a
motor vehicle collision.
sounds familiar.
That's that current funding of
fifty dollar fine in the motor
vehicle code for all three.
Or modifying a muscular.
On the manufacturer's
specifications.
Exceptions would be made madam
chair for repairs that bring it
that much more to the same level
of noise reduction.
Just city as its initial
manufactured condition.
Or a modification that increases
the mufflers noise reduction
capacity.
Madam chair of the bill is an
attempt to reduce the product
with the proliferation of cars
in New Mexico communities with
modified mufflers.
Which result in increased noise
fumes and smoke exhaust.
Madam chair complaints to police
departments and that the
officials continue to increase
as not modified mufflers impact
quality of life in residential
neighborhoods and business areas
of New Mexico communities.
And madam chair.
Vehicles come off the assembly
line with them offer all
standard vehicles come off the
assembly line with the muffler.
Madam what happens is that some
individuals a small minority but
a very loud and and of those
surfers automotive
noise some individuals take
their vehicles to a muffler
shop.
To remove them up for.
and install what is known as a
replacement or modify month for.
That essentially increases the
exhaust decibels.
Similar to that of resembling a
resembling the noise.
Of an Indy five hundred race
car.
And the then chair.
Vehicles that are in the meeting
not Norreys.
I have had the monthly modified.
so you might say well how how
would a police officer basically
detect these if there's no
decibel reader handy.
You know you don't need us of
our reader handy to figure out
that there's been a lot of play
month for install of the ical
because a a standard month for
makes no noise except that there
are options.
Madam chair vehicles with the
standard month remaining on
this.
And if it does make a noise is
probably because it's been
eroded it's got a little holes
and that's what's causing the
the the race card type of noise
and it needs replacement.
And madam chair of the law
enforcement officer can easily
be trained to detect a standard
month for from our flight left
for.
Not only by appearance but also
by sound.
And the and madam chair a with
that I stand for questions.
Thank you.
From the.
Sorry we go to the audience.
Are there people in opposition.
And that is in support.
Okay we'll go with those in
opposition.
Thank.
Chair of anything for me yeah
as well as also seventy one.
Hello acknowledge the
we're gonna technician this I
really charters Laurie
conclusions because protests the
use of less expensive universal
mufflers and still all within
already established festival.
For certified dealership or
beautiful specific parts that
are much more expensive still
one of the legal limits of the
continental is much wider than
four focus but you can't by
universal for the only reason
going into level four focus for
this bill there's no provision
for classic vehicles over ten
years always willing actually
the required by federal law to
provide parts of the park should
be repairs needed to be able.
That would be illegal under
supervision for motorcycles we
were so quiet you can hear about
all the factual reportage office
standards of Eurovision and and
a lot more than just be louder
but still within the master
decibel standards and laws
provides no recognized element
of safety by causing other
mothers to be able to be aware
of our presence also known as a
lot might save lives so there's
a lot of things here the.
We are closed on a loss and
officers already have
measurement tools for measuring
the walls fifty to sixty two and
seventy two decibels Division on
weary Rockledge thank.
That.
Thanks for opposition.
Going to be just fine.
Okay.
Okay we'll go to those in
support would like to speak.
Mr.
Sure.
Thank you.
This is.
I have
a suggestion.
Change.
Service.
I always.
Our.
Just for
the money as we know.
These can work.
All.
So that's all I have
The longer hours.
You.
Yes.
Around.
So.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
Going on.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker in.
Okay you're gonna get madam
sorry I mean I I understand it's
so frustrating that get those
little cars this is really loud
I get it there and we just have.
My problem is is I think about I
grew up with glass.
I love the sound last back on
older cars love that sound and I
don't want to hinder our people
have the classic cars or do
anything to them to not allow
them to modify their cars in
such a way that it would take it
back to that nineteen seventies
air that rumble love that sound
also read a motorcycle and one
of the things that we go as well
I save lives and I'm not talking
about really I'm talking to just
the fact that I can read my
engine there's been so many
times when I've had
Representative the problem I I
to keep somebody from literally
running the right route
Those are my main issues with
that I don't know how to fix it
I know in other states they have
like the decibels you know that
you can check with the decibels
that I would probably but but
with this I'm just.
For me is a writer and other
writers are here's some
excellent points I just worry
about us being limited in.
I almost got run over by an
electric bike the other day look
at motorcycle because I did hear
this guy came up that scared me
to death and I'm like oh okay I
don't want that and once so
quiet I can't hear motorcycle so
I will not be supporting this
but I I would love to talk about
like decibel levels and other
things we can do to address the
issue of those very loud little
cars at direct to the
neighborhoods that are ever
going sorry last tax yes the
other person in South.
You madam chair comes a large
The bill makes reference to a
vehicle.
And I don't know of of the New
Mexico as defined in the
statute.
but
this bill was meant exclusively
for.
For.
Bills.
We're looking at automobiles
that's where the real problem is
coming from.
Motorcycles madam chair they've
always been out I don't know how
you kind of resolve that we're
not going to motorcycles with
this legislation and if I need
to spell that out in.
I want to that's why I I I
definitely will be following up
with.
How vehicle is identifying.
RT find in statute and if it
doesn't cooperate.
Our cycles
Okay this what whatever whatever
then we definitely want to
clarify that in the legislation
that it's meant for automobiles
madam chair thank you thank you
madam chair and and
Representative I saw something
like our list care two more.
You so with the horses Care Act
was but it was by like to
talking about this as it moves
forward because I understand
we're trying to get but I also
don't want to hinder the people
that especially if you.
Can't get apart from more from
ritual that would sound the same
and it's different that be in
violation and I'm thinking about
I'm I live closer to sixty six
there's nothing but you know
these beautiful restore car so I
don't want to hinder them and
have them show up at one eight.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Representative block.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Garcia you know I
I kind of have some of the same
points as Representative Lord
I'm looking other states here I
I I knew New York has the law
and there's says that it can't
be more ninety five decibels for
motorcycles and over sixty
decibels for motor vehicles so I
guess this is not really a
question is it would just be a
COVID I would potentially
suggests that amending the bill
to add.
More clear clarifying language
to ensure that folks can be in
compliance with this law.
the second point I I have real
quick was how will we enforce
this law our law enforcement
official vehicles going to be
equipped with decibel readers is
that something that would be
necessary to make sure that this
law gets implemented Madam chair
representative.
You know chair representative
blocked that's a good question.
I know that manager when we pass
and state law.
There's always a rulemaking.
that comes with.
That state law that we passed.
And madam chair and and in the
rulemaking is where we do the
fine print.
Now because we're making part
chair of motor vehicle
violations.
And we're adding it to that list
of of of citations
I don't know.
If this bill would require.
Rulemaking if this amendment
would require rulemaking.
But madam chair that's not to
keep.
A local government.
From expanding on this.
To possibly include some of that
but we're not spelling it out
here.
And
So that's the process
Representative block
and it is a good question.
And I need to kind of also see
just.
Just how that.
Have rulemaking process would
apply.
To an amendment to already an
existing statute.
And and I'll and I'll have
answers.
To that you know
mainly because the
transportation department.
Probably has encountered these
types of scenarios before or
making additions to existing
statute.
And and and what proceeds from
that after what proceeds from
that chair in terms of that
possibly some rulemaking that
lays out the fine fine details
of fine print thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and I agree with you I think we
need a little more clarity
especially if we're gonna for
force local governments
especially smaller ones to
comply with the law that is sort
of an unfunded mandate we want
to make sure that they have
those resources through the
department transportation or
wherever so that they could
implement this law for this bill
if it became law so I appreciate
the spirit of the legislation
Madam chair representative thank
you.
What else
chairman to table.
Thank you there's been a motion
to table sorry.
I thank you madam chair thank
you members of.
The comments.
Next have.
House Bill three four.
The service
Representative Lord.
Michael yes.
Yes.
It should work yes it down that
should be on the the medals on.
Yeah yeah.
We can.
Representative Lord.
Thank you okay perfect thank you
madam chair and there's no
speaker so I wanted to just do
this at today it was so funny.
so this is house bill thirty
four this is to amend the family
in need of court order to verses
and expand the definition so
this bill has passed the house
in two thousand fifteen we're
breaking it forward again hopes
to fill a gap missing in our
child protective and family
welfare continuum of care.
We continue to the families who
need intervention and support
services the most and they
continue not to receive them
we're broadening the definition
of family need which would
called Franco's in to include
families with lengthy history of
substantiated abuse and neglect
claims allowing us to better
engage with these families in
crisis.
The most recent example of why
we need to address issues early
on as a very publication of the
December amber alert the five
year old that was found safe on
a bus and we offer that story.
Potential about to be human
trafficked and for family that
CYFD has known about since she
was fourteen months old.
We ask ourselves why this child
and this families subjected over
and over again to see what the
involvement but without improved
outcomes and that was in the
Albuquerque journal.
Our services all the services
are voluntary which is very
surprising unless otherwise
court mandated.
HB thirty four defines the
definition of family need of
court ordered services.
By adding the category families
when the family was found by
credible evidence to have been
abused or neglected.
See what the reported in two
thousand fifteen at this bill
provides the opportunity to
enforcing gauge when families in
need to services were unwilling
to do so voluntarily.
Addition this bill ensures
family involvement and services
designed to meet their needs and
strengthen the family unit
without the necessity for abuse
and neglect petition and or the
removal of the child.
As we saw with this amber alert
here's a family with the lately
lengthy history of CYFD
involvement that is clearly not
getting help and support that
they need to move forward in a
stable and healthy manner.
Broadening the definition of the
Franco's and fifty H. B. thirty
four directly gets to the heart
of our most vulnerable families
in crisis and offer some
additional support with these
voluntary services when they
need it most.
In New Mexico over forty percent
of children placed in foster
care stand less than thirty days
before being reunited with the
family one of the highest.
Range of short stares in the
nation.
Steinborn mobiles are necessary
to ensure old shop child safety
however.
As are likely necessary over
ninety percent of the state
short stairs aren't care for
less than eighty days.
Second second.
One.
So CYFD reported previously this
bill was first heard and that H.
B. thirty four increases the
flexibility of the child welfare
system respond to the specific
needs of individual
municipalities by allowing for
a level of intervention above
voluntary services but below the
petition of custody when the
child is found it credible
evidence to have been abused and
or neglected.
This bill acknowledges that not
all abuse neglect occurs Rick
at current says require the
separation the children in the
family unit currently there are
two primary methods for a family
to receive services on one to
the spectrum are voluntary
service without court
intervention on the other end of
the spectrum is court ordered
services implement with a child
is in legal and physical custody
of CYFD.
The bill introduces a third
option for cases that do require
intervention but we're the need
is not necessarily rise to the
level of severity with a child
must be removed currently the
families in need of court order
services statue is narrowly
terror tailored to provide
services for families to
children might have run away are
truant or do not want to return
home.
According to the administration
offices office of the courts
this bill would expand the
statute to at the use of court
services to include families who
have at least one substantiated
investigations statewide FTE
under the abuse and neglect act
also if you look at the bill
analysis this bill is identical
to what representative Kelly
Fajardo introduced H. B. one
eighteen in two thousand fifteen
it passed the house fifty seven
to eleven.
The bill provides you with you
with the opportunity to enforce
the engagement of families in
need of services were on willing
to do so voluntarily this change
will allow services to be our
offer to a broader category
those in need which will
hopefully benefit them before
the situation escalates.
According to testimony given by
CYFD and the two thousand
fourteen C. pack hearing the
bill increases the flexibility
the job offer system to respond
to the specific needs of
individual municipalities by
allowing for a level of
intervention about voluntary
services but below the petition
of custody when a child is fine
as found by credit credible
evidence to been abused or
neglected.
Currently we have a volunteer
option on one end and the other
item is a court ordered services
I also like to point out that
the supporters of this bill are
CYFD New Mexico district
attorneys association the tenth
judicial District Court and the
New Mexico state police
corrections before several
questions I would like to
introduce my expert witnesses.
My name is there on back I'm
from New Mexico child first
network and the executive
director and I think this is the
other co sponsor.
Yes I'm Representative Andrew
even on the co sponsor of this
bill and and then madam chair
members of the committee
packages at a couple things
prior to defer to the expert at
one of the things I would just
like to point out is that eighty
percent of substantiated abuse
claims are not prosecutor
petition ever filed I'm so I
think it's important to note
that you could have any
substantiated cases and it
doesn't mean that these children
are going to be taken away from
their parents it just gives you
another it gives more resources
for them for us to help them and
for at the agency to help them
because forty three percent of
children in New Mexico who had
substantiated serious injury
from child abuse or neglect had
a prior
contact with CYFD within that
last year so I think it's really
important that we know that this
isn't at something that we're
trying to you know say that
petitions are going to be filed
based on unsubstantiated type of
case and there's going to be
working with these parents in
these families it's just gives
more opportunity to help them
and most of the time I believe
in a report that we were looking
at at the twenty one thousand
five hundred thirty six report
found and our file significant
and basically is only four
thousand three hundred ninety
nine actually resulted in a
substantiated claim and eighteen
to twenty percent of those cases
were even filed so I think
issues important to note that
this isn't something we were
trying to take kids away for
parents we're trying to help
them and have to more resources
for them I'm so with that madam
chair with your permission I'll
defer to the experts if she has
anything to say at thank you
madam chair and representative I
just wanted to reiterate that
you were all presented if you're
at the LFC hearing and Thomas in
twenty twenty two.
That New Mexico's rates of
repeat maltreatment are among
the worst in the nation continue
to be so and this is an issue
that is packed New Mexico four
years you will see before you
multiple times in the session I
have built a legislation working
to address this we are calling
this short stays short term
foster care placements you
several bills have already been
introduced New Mexico's range
just so that to quote this and
you'll see this many many times
throughout the session stays in
foster care under forty eight
hours or twenty three percent of
right the COVID the next highest
status eight percent stays in
foster care under eight days are
thirty eight percent the next is
thirteen percent so what we're
talking about here is trying to
find a medium between families
who we see over and over and
over again we call them frequent
flyers in the repeat
maltreatment case that we know
that that the department has
exhausted resources in trying to
get these families the services
as many of us are familiar with
the amber alert for all at like
Representative words that she
had been on CYFD is Rader since
she was fourteen months old she
had had prior engagement that
same calendar year and when they
took her off the bus to put her
in her third short term state
she had already been in two
separate forty eight hour hold
with the department and that is
a very clear indication that
whatever services her family
were getting are offered it
wasn't working and so when this
child who was found on a bus
about to be sold in human
trafficking is a five year old
because her parents had it being
necessarily engaging in the
services that were offered this
would provide an alternative to
not take the child into custody
we know that foster care is
traumatic with the family first
prevention services act under
federal law there's a lot more
title forty funds for providing
foster care we want to prevent
foster care but some families
this is instead of that could
get involved this is a family in
need of court ordered services
to help prevent the removal.
Get families the services they
need and these crisis situations
thank you.
With that madam chair we stand
for questions.
You go to the audience those
opposition of this bill.
And that was in support.
Ballots in support
okay I'm sorry.
That's it.
That's it okay we'll go on.
First those in opposition.
If you'd like to speak have.
Go ahead.
You can respect Madam chair of
the quantity I have a policy
associate with full features
hello
we propose.
Or because you know that wasters
evidence this afternoon.
We also want this is what
happens session terms and.
as we do is that to
individualize
target last.
Callers.
Anyone else in opposition.
Chasing.
Madam chair members of.
Your application.
As well as.
Our.
Situation.
Members and.
The sisters has used.
As.
Our.
I would like to hear these.
Whatever it is.
Twenty one hundred to one
thousand five.
Except for white.
Most of the program.
As.
I also do have nieces and
nephews Mexico and all the
members of the farmers.
And.
I would like to.
A budget on.
On the.
Madam chair just ask a question
real quick about the volume some
people on scene they can't hear
the folks in the audience okay
so I have people come up.
Question.
Our responses are anybody else
in opposition.
Okay.
Madam chair for can I just
wanted to address what they just
brought up that has a in your
substitute are credible evidence
was ready change to
substantiated the that has been
already been addressed in this
bill thank you.
You know about that.
That's in the conditions change.
Okay and those in support.
Madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director of
protective services at CYFD.
we are in support of the concept
of expanding the language in
this bill that would allow us to
Allow us another tool allows
CYFD another tool to work in
support families to ensure that
we are providing safety and
permanency of a child however we
do have concerns with the spell
and Act as it's presented and
would like to work
collaboratively with the
sponsors to address those
concerns a change of Franco's
has to be a supported by
appropriate policy rulemaking
procedures to ensure that it is
more supportive of families and
that also CYFD has the
appropriate resources.
Meeting staff and trying to
implement not every family or
situation should be mandated and
also want to ensure that.
In state that the Indian family
protection act does apply and
because cases however we do have
a concern as it's currently
written that it would bring more
native American families
families of color into a system
through Franco's particularly
with respect to cases where
poverty rather than actual
neglect is the basis for
substantiation
and so at this time we we do
support the concept but we do
have concerns with like to work
with the Sanchez to address
this.
Yes Representative lost madam
chair I move the path.
And we.
We're going to discuss the bills
on.
That's good USA.
Okay.
Representative for bringing the
bill I just trying to get a
little bit of background I'm not
familiar with the ghosts and is
that federal law chair
representative.
Madam chair representative of
our for to my experts.
Now this is actually New Mexico
and so and it's actually
interesting because it was
brought on the books
specifically for truancy and
some families that were having
trouble in that recommendation
so this bill popped up eight
years ago as a means to prevent
kids from coming into care but
again those real crisis
situations where we do not want
to file and I I just wanna
remind everyone that poverty is
not neglect which is why the
committee substitute on your
desk specifically says it takes
out credible evidence and
specifically says substantiation
I know that there has been back
and forth on that page as we
work with everyone in the room
I'm really understanding what
substantiates K. verses that
sent wide is the right to choose
to file and not I think there's
going to be a lot of
conversations around that during
this legislation session but
right now the substitute
Committee does say
substantiated and then also fun
fact there's also family need of
services which is also in the
children's code and so that's a
different stat but this is
family in need of court ordered
services legislative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the clarification
I would also I understand that
this was on the books back in
the nineties and that was
repealed or like a version of
this act as it's proposed today
or my I'm just trying to get
some history here because there
was a version of this perhaps on
the books and what's changing
and what are you yeah.
Chair representative about how
to back to her expert here I
have this bill sorry this bill
as part representative madam
chair representative this bill
as presented passed the house in
twenty fifteen so this exact
bill that you have in your hands
today has already gone through
the house committees and it got
stalled from time in twenty
fifteen and as are working to
modernize the legislature which
is a great thing we should be
bringing back really get bills
that passed through some of
these committees on a more
consistent basis so it is not on
the books that was never
repealed it just never made it
to the Senate thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
I'm I'm glad to hear that CYFD
is in support I'm just can you
clarify where the wires are
being processed now with what
they're interested in shifting
in the bill and what you're
proposing within this bill and
are you in agreement for
potential changes to be made and
should we hear about those today
or is this the future
discussion.
Thank you madam chair
representative and I definitely
heard and we will be working
with them but I'm going to defer
to the expert for more
information.
So if path which is the Indian
family protection act as its own
act within the children's code
and and under state law it's is
that anything in its path takes
precedence and anything in the
children's code if there's ever
a discretion if Pat always rules
so we're happy to work with CYFD
especially for this because you
did to sherry I think we should.
Act you want to scan to at the
top yeah okay.
Public services sorry but that
manager he he would like a copy
the substitute place thank you
for standards that it's that.
Madam chair representative to
clarify because we didn't really
distinguish necessarily between
the substance you and this the
only change I could find and is
that that is based on the
standard of evidence is that
correct.
From substantiated are from
found credible evidence to
substantiate it Madam region
that's correct.
Okay so madam chair
Representative I'd love to see
what CYFD thinks about the
changes before I can vote yes I
would love to be in concert with
everyone given that they'll be
implementing the law on this it
understand for protecting
children and families across the
state.
Maybe there's not a conflict of
law that we're going to deal
with later and also ensuring
that there are checks and
balances for families to be able
to go through.
Versus what I'm hearing from
constituents and otherwise that
there may be a risk there
please.
I would love to hear how that
gets resolved.
But I can't yes today thank.
Madam chair representative we
have did you want to add
something out of it yeah.
I think that was he had a
committee goes what's the will
of the committee and I think we
talked I know that I'm CYFD
continues to be under funded and
we really need to make sure the
staff I'm in the twenty fifteen
FIR there were significant
fiscal impacts to the the courts
not necessarily CYFD which I
found interesting and that the
differences in the FIR so I
think that as we move forward
this I think the courts CYFD and
the bill sponsor should be at
the table to make sure that if
we need to add more money to
make sure these kids are safer
K. let's go up or down that's
kind of the goal is to make sure
kids are protected and we are
happy to do that.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair I just kind of have
a process question why did you
choose to do a substitute bill
for one minor change I'm just
trying to figure out who does
what in house of.
Madam chair representative here
and that was a drafters choice
okay all right thank you that's
all I have but excellent
question.
Chair representative.
We have a motion.
How much effort did not.
That motion I'd like to do pass
on the house consumer public
affairs substitute for house
bill four thirty four.
I think you have a motion for
two thousand nine cents to per
household.
I I I I wanted to would you have
of the questions for
washing the table for the
substitute.
Okay thank you madam chair just
some process are you willing to
roll the ability to work with
CYFD so that we can hear what
that resolution may be or we.
As I have to move to table
Flexible yeah madam chair we
definitely like to roll that and
I need to get your information
please thank you.
Act right it's great.
All right.
I'd like to just now that
house bill seven four is going
to be expected to be a place.
So we're going to go ahead and
the white house bill one thirty
one.
Representative Thomson tactic
Representative.
Thank you.
Sure.
That's.
Well I.
Mr.
We.
We
is yes.
Looking at.
Thank you madam chair and
members of.
The best committee second to
health in the building
And that's only because we're
yes exactly.
As as Representative Lord.
Madam chair this is this is
really an exciting bill
most of you know I'm a pediatric
physical therapist so I have
worked with children with limb
loss and limb difference and
have worked with prophetess than
architects on making sure trying
to make sure that the kids got
what what what what they needed
to be kids and that hasn't
always been the case so this
young man next to me who will be
an expert witness came to me and
as it turns out his physical
therapist after his limb loss
was a very dear friend of mine
who's also a PT and so she sixty
money me and we've been working
together ever since and
essentially what it does is say
to insurance companies you can't
just give people the cheapest
thing that there is out there
because people need to continue
to work I mean if you're on auto
mechanic for instance and you
you have a an above knee
amputation and they give you a
horrible prosthetic that hurts
that doesn't allow you to pin
them to kneel and do all those
things you can't do your job and
in particularly for me with kids
but with adults as well.
You need certain kinds of
prosthesis for certain kinds of
activity so to give a six year
old kid a prosthesis that
doesn't allow them to run you've
just taken away their childhood
essentially so this bill is to
ensure that insurance companies
at least match the rate of
payment that through Medicare
and now we would be the first
state in the nation and main
main has done it for children
but we would be the first state
in the nation to do it for
children and adults and with
that I will pass it off to my
experts.
Madam chair and representatives
my name is called step and I'm
deeply honored to be sitting
here before you to share my
story and unrelenting desire to
create access to equitable
prosthetic care that's life
changing for over twenty five
thousand New Mexicans that can't
be here today.
They no longer should have to
fight for the ability to create
access to life changing
prosthetic care because of house
bill one three one no one ever
expects to have to endure the
hardship of limb loss but the
unfortunate reality is every
single one of us in this room
our family our friends can
become part of this community at
any point in their life.
For most of my childhood I grew
up in foster care homeless
shelters and domestic violence
shelters.
But in two thousand and eight I
returned to New Mexico to live
with my grandparents with hopes
of a new beginning an
opportunity just to be a kid
like most freshmen I plan to
walk through the doors of high
school brimming with confidence
and attitude to try everything
at donor a high school however
my hope for new beginnings was
suddenly transformed into the
fight for my life what I thought
was a simple knee injury during
baseball tryouts led to the
diagnosis of a rare and
aggressive bone cancer on
October fourteenth two thousand
and eight I was started three
and a half your battle filled
with countless rounds of chemo
and a dozen surgeries my
orthopedic surgeon for me that
amputation my left leg was
inevitable but perform this
procedure called limb salvage
with the hopes of preserving my
limb for as long as possible a
replacing the infected bone we
stay in the state implants for
the next twelve years I would
try to adapt but unfortunately
what live with chronic pain and
mobility impairments prevented
me from running and playing
contact sports there's one thing
I could do and that was cycle
and so I kept doing that October
seventeenth twenty twenty
thousand angelfire downhill
mountain biking do what so many
New Mexicans just love to do.
And what to do under my last run
of the day I suddenly lost
control and crashed into tree
and breaking the metal implant
those left to that was placed in
my leg twelve years before.
Medially after the crash I knew
amputation was no longer future
inevitability but a present
reality.
For twelve years I accepted the
payment challenges that come
with limb salvage because I
feared amputation I feared
imputation because I never saw
individuals with limb loss in
New Mexico living an active
lifestyle in doing the things I
loved I had no idea that was
actually because of lack of
access to appropriate
prosthetics not because there's
less of us.
I quickly realized that in order
to receive the care I needed I
would have to fight and during
my first year to have as many P.
T. I was denied multiple times
access to the proper prosthetics
just needed to walk safely with
insurance denial stating and I
quote the requested prosthetic
device exceeds your basic and
minimum needs and is not
medically necessary.
Eventually the case was
overturned by third party review
that determine the prosthetic
knee was in fact medically
necessary if we had insurance
fares in New Mexico amputees
would have to fight every step
of the way for the access to
prosthetics because the standard
of care protected by insurance
fairness after we learning to
walk with a prosthetic I was
excited to run for the first
time in twelve years but that
would require a specialized
running prosthesis so space with
the new fight and I quickly
learned that the only way to
access prosthetics necessary for
physical activity was a pay
high part of out of pocket costs
or travel out of state for
terrible support because
insurance considers physical
activity for amputees as not
medically necessary and
consistently denies coverage for
those specialty devices I'm
fortunate enough to have this
running Billy donated to me but
the reality is physical
activities are right.
Not a privilege today we have
the choice to give thousands of
New Mexicans with limb loss on
the difference the ability to
exercise that right and we have
the opportunity to get the power
deciding what's medically
necessary to health care
providers of New Mexico.
And I'm gonna you'll to mice my
second witness.
Thank you madam thank you good
afternoon madam chair and
distinguished members of the New
Mexico house consumer and public
affairs committee my name is
Ashley white I'm the chief
programs officer for the NPT
coalition the coalition's
mission is to support educate
and advocate for people impacted
by limb loss and limb difference
we do that by for providing
programs that train and survive
here visitors facilitate support
groups across the U. S. and
develop and disseminate
resources to support individuals
throughout their imputation
journey.
When Kyle called.
when Kyle called me to contacted
me to ask if I can help out with
the Senate New Mexicans can move
initiative if the amputee
coalition could help of course
we said yes are the most common
concern we hear from individuals
living with limb loss or limb
difference and their family
members caretakers and help
providers is uncertainty about
the access the to appropriate
prosthetic care to restore
function that has been lost or
is missing.
File Callaway Laura Suzanne
Jason Danielle Helen grace
dually David B. the call they
have share will share powerful
testimony personal testimony
today about the inadequate how
inadequate insurance coverage is
disabling.
The coalition commends insurance
companies in New Mexico that are
currently providing appropriate
prosthetic and orthotic coverage
for individuals living with limb
loss and limb difference
unfortunately the experiences of
the individuals we work with our
organization works with do not
show consistencies across all
carriers or even within the same
Kerrier creating a scenario
where cost to care for
individuals living with limb
loss or limb difference are
transferred to the state or
federal government the impact of
these inconsistencies
underserved communities
indigenous Latino and black
communities the most prevalent
study commissioned by the
coalition show that African
Americans are four times more
likely to receive amputations
than those who identify as white
health disparities present in
the limb loss and limb
difference community are
devastating people often ask
what prostheses cost so much but
you rarely hear that question
about knee replacement or hip
replacement surgeries both
restore function because it's
external prostheses are covered
under a different part of the
insurance policy individuals in
need of external prostheses are
more likely to experience
restrictions in coverage
arbitrary caps or outright
denials as with Kyle and
reimbursement for prostheses is
commonly misunderstood process
the test are not paid for their
time prosthetic care inclusive
of the device is billed to the
insurance company as a global or
bundled payment the full episode
of care is captured in a single
health care claims including the
evaluation cast a measure custom
fabrication fitting appointments
definitive and delivery
appointments and all follow up
care for ninety days according
to move United adults with
disabilities are physically
active are more likely to be
employed advance in their
careers enjoy improved physical
mental health and have higher
quality of life madam chair and
distinguished members of the
house consumer public affairs
committee the help economic
argument clearly supports HB one
three one the Human Rights
argument even more.
So.
Thank you.
I'm sure we will stand for
questions.
well this
opposition to this.
Okay.
And those in support.
Okay we'll do opposition first.
So.
Madam chair.
Sure this you want to the issue
of the New Mexico
it's obviously very difficult to
stand in opposition to this
legislation and we would like to
spend some time with the Sanchez
and the advocates it.
And the advocates.
At the.
No you don't have to the
Department down.
To see if we can work through
some of the issues that we think
are problematic in the bill that
for example the bill provides
for mandated coverage for two
separate custom orthotic
prosthetic devices one for
everyday living and one for
engaging in physical activity
bill also mandates coverage for
all ancillary services including
the repair and replacement of
those devices
the bill also does not allow for
any reasonable limitations on
the repair and replacement of
those devices as included and
other types of durable medical
equipment
that we have another in other
areas we also have concerns
about that drafting language
that may limit our ability to
provide utilization management
and the ability to negotiate
contracts with suppliers for
these devices so that we can
ensure our members would likely
pay a portion of these costs
that we can try to contain those
costs we would again we have
some ideas and about some of the
drafting that we might be able
to amended it and that it might
be more administratively
feasible but we wanted to go
ahead and and let the committee
know that we do have some
concerns but would like to work
with the Sanchez as we move
forward thank you.
Anyone else and officers.
It doesn't support I'm sorry
which means you.
One opposition.
Okay I will come back in just a
minute those in the audience and
support.
The start of this side in the
back you can come up with not
too hard to come up okay.
I was going.
Thank.
Madam chairman and committee
members we want to say a big
thank you for hearing our costs
today and I especially want to
pass a personal thank you on to
you from mothers who parent
alongside me and can't be here
today and and they send their
heartfelt thanks personally for
providing their children access
to physical activity.
Hello we lost her Kelly is my
daughter Callaway lost her right
leg doing what she and so many
other New Mexicans love to do
she was out for a more mountain
bike ride and stop to climb
those Albuquerque foothill rocks
that you believe have been there
for centuries the rocks moved
and she found herself slams
between boulders it was
immediately clear to us that her
injury was limb threatening she
became an amputee several days
later surreal was an
understatement five weeks later
she was discharged from the
hospital but now what as parents
we didn't know what what comes
next I can't tell you how many
times we were told that calorie
was resilient and that was
propped followed by the promise
of what she would do again the
promises would be somewhat like
this just you watch this time
next year Callaway will run
right past all of us we believe
that we pictured her climbing
and slipping and bracing and
biking but we didn't know that
insurance would expect her to do
all of those things on a walking
like.
On a lake that dealt a heavy
stiff and didn't feel much like
play at all it was hard for us
to imagine the lack of quality
of life the insurance offered to
the limb loss community Callaway
has activity legs today because
of the charity that believes
that kids should be kids just
like you and I do what happens
when you're not found or accept
or accepted by a foundation the
answer is a lack of freedom to
be active and an increased risk
of secondary health issues I
believe this issue to be a non
political issue rather it's an
issue of physical activity being
a human right.
Thank you.
And madam chair will the next
person's coming up I have to say
that I got a hand written letter
from one of Callaway's
classmates yesterday Alice king
school her name was the fear I
and I called the school and I
talked to her and she was just a
wonderful young lady and that's
why we do this job.
We.
Kelley blue.
Would you all be able to hear
the questions should we share
the money.
Make.
Will share the money.
Yes Kelly can you tell us how
you came to use prosthetics I
was an oxide in twenty twenty
one and I had to have.
What were you afraid of when you
lost your leg not being able to
do all the sports and things
that.
Which is your favorite
prosthetic there anyway because
it's very fun and bouncy.
How happy were you when you
first tried you're running late
there.
What are your favorite
activities now
activities are climbing running
and swimming are they the same
as before the accident yes.
Could you do these activities on
just a walking clinic no because
lacking links very heavy and the
ankle is not work at all do you
use your walking like for
anything else no.
One thing.
yes sorry.
I use it for our writing she
uses it for words writing
because she doesn't want to
speak to our with her blade.
How does it make you feel when
you see or hear about others
playing sports on a walking like
that because it's like really
hard to use them and they're not
able.
Do your activity legs help very
active and play with friends at
school yes add to play field
games and what would you do
without that walking like during
recess at.
At recess what would you do with
just walking like.
probably just sit at the bench.
Hello thank you.
That was a nice way
thank you that was a nice way
to.
Thank you for letting me be here
my name is Helen P. now and I
appreciate you giving me this
opportunity I'm here on behalf
of the children like Callaway.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico exponentially those that
require prosthetics in order or
thought ex in which.
Allow them to do their daily
needs but also which enhance
their quality of life.
Little bit of information about
myself to help explain why I'm
so passionate about this
proposed legislation.
I'm a retired physical educator
I served in the public school
and private school for forty one
years in that capacity.
I was also involved at different
levels in camps for children
with special needs and that's
where I happened to meet Kyle he
was one of the campers where I
was the director.
These camps include camps for
children with asthma kids with
diabetes and also those with
cancer I currently work with
children for the care at the
Carrie Tingley hospital.
Those children require our kids
that have permanent physical
disabilities during my career as
a teacher and I can't staff
member anything captured
children who have limb
difference and disorders that
require prosthetics and
orthotics and specialized
equipment to do their daily job
job which is to be a child.
As children become exposed to
different physical activities
which was my job as a physical
educator and as a camp.
Person to get them excited about
physical activity.
One of the things as a physical
educator that used to really
hurt was to go around to other
schools and see these kids with
prosthetics sitting on the
sideline being the scorekeeper
being the cheerleader being the
water girl or the water boy
rather than the participants out
there on the court or out on the
field participating.
These kids deserve.
To be kids and I appreciate you
honoring this bill for the sake
of the kids of New Mexico you.
Afternoon madam chair
representative so my name is
Nicole over Kailyn and I'm
honored to share my story with
you today in support of H. B.
one three one.
Twenty one years ago this past
weekend I lost my leg to
osteosarcoma bone cancer when I
chose to amputate my leg at the
age of ten to save my life I had
no idea that waterproof
prosthesis would be considered a
convenience or the like for
running would be considered not
medically necessary.
My family didn't have the funds
to pay for prosthetics not
covered by insurance and so I
went without but I still want to
be included in everything my
peers have the opportunity to do
and so I pushed myself and my
prosthesis to keep up with the
potential that I knew that I was
capable of but it couldn't it
was a bill for that what was
supposed to last three years I
was breaking every six months
and crossing my insurance even
more money than if they just
provided me what was appropriate
in the first place as I got into
college I started running five
K. and ten K. and even half
marathons but now instead of
just my prosthesis breaking down
my body was breaking down to but
forcing myself to run on an
inadequate prosthesis I had
literally run might pull this
out of alignment I was in
excruciating back pain and
physical therapy twice a week
and yet I still could not get
access to a prosthesis built for
running.
My story is not unique the
health care for twenty five
thousand New Mexicans with
disabilities is at risk through
my work at the American
orthopedic and prosthetic
Association I also see the other
side to the story and master the
lens of New Mexico's health care
providers the twenty aids or
thought I can process the
clinics in the state all share
one thing in common their
battles with insurance companies
to deny claims at every turn we
might not have a cure for cancer
but these talented medical
professionals have a cure for
but mobility impairment and
their care is not only
affordable it's safe to health
care system money.
Bill similar to H. B. one three
one have already been passed in
twenty one states including New
Mexico's neighbors you talk
Colorado and Texas why because
every single study commissioned
by the states show that these
laws have a minimal impact on
insurance premiums and clear R.
Y. to insurance carriers we know
movement is medicine we know
being healthy not only saves
lives it saves money H. B. one
three one is a win for me New
Mexico and the do this
disability community thank you.
Anyone else would like to speak
it's
up to you and mine are.
Okay.
Okay to think go ahead shop.
Thank you.
Hello everyone my name is is
unsurpassed decker and I'm proud
to be here on behalf of adaptive
sports program New Mexico in
support of H. bill one thirty
one.
As the vice chair of the board
for a US PNM I see the positive
impacts of adaptive sporting
events for the New Mexican with
with physical disabilities both
children and adults our
activities are often done in
group settings allowing athletes
to connect with others with
similar issues this helps build
a community.
And can provide support and
comfort for affected individuals
and their families potentially
reducing isolation and
depression that often occurs
with physical disability.
Our organization is a five oh
one three C. nonprofit that
provides year round sporting
activities for the disabled
communities such as snow skiing
snowboarding indoor and outdoor
rock climbing and various water
events.
Our operating budgets and prop
approximately a hundred fifty
thousand dollars per year we
have three of paid staff and to
contract employees.
We have over two hundred fifty
volunteers that provide
assistance with the Act athletes
during our sporting activities.
I'm just PNM find some adaptive
equipment for skiing
snowboarding and water sports
but cannot provide specialized
custom prosthetics and orthotics
devices that are often required.
Especially for the limb
difference population.
customer thought X. in
prosthetics as you've heard a
very expensive and most disabled
athletes do not have the
resources to purchase a second
device that's specific for
sports.
There for us therefore they must
decide if they want to emulate
in the community or participate
in the sporting activities that
provide them with so many
healthful benefits your time is
up thank you thank you.
Right.
That you want to.
Thank you madam chair of Madam
co chair members of the
committee and our sponsor
representative Thompson.
I'm not required to be my star
my name is not being and I'm a
survivor of multiple traumatic
brain injuries and I have some
other disabilities.
I'm not to bring up an issue to
muddy the waters I'm simply
bringing up for an awareness
component.
if I were a veteran my service
dog would be considered a
prosthetic device.
And to replace my successor Dodd
will be ten that was ten
thousand dollars this year going
back it was three thousand and
one thousand and a hundred
dollars and fifty dollars so
this is why I thought so when
this dog retires in five years
and I I have six plus or dog it
may be much more than that but
the thing that I'd like to state
is and being an advocate for
other people with disabilities
and and witnessing and
difficulties they've had when
they've had a limb a prosthetic
device that's been inappropriate
to their activity level or their
appearance it's heartbreaking
and to see many people's bodies
deteriorate by the extra added
weight if you pick up a little
it's very heavy if you pick up a
prosthetic and it's not
appropriate to the activity it's
even happier and witnessing that
brings so many more other
physical disabilities and other
components and so my urged the
support of this bill to the
committee because it makes a
life changing difference it has
a trajectory of eliminating the
other
additional disabilities and I
thank you very much the sponsor
for bringing this forward and
for the witness to speak in
favor I stand in support of the
bill and will sit in support of
the bill thank.
Being at yes.
Hi my name is grace Walter and
I'm testifying in support of HB
one thirty one I am a certified
processes or the test active
life by ottobock I work in
Albuquerque Santa Fe Roswell
running all over the place my
patients include disabled people
who need custom braces to
support the limbs that are not
functioning properly that's
orthotics and people with limb
differences for whom I find
prosthetics to replace their
amputated arms or legs I enter
this profession with the primary
goal of listening to my patients
needs and providing solutions
that would change their lives
for the better every day thanks
to devices that are covered by
insurance I see success stories
prosthetics and orthotics are
number one size fits all in fact
some entities as we've seen
today cannot achieve their goals
with the single prosthetic arm
or leg which is what's usually
covered by health insurance and
even that can be tricky for more
active people specialized
devices are often necessary for
fall river rehabilitation for
example running blades like Ben
is are designed to store energy
like a spring allowing the
wearer to jump and run
effectively although still not
mention the function of an
anatomical foot because they
can't be used for normal walking
rudimentary running blades were
invented in the nineteen
seventies the technology has
come such a long way in five
decades but access has not.
You may company organized an
event we're fifteen amputees
were able to trial running late
for a couple of hours I was
stunned so many participants
were running beautifully for the
first time since becoming
aptitude amputees since only
having access to the right
equipment immediately began
writing recommendation letters
to charities to fund these
devices for participants but I
personally believe the burden of
payment should be placed on non
profits that a patient has to
seek out as motivated entities
are fit with the technology
their lives will radically
transform in fact their future
health care costs will likely be
lowered because of their
improved mental and physical
health how could insurers
dismiss these benefits as an
able bodied athlete myself I'm
involved in traffic on skiing
backpacking and more I regularly
appreciate my body's ability to
regulate in the beautiful state
of New Mexico I yearn for my
disabled appears to be able to
do the same New Mexico has a
unique opportunity today to
become a cutting edge leader in
coverage for these devices this
is the humane thing to do thank
you.
Thank.
My name is Jason Burnett I'm
from Albuquerque and this is my
daughter hope she was born in
two thousand sixteen I'm after
very difficult and uncertain
pregnancy mid term sonograms
indicated that she was missing
her right leg we were uncertain
what other medical conditions
would be present when she was
born thankfully the only problem
that she had was that she was
missing her right leg her right
her right public bone and her
kidney she was otherwise healthy
and was released from the
hospital just a few days later
but because she had no medical
needs we were left to figure out
our own path going forward after
our own research we were able to
find a name for what hope Pat
she was a congenital and the
public to me I have a productive
me is the rarest and most severe
amputation taking all the lake
and the public about most of
those happened much later in
life when hope turned one we
found a young eager process the
test willing to take on the
challenge and when many others
were saying wait until she was
older she was successful in
getting her prosthetic leg but
she was so small they didn't
have the right components
available which was about three
were sitting the floor of her
bedroom trying on her leg that
was now getting outgrown and not
fitting well and she asked Daddy
when will my other leg grow.
That was a hard pretty covers it
should.
To say that this was a lifelong
condition.
As a sole proprietor I was
paying eighteen thousand dollars
a year on gold level family
health insurance
from one of the best providers
in the state and under that
covers that prosthetic leg will
only was covered at fifty
percent this prosthetic leg but
she was trying on on Monday is
sixteen thousand dollars and has
to be replaced at least once a
year as she continues to grow.
Last year she asked can I have a
running like and being able to
see people like tile they can
run on such a leg has been an
inspiration to her issue looks
forward to her life.
We
can hear it.
Hi my name's Daniel Cummings and
I'm an avid athlete biking
skiing running and climbing but
I never dreamed of a day or that
would be my reality however on
March fifteenth of two thousand
seventeen I was climbing when I
fell twenty feet shattering
meticulous and my left ankle
from the first few appointments
I had my medical team at it very
obvious that I would never be
able to run again and being
position was never going to
happen three years later brought
in chronic pain and no mobility
my doctor just heard of a man in
Washington those making these
hybrid prosthetic orthotic
devices that he believed would
allow me to chase my dreams
eager and desperate I flew to
Washington very fortunate that
my family could pay all the out
of pocket cost because insurance
would not cover this brace I'm
so thankful for that device
today because I could stand here
in front of you saying that I'm
enrolled at UNM School of
medicine and I've been able to
get back to running but the
chronic pain is still here it's
consistently in eight out of ten
and my exclusive has many
challenges with having to find
ways to add padding and other
ways to keep it functional as my
late after fees on top of time
to fly to Washington for
appointments.
Many days it takes everything I
have to push through pain to
show up to be the best daughter
friend and student I can be as
my medical team discusses
options your account was stories
of amputees going out Thompson
crazy athletic endeavors and
living without pain I'm hopeful
that may bring for me but the
reality is the access to
prosthetics it's really
overwhelming I also myself often
is it better to live with the
pain and being able to kind of
run are to be pain free and
that's the part but we're doing.
Thank you
everyone.
That's our problem.
Okay and do you know her name.
The state secretary.
Of the SCC.
Would you raise your hand so we
can do things that she wasn't
able to recover yes right.
Sure let's try to.
To sign okay the governor but
had CC hello can you hear me.
Yes we can get two minutes
please okay thank you thank you
very much
I want to thank the president
Representative Lee Thompson.
Bringing up please.
Well bringing of this bill might
it hello.
Go ahead I'm sorry I didn't hear
you say you need okay my name is
CC tied for I was born in
Cameroon because my mother took
a drug called to let the money
and because of that I was born
with a disability I grew up in
Cameroon growing crawling on the
streets of come everyone because
might finally could barely.
Four to get crutches for me
eventually as I grew older I
ended up in the United States
I've been wearing for us this is
scenes I was sick fourteen years
old I've had to deal.
We are different kinds of for
press this is over the years and
because across this six have not
been able to work well for me it
has been a challenge that has
caused me to many are there
medical issues in the later
years of my life to the I'm not
looking for the running blades
on other things but I'm praying
that this bill that is being
introduced can help the younger
generation and people that can
still use it to improve their
lives I agree with all the
sentiments that have been put
out yet to be about dealing with
disability and trying to make a
better life for yourself
activate
you find yourself in an accident
or your life changed changes
drastically so I want to see
thank you to a representative
Thompson for bringing this bill
and all the support that's of
the bill and I hope that this
bill goes through.
Thank you CC.
Okay of the do you have any
closing.
I thank you madam chair I'm just
I want to thank all the people
for making us cry.
Madam chair.
It's a.
Madam chair a committee I in the
interest of time I will not make
a long statement I would just
say of course I am support this
bill there is no more additional
specifics I can provide to the
committee what has already been
provided to you I will say that
I believe that this is a civil
rights issue and is also an
issue of that I am concerned
about the neglect of individuals
especially children with bill
fitting prosthesis is causing
long term health care due to
what insurance companies are
saying are medically unnecessary
and I stand and support this and
thank you very much for your
time.
And madam chair I just want to
add one more thing that I'm this
is a bipartisan bill
Representative Hernandez and
Representative block are also co
signers on this bill.
So we all want people to have
what they need to live their
lives thank you.
Have questions in the committee.
Over the past.
before we take that I just
wanted to add.
Working with make a wish we had.
At
that last all month and they
have that situation where they
had
Hi prostheses.
The area now three.
She had outgrown.
And have that difficult so I
think this will help.
Grown in different needs and use
that and and.
Alright so thank you I just
have.
This bill thank you to all of
the brave up folks who stood up
to talk about their stories and
their lives and you support you
and I'm just grateful to our
sponsors for raising bill and
for everyone pushing so hard for
this I am just curious on the.
The joysticks of Insurance it's
always so complicated
I recently insured with health
care this year
so I.
Excited to hear about the
exploration of that
having through numerous
iterations of that but
How often are these coverages is
it universal we know that
prosthetics for alternative
purposes that aren't what I
guess North I don't even know
what the.
Standards would be but that are
considered not medically
necessary expect anything
supplement to what is how to can
you just describe what the not
medically necessary category is
and is that like a universal
standard.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero super woman
So in general I mean as a
physical therapist working with
kids with special needs we
always expected and now I mean
that was just the given and
sometimes if you knew the right
forms to fill out of the right
words to use are the right
person to talk to you might be
successful but generally it's
considered in on most of the
time it's just a flat out no
this is what we find go away and
I mean and and most most people
are dealing with emotional
issues and financial issues and
they just don't have the time or
the knowledge to fight it out
essentially so I will let an
expert.
Thank you madam chair
representative from it Romero
the coverage language and most
insurance providers coverage and
to clarify this falls under DME
and not under major medical so
not under your surgical sorry
durable medical equipment which
is DMA not under your surgical
or medical coverage and so this
is a separate classification of
coverage with separate claims
codes that are filed and
normally when a code when a
claim is filed insurance
companies will have either
software or reviewers that will
anything that is filed for that
is not considered your standard
walking prostheses usually will
be flagged in the system even
the testimony provided today by
Blue Cross blue shield they
clarified that they are
concerned that this would be a
second type of device that would
be approved and so these
classifications of the deceptive
devices are triggers for the
denials automatically and so
that Representative but
Representative Thomson shared
about just expecting the no that
is the standard there are public
payers such as the BA where that
is not the case because they
believe that it is the standard
of care for individuals to have
access to this.
And we're we're closing as we're
creating the standard of care
through this legislation and so
through this initiative we have
the opportunity to create that
national standard for other
states.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives for sponsoring
that helps me understand you
know how to be able to create
that standard I am happy to join
main.
As the number two I'm glad that
they can set goals and that we
can you know be in the category
that cares about the seventy
people's lives it's shocking to
be quite frankly that.
It would be medically necessary
to be active what we're trying
to promote that every other
facet of our lives it is
declared by madam chair main did
it for children we will be the
first to do it alright everyone
thank you for clarifying and
would love to be.
First to do all of those things
for all the right reasons thank
you all for your persistence and
I spoke about thank you madam
chair.
Hey we have a motion on the
floor for deep passes there any
objections.
That we have in census in that.
At the past.
Thank you madam chair members.
Do.
Bill.
What thirty one thirty.
A short break for me.
I.
I was.
You.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I have.
And she she.
As in the.
With.
Los.
This.
I have.
The office.
From.
Last year this.
One.
Yeah.
Right.
I want to make.
Is that right.
We
she's.
Yeah.
As you.
What.
To all persons there.
And then to find.
so I have me is sitting.
Support.
Actually position is that the.
This bill addresses.
Are largely with the coverage
but we think that there's a lot
of the Senators.
The rules were to help up to
share some interesting position
about the sponsor.
Hi my position.
It's really questions.
To the committee on these issues
and thank you Mr.
Around.
But it's a little more
complicated than that I think.
So
okay what what's the hearing.
To help you if you will be a
parent.
We have to go through what
we're.
There is not.
Right
now okay Representative that
would.
I would be happy about.
For that.
The complete new program.
Sure.
Mexico.
For.
Get.
Right okay.
Ready to hear house bill seventy
four.
Didn't have the feel and Kevin
and then.
Thank you madam yes I do do you
you talk into this.
For our sins.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
we do have an amendment.
Yeah.
Like.
We we don't have an amendment
madam chair I'm not sure when
the best time would be to
discuss that right now sure so
the amendment is adds an
additional section see I think
on page two which gives
additional language on how we
would like to see calibration of
the Arnold to enable our
current.
As part of this legislation I
apologize I shouldn't have to.
Yes bill and in.
But this bill then Madam chair.
Basically deals with what we
call the Arnold tool which is
System this year uses to assess.
our judges in.
Figuring out whether or not
certain pre trial services are
to be assigned to
a defendant while they're
awaiting trial
and we are.
We are asking three things with
this bill one that we require
calibration based upon specific
data of this tool every two
years also asking to change the
standard the judge Hughes but it
eventually standard as to
whether or not tried to finish
should be detained after they
have already been
After they are awaiting trial
many reasons and then we are
also asking that judges receive
specific training on the Arnold
pool as part of the staff.
And then the amendment is just
more specific on the type of the
re calibration and data that
we'd like to see.
So you want to move the
amendment you are muted go into
the presentations I have a
motion.
Okay is there any cost of second
all right so let's.
I would like to.
I move that we adopt the
amendment.
We would like to.
I'm
sorry.
So madam chair just part.
the addition of the data to be
assessed is that correct.
Okay.
At this issue to the.
Okay.
There's is there any opposition
in the building adopt.
Here
That has been adopted.
Position today okay so for him.
Bring this back to the original
place that I spoke to you about
yesterday madam chair that I
don't think this hearing is
going to be your usual type of
hearing that we would have in
front of the your committee as
it relates to a proposed bill it
was the same to my left is Mr
already happened from the
administrative office of the
courts and work quite the
unusual pair today because we we
can't sure difference
Different.
Perceptions of this issue but
we're here together because we
both thank you share the same
call which is today I want to do
a deep dive and have long
interesting conversation on the
issue of crime in Bernalillo
county specifically and what.
What aspects of.
How we are utilizing tools like
the on screen are either are
contributing to that issue for
alleviating that issue so what I
would like to do I prepared a
little bit of a presentation and
I want to start by talking about
what the Arnold tool is because
I think that there's actually a
lot of misinformation and I
think that
While it's easier to message of
the the Arnold pool something
that the judge should be using
specifically to to either
detained or released a
definitive awaiting trial that's
actually not at all what the
Arnold school is supposed to
deal and so we're hoping to
educate the committee and
everybody here today on the
difference on what the Arnold
pool
What the UNM School of facts and
what it is not a fact and so
going into what it what the
standard is for detaining are
releasing independent waiting
child that's actually defined in
case law for us the cases he
all.
And madam requires to
requirements the first in order
to subject a presumed innocent
defended to pre trial detention
the state is required to prove
by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant poses a
future threat to others or the
community and to no conditions
of release a reasonably protect
the safety of another person or
the community I want to focus on
the second prong no conditions
of release will reasonably
protect the safety of another
person community so what's
important for the committee to
understand madam chair is that
it's actually up to the judge's
discretion the first part of
this inquiry as to whether or
not you want to order the judge
wants to detain or release the
defendant and that usually is
based upon many factors such as
age and circumstances of the
offense charged including if
it's a crime of violence and the
history and circumstances of the
defendant including any past
targets or connections I want to
make it very clear channel tool
has nothing to do with any of
either of these problems what
the Arnold tool comes in for
madam chair is that it is
already decided by the
discretion of the judge of that
conditions of release are to be
allowed for that defended the
aisle tool that gives that judge
additional information via an
algorithm as to what conditions
of release our appropriate to
ensure the safety of the
community if we were to release
that this and that so I've
waited a long time to kind of
make that distinction I've been
studying this issue for quite
some time and I think it's a
really really important for the
public to hear the Arnold pool
is not the only thing that
judges rely upon to detain or
release someone is just one part
of a very important factor
and I've discretion that a judge
can use.
Choose to go through that
decision making process so.
The reason for money bill and
share is based on some of the
research that I've done which
includes input from folks that
actually
make the Arnold tool they are
the experts on the Arnold tool
that the justice action network
I believe there are they are
here today
New Mexico is not calibrating
the Arnold tool to the best of
our ability meaning there are
some data points that we are
missing not to make the Arnold
tools that are and helping a
judge make the decision as to
what pre trial release
restrictions would be
appropriate for this particular
case so specific data that we're
talking about I would be a
retrospective look at cases with
the risk assessments for and we
look at New Mexico will look at
what alternately happens with
recidivist the data as it
pertains to those cases right so
what did the Arnold pool
recommend what ended up
happening to those defendants
that they were sedated the not
percent of they also look at
racial demographics of location
based in the graphics I want to
make sure that the risk levels
match other with levels are
occurring in New Mexico and we
want to look at the recidivism
up low risk individuals because
of thank you percent of thank if
they keep percent meeting even
with the assessment of a normal
school recommendation Arnold
tool recommendations there we
know there's something wrong
with the tool.
And so we have been looking at
that data you did a fantastic
study not that long ago and was
very thorough
and so we we we have that day at
the administrative office of the
courts has that do that as well
one issue where I think we
disagree is the
the the sample size of data so I
think what New Mexico has tend
to as you've done since
inception of using Arnold pool
is we look at a larger pool to
do that we're looking at
national data we're looking at
hundreds of cases so that we
could have more certainty as to
what is happening when you.
Use an auto tool to essentially
help you predict the results of
my bill would focus more on
local data.
And local specific cases as it
relates to that data.
another thing that I think
we we are going to have the
argument about madam chair is
what the standard should be when
you have someone who recidivism
if you have a defendant who is
awaiting trial and they re
offend right now under the
constitution and the Haidle case
that I decided to use the
standard is clear and convincing
evidence that the judge was half
must have feared Committee
evidence that there is that
person is not going to be a
addressed community and that no
other
No other restrictions.
Other than keeping a jail person
jail will keep the community
safe.
Where I guess I want to have the
conversation today madam chair
I'm not sure that that
constitutional standard applies
raise standard when you have
someone already awaiting trial
in the city.
I am I'm asking for a lower
standard meeting if you have
someone waiting trial
babysitting.
We just simply ask a judge to
make a decision based on a
preponderance of the evidence as
to whether or not that person is
a threat to the community right
or are there other and
restrictions that could there
are lesser restrictions that
could accomplish the same thing
by keeping teens safe.
That's what we want to start the
conversation we're actually
gonna be having a very similar
presentation and Senate
Judiciary madam chair tomorrow
we're gonna continue to take a
hard look at the article tool
and I want to make it very clear
to you and all my colleagues and
and Mr pep and that I am I'm not
one of those legislators know
hammer looking for nail my
interest is in actually figuring
out where the system is not
working it is the Arnold pool
let's fix that.
First let's agree whether not
broken and then let's fix it if
it's not the Arnold tool where
also we look we're also what
data do we need to procure to
help us figure out what part of
the system is broken or at least
what is giving the public
the perception that the system
is broken.
And as legislators we hear a lot
that many of our constituents
feel that they are unsafe in the
operating Bernalillo county area
because there's still a lot of
time and there's still a lot of
reciprocating that is we can
argue all day as to what the
underlying factors are for that
but that's not why we're here
today we're here today to
discuss this bill whether or not
the Arnold tool is working if
it's not working should be fixed
and if we fix that how can we
fix that and that this changes
standard is one constitutional
into something that would
actually help keep those folks
who the tool tells a should be
detained.
Detained until they are given
their due date in trial so I'm
gonna leave it at that I'm sure
I'm gonna get.
an opportunity for Mr for Mr
Pappas because well
and we'll just see what.
Thank you madam chair again
ordered that the non the
director of the administrative
office of courts and I'm here
hopefully to answer questions
and problems more information
about how the public safety
assessment which Donald pool
that's it's.
It's called the public safety
assessment but I know
politically it's called the
Arnold pool your term refers to
the same thing.
Of the public safety assessment
works and also how replication
works in the event that a person
on pre trial release is alleged
to have committed a new crime I
am going through a lot of the
research reports that have been
done locally I mean I universe
New Mexico by these two for
Social Research in Santa Fe I
understand that we use new
criminal activity and CA as if
the person committed the crime
but it's really just their rest
right we don't have that on how
many of us who were arrested
convicted of that charge we are
using the arrest this new
criminal activity we're taking
that often it's referred to as a
defender commits a new crime is
going to be clear there arrested
for new crimes in these
consequences follow from that so
I I guess I want to start with
this piece of paper that I
handed out tell you tool looks
like what the public safety says
looks like this is in Bernalillo
county and I'm.
Okay.
It to ten minutes.
In
rectally how it relates to the
bill will do with.
Okay great so one of the
defendants arrested this
assessment is made the Arnold
pool public safety assessment is
done and the person is given a
scale a score rather and that
goes on to skills you see on the
top in the blue box new criminal
activity scale you'll see that
Calkins CA that's what they got
arrested for while there you
know.
But the likelihood is that
they'll get arrested for another
crime other on pre trial release
so you got arrested you're
charged with some crime the
Arnold assessment tool the
public safety assessment
provides of level of.
Restriction the judge can impose
on conditions level conditions
the judge might want to impose
to ensure that you don't get
arrested for new crimes.
While you're on release and then
the scale on the left side for
the Jewish peers scale of the
FDA still does the same thing
for your any conditions that
would be appropriate to reduce
the risk that you're going to
fail to appear all the risk
assessment is done looking
backwards well that the new
charges scored act of violence
charge scored as well charge
those things but otherwise
disappear history do you have
private crimes Care prior face
to appear in addition to the two
scales the new criminal activity
scale and the state to appear
scale there's a of violence like
if you look at the top to a red
flag not surprisingly that's the
violence I it's also referred to
as the NPCA no violent criminal
activity and if pledge the
higher risk for some individuals
based on their past conduct that
their risk for violence to get
arrested for a violent crime
during the pre trial period.
When we talk about so that's
what happens when a person shows
up and I have a score that we
this was a place in one of these
boxes.
And no further to the left you
are in the higher up you are the
less risky you are the more the
least less restrictive the
conditions would be that would
sure your appearance in court
and you're not getting arrested
for another crime.
The further you are to the right
and the further down you are on
scale that that that's the
session of the tool based on
history and other things that
you're at risk for committing
new crime or getting arrested
for new crimes and released for
failing to appear for all your
court appearances the FDA
doesn't get talked about that
much if you fail to appear words
going to be sure we're going to
arrest you again and be back in.
That doesn't have to do with
public safety so much really
focus on NCAA new criminal
activity are you gonna get
arrested because we find
probable cause to believe you
did something another crime
higher out.
report is a couple of
interesting things with regard
to assessment in section eight
it would have would impose a
requirement by statute that the
violence let be used anytime the
public safety assessments used
in every jurisdiction where we
their O. C. as in.
Implemented pre trial services
we do we do score the violence
like we do all the scoring in
Albuquerque for everybody except
the second district Albuquerque
there in boulder they've been at
it longer so they do their own
we do it in Albuquerque for all
the other courts around the
state that are already
implemented Act pre trial so
that would be the thirteenth
district alliance here see below
and Santa Fe counties that would
be McKinley in San Juan County
that would be the third district
in Los crucis Dona Ana County
the three quarts of make up the
sixth district in the south.
Southwestern corner of the state
Hidalgo Luna in great counties
we're currently implementing in
Santa Fe County we we will be in
the other two just two courts
that are to counties there in
the first district and over the
fourth this official says three
counties Las Vegas is with the
District Court it is located in
And also more County in the
fourth districts so.
All those places we use the
violence like already.
The court has rules and those
rules determine what kind of
things the courts when they have
a defendant from them can
consider and they have approved
the use of the public safety
assessment as a risk assessment
tool to inform the judge about
the defendant in front of them
when Representative peers
usually a few hours after their
arrest they get arrested on at
two o'clock in the morning it
appeared from the judge either
then the next morning or next
early afternoon the judge Rees
required to set conditions of
release.
If they are going to the state.
Yes the judge has the question
says a judge shall release the
person with one exception and
that exception is if the
district attorney filed a motion
to detain the defendant then
they're gonna be held for a
while we're gonna be hearing and
at the hearing the judge will
determine based on many factors.
Okay what whether or not that
person would be detained so the
judge can't as the looking at
the person the next morning
state I want to detain you Here
I'm ordering that very help for
detention they're not
constitutionally allowed to do
that what they can do under the
rules to speak what's written is
if they see someone that really
presents an opportunity for the
tension in their view they can
go ahead and release for a
couple of days and that the DA
file a motion of course if you
had to file a motion any time
say the judge doesn't have to be
in front of them they were
conditions of release the
persons released throughout for
we could to the DA finds out all
I really want to file a
detention motion on this person
that I would catch motion that a
week later a month later
whatever they decide they have
evidence that makes it necessary
to detain the defendant because
it is releases such a threat to
public safety I know the
conditions over the school for
public safety.
When this happens so we do use
violence flags and this scale as
I said is one the using in
Albuquerque it's probably gonna
be modified since we use
different matrices mattresses in
other the other places I mention
because the community of
criminal justice partners all
decide how to how this was going
to fit in the box where the risk
level is going to be assessed
based on your point scale so
it's different a little bit
different informative than it is
in Santa Fe County Burnley.
with regard to assessment that
the locals the majority decided
locally.
With regard to whether or not
the tool is assessed it is
assess them in this package on
the fifty piece of paper would
be page Turner I don't know it's
a fifty so paper I don't want my
numbers didn't come out you'll
see the front page of a study
done by a bunch of smart people
at university New Mexico looking
at a little over ten thousand
cases and Bernalillo county
where the public safety
assessment was done it is just a
risk for the person was released
and in that case covers all this
could be a period of nine months
to complete twenty four months
this occurred.
Over a period of three years we
have the same thing updated for
a fifteen thousand cases that
occurred through twenty twenty
two.
And this is a validation
assessment to see if the public
safety assessment is being
predictive in having value for
the judges give you have correct
information when they come in
front of the and if you flip
over one more page to see the
speech sharks with the flu.
Discounted that blew all the
people who didn't get arrested
for another offence after
they're released in this case
ten thousand you see the same
kind of thing so the fifteen
thousand that cover a full five
year period.
At the people got arrested for a
first degree felony the most
serious level of crime whether
it be Travis as ten thousand
people I was thirteen people
it's so small you can't really
see the little piece of the pie
chart that that would represent
the orange are from the second
response serious crimes not as
serious as the first refined
discussed here is and then the
great are third degree felonies
as you can see we're talking
about a very small part of the
overall number of people
released in this case let's uh a
little over two hundred people
out of ten thousand whatever not
two hundred eighty nine thank
you to someone numbers on the
fifteen thousand that the
current study has most people
get rearrested father and
released get arrested for four
three from the lowest level
felony we have a misdemeanor or
a petty misdemeanor
so we believe that this is that
he says keep going there's
something to do with the tort
better but it's working it's
it's valid and it's not by
that's one of the big issues
with these tools other bias
based on race or gender or
anything else and the study said
no it's not I guess that all
fifty states there's.
It doesn't really count for
different ethnicities or other
factors which is great because
some some insurance to do
particularly if they're based on
arrest that but we talk about
that agency sample what would
look like this is the background
investigation report when the
judge gets the public safety
assessment the boxes also gets
here she also gets one of these
this shows the whole criminal
history of the defense out at
the top of the current charges
this is made up so the dates are
in the future.
It's a the current charges any
cases that are currently
pending.
The finance on probation and any
close cases this show
convictions the judge has more
than just the score in a box in
front of him or her the judge
has its higher criminal history
of the defendant and whether or
not to history want to violence
lack in anything else that the
prosecutor or the defense
attorney wants to tell the judge
with the judge goes to release a
person for from the detention
motion from the district
attorney anything else would be
a wants to bring in front of the
judge to justify detention but a
judge in every case has these
two things the score with the
boxes that they've put on the
matrix together and the entire
criminal history background of
the defendant
whose before.
So.
I'm gonna go back very briefly
to the bill because we do we do
about exercise that's what I
just talking about the one from
Bernalillo I'm wrapping up with
regard to the second part of the
bill which is
has to do with what happens with
some of its rearrested we
already have provisions in rule
five four three that allow that
bring the person back if they've
been alleged violating condition
of release one recommendation is
always don't commit another
crime so you violated if you
commit another crime get
arrested that's probably because
you come in front of the judge
and at that point all the stuff
about the presumption of release
and all that stuff is out of the
judges deciding is because if
you violated my conditions I
believe this probably be
committed a crime sure I set
really should get in should I do
so under new conditions more
restrictive usually or should
revoke your release and put you
in jail not under the real high
standard that applies when
you're first arrested but
understand the preponderance of
the evidence that you violated
my conditions there for I don't
believe your safety we have
there and we're gonna put you up
back in jail.
And that does include an
administrative agency
interference with the
administrative justice is not
just a
in this session so there you go.
So where we are madam chair the
first thing we wanted to do was
just the education right we
wanted to kind of clear up
exactly what the public safety
assessment the Arnold pool is
how we utilize it when it is
utilized and really I think that
the issue the two issues right
here.
Talk about today is.
Do we need to re calibrated do
we need to bring in additional
data different data to make sure
that we're getting the best
recommendations that we can I I
do want to say that the
recommendations I brought in
this bill do come from the
justice action network and they
are considered the national
experts on the Arnold pool and I
and also the preponderance of
the evidence standard and
whether or not that should be
utilized this is clear and
convincing when a judge recent
decision to detain someone if
they have me offended while
awaiting trial so does it really
I think you issues that we don't
agree on madam chair but I am
happy to sit here with Mr Papen
today and and see I think we
were doing a good thing for the
state of New Mexico here in just
explaining kind of came through
the misinformation explaining
how all this stuff works and
then figuring out what we can do
to to make it better and that
this is not a problem and
continuing on to figure out what
it I don't know if you want to
vote on the vote on the on the
bill today or if you don't want
to vote on bill we have another
round that we're going to go
through in Senate Judiciary
tomorrow but this is the first
part of our mission is really to
students to have a conversation
and educate because I think
there's been a lot of
misinformation floating around
about this for a long time
especially in Albuquerque
Bernalillo county area.
Thank you for listening to us.
Thank you for your support we do
have a profit we don't have an
FIR and.
This will have a statement on it
this would affect the towards us
with more people jail or not
We were thinking that it
wouldn't is that correct.
I never I was never told there
is no FIR I assume that there
was I never saw myself but if
there's not then we need to work
on getting one for you obviously
we've been.
We can pass and still.
Given the details not their
fault that the
manager we submitted ours to the
LFC in the one of the things you
have the speech B. seventy four
attachment was an attachment to
our analysis I don't think they
give you each agency or entity
analysis but I know that we
submitted to the folks that
needed our analysis of seventy
four I was surprised also to see
that wasn't an FIR on the bill
yet but I hope ones coming maybe
they're taking a long time to
read what we wrote because we
wrote their budget.
Thank you well let's go to the
audience
how many are in support of this
bill.
Six and.
How many are in support I mean
opposition.
Okay so it's about the man
And let's uh to one minute since
we have so many and getting we
might have a lot of questions
from the committee those in
Opposition first like to come up
to the money if if you would
like to speak to.
Yes because of the scheduling
difficulties how the bill
mysteriously got dropped in the
agenda yesterday I think that
the
Legislative Council I listen I
thought that the FIR wasn't
needed nineteen south and.
If the.
Posted.
The date was posted they should
have started drops PSI are just
was over nine that it
was a problem have questions.
Posted on the cold someone
working on it.
Hi good afternoon.
In which state your name and
town will time for you need to
do that thank you yes I'm I'm
than the cash thank you with
much respect Representative
Hochman Vigil I still don't
understand why this legislation
is necessary data indicates that
current law and the constitution
and provided for appropriate pre
trial detention with extremely
few mistakes being made I have
heard repeatedly that things are
working as is and the only
jurisdiction in the state that
seems to be having a problem or
the public perception of a
problem with pre trial detention
is Bernalillo county Chief
Justice Bacon address the issue
of pre trial detention or remark
to the joint session the other
morning one of the things that
she said that struck me is that
pre trial detentions are
currently back much higher than
previously if there's a problem
with pre trial detention it
doesn't appear to be the fault
of the tools that are currently
in place the fix should be done
within the context of existing
law and the constitution I
understand it may be politically
attracted to adopt losses
legislation like this in an
effort effort to demonstrate a
tough on crime stance we health
kind of feel that I did it but
ask you to resist and to vote no
on this unnecessary piece of
legislation thank you so much.
Anyone else in opposition.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender I have a
colleague on zoom who will cover
the Arnold tool that the
conversations I'm gonna focus on
section two of the bill
primarily subsection C. which is
the the peace creating a
presumption of revocation if you
commit a new crime on release as
Mr Pepin noted this is
unnecessary because there is
already a separate rule that
allows for revocation of the pre
existing conditions of release
when you're charged with any
crime and to the way that it is
written is directly in conflict
with the constitutional
requirements as outlined in
state the masquerade a Haidle I
will since I only have a minute
I will not go into great detail
about why but the the fact that
it allows for an assumption of
the both prongs of the
requirements to be satisfied
solely on the basis of the new
charges arising is is direct
exactly what the Supreme Court
said in my screen Haidle was
insufficient to meet the state's
burden under the constitution.
Thank thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Rikki Lee Chavez I'm here
before you today on behalf of
the New Mexico from the defense
lawyers association I appreciate
the sponsor and Mr Pepin I
recognize that this is part of
the ongoing discussion so our
comments though in opposition to
the overall all bill do take
into account that we appreciate
that and hope to be part of the
ongoing on going dialogue on
this issue
all the men are comments to a
section two subsection ain be
and that it codifies what is
currently in the Supreme Court
rules we believe that it's
appropriate to leave those
process sees in the rural format
so that it is for the at the
court's discretion to amend or
to adjust in rural form if they
see the anything does need to be
changed or fixed or or adjusted
and by putting that into statute
you do limit some of that
flexibility and so that is our
comment on the draft before you
today and thank you for your
time.
If anyone else in opposition.
With the men's okay that's right
you would follow with.
Yeah.
Some of them are.
Go ahead Jonathan.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives we this is
Jonathan I I work for the office
of the public defender as miss
Chavez Cook set up want to talk
about the Arnold school
specifically I think I I
obviously haven't seen the
amendment but certainly we have
to understand that the pool was
developed after looking at a one
point five million cases and
coming up with what was just a
strictly valid as far as risk
factors we're never going to get
one point five million cases in
New Mexico I do think it's
worthwhile to try to validate
the tool for New Mexico I think
it's going to be impossible to
do that for most counties we
could probably do it for
Bernalillo county but Harding
County isn't going to be able to
do an assessment of what risk
factors there are to
statistically scientifically
validated way it's it's just
never going to happen it's
impossible and so I think going
more local than the state is is
going to be difficult at best
probably impossible so I think
you know we can look at re
validating I think C. JCC's can
propose ideas of what they think
other factors are that courts
should look at but we need to be
very careful gonna mess with the
pool because then it becomes not
validated it becomes more more
worthless rather than worthwhile
thank you very much.
Representatives.
Is anyone else in opposition.
Eight thousand four.
Thank.
thank you madam chair my name is
JD Bullington and today I'm
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce in Bernalillo county
there's an average of two people
per day arrested for new crimes
while out on pre trial release
and those are just the ones that
get caught the Arnold pool the
now infamous Arnold pool is one
of those critical problems
within our criminal justice
system because it often ignores
the nature of a crime among
other key factors has been
pointed out by the bill Sanchez.
Our judges are using a tool that
systematically underestimates
the dangers Business of criminal
defendants we appreciate the
attempt by the sponsor and this
legislation to address the
problem in the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
supports house bill seventy four
thank you.
Anyone else.
But come on in and support that
would like to speak.
I'm good afternoon madam chair
mining shovel filamentous and
special counsel to the Attorney
General
And I have quite a bit of
experience with our tool that
stand in support of the bill
especially the that it's opening
and is part of the dialogue
about the Arnold tool in his
bring it here to the vote so
that it can be presented and
discussed in front of the
legislature to recognize some of
the gaps that maybe within the
Arnold pool especially
appreciated the idea of what I
understood to be an additional
flag to alert our judges as to
the to just alert our judges
that the individuals coming on a
very serious crime in this in in
the case that's before them
there so
that would be an important thing
to do is to alert our judges to
have that additional flag there
so just stand in support of this
motion for thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I actually have to
clients that are interested in
this bill one sorry Jason Weaks
the first as the Albuquerque
Hispanic chamber of commerce
they've been looking at this
issue obviously from the lens of
crime and how we can work our
system to improve of the tools
that the judges have to try to
reduce crime make good decisions
all day on release very much so
similar to the talking points
from the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce commerce the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce supports this effort
and it's support the bill in
total I'm not gonna delve into
those reasons I think Mr Clinton
well outlined in the second
client that I have that is
related to this issue is
Bernalillo county Bernalillo
county is not necessarily
standing in support or
opposition of this bill but
because we run the county jail
as every county does we have a
major point of interest in who
is detained who's released and
general public safety issues the
issue was asked earlier will
this because the courts to see
fiscal impact what could but it
will also affect the counties
and the county jails and so what
we really think from Bernalillo
county standpoint which we do
have a C. G. C. C. there we have
a well for C. G. C. C. so that's
important in the state we can
evaluate these issues on CDC C.
level and we applaud what
Representative Hochman Vigil is
trying to do to improve and
evaluate the pool to on bringing
transparency to it so that it
does make good predictive
decisions.
Actions.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is David purpose or any Macy's
recovery center we get a lot of
kids who are in our system and
pre trial services and I think
where this needs.
More
if this is on the mental health
and substance abuse and they I
know it's not actually part of
the bill but I feel this is part
of the problem for pre trial
services we don't have enough
mental health services we don't
have enough of the
A substance abuse treatment
centers so when the kids get out
of treatment are when they're in
pre trial the judge says you
have to go to substance abuse
there isn't there's an adult
Asagoe how to get there were the
barriers in place for them to do
that our our gonna fail of
course again we commit because
there's nowhere for them to go
to get the mental health
treatment they need and the
substance abuse treatment they
need so I do feel that there are
places that this can be revamped
so it's even more successful and
people don't precipitate.
In terms of the committee was
chase bow in the cabinet
secretary for yes of we stand in
support of this which was a
really appreciate the
conversation having to be look
at that at the table with
different opinions exactly what
the governor asked for yesterday
during a press conference that
you know that the dialogue and
discussion and all those scores
to make sure that people are
coming together for this crime
issues and ethically this act
what we're doing you know I
don't know that all the stats
regarding the public's safety
assessments for the arts and I
can just tell you what law
enforcement and I don't believe
that it's working and I don't
believe this is an issue
particularly brilliant County
having worked for twenty seven
years in the account set of all
for the city Rio Rancho we saw
the state difference the moment
this tool came affects our hope
that this bill one just die here
that it would move on just like
last year we saw AC sixty eight
had a lot of good ideas all
combined in the omnibus crime
bill I would hope that we see
similar success this year The
convention.
Anyone else.
Okay.
And anyone.
Okay.
Would you like to have anymore
comments where we go to the
committee
thank you madam chair for the
opportunity again I think this
is a great conversation
I don't have some grand scheme
programs planned for you with
this bill I can say that we are
the dialogues are on going
whether or not the language in
this bill is perfect I would
probably argue too that it is
not however there are some good
ideas in here that I know will
be combined with other good
ideas as we progress through the
session so in the deliberations
of the committee we would ask
for maybe I know rack or
something that would allow this
part of it to survive while we
continue to work with our
colleagues here and the other
stakeholders to put something
together that's really the work
for the citizens of the state of
New Mexico thank you and your
next committee we need to do
Cherry correct.
Really.
K.
are there any questions from the
committee I have that.
Representative Thomson thank you
you gave us a lot of information
too much for me.
You know for all of us probably
at this point so in one sentence
tell me what your bills that.
In one sentence my bill would
require the Arnold tool to be
recalibrated using a very
specialized set of data every
two years it would also change
the evidentiary standard as to
when a judge may be able to
revoke
pre trial services and detain
someone while they await trial
and it also create violence
flags for continued violence I
for certain related crimes in
the folder and what the judge
sees when they're going in and
looking at the recommendations
and the information being given
to them by the algorithm as to
whether or not to release the
marketing.
And then my second question is
gone actually.
Do we need a law to do this I
mean could this be done under
rule of the quarter something
that that that that the re
calibrated every two years.
Respectfully madam chairman
respectfully at the two
thousand.
Right you very rarely need laws
I think generally legislators I
think the question to ask
whoever is is many attempts have
been made to because she with V.
agencies that could be.
To get some of these we crack
calibrations done and again that
foresees discussions to be had
and so far we've been kind of
unsuccessful not for anybody's
fault but I mean again we we
still have to decide whether or
not a problem exists and what
the problem is but I think that
any solution we do come up with
is probably going to have to be
codified in statute just to
ensure that everybody all the
stakeholders that that need to
take part in this will so madam
chair just one more question and
I know that some folks hate task
forces and stuff but sometimes
you need to happen is that the
consideration where you get
everybody at the same I mean
I've heard like black and white
and we're of course we're all
worried about crime but is this
the right way to go is that is
that something you've discussed
or would consider.
Thank you madam chair and chair
Thompson I'm always open to a
task force or or you know a
discussion board just freaking
like minded people together who
are smart and have good ideas I
that I just of the state the
president has not been.
Very
There hasn't been a lot of
promise for what we've seen from
some of the C. G. C. C. as in
the past and I think getting
some of these folks together Rio
People disagree or feelings are
hurt and then we have certain
parties walk out who we really
need to have their yeah their
particular point of view and so
we're human beings right we are
fatally flawed.
And as much as we tried to to do
this process and and less of a
specific way we haven't really
seen I haven't really seen the
Progress I would like to and
that's what kind of brought me
to to bring thank you Matt and
and I just madam chair I I
texted are major for the rich we
should move forward with this.
The thing
that even.
Issue that yeah.
I mean I'm I'm not telling you
what to do I'm just telling you
what Sir let's go ahead with
discussions and that we can.
The side
that the FY are.
So Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you party
and folks in the audience
I would.
Generally.
What about the bill given the
fact that.
The conflict with the
constitution number one on to
the idea of calibrations meeting
is still an idea it does you I
don't understand what re
calibration means and it's not
clear in the statute what.
We are recalibrating exactly and
so I guess I'm.
This is new to me but that said
I am I don't necessarily see you
how
Yes other retail operations more
clear if we put it in the
statute can you just discuss
maybe what that means and and
how calibrating one way or the
other and with that distinctive.
You know facet of what you're
putting in statute so that makes
sense to me thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
are up so yeah we talked about
actually the larger calibration
right having the larger sample
sizes that we could protect the
some certainty what's going to
happen with these types of cases
of these types of defendant's so
that's one part of it what we're
talking about terms and more
local calibration would be in
the these exact terms that that
was given to me Representative
respectively cases that had risk
assessment score and ultimately
what happened with percent of
the stock data they're going
case by case looking at this
point that the risk assessment
that was given and whether or
not that dependent rescinded or
not
looking at racial demographics
which I think is important
especially to our local
communities location based
demographics you know what what
is contributing to crime and
this is not necessarily
contributing to crime in
Albuquerque that's an important
thing to keep in mind making
sure that risk levels match
throughout the state so some of
our communities are just going
to have more crime that's just
the simple fact of it
and then we need to also look at
the recidivism what we call low
risk people so if we have law
and this is more of what I
stated previously but if we have
low risk identified people
through the risk assessment.
Percent of the meeting right are
doing worse things later on then
that means our tool is broken.
And so we need to we need to get
to a better place or we feel
like what is being predicted is
backed by statistics factual
information so that's kind of
what we're talking about when we
need in retaliation thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I guess that
brings me to the question of
this facts and statistics and
data that we have presented yes
now which shows in my humble
opinion that the system is
working where we have to what
less than one percent point one
percent we're sitting in the
first degree and one point one
percent.
You know having a second degree
felony.
I don't see it any perfect for
us that we would have a zero
percent chance like where where
do we have a hundred percent
chance of.
Anything all of that from
happening
so my discomfort is and be able
to see the facts and statistics
show that giving the discretion
based on the tool that we have
in place knowing that.
That recalibration should happen
in one way or another.
We could make it worse we could
make the situation worse as well
And so my posits that you know
we're making this proposed
sweeping changes to the level
evidence is needed to keep folks
in jail at the time of.
For longer times it's not so
that there's a that the
recalibration where another is
going to skew the data in the
right direction at the data
itself seems pretty sounds to me
that the system is working and I
would love to be convinced by.
If that's the case but from all
the analyses that I'm seeing
and the ways in which we keep
continuing to try to improve the
system that this is actually one
it's really working
and.
So I don't know how else to
improve it and I don't
necessarily think this is the
way to do it so I really do
appreciate the conversation and
the sort of bored right to say
let's look at all the facts and
statistics and how it's being
presented but I don't think this
gets as to any any better place
in the way that it's presented
today
But I would love to hear more
but I I do appreciate the
conversation and
The opportunity to really unpack
service certainly this area will
have a new to and the department
generally and this this see
JCC's witcher's the criminal
justice coordinating council
which again it sounds like
they're doing a good job so
With.
Just just yeah tax I mean that's
exactly I think the questions
bigger Madam chair
representative actually so like
I said before that's why this
conversation needs to to be
happening is that in some
instances we can't even agree on
whether or not there's a problem
and so I think that it was
really good really good that
stuff for all of us I mean I Mr
Kevin has all this great data
I've never seen any of that and
I've been working on this issue
for a long time so isn't it
great that we have this forum to
bring all of this great data so
that we can come to
come to an understanding is
whether or not there's a problem
or if there is a problem how do
we fix that how we make it
better so this is precisely why
we need to be doing what we're
doing today right now so that we
can get all of the facts in
front of us instead of listening
to you know quite frankly
misinformation or sound bites or
what you know evokes people's
emotions because we are human
beings after all it's really
important that we can stay
within the fact is that the
realm of facts and science and
so that's that's precisely what
we're doing today I think
that's what we're here thank you
Representative we have.
More questions from
Representative on.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and you know
I agree with you I think it's
important especially our state a
lot of violence going on right
now especially in these metro
areas we need to do whatever we
possibly can to ensure that this
violent criminals don't get back
on the streets so with this new
change to our state I would
give.
Mortician discretion.
For judges to.
Have more discretion and you're
not in your head so I'll let you
answer that madam chair.
Mentors should.
But I just or anything so
nothing about this changes due
to judicial that discussion and
that's actually one of the
largest points that I want to
make sure it gets through here
is that if you think about how
how our system works when you
take a defendant who is accused
of the crime rate you have a
judge to us to take all of these
things into account what they're
discussion right they make a
decision first with their
discretion and then and only if
they come up with we have to
handle cases which tells us we
have to give the least
restrictive
treatment possible to make sure
that they unless they you know
we can't protect the public
If we are not going to do then
vaccine we utilize the public
safety tool right that's when
that whole
Conversations start so this has
nothing to do with giving judges
more our last discussion they
have that discretion they have a
lot that they have to consider
when making these decisions but
this tool is just one part of
that decision it comes together
at that that makes a judge feel
good about what it is that
they're going to recommend for a
defendant going going to trial
so it's not about discussion
it's more about an evidentiary
standard it makes it easier
evidentiary standard to be met
as to whether or not someone
should be teen petite be
detained after the revival that
we offended again so I I hope
that answers your question thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative and so with this
recalibration that we've been
talking about and you mentioned
a few factors that.
Please use that racial
demographics location
demographics on location have
you seen similar tools is this.
Change very much regarding the
smaller community like where I
live in Alamogordo versus
somewhere like Albuquerque for
instance Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative black I have not
there's still so much
information and data that I need
to be able to review I would
love to ask other states that
have utilized the Arnold pool
what have changes have been made
once they've done re
calibrations I think there's a
lot of really useful information
there for New Mexico to consider
that gap I I myself have not
seen anything specific there
still kind of in that idealistic
phase of us.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative block if you read
about the study which was
published in two thousand twenty
one.
You'll see that it does violate
fact race gender in fact it's
the first validation study in
the nation that looks at native
populations see if there's a
bias there and what they found
in every category and they went
through I don't know eight ten
is that the tool is not biased
as used over the first three
years which is now five years.
And that's exactly what a
validation study does and you
need to have enough data we
probably need to do a statewide
validation study when we get
enough cases statewide we had
enough in Albuquerque so we
requested obtained it spent
public money that independent
people with lots of letters
behind their name Wonderstone
and statistics tell us whether
or not it was working in the
sector it is working and it's
predicted and I would ask the
committee to consider that this
this will be a bill says when
you requested then there's an
expedited detention motion under
rule four or not the right now
when you're re arrested because
that means you violated a
condition of
Arrested for another crime that
violated the judge's conditions
and therefore the judge should
revoke your release that's what
You violated conditions of
release for your continued
release is necessary to prevent
interference with witnesses for
proper administration of justice
for pretty broad standard to put
someone in jail until trial much
easier than bringing another
motion to reform reinstated is
so much higher
And while the crimes tend to be.
Last year is there still crimes
Mr violations of what the judge
ordered and the judge can has
the whole plan.
Options available to her really
sure again or put you in jail or
anything.
Perspective the madam chair one
thing that is not happening and
I but I do respect Mr have been
greatly really has a lot of
information but I'm both the
dust are not filing those
emotions.
Have the ability to file them
and they're not always being
filed so you know sometimes we
need to give other options if
needed.
After the Swiss senator Clemente
chair but just give me when
people are are released and
people think because they're
charge something serious the
judges leading the crazy
criminal person out on the
street to do this if the DA
doesn't bring a motion the judge
has no option but to release
them the first time the judge on
is our own motion can bring a
four oh three and bring them
into court because they got
arrested and rule that they
fired a condition of release we
don't want to take that away I
don't think anybody would want
to take that away from judges
and judges do this without the
help of the prosecutor who
really the district attorney
should be watching these people
and saying well you had your
chance I don't think the public
safer you won't listen to the
judge so the judge Department
trip they may not they may but
the church Act this was very few
times when a judge can say I
should in order you violate my
order therefore I'm gonna take
this action on my own without a
party bring the motion in this
case it desert tortoises judge
can do it on his our own her own
motion and and they do do it I
did want to point out that it is
for page of a have which goes
with the analysis we did on this
bill It list up fifty one crimes
that in Bernalillo county are
considered violent crimes that
will get you a violence like and
that will be scored as a violent
charge when you do the PS that
the public safety assessment
fifty one that's a lot but you
know there was a big fight back
in twenty seventeen with all
these were developed and we gave
a lot of ground what what the
prosecutor felt was necessary in
the interest of public safety if
you look at that list you might
be surprised at some of the
things that are I'm on the fifty
one times that would be
considered crimes of violence
maybe like all of them that's
great that's which used in your
community to live in Bernalillo
county to determine if you're if
you have a wrist provided let
alone risk to get arrested for
another crime if you if.
You begin to work on that and
it's on the second page also see
what the factors are the
restored give you your score on
that on the public safety
assessment but
and I can going to one of those
nine factors are extraordinarily
productive with regard to
generally risk of re arrests and
risk of.
For you to appear I'd be happy
to do that if you want me to but
there are no tool is a valid
tool it's being used properly
not only Bernalillo county but
elsewhere in the state and I I I
am concerned about those
provisions of some folks
described this ship for the
circumscribing judges ability to
deal with people.
In the judge's discretion madam
chair and interesting time is
one more question this
Representative HochmanVigil you
mentioned that there's some
misinformation or some
at least it sound bites that are
misconstruing your your piece of
legislation but like to just
give you an opportunity to
disprove any of this information
by the madam chair I thank you
Representative it's not about my
bill it's about time yes they
generally really and we also
gender generally I think a lot
of I have on the public believe
that this is the only method
available to a judge make a
determination as to whether or
not to detain or release someone
pending trial and I think that
we hear a lot of people getting
upset let's take for instance
the last case Solomon Pena the
gentleman who was terrorizing
legislators prior to beginning
the session and it that news
media made a big deal about
house was just up to the Arnold
tool he would have been
recommended the least and it's
precisely stuff like that but is
not helpful to the narrative
that we're trying to spread here
which is this is just one small
small piece and when a judge is
making that decision they are
not simply opening up the file
seeing would be Arnold will
recommend recommends happening
happens and does that that's not
all it's happening and there's
been a lot of I think anger
misdirected anger publicly at
the pool for that exact reason
and so that's why it was
important to me and I think
others to kind of clear this up
and tell you exactly what it is
that the PSA does how it's
helpful to us what it is
supposed to accomplish and
whether or not we can make it
better.
That I am the Sanchez we one
hundred percent.
That's thank you madam chair and
you know I your comments we
definitely don't want violence
like about.
Vigil such as the person you
mentioned getting released and I
appreciate your conversation and
I think we can work together on
making sure there are some
reasons thank you madam chair.
Thank you any.
I just like to ask
My understanding is that most
states recalibrate
The article tool every year.
How long has it been since New
Mexico has helped retailers and
thank you madam chair I I
believe twenty seventeen to
twenty eighteen was the last.
New Mexico County about five
years.
I'm not sure.
I'm using validation I think
you're using recalibration but I
think you're seeing the same
thing if we do and that the only
validation study that was able
to be done in New Mexico so far
was in Bernalillo county that
was a one published in two
thousand twenty one the standard
is to read validate every three
to five years because you get a
bigger set up data and you and I
had ten thousand now you got
twenty thousand cases right
three years later and then you
look at twenty thousand cases we
will never have enough cases to
do a scientifically valid study
in I can attempt district which
has one judge and and that
criminal activities probably not
even a thousand cases here but
if we do the whole state which
is what we will do and that's
what other states do when we get
enough data from the other
jurisdictions because you have
to have a public safety
assessment done you have to
release the person and you have
to finish their case takes a
while to get enough of those
cases around the state we'll do
a validation study statewide
we're getting close you know we
have implemented in all
districts but we've implemented
recovering two thirds of so of
all the crime ledge crime in New
Mexico now so we're generating a
lot of data we're getting close
to being able to do a validation
study statewide and we will do
it and it it is three five years
on a validation study that's the
stated Kalyan all right about
that yes it is.
The best practice statewide
using all the local data
teenagers
So I mean Madam chair New Mexico
state re with I'm just depends
and I think just like everything
else New Mexico's gonna have to
figure out a way that's going to
make sense for New Mexico and so
that's probably another part of
the discussions that we need to
keep happy about this issue and
this bill and figure out the
best way to to get this
information and the data
validation and make sure that
you know everybody is.
Following best practices and
getting what they need a single
person sitting at this table
madam chair doesn't want the
state to succeed and this way
and to help the judicial system
do its job and do it well right
so that's why we're all sitting
here that's what we're
interested in doing and that's
what we're going to continue to
keep doing by having these
discussions.
Thank you.
I know that we had talked about
how.
I just feel like I've of the
state that I have an
environment.
And so I I don't know.
But like I needed.
To make that we.
Madam chair project
So maybe what we should do is
just role what and if you want
to do something to that if you
don't we'll just come back when
we had the FIR just vote no more
discussion no more just just
that we need making sure that we
each have as much information.
Just a great idea would that be
alright Representative I think
that's great madam chair thank
you yeah if you want to come
back.
Three at the FIR that.
Or just leave a discussion I
think thank you thank you for
the discussion really appreciate
thank you Mr happen to this.
But yes thank you because.
Okay.
