Representative Hernandez.
Representative Human B Hill.
Here.
Representative Jones,
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vila.
He dela Cruz present. We have
corn.
Representative, you're ready? Go
ahead.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
committee members, 3rd time's a
charm. So I'm back with OSI and
um my counsel today will be Mr.
Bruce Thompson. Um, I know
you're used to seeing Mr. Romero
up here with me, but he's
actually having surgery today,
so we wish him a speedy
recovery. So I brought you two
handouts, um, I will start with
the one that has the bar graph
on the front, um, and that is
just really a rundown of the
definitions of all the terms
that we've been talking about.
2 times that we've discussed
this bill prior. So first, what
is underinsured motorist
coverage?
Um, and this is what we've
talked about motors coverage
pays for medical bills, lost
wages, and damages when you are
hit by a driver with no
insurance, liability coverage is
what we already require, um,
that is the minimum liability
coverage of $25,000 per person
and $50,000 per accident and we
are only going to be talking
about in bodily injury. So
that's key to know. And finally,
what is underinsured motors
coverage, which pays for the
medical bills.
lost wages and damages when you
are hit by a driver that doesn't
have enough insurance, for
example, if you're hit by a
driver with liability insurance
who has the minimum $25,000 of
liability, but your medical
bills are $40,000. The
underinsured should pay the
difference. So what is an offset
and offset means that the amount
of underinsured coverage that
you purchase is reduced by the
amount of liability that the
other driver has.
So in that same scenario, that
$40,000 of bodily injury damage
accident, 25,000 of that will be
covered by the other driver, and
one would assume that the
remaining $15,000 in damages is
covered by your underinsured,
but that is not what is
happening today. So if you go
down right below that bar graph,
that last paragraph says when
insurance companies are selling.
2550 and underinsured, they are
in fact selling an illusion. The
underinsured coverage will
always be completely offset by
the other driver's limited
liability policy, so House Bill
97 will end those offsets when a
customer buys 2550 and
underinsured, they get what they
paid for. So that's what we are
trying to accomplish in that
bill, in this bill.
So if you go to your second
handout.
This was some um graphics and
visual aids provided by OSI. I
share with Bruce. So it just
outlines on the first page, the
two changes that we are trying
to make with House Bill 97.
You go to that page with the pie
graph, that gives us a
breakdown.
Um, that we described, um, the,
the second time that we
presented this bill of how the
premium increases will affect
New Mexico drivers. So just to
show, 90% of the insured New
Mexico motorist population.
Already has.
U M U IM, so they will not be
affected by the spill change at
all.
7% have all other coverage, but
they do not have UIM UIM. They
will see that 16% increase and
then 3% of New Mexico drivers,
with just the um minimum amount
of required insurance, we'll see
that largest jump, that 43%.
And granted that is still not
entirely taking into account
that if insurance is mandated,
then the insurance companies
will have to compete for the
best price. So then if we go
over to the 3rd page, which is
changed to scenario 2.
That just gives you a visual
breakdown of what removing the
offsets will mean for drivers.
So essentially it's a different
version of that same scenario of
if um
2 drivers are in a car accident,
if the red car is a fault and
causes $50,000 in damages to the
blue car, that red car carries.
minimum amount of liability
insurance, the blue car carries
$25,000 of underinsured motorist
as it stands right now, those
two policies cancel out and of
the $15,000 in damages, $25,000
is unrecoverable.
Um, the blue car will never see
that money again. So if you go
down to the bottom here,
Um, a scenario too, if the
change in the bill goes through
and we remove those offsets.
Now,
The remaining $25,000 that would
go unrecoverable by removing
those offsets.
That blue car will be made whole
again by removing those offsets,
jumping if you would like to
have something. OK. And if we go
on to the 2nd page of scenario
2, that is just giving another
example of the same sort of
accident with the policy amounts
changed to just further
illustrate.
How uninsured motorist works and
how it will work going forward
by removing offsets, um, and
then the very last page scenario
3 is really just um a scenario.
Um, which just shows uninsured,
which doesn't change at all.
Um, if the drivers are
uninsured.
So
I'm hoping that these um like
being able to see it in print,
being able to have the
definitions in front of you when
we have these discussions, we'll
make it a bit more clear about
what House Bill 97 is aiming to
change.
So once again, Mr. Chair and
committee members, we stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
there had been quite a few
questions regarding that offset
and the ability to really kind
of grasp it. It's not something
that that members generally have
to deal with it certainly, I
don't think anyone here is an
insurance person.
So I do think this is helpful,
so members uh questions related
to the new information.
That
is a little bit uh of a detailed
job in this description of this.
No questions?
Members
Mr. Chair.
Uh, vice chair moved across.
I
Hold on, we have questions, uh,
Representative.
Is from
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative, so
There this still mandates
insurance.
At the moment me, Mister Chair,
Madam Leader, yes.
So every motorist that pays for
insurance.
It is mandated to pay for more
insurance with the uninsured
motorist coverage.
Correct.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Leader,
yes, I don't believe you were in
here in the room yet when we
started the presentation, but if
you go to this handout that
you're provided, the second
page, um, has a pie graph of how
we those premium increases will
actually affect New Mexico
insured drivers.
And Madame Chair Representative,
we're doing this all because we
have 27% uninsured motorists in
New Mexico.
24.9 uh Mr. Chair, Madam Lee,
yes. Where do we stand, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Representative in um
other states that require, we
care at least a minimum of
liability. Where do we stand on
the graph.
Of the percentage of uninsured
motors that we have in the
state.
Oh
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, my understanding is that
there are roughly 23 states
including and Washington DC that
mandate on insured motors
coverage in addition to the
liability coverage.
No, thank you for that, but my
question is,
Across the US.
states that mandate to have
insurance liability minimum of
liability.
It's the law in New Mexico. We
are, it's the law. We're
supposed to have insurance
coverage.
And so how many where do we
stand?
Comparative to other states.
uninsured motorists. Where are
we on the list?
I
thank you, Representative. Go
ahead.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
um,
All but one state actually
requires liability insurance.
That's New Hampshire. I'm not
sure why, uh, but of the
remaining states, New Mexico is
actually #2 as far as having the
highest portion of uninsured
motorists on the road at 24.9 DC
is first. OK, that's the, that's
the answer I was looking for. So
we're 2nd again.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Representative on the list, the
bad list.
And, and we're doing all of
this.
To try to protect.
New Mexicans.
But, but Madam, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Representative, I still
can't support your bill
mandating.
That all these people buy
insurance and and and have this
coverage, even if the pie chart
shows.
It's still
A huge
Um, a problem.
And it's not anybody who's
uninsured now is gonna, it's
gonna increase there.
Insurance, if they decide to buy
it, not break the law.
So this is
I, I, I cannot pass on Matt, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Representative,
another cost increase to the
citizens of New Mexico. We've
done enough damage in this
session. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Orego.
Oh, Mister Char, I was just
seconding um.
Represent Vice President Loss
motion ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um
I, I think the sponsor for the
graphs, I think these are, these
are very helpful, but I still do
have some issues, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, is this
Uh, a bill that's either a
mirror bill or similar to Senate
Bill 3, I think it's 319.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Representative, yes. The
substitute is the Mirabel.
OK, thank you. uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so, um,
Senate Bill 319 was defeated in
the Senate.
For some of the same reasons
that have been vocalized here
about why some of us really
don't like the bill, and I think
Um, Armstrong just gave a really
good summary of some of those
main reasons.
Uh, so I, I, I'm kind of
skeptical that if even if the
bill passes this committee
that'll ever have any success in
the Senate.
exact same reasons.
But, um, Mr. Chairman, I think
Really the solution to having
people not carrying automobile
insurances.
That the motor vehicle division
and the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance
should be talking to each other,
and when they find that someone,
you know, to register a vehicle,
you must show proof of
insurance.
I think some people we know just
dropped that insurance too.
You know, I think they can get
away without it, but
Maybe the ideas that we do a
better job of talking uh between
the agencies and then if someone
does drop insurance coverage.
Um
The registration would be
rescinded.
I think that, that makes sense
to me.
So we do want people having
insurance but um again, I'm
I'm really not of the opinion
that this bill does it the right
way.
I see uh
Making other people pay, and
again, I think there's a
disincentive then if this bill
passes for people to purchase.
Um
Uninsured modus coverage because
they're gonna get covered
anyway.
What the bill sets up, so Mr.
Cha.
appreciate the time. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Hockman Hill. Thank you very
much, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Um, thank you,
Representative. So, I think the
graphs are really helpful. The
question I have for you, um,
I'll go to my reason for why is
what percentage of New Mexico of
New Mexicans purchase UM slash
UIM coverage, but at the minimum
2550.
You know that percentage?
Mr. Chair Representative, I do
not, um,
I know of the total population.
Well, actually, no, I'm sorry,
I, I don't have that number,
because Mr. Chairman
representative to me.
That
The biggest problem, so I can
absolutely 100% understand why,
um, my friends from across the
aisle would, would
Be opposed to a mandate on um.
Purchase of this type of
coverage, but to me, Mr.
Chairman Representative, the
problem again is just these
minimum limits.
Policies, we, it is the offset
to me, the number one issue that
this bill fixes is the offset. I
would be able to live without
the mandate as long as we fix
the offset and I, it's my hope
with this graph, Mr. Chairman
Representative, that
That at least now my colleagues
kind of understand the offset
problem and, you know, perhaps
the question is for us to be
asking is perhaps that in itself
alone would pass the Senate
because to me, the biggest um
Outrage with the system is as it
is right now is that people are
paying for coverage that in most
instances, they do not receive,
and it's a shame, Mr. Chairman
represented that we don't have
that number because I ventured
to say the number is pretty
high.
In New Mexico. I just based on
my anecdotal evidence, you know,
in my everyday law practice, so,
um, I think it would be really
helpful to get that information
and again, for me the most, the
most important thing that I, I,
I believe I would be voting to
change here is to ensure that
New Mexicans who are already
doing the right thing and who
are already paying for
insurance, get the value of the
insurance that they're paying
for, um, to me, I, I think Mr.
Chairman and, and
Representative, um, it, it's
outrageous.
That we even allow this to
occur. So, um, I will be voting
in support for the bill.
For that reason alone, but, um,
you know, perhaps Mr. Chairman
Representative, there are other
ways to kind of
Figure this out so that we can
get that accomplished, um, at
the very least. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for the
handout. Um, I do have a couple
of questions on change number
one, where we're talking about
the premium increase associated
with the additional coverage.
When you
Mm, Mr. Chair and
Representative, when you're
talking about the premium
increase.
I so
What it says here is that 90% of
the population purchases the
uninsured motorists today, so
there's no no price impact on
them.
Mr. Chair and Representatives,
so did you discover from this
research that 100% of the people
who have uninsured motorists
have uninsured motorists on 100%
of their vehicles, and there's
zero impact because I, I am
impacted by this.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
don't have an insured motors on
all of my vehicles. We have it
on the vehicles that we use
daily. How did you come to the
conclusion this would have zero
impact, price impact on myself
and others like me who have a
Jeep or a a street legal vehicle
that they don't use often.
So, Mr. Chair Representative,
another thing that this bill
does is remove the stacking
issue, which can get kind of
complicated to explain, so I
will let um Mr. Thompson answer
that, if I may.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Representative, the, the
stacking issue is um
Sort of key to this.
To this question.
Excuse me.
Um, each as, as Madam
Representative pointed out, each
vehicle um sort of by definition
should have a level of uninsured
motorist coverage on it.
Right.
And the question I, the question
that I have is why, why did the
insurance companies not want
us to pass a mandatory
uh coverage.
Why, why do they not want to
sell their product.
And so I think in this context,
it's important to keep in mind
that the, the insurance
companies are not competing on
an even playing field when they
get to reject all of those facts
stack coverages.
If it were mandatory for each
vehicle, then the insurance
companies would have to compete
and they would have to price
those accordingly, so.
Mr. Turn representative, that
was not my question. My question
was if 90% of the citizens in
the state.
Have uninsured motorists today.
That's, that sounds like it's
in, in conflict with the number
that you're saying of 27%
uninsured. You're saying that
the price impact for those folks
is 0, even though now we can
pick and choose which vehicles
we want uninsured motorists on,
and you're saying that there's
zero price impact. I'm wondering
where you came to that
conclusion, because I am now
going to have to insure, I
think, if I've understood
correctly, 2 additional vehicles
and I hear the secretary.
Sorry, no, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, so that means
that there's not going to be an
increase.
Mr. Chair Representative, that
is correct, uh.
Now that I think about
representative's question again.
I probably could have labeled
this better.
That is correct. That is the
number of New Mexico vehicles
that carry UMUIM today. That is
correct if there is a person
that is in.
that has multiple vehicles, they
could be in different
categories. The total
policyholder impact could be
different. 90% of vehicles today
carry UMUIM and will not see a
price change.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the clarification.
So what you're saying is that
the folks who are carrying the
uninsured motorists vehicle
insurance have more than one
vehicle.
those households, but, but it,
but as far as citizens, 25% are
uninsured. If if 90% of vehicles
are insured. We're doing this
for 10%.
Cause I heard 25% are uninsured.
Mr. Chair Representative, there
are 2 separate issues.
So the table here is only for
the 75.1% of New Mexicans that
currently carry insurance.
In addition to that, there are
24.9% of the population that I
know very little about. Uh,
well, actually, I guess they,
they carry none of these, um,
but of the remaining 75%.
90% of the vehicles
Carry U M U I M.
And 10% do not and uh just
anticipating your next question.
Unfortunately, given the data
that I have, I just do not have.
How many people have 3 vehicles
with UM, 1 without, etc. the,
the data that I was able to
extract from the rate filings
was on a per-ve basis, I could
say that 90% of the vehicles
today of the insured vehicles.
Currently carry U M U I N.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the clarifying. So, so
you're acknowledging that the
price impact for the people who
are insured, this the zero price
impact.
That, that's, that's not
accurate.
Because it's, it's telling part
of the story.
Mr. Chair Representative, so 90%
of insured drivers in New Mexico
already have UMUIM.
So they will not see that
increase, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Chair and Representative
will, according to your bill,
will I now have to insure my
husband's jeep that he uses only
for hunting, he only hunts elk,
he only does bow, and sometimes
he doesn't draw out. He probably
puts less than 500 miles a year
on it, will he have to then
insure that Jeep.
Mr. Terror Representative under
the current language of the
bill, yes, that will be a very
minimal increase. Mr.
Chapresentatives. So the impact
of 0% is inaccurate on this
chart.
Um, Mr. Sharon Representative,
on the other people who, the 7%
purchase all coverage but not
the uninsured motorist. They are
going to see a 16% increase on
their premium. Is that what this
is saying or that 16% of the
population will have to now have
this that don't have it. I'm
trying to understand what this
even means. Mr. Chair
Representative, that's a 16%
increase on their premium before
we take into account the fact
that
auto insurance carriers will
have to compete for pricing.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
and then so the purchase only
minimum courage coverage today.
So that's someone, um, that only
has liability insurance. So
someone with only liability
insurance today.
And I'm assuming that they're
only carrying liability
insurance because they can't
afford more coverage. Those
folks just think about their
insurance premium if it's $400 a
month, they're going to see a
43% increase in their premium.
Is that correct, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Again, Mr. Chair
Representative, that 43% is not
taking into account the fact
that auto insurance carriers
will have to compete for
pricing. Mr. Chair and
Representative, I one of the
questions that I asked.
And that I was hoping to see
today was this premise of
insurance carriers being able to
compete for competing for price
or for customers, therefore
lowering their prices. I've not
seen that happen. I mean, maybe
a couple of bucks or something
like that, but you were gonna
bring a chart from the other
states what I asked for. I
realize you don't have to do
what I ask in the minority, but
I think it's
would be
Nice if the, if the Secretary of
Insurance office at least
brought it, um, to show the
other states where this
happened, where the price of
insurance went down.
So, Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't believe that that is
information that we brought
today because I don't believe
that's information that we have,
but we have seen it happen in
other states, as for the exact
amount.
That is just not something that
we can provide for you today.
Mr. Taran Representative.
I mean, I, I don't, I, I, I
actually agree with um our whip.
the Majority whip, who said that
the offsets is what we're trying
to fix. Um,
I, I truly believe that if folks
who are right now carrying
liability insurance only are
going to see a 43% increase in
their insurance premiums,
they're gonna drop.
insurance and we're gonna have
more uninsured motorists, and
the cost of insurance for those
who are getting the coverage is
going to go up. The one thing
that I asked for, and I realized
you can disregard me.
The one thing that I asked for
was to see the example where the
insurance costs went down, and I
believe the char you brought us
back to a point of order because
they went to something different
that was taxpayer subsidized.
I'm not OK with increased costs
on the taxpayer either. And so
the same bill is here, it
doesn't have amendments,
amendments that we consider to
be friendly, and we didn't
actually, if, if it existed and
the price of insurance went down
in other states that did this.
It would have been nice for at
least, I'm not saying you have
to, you can do what you want.
It's your bill, but we did ask
this of the the the the
insurance office and I'm, I'm
disappointed that there's not an
amendment or the information
that I particularly asked for,
because I think we're going to
see more uninsured motorists,
and the rest of us are going to
see much higher premiums. I, I
think about someone with
liability only.
Just think about what your
insurance costs today. And if
that had a 43% increase, are you
going to drop that insurance?
Or are you going to say,
I mean, there's a reason why you
only have liability today. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
But
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
going to ask
The OSI to answer these
questions, it'd be helpful for
me since you put the chart
together. Um, I'm looking at
Change number one requiring the
purchases of uninsured and
underinsured motorist coverage.
I am confused about this chart.
I need you to explain it to me.
When we say percentage of New
Mexico insured population.
Can you please explain this
chart to me.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
first of all, is representative
Doo pointed out this would more
appropriately be labeled the
percentage of
New Mexico insured vehicles.
Uh, uh, because someone could
own different vehicles in
different categories, but
essentially what this means is
that 90% of the vehicles that
are currently insured in New
Mexico.
We'll see a 0% premium change
from this bill because they
already carry the coverage that
we're going to be mandating.
7% of the vehicles on the road.
Carry things like in addition to
their third party liability
insurance. They carry comp in
case there's a, you know, hail
storm or a break-in, they carry
collision which covers your
vehicle if you're at fault in an
accident. So they're already
paying more premium. So adding
this coverage.
isn't as large of an impact.
Certainly it is, it is a 16%
rate increase, but 7% of the
vehicles will see a 16% rate
increase. And then 3% of the
vehicles on the road today do
not carry uninsured motorist
coverage, they do not carry
comprehensive coverage or
collision coverage. They only
carry what is minimally required
by the state today, and by
requiring them to add this
coverage, they will see a 43%.
Premium increase.
So this is only Mister Chairman,
so I'm clear about this are for
people are for New Mexico
insured vehicles currently. It
does not take in any of the
other population that has no
insurance.
Mr. Chair Representative, that
is correct. OK. And you think,
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm sorry,
sir, what is your name?
Sorry, I forgot that part. My
name is Christian Myers. I'm the
chief actuary at the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance. OK,
Mr. Myers, OK.
So, um,
What
If this is just for those that
are insured, uh, have some.
Coverage in the state and we've
got over, sounds like 24% that
have absolutely 0.
They have absolutely zero
coverage of any kind in the uh
vehicles in the state.
Chair Representative, that is
correct. It is currently 24.9%
is the latest estimate of
vehicles without.
Uh, any sort of insurance.
How do you know that, Mister
Chairman, Mister Chair
Representative, there's a group,
uh, I'm gonna
butcher the acronym, but it's
the Insurance Institute or
something. It's the III and they
do a study on this, uh, every 3
years, um, and essentially they
look at the number of claims the
uninsured motorist claims as a
ratio of the third-party
liability, uh, insurance claims,
um, as a rough estimate.
Well, it's just, it's the, it's
the best available estimate
there is today, um, of the
number of drivers.
And uh well I could say lots of
other interesting things about
it. That's, that's how we know
there's a third party study on
it.
So it's a third party setting
for those that actually live in
New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, that is correct.
How do they, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Mr. Mars, how do they account
for places like Galla where we
have so many Arizona folks that
come in and out of our county
and imagine lots, there's lots
of areas like that in Mexico.
When there's
I mean, how does that work?
Did they
Account for that kind of vehicle
that if they're working in the
county.
I mean, our labor pool, Mr.
Chairman, is far more than just
McKinley County.
Mister Chair, I'm, I'm thinking
I'm not ignoring the question.
No, I understand it's not,
they're not easy questions.
Mr. Chair, I would wanna go, I,
I don't know the answer to that
question, and that's fine.
trying to say you don't know if
you don't know. Yeah, I don't
know. OK. I wanna also ask the
superintendent of insurance is
um UM UIA rates reviewed by your
office, and do you approve them?
Pardon me, could you repeat
that? I didn't you approve.
The rates OSI approves the
rates. OK. So,
Is there a reason why this has
never been, I mean, I've, I've
been here 25 years and your
office is never brought anything
like this to us before. I'm just
curious
with you um and UIM if you
review the rates.
Um
Has there ever been a issue
raised by your office to any of
these.
Companies, apologies, I've only
been here a year and a half. I
can't speak for my predecessors,
but you can't for what you've
done in a year and a half, yeah,
and that's why we're pardon me,
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
why we're bringing this forward.
OK.
Um, you know, Mr. Chairman.
I gotta tell you, I
I'm gonna ask for a point of
order. I'd like to have these
presenters go through you the
appropriate way.
I'd like to have them express a
little more um.
Respect for the legislative
body, it seems like they're
getting upset we're asking
questions, so I'm gonna ask him
to do that.
Cause that's a good way to kill
a bill that you really want.
So I'm gonna stop now, Mister
Chairman, but I'm gonna ask if
they go through you and and have
appropriate decorum in this
committee.
Thank you.
Thank you once again, ranking
member Brown.
Thank you for the 2nd time, Mr.
Chairman. I, um,
Really still trying to
understand what the impacts will
be if this bill passes and
signed into law. So, Mr.
Chairman, I
Uh, we know we have some people
who own vehicles and drive those
vehicles who have no insurance
whatsoever. So under this bill,
Mr. Chairman, what would happen
if an uninsured motorist has a
collision with another uninsured
motorist. What would this bill
do in those situations? Sure.
Mr. Chairman Representative were
this bill to be chapters signed
by the governor, nothing would
happen if two uninsured
motorists have a collision.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative.
How does that play out?
2 uninsured motorists. What,
what happens under the status
quo.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative.
Under the status quo, how does
it play out when two uninsured
motorists have a collision, is
that what you're asking? OK. Um,
essentially nothing when there's
bodily injury, those two
uninsured motorists are
responsible for their own
damages and their own injuries.
Um, usually,
A lot of times actually in this
state Medicaid and Medicare ends
up picking up that bill, um
unless they have private health
insurance.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, so, um,
Can we force people
And enforced.
Having people have UN and UIM
coverage.
German
Mr. Chairman Representative, we,
um, I believe we can because we
already forced and forced people
to carry liability insurance.
Mr. Chairman represent, but we,
we know that there are people
who simply don't do it. They
just don't comply.
And uh I, I, I think
That, that's a problem that we
need to solve. I think that's
where the real problem lies.
Um, I want to ask also, and
thanks again, Mr. Chairman for
the 2nd turn here.
Um, I've heard it said several
times that the insurance
companies will compete for
pricing and.
My experience, Mr. Chairman and
Representative people unless
your insurance goes up a whole
lot. They're not shopping for
another company. They tend to
stay with the insurer that they
have.
And so, um,
I don't know about if this would
actually be the way this would
turn out.
So again, if it changes a lot,
they might, might look for
another company.
Um
Mr. Chairman, I, I'll just close
by saying that I, I did ask the
sponsor, um, after the last bill
presentation, if we could um
remove the offset, and I think
that would help.
Uh, we saw each other, I think,
on the floor in the hallway, and
I, I said, if the bill did
anything, and I agree with the
majority whip. If we just didn't
allow for the offset to occur
where you kind of lose the value
of what you've been paying for
as an insured.
That that would help.
And apparently here 90% of the
vehicles on the road today, if
you're paying for insurance for
your vehicles, um, they couldn't
pull that little switcheroo and
uh basically not give you the
value of what you paid for. So I
think that would be one way to,
to take the bill forward. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you. I don't see any other
members with questions. I have
some questions.
So just so that I understand,
Representative.
If I am currently carrying the
bare minimum amount of insurance
which does not include uninsured
motorists.
What percentage of an increase
of I see on average.
Mr. Chairman, I will said Mr.
Chairman Representative. So,
If you have liability insurance
only.
According to the chart provided
by the OSI. You could see an
increase in your monthly premium
up to 43%, but we do not believe
it will well.
We don't believe it will be that
full amount because of the
Market competition, the
insurance companies will have to
undertake.
Thank you.
And, oh, sorry, uh, I just
wanted to add just really
quickly I know representative uh
Brown didn't ask a question per
se, but um I am willing to
continue conversations should
this bill come out of committee
about removing, you've alarmed
me a little bit, representative
Mr. Tay, when you said removing
the offset because I don't want
to remove that portion from the
bill, but we were in fact saying
the same thing about making sure
that offsets by insurance
companies that they are no
longer able to do that, but I
am.
willing to have conversations
going forward about removing the
mandate.
For um uninsured. Thank you so.
Let's talk about the offset,
because you have to understand
representative members that
The viewing public may be
members in the audience, they
don't know what you're talking
about when you say offset. I
want to know in plain English
what you're talking about.
Yes, so,
In the plainest English. I wish
I had like little cars on the
table that I could like act this
out with. Um, Mr. Chair, if you
have, let's say that you were
driving down the road and you do
have uninsured underinsured
motorist at 2550, um, which is,
I believe, the least amount that
you can purchase in the state of
New Mexico, and you are under
the, uh, you are driving down
the road on the assumption that
you're underinsured motorist is
fully covered at 2.
550, and you get into an
accident, somebody hits you.
You're not at fault.
The person who hits you.
As the minimum coverage required
by the state, the liability
coverage, and that is also 2550.
Let me stop you for a second. So
2 vehicles collide. They both
have identical amount of
insurance for the 25 and the 50
you as the driver who is not at
fault, you have 2550 of
uninsured underinsured. The
driver who hit you, who is at
fault, has 2550, which is a
liability, which is the minimum
that we require in the state of
New Mexic.
account.
Now, however, in that accident,
we'll keep the numbers really
simple, um.
There was $35,000 of damages,
let's say.
One would assume.
That
35 minus 25 leads you leaves
$10,000 remaining.
You would assume, as the carrier
of underinsured that that is
what you're underinsured covers
is the difference between the
amount of damage and the amount
of insurance.
Under current New Mexico law.
That is not really the case.
Your $25,000 of underinsured
motorists that you pay for every
single month.
is allowed to be offset.
By the liability insurance that
the person who hit you.
carries.
They cancel each other out.
Currently under New Mexico law,
that remaining 10,000, you would
never be made whole for that.
You're underinsured motorist
because it matches the liability
insurance of the other driver.
equals 0.
You're 25 that you pay for.
is subtracted out from the 25
that the other driver has, that
leaves you with $10,000 in
damages that no one covers.
That is one of the things that
this bill fixes.
It would change it so that
The 25,000 of the other drivers
is taken out of your $35,000 in
damages, and that remaining
$10,000 is actually covered by
the uninsured motorist coverage
that you've bought and that
you've been paying for this
entire time. Thank you, that was
very helpful. We sometimes need
the comic book version.
So you were describing
Representative of your expert
was describing stacking.
And then it was cut off. I was
intrigued by that notion, and
you go a little further and
describe for the committee and
the viewing public, what you
were talking about.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and I,
I don't know exactly where,
where I stopped, but stacking is
a concept that was created by
the Supreme Court to sort of
address this problem where
consumers were paying multiple
premiums for each car that they
had, but the, but the insurance
companies were only providing
one level of premium.
And so let's say you have 4 cars
and each of them has 25,000.
Of coverage, uh, you think has
25,000 of coverage, but you sign
something that says you don't
get to stack and so therefore,
the insurance company says you
only have $25,000 and then if
the other driver who hits you
also has 25,000 of coverage. You
now have zero coverage because
that liability coverage from the
other driver completely offsets
your only
your only car worth of coverage.
So stacking is, is the idea that
Would you pay for multiple
premiums for each vehicle, you
should be able to stack each of
those coverages on top of each
other. So there's no duplicate
recovery. It's not like you're
recovering the same damages, but
if you're in a catastrophic
crash where you have $100,000 of
damages. That's really what
we're talking about. We're not
talking about the sea of very
small crashes we're talking
about people who are
catastrophically injured. So
that, that's the general
concept of stacking. I hope that
addresses your question.
Thank you. That is helpful.
Now, just to be clear.
Because it was related to
Representative Doo asking about
her husband's hunting gene. I'm
in a similar situation. I have a
classic vehicle.
And I don't think I drive 20
miles a year.
Maybe 2.
Maybe
You would have to have insurance
for every single vehicle,
despite the fact
That you drag them at a very
minimal amount. Is that correct?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And under
this bill, that is correct. Let
me say something about that
though. Um,
Again, when you're trying to
think of why insurance companies
don't want you to have this
coverage.
You have to think about, put
yourself in the mind of the
insurance company and how they
rate, how they make money.
They can look at you and, and me
and everyone in this room and
look at them individually and
say, what is my risk of having
to pay out on this person,
right? Uh, and then they can,
they can adjust that risk and,
and choose the premium. With an
uninsured driver, you cannot
decide that I'm going to have a
greater risk of being hit by an
uninsured driver. All right, so
the, the, the whole, the whole,
um.
way of making money breaks down
because they can't predict. So
that's why they don't want to
sell it. The one thing that they
can do.
Is they can look at the number
of miles you drive.
Because the number of miles you
drive on the road is directly
connected to your risk of being
hit by an uninsured driver. So
in your case, if you're only
driving a particular car or a
Jeep, 200 miles a year, you and,
and the superintendent could
certainly enact this through a
rule. It doesn't have to be
through the statute, but you
tell the insurance company, I
only drive this car 200 miles
per per year, and we all do that
when we apply for insurance. We
say this car, I drive.
15000 miles a year. This car
20,000 whatever.
But if you only drive it 200
miles per year.
That should be the, that's the
one thing that they can say
determines your risk. So that
should calculate your premium.
So a 200 mile per year car
should have a very small
premium.
I hope that answers the
question. Thank you. You alluded
to it earlier. It's come up
before.
But I'm intrigued by the idea
that it seems to me that this
would
Theoretically be a boon to the
insurance companies, this bill,
and it would be a boon while you
would have.
Some additional liability that
you might have to pay for.
At the same time you'd have a
whole bunch of new customers.
Because you'd be increasing on.
You know, trucks like mine, uh,
that are classical it would be a
boom, but yet when we had the
in favor for an opposition for
the insurance were in opposition
to this bill. I'd like you to
take a moment and describe why
would there be opposition or
something that would give him so
much new business.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
that, that really gets to the
heart of the problem here is
that um what I said about the
insurance companies, the way
that they make money is that
they are able to
Calculate your risk.
And so they can, they make a lot
of money on liability coverage
and they want to sell you the
most liability coverage possible
because that's their product.
But with uninsured motorist
coverage because they can't
assess your risk. Everyone has
the same risk of getting hit by
an uninsured driver. So because
they can't assess your risk,
their models don't work.
And so they, they, they, this is
the reason why the insurance
company wants to sell that
lowest.
Level of coverage because and
especially with the offset that
the reason for that is because
if most drivers have already
have at least minimum coverage.
They know they're not going to
have to pay anything for the
vast majority of claims.
And so that is the way that they
make money is on these lowest
levels of insurance.
But once you get to the to the
50,000 level or the 75,000 level
or higher. Once you get to those
levels, then they can't count on
the, the, the tortfeasor
liability coverage, paying for
the whole claim, then they
actually have to absorb those
claim costs and so that's the
reason why insurance companies
only want to sell.
Pardon me, Mr. Chair, only want
to sell that lowest level of
coverage, and I can tell you I,
I did a quick search this, this
issue, this is the reason why
there is decades of law in the
Supreme Court and dozens of
court of appeals and and Supreme
Court rulings.
Because the insurance companies
continue to seek ways to just
sell this lowest amount of
coverage, uh, instead of
providing the full amount of
coverage. So I hope that helps
address the question. Thank you,
uh, I'm not going back to the
committee. We're gonna take a
vote. We're gonna vote this bill
up or down.
But I do want to mention a 4
committee members benefit and
for the audience and in the
future, if I feel that there is
any disrespect of any member on
this dais that I will roll the
bully the bill immediately and
You may never see the light of
day again.
Want to give everybody a heads
up and warning that happens, I
will not tolerate any disrespect
to any member here.
So
We need a motion on this bill.
Do we have a motion? What is the
will of this committee?
Mister.
We have a motion by
representative and vice chair
Lata. We have a second.
We, we have a second by
representative Romero, please
take the role.
Mr. Chairman, uh, I'd make a
substitute motion to table.
We have a motion to the table.
Take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Porrego.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Dell.
Representative Hernandez.
No.
Representative Hopkin.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
No.
her alone.
Narrative
De la Cruz, Notre Dame.
Back on the bill. We have a
motion at 2. Take the roll,
please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Gorigo.
Representative Brown.
Uh, no.
Representative Dell.
No.
Representative Fernandez, yes.
Representative Hopkin B Hill?
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative of Romero.
Yes.
Later.
Yes. Hi Cruz.
Yes
Representative Lestrom to
explain.
I um
Very hesitant in voting for
this.
My hope is, is that when it gets
to the next phase of the process
that there will be an amendment.
That only focuses, um,
But we really, really care
about.
Uh, and that is to make sure
that we, this isn't mandated.
I, I don't like that either. I
think it will be.
tough on everybody if that
happens. And what we've always,
we've been talking about is the
offset anyway.
That's what we're really trying
to get to, then let's do that.
Um, and I'm hoping that we'll
see a change when it comes to
the next.
To the next phase. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Lustrom and Representative, you
have a bill that's moving on,
but I do agree that there needs
to be some, some adjustments.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you committee members, and
I will be speaking with you
about amendments going forward.
Thank you very much.
HB 588 public peace, health and
safety and welfare.
And uh I believe that if you
looked for the bill because it
was a dummy bell, you wouldn't
find any information, but you
would find information that
relates on SB 24.
Representative Garrett, are you
ready to explain.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Do you
have the committee substitute?
We do have it. Everybody have
that?
Let's get the copies to
everybody.
I understand it's in the binder
members, please confirm.
I
No, no, it's not Senate bill
something. I'm just saying that
this was a dummy bill, but it
was the identical bill as as
Senate Bill 24. We did not
include Mr. Chair, I, I was told
to refer it as a generic bill
instead of a dummy bill, which I
call it a dummy. I apologize.
It's a generic bill.
Does it come in a black and
white wrapper because it's
generic
OK, we, uh,
We need motion on the doctor
or move for discussion on the
committee substitute.
Any opposition? Let's move
forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee.
Um, great to see you in, in a
nicer room.
Um, which I know that many of
you know exactly what I'm
talking about.
So, House Bill 588, um,
Which is public peace, health,
safety and welfare.
Uh, it's nearly identical to a
bill and House Bill 21 that
passed this committee, passed
the House floor, passed two
committees in the Senate, and
then time ran out, so it didn't
go to the Senate floor.
Um, and let me introduce my two
expert witnesses before I go on.
I have secretary Sarita Nair for
the Department of Workforce
Solutions, and Matthews, the
Western states Regional Council
of Carpenters.
So, as you know, there's a
tremendous effort to expand
career and technical education
and to recognize the value and
support pre-apprenticeship and
apprenticeship opportunities
toward that goal.
So this bill which when it was
uh Senate Bill 24 is apprentice
and training program
contributions.
The bill amends, the public
works apprentice and training
Act.
To remove the exclusion of
street highway bridge Road
utility and maintenance
contracts that's Type A
contractors from public work
projects that require employers.
To make contributions to
apprentice and training programs
or have their own program.
Uh, the effect of the bill is
that all public works
construction contractors would
participate in one of 3
apprenticeship systems. So they
would either contribute to
established apprentice, uh,
The apprentice and training fund
or POT for each hour of labor
provided, and that's how in the
Department of Workforce
Solutions at 60 cents per hour.
Or they would pay a contribution
to a registered apprenticeship
program if they're affiliated
with one.
Or the contractor would have her
start its own registered
apprenticeship program, and
therefore they would not pay any
contribution because they'd have
their own program, and there's
no cost to do uh
To license with the state your
apprenticeship program.
And um
I would just like to add that I
think this spill it when I, in
2021 there were 41
apprenticeship programs, now
there's 58. So I think it shows
that our state is really
supporting.
The type of apprenticeship
programs that really move young
people and older people also
into these um excellent careers.
Current statistics on registered
New Mexico programs are, as I
said, are 58, uh, this year we
have 2500, more than 2500
apprentices, earning these
wages, earning while they learn,
um, at the end of each year, the
Peot fund is split among the
registered apprenticeship
programs who have qualifying
apprentices, and it's used that
fun that ot fund is used for
education.
Training instructors and related
expenses, the PO program
provides costs for
apprenticeship programs.
1.9 million in 2024.
Uh, the distribution at that
time was uh 1700 per
apprenticeship.
Uh, and with that, I will just
ask my two expert witnesses if
they want to briefly add
anything.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Matthew Suttis. I'm with the
Western States Carers Carers's
Local 1319. We are very happy to
see this legislation being
introduced to the House as this
bill, um,
The bill on Essentials for New
Mexico's economic growth and
workforce development. It's to
build our skilled and trained
workforce opportunities for all
the job training and to create
the environment to grow our
skills and trained workforce,
and to create pipelines from our
state, especially in rural in
Mexico to the jobs for all New
Mexicans that way jobs stay
local, the money stays in our
communities and helps build our
community wealth.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee just happy to answer
any questions about how the
apprenticeship programs work or
in demand occupations. Thank
you.
Mr. Tat that we stand for
questions.
Are you done Representative
presenting?
Yes, Mr. Thank you. Is there
anyone in the audience in favor
of this bill. If you are and you
wish to speak, line up behind
the presenters and we will have
a mic for you to speak into.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor.
Uh, we once again think
profusely our sponsor for
bringing up this bill. Um, I
know that this is something that
we have been working on with
her.
Years now, um, and we encourage
her to continue bringing this
up, regardless of what happens.
For us, uh,
I, uh, representing the New
Mexico Federation of Labor, the
AFL-CIO, uh, I get to stand here
and say that this is certainly
not a union bill.
This is an apprenticeship bill.
This is a workforce training
bill, and this is something that
we should all be invested in.
Um, I think we've heard multiple
times in this committee and
others that we need to be
building a workforce, uh, like
this, and that, you know,
alternative paths to success for
young people, and that is what
we're trying to do here. Um,
ultimately, I think that this is
aside from a training bill, this
is a fairness, you know.
every, I, we have other uh trade
uh contractors that pay into
this fund. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
A reminder, it's one minute for
everyone.
Um
Crew's honorable members of the
House Transportation Committee,
um, Mark Carlin is with the
Western States Carpenters and
carpenters Local 1319. Uh, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today in support of House Bill
588. This bill is about, it's
about ensuring that New Mexico's
public works projects don't just
build roads, bridges and
infrastructure, but also build
our workforce, strengthen our
economy and keep our our
transportation dollars right
here.
This is a win-win for our state.
First, it keeps our tax dollars
in New Mexico by investing in
local workers rather than
outsourcing jobs.
Second, it ensures the roads,
bridges, and infrastructure
projects rely on are built by
well-skilled, well-trained
professionals, workers who live
here spend their wages here and
reinvest in our community.
in our communities.
At the end of the day it's about
jobs, economic development, and
making sure New Mexico taxpayers
are investing in workers.
I urge you to support a
household 588 to ensure that
when we build our roads and
bridges, we're also building
opportunities. Thank you. Do we
have anybody online in favor.
Stephanie Myers.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Stephanie Maez and I'm a
registered lobbyist. This
morning representing the New
Mexico building and construction
Trades Council, where an
alliance of 15 craft unions with
15,000 members statewide.
This morning I'm also
representing the International
Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers, local 60.
This bill is important for
supporting the expansion of
apprenticeship programs in New
Mexico. We know that
apprenticeship programs, as
you've heard, are proven tool
that helps us build a highly
skilled workforce. It increases
access to quality, well-paying
jobs, and these programs help
employers close the skills gap
through their ability to recruit
and retain more workers who have
practical experience via these
critical apprenticeship
programs. We also want to thank
Representative Garrett for
bringing this bill forward and
being a.
champion for apprenticeship
programs both non-union and
union, and this morning we're
asking your support and a yes
vote um of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition to this bill in the
audience, if you wish to speak,
please line up.
behind the presenters.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, my name is Franklin
Garcia, representing the asphalt
pavement Association of New
Mexico. We have several members
in the audience I can speak to
the training and the workforce
development programs for the
industry.
The industry is not opposed to
apprentice programs or workforce
development, road contractors
and subcontractors all currently
participate in DOT and federal
approved.
Training programs to ensure that
materials and highway projects
meet national standards for
transport transportation,
construction.
Removing the current exemption
does not provide any benefit to
the construction industry and
the industry would be paying
into a system that main focus
for vertical construction would
not benefit road construction
projects, as you mentioned, the
beer, the bill does mirror
Senate Bill 24 and the analysis
on that bill does recognize that
there could be a conflict with
the current.
which talks about building
trades as recognized by the US
Department of Labor
Apprenticeship and training for.
In a Mexico Apprentice council
that inconsistent.
Inconsistency could create legal
ambiguities and implementation
challenges.
So based on that, we stand in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mike
Sandoval registered lobbyist for
the contractors of New Mexico we
have about 15 or 20 members here
and
These the chair rather than have
them all get up and speak for a
minute.
succinctly summarize our
choosing 3 or 4 minutes and save
the committee time.
Um, just real quickly, Mr.
Chairman, we appreciate the
sponsor bringing this bill
forward allowing additional
time.
OK.
Um, go through it real quick
then costs, Mr. Chairman, I
don't think, uh, what they
recognized in cost is
recognizing two key pieces
they've they've done that MDOT
and maintenance, but not
utilities, utilities is a huge
cost as well as FEMA pricing any
nowadays disasters are hugely
happening at least every year.
All the FEMA money that comes
in, that was bridge and culverts
subject to this, um, we already
have an existing training
program that we construction in
in place for 30 years at
directly caters to the high.
A system whereas their program,
um, consistently goes towards
building trades.
Um
Many maintenance projects are
not included in this, um, and
they are on fixed price
agreements, which means that
there is no ability to raise us.
For that
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jane Jernigan with
the New Mexico utility
contractors Association. We do
everything from the curb down,
water treatment plants, roads
and highway projects, and mostly
work on public works projects.
Many public works contractors
such as utility contracts.
Contractors do not have access
or have apprenticeship programs
in place, and therefore would be
forced to pay into a fund that
they have.
And not receive a benefit from.
About 60 cents an hour sent to
an apprenticeship program fund
will take away funds from
in-house training and other
training.
The business puts on. And we do
have contractors that have
in-house apprenticeship.
programs that do not receive.
from this apprenticeship fund.
During last year's session,
House Bill 5 was chaptered,
appropriating 50 million from
the general fund to the newly
created workforce development
and apprenticeship trust fund.
This fund distributes 2.5
million to existing public works
apprenticeship and training fund
for 2025 and 2026. Thank you and
1.5 million.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members. My name is Justin Reese
and I represented SDR
Consulting.
I believe a lot of these costs
that are gonna add to the rising
cost of our construction
projects.
that this is
Along with that, representing
the contractors that are already
unfixed maintenance project
costs price agreements, this is
what's going to be an additional
cost to add to what they're
already paying.
Morning, Chairman. Thank you
committee. My name is Jim Garcia
and I'm the executive director
of the Associated Contractors of
Mexico, representing the heavy
highway industry.
I will tell you that AC&M has
sponsors 22 training programs
called TTCP. These are unique
training programs for our
industry.
In our industry, we do not have
a apprenticeship to journeyman
program in place. So we use this
instead the TTC programs. We've
been exempt for 30 years because
of that program. Program is uh
sponsored or um uh.
Agreed to with Federal Highway
in Mexico Department of
Transportation Associated
contractors of New Mexico. We
are in opposition to this bill
and this will be an increase in
road projects. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
I appreciate you.
Hearing our words, I'm Fisher
San John Hammer with Fisher
Sangra.
I think what this bill does not
take into account is the impact
of the small businesses.
Uh, there's a lot of very
specialized businesses in the
industry, such as striping, uh,
guardrail, uh, there's a lot of
things like
This bill will not provide any
benefit to not.
Any erect.
benefit other than payment.
Thank you for
Mr. Chair, thank you, members of
the committee. I'm Dan Lewis,
asphalt Pavement Association in
Mexico. HB 5 was passed, was
signed by the governor in 2024.
HB 5 created an apprentice fund
for the purpose with this
purpose with distribute
distributions going into the
fund and the amount of 2.5
million.
In 24 and 25, 1.5 million each
year after highway contracts
supported this bill because
these are the type of funding
mechanisms that make sense for
this program.
Therefore, there's no need to
pass this bill and assess fees
to.
Uh, from it, uh, so we
respectfully ask to no one.
HP 588
Mr. Chair Brian Legan with the
Associated.
of New Mexico.
We've had an existing technician
training certification program
in place for 30 years.
So meets the demands and
requirements of federal highway.
New Mexico DOT we interact with
thousands of students.
He
To support the industry.
Ask
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online in opposition?
No, Mister Chairman.
Thank you. Questions of the
committee, uh, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, um,
I'm looking at the FIR and it's,
it's basically says that New
Mexico DOT reported 1.8 million
labor hours in FY 21 and 1.6
million labor hours in FY 22.
If the cost had been passed on
directly at a rate of 60 cents
per hour, the spill would result
in an additional annual cost
ranging from 983,000 to 1.1
million.
So can you all talk a little bit
about what this means in terms
of additional costs.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. The point
is, if, if you have an
apprenticeship program, you do
not pay that 60 cents, and the
FIR ignored that fact. So, uh,
company with an apprenticeship
program doesn't pay into PWOT.
OK, so let me also ask, and I'm
looking at the bill itself
looking on page 2.
Just so I'm clear, page 2, line
3.
I'm gonna read this out loud and
just so I understand it, public
works construction projects.
shall not be constructed unless
an employer agrees to make
contributions.
been approved apprentice and
training program in New Mexico.
Can we do that, Mr. Chairman? I
mean, is that legal to do that?
The hold up construction
projects. I'm going to ask uh
Secretary Naier to answer that.
OK, thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lindstrom. So that is current
law, uh, it's just they're,
they're taking out that
exemption, uh,
OK, so I'm just curious about
that. Is it under practice now,
is this happening now.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, yes, I mean, we
don't, um, prevent or file
injunctions or anything to stop
construction programs from being
um commenced, but we do have
compliance mechanisms when you
do audits and so forth to make
sure that all public works
projects are in compliance.
And and Representative that
projects that cost more than
$60,000. So, so my, my, but my
question is, is do we
And would we want to um
Stop or delay these construction
projects.
Because you're not contributing
to an apprenticeship program.
I mean that that that doesn't
make sense to me.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lindstrom,
uh, again, we don't try to stop
them in advance, we become aware
of them and then follow up on
compliance uh this was language
that certainly I inherited, it's
been around, I think since the
beginning of the bill, but, uh,
you know, we, we would never try
to join a program, uh, a
construction project, we always
seek compliance in the other
avenues available to us.
Yeah, I, I, I, so I'm wondering
if it's not particularly
implementable, and the fact that
we've got billions of dollars in
backlog now, Mister Chairman and
Capitol outlay projects.
Would we even began to try to
blow these kind of things down
and that's all I have, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
ranking member Brown.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. Um,
Representative Garrett.
Secretariat
Your expert
Um, I've looked at the um fiscal
impact report as well, and Mr.
Chairman, what I'm seeing is um
The escalation of operating
costs that would occur if this
bill passes, and particularly
concerned about our local
governments, uh, when they do
projects, uh, I
You know, I, I just don't want
to pile more on them. I really
don't even for um these training
programs and Mr. Chair, I've
heard it said that programs
already exist.
Uh, so we can continue doing
that and have been doing it for
decades, apparently, and Mr.
Chairman, I, I also want to
focus on page 2 of the bill
starting uh representative line
3.
And just for the benefit of uh
everyone here give you the
wording of the current uh
statute.
It says public works
construction projects, and then
this is language that is being
proposed to be stricken, except
for street, highway.
Bridge road, utility, or
maintenance contracts with
employers who elect not to
participate in training, shall
not be constructed. So we do
have this exemption.
And it's for roads, highways,
bridges, and so forth.
And Mr. Chairman, as a member of
this committee, I think I'm
looking out for the interests of
transportation here in New
Mexico and um all this would do
if the bill passes is is make
things more expensive.
Um
It's not just the local
governments that would suffer
from that, that we're looking at
a million, 2 million, and so
forth in some of the.
Upcoming fiscal years, um,
your cost would be maybe in the
case of $0.4 million. That's $4
million in road projects.
So I, I do have a concern uh
with the bill.
Um, all it really does is make
everything more expensive and
when the diversion of money, Mr.
Chairman Representative.
does not go to work.
But uh
The exemption out of.
Um
out of reality, you're ending up
Basically assessing a fee on
these contractors and their
operation, their employees don't
really benefit. It goes
somewhere else. So the nexus to
me is missing, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you.
returns representative, I just
want to add something.
Again,
The fruit doesn't take into
consideration, for example, a
journeyman equipment operator.
And I have an example makes
$34.06 per hour bids.
The, the initial apprentice
makes half of that. So you're
cutting down your labor costs
significantly. I also want to
note that there's about 15
trades that have apprenticeships
that contribute to building
roads, cement masons, laborers,
you know, the people who, you
know, the car drivers, the flag
holders, iron workers,
carpenters, masons, equipment
operators, truck drivers, pipe
players, asphalt paver
operators, concrete finishers,
surveyors, electricians.
Oh
Road construction benefits from
all these apprenticeship
programs. Again,
If a company has an
apprenticeship, they do not pay
the 60 cents, the price of the
roads does not go up. I think
it's really important to
recognize that.
Also, the biggest cost overrun
comes according to the
Association for General
Contractors and Bloomberg News
is a shortage of skilled labor
in this state, we have, I think,
about 25% of our skilled labor
doing all these projects is set
to retire. And so this really
pushes us forward training the
skilled workforce to build our
roads over the next decades.
Before I go to leader Armstrong,
I just want to prepare uh
secretary sir. I will have some
questions that may require your
input, secretary. Heads up.
Armstrong
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, uh, Representative.
Um, how many, uh,
How long does it take to start
implement and, and put together
a registered apprenticeship
program.
Uh, Mr. Chair, minority leader
Armstrong. It, it really
depends, but we've tried to um
expedite that process, so
certainly within 6 months if you
have an existing curriculum, we
can get that through the uh
department's approval process
through the state Apprenticeship
Council and then on to final
approval.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and,
and ma'am. um, I, I know of one
that took 2 years.
to get approved.
And, and, and that's an issue
for me when people are trying to
start up and and do these
things, um, also the question of
You know, getting the approval
part some companies have
apprenticeship programs inside
of their companies that are
training workforce, um, to do
what they need to do and, and
paying for their education
through CNM and other um other
things. Uh, so it, it is a
problem. The other portion of
this.
Is the, you know, most of the
apprenticeship.
Programs are, are more like
vertical, and that's why one of
the reasons that these were
exempt back in the day. That's
why they stood up in, in, uh,
support of the 50 million for
the apprenticeship programs, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
you know how I feel about
apprenticeship programs and,
and, and career technical
vocational anything, uh, I'm all
for it, but I'm, I'm, I get
concerned when we're just trying
to build to have more money uh
from an
that's not, in my opinion, is
not going to receive the benefit
of this. Everyone who pays into
this receives a benefit and can
do that right now.
Um, as has been said already.
The, um, we all know what the
Cape Otway projects look like.
We all know how hard we fight,
Mr. Chairman, for transportation
dollars here, uh, in this room
and on this committee and, and
to, to, um,
tie this to the transportation
part of it. I, I have, um, I
have issue with. I, um,
I, I feel like they already do,
they already have the programs
in place. They do a phenomenal
job, um, with a
I think it's a 57% workforce
participation rate that we
already that we have in New
Mexico. I don't think that this
is an avenue, um,
Billing them to pay into a
program that they get no benefit
from where we have an avenue
where we're growing these
apprenticeship programs. I heard
the number it's, it's phenomenal
from 21.
To 25.
There, it's grown a lot. Um, I
just
Have I take issue with a company
or an entity that can't um
benefit from this program that
has an in-house way of training
that is held to a very high
standard through DOT and others,
um.
Man mandating that they pay this
this fee, so, um, without that,
Mr. Chairman Representative, I,
I cannot support your bill, but
I appreciate, um,
Working with you always.
Thank you, Secretary sir if you
would come up.
Uh, representative, I have a
question. So what is the genesis
of this particular bill, was
there a situation where
contractors to Representative
Garret, you know, we can't, we
can't staff our, our, our ranks,
and we need these particular
area of of roads and bridges and
whatever is exempted up to now.
Did, did that occur? What was
the genesis?
Mr. Cara the Genesis is the
importance of building our
skilled workforce in this state.
Uh, we have tremendous
Uh
need for skilled workers, as I
said, that's one of the biggest
cost overruns isn't this bill is
the fact that we lack skilled
people, um, actually I learned
that weather in New Mexico
drives cost overruns, um.
It's believed that one of the
now the federal government
through the uh the bipartisan
infrastructure law supports
additional funding for
pre-apprenticeships and
apprenticeships, so that's a
change in the law that supports
highway companies for having
apprenticeship programs, so
there's multiple factors. There
wasn't like some triggering
event. It's just increasing the
support for workforce
development, starting
in high school, which doesn't
directly get affected by the
spill, but Bill's career
pathways. So it's, it's really
the impetus to support trained,
skilled workers.
So
there was not a request because
it happens, there are requests,
uh, for a certain type of
employee as an example when when
Facebook was under construction
in Los Luas, there was a
tremendous need for low voltage
texts, and so some of our
institutions like CNM stepped
up, created classes to try to
create that type of employees,
so.
There was not a specific request
related to this
in
which now we would exempt those
categories? Was there a request
or there just wasn't or this
kind of preemptive sort of.
Mr Chair when they built
Facebook, the IBEW and the
building trades were
actually uh factor in that in
Los Alamos, it's been a key
factor to build skilled trades
again, in the apprenticeship
programs, a 3rd or non-unit, I
think 2/3 are union, um,
So it's really the process of
safety.
Also, um,
These programs again, the
highway programs that use the
courses at ACNM.
Um, all of those qualify
in-house programs, all qualify
as apprenticeship pathway.
So it's
It's registering and really
training those skills and
knowing what you got.
Thank you, Secretary. Please
come on up.
Go ahead and have a seat,
please.
And, and
I would like to know.
Uh, and this could be to the
presenters as well, and, and to
the secretary, why was there an
initial exemption that exempted.
Street, highway bridge Road,
utility, or maintenance
construction work can someone
speak to that?
Mr. Chairman of the committee,
it's my understanding that when
the statute was passed, that was
the, the, the, the part of the
how it got passed was to make
that exemption then, um, we
thought the exemption has long
past its its date and we be able
to offer opportunities and ship
and the scope of work is going
to be helpful to build our slow
train workforce.
Sector
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and um,
It may not have been a factor,
but it could have been explained
at the time that although the
employees would be trained
through a
Um,
apprenticeship program that they
would still need to be TTCP
certified in order to work on a
federalized project, and that's
a training that's provided, um,
at the Department of
Transportation in partnership
with uh ACNM.
Thank you Mr. Terry I believe
that program, the federal
government does channel money to
people that go through that
program, is it 80 cents, the
training.
Um
Mr. Chair,
I, I don't believe that federal
funding is supporting the
certification, but I can, I can
double check.
Thank you. So this is for, for
Secretary Secretary.
You, you have training in your
shop.
And we heard some of the
contractors talking about their
own training, and you tell us a
little bit about that because I
assume you work with these
contractors all the time, so can
you just address that, please?
Sure, Mr. Chair, and um,
We do certainly so the
Department of Transportation on
its own for its heavy um
construction or heavy
maintenance program, we do train
our employees internally and in
certain positions where we see
either hard to feel, um, uh, or
data that supports that we need
to do training because they're
hard to fill positions
historically we have high
turnover or there is an
institution that's providing
that training, we're in the
process of working with
institutions to develop it on
our own utilizing our subject
matter.
experts. Um, outside of the
Department of Transportation
with the contracting community,
I think the question is, uh, my
question is your question, and
that is, do the contractors have
a need that needs to be filled
in some way, shape or form by
way of established training. I
think that's critical and, and
one of the comments that was
made earlier that I'm also
curious to learn more about is
the extent to which this program
would curtail some out of state
worker hire.
hearing, which I don't believe
is happening at high rates, are
we, we work predominantly with
New Mexico contractors, and it's
our understanding that they work
predominantly with New Mexico
workers and, and so, um, our
understanding based on our, our
discussions with the contracting
community is that.
Um, they do not feel as though
there's a
A notable gap that would be
filled with a registered
apprenticeship program, but
instead with the pipeline
development that they've put in
place through their training
programs.
Thank you, uh, Vice Chair Lana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward. Um,
I, I'm trying to grasp.
this, and of course you know I,
I support.
Uh, apprenticeships, I
understand the need for skilled
labor.
Uh, the, the question that I do
have though is, Madam Chair, Mr.
Taran and Representative is, are
there any
positions within, within these
projects.
That don't necessarily require a
partner uh of an apprenticeship
as I remember, I had considered
this before, Mr. Cha and
representative, and I heard it
during the public comments that
there are some physicians who,
that don't have apprenticeships.
And that people will be paying
into this, even though they
won't receive a benefit from it.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
can you tell me what positions
these might be that don't have
any apprenticeship.
Requirements whatsoever and yet
the contractors would be paying
into this.
Mr. Chairman and
Representatives, thank you for
the question.
As I said,
The labors, uh, there's union
training, there's non-union
training for even the most basic
positions.
And so
You would get the benefit if you
started apprenticeship program.
can't emphasize that enough. You
can start a program.
It's free
I think under the current uh
Department of Workforce
Solutions, some of the problems
that representative
Armstrong identified have um.
Moved a lot faster, and I think
in the environment that we're
in, where apprenticeships are
recognized as an important
post-secondary training program.
That's, that's why we've seen
the growth just in 4 years from
41 programs to 58 programs.
Uh, thank you for that, uh,
representative, uh, Mr. Chair.
So, uh, one of the first things
that comes into mind is those.
good hardworking people that
stand on this fund with the
stopping.
You know, go signs.
And the, the, uh, the drivers
that uh are the are the pilot
drivers.
And so Mr. Chair Representative,
there are apprenticeship
programs for for those
individuals. Yes, Mr. Chairman
and Representative of the labor
unions actually have extensive
programs to train those people.
And, and as you know, this, this
committee is addressed.
Uh, workforce, uh deaths caused
by um
Driverss not seeing those signs
sometime. It, it's in a very
important area that's vital.
Thank you, Representative Mr.
Chair, I totally agree, and I
was, I was, uh, thank them as
many as much as I can when I
drive by and I thank them for
what they're doing. Uh, those
projects, but I, I, I still
can't grasp and, and I, uh,
please forgive me because I
can't understand how
is that
A program for someone who does
that.
Exactly just that.
I understand that, you know, it
may be an introductory type of
job, and you know, you start
doing that so you can learn the
system, you can learn what's
going on, but, um,
Being able to fill the
contractor, Mr. Chair and
Representative would have to pay
it to this system.
Uh,
Even though the position itself
may not necessarily have.
Uh, uh, I dedicated
apprenticeship to her.
Mr. Turner representative, the
contractor doesn't pay into the
program, if they have an
apprenticeship program of their
own. And again, all these road
projects rely on variety of
Uh, types of workers, I think I
mentioned there's about 15
programs that a contractor is
hiring people that have gone
through apprenticeship programs.
Thank you, Representative Mr.
Cherry. Another thing that I
wanted to ask was, so
I
There currently is an apprentice
in training program fund,
correct?
Mr. Chair, Vice Chair a lot of,
yes, there are several funds, so
there is the public works
apprenticeship and Training
Fund, and then now as of last
year, there is the workforce
development and training fund, I
think or workforce development
and apprenticeship training fund
that uh is sort of a big fund
that then feeds into both the
public works apprenticeship and
training fund and uh there's not
a unique fund, but the
apprenticeship Assistance Act
also gives funding through our
department to apprenticeship
programs.
And uh that's the other fun,
that's the other program that's
bad with the uh
I think it's W.
ATF or WTAF, but yeah.
Thank you for that. I, I, I
appreciate that answer being
decided. So these are these
funds in any way funded by the
general fund and and through
HB2.
Mr. Chair, Vice Chair a lotta, I
believe that the initial
appropriation to see the
workforce training and
apprenticeship development fund
was general fund money, I
believe it was, it was
originally $50 million but I
believe it was actually funded
at 30 million.
And then, um, the apprenticeship
assistances Act receives that
strange money that comes over
from the workers' compensation
fund to us every year in the
budget. I think this year it's
$750,000 of um.
Workers' comp money plus
$250,000 of uh general fund
money is what was in the budget
as it crossed over.
Thank, thank you for that
information, Mr. Chair, and
yeah, I think this is uh very
important to
To, to note that that there is
uh some kind of money coming
into these programs.
Uh, and so that said, Madam, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
When, when determining how much.
The contractors we're gonna put
into this.
You know, how, how was that
number determined uh
representative Mr. Chair.
Again, it would be 60 cents per
labor hour.
If they did not have their own
apprenticeship program or we're
affiliated with an existing
program.
Thank you for that,
Representative, Mr. Chair. So
what was, how, how did that 60
cents was, where did that number
come, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice
Chairman, that was the created
in the initial statute. We, we
would have to go back to find
out what the meaning of that
will be, but my understanding
was passed in the early 90s and
that number has stood since
then.
OK. Thank you for that. Thank
you for that answer. So I'm
just, I'm trying to learn as
much as I can and absorb as much
as I can. So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I, I appreciate
this bill. I appreciate what the
intent is and um
Um
That's all I have. Thank you,
Mr. Trump. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Rome.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this forward so I have
a question about any of the, the
The thing you keep repeating
representative is that you have
to have an apprenticeship in
order to pay for the fund. Could
you explain that a little bit.
Uh, yes, uh, Mr. Chair, thank
you for the question,
Representative.
If the bill passes, then there's
3 ways that you respond to it.
You either contribute to 60
cents per hour.
Uh, to the fund, the Peot fund
that's housed in the Department
of Workforce Solutions.
Or you pay a contribution to a
registered apprenticeship
program, if you don't have your
own.
Or
If a contractor has or starts
its own registered
apprenticeship program, they
would not pay any pewatt.
Um, contribution because their
funding their own.
OK. That, that settles it a
little bit. Um, Mr. Secretary,
you said something that, that,
that I noted and I was hoping if
you could elaborate on you
mentioned um
Or did I take it down. Oh, that
the benefit and if and if I miss
hearing this, please correct me,
but um would be in pipeline
development if there's a
benefit. I was wondering if you
could explain that a little bit.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
I believe really I guess I could
summarize it this way, right, as
in having been in Secretary
Naer's position before, I think
the responsibility is to really
look at the employers and ask
them fundamentally, what is it?
that we can help you with to
establish a pipeline to develop
a workforce and to essentially
create a career pathway that
allows them to earn more over
time. Those are like the
fundamental questions, right?
And so when we see industry in a
discussion pushing back against
the strategy for doing these
things.
Then it means that they likely
have established the pipeline
they've established the training
mechanisms and they've
established the career growth
plan for the workers. Now, the
accountability measure that we
place on them us at DOT is when
we provide them with contracting
opportunities that they have the
workforce to meet our needs, and
that's important to us. So we're
holding them accountable every
time they say we can handle
these projects.
we can handle.
What you're putting out on a
wedding schedule. And so our
position at the Department of
Transportation has fundamentally
been OK contracting community if
you oppose the resources that
are being provided by this
legislation, then you're telling
us that you can meet the demand
that the DOT is going to place
on this community. And so when
we hear the contractors push
back, then putting my workforce
hat on, I'm thinking they don't
have a workforce challenge that
they're trying.
to salt, at least not using this
mechanism.
And what they've done over time
is established pipeline
development on their own through
the associated contractors in
New Mexico, the asphalt
Association of New Mexico, where
they trained their entry level
workers from Flagger training,
traffic control, flag or
supervision, etc. all the way
onto heavy construction workers.
and so we partner with them in
that regard to ensure that our
workers are certified to be on
federalized and to be safe on
state projects.
And that they have the workforce
necessary to answer the call
when we put millions of dollars
in contracts out.
And so Mr. Chairman and in the
example you gave Mr. Secretary
of of these contractors that may
have their own internal um
apprenticeship programs, would
they have to pay in in this
system representative.
Mr.
Chairman and representative if
they didn't, uh, convert to an
apprenticeship program with
their existing training, yes,
they would have to pay.
And, and I appreciate that
answer. I mean, I guess part of
what I'm thinking is in, in, um,
Mr. Chairman and Representative
is um
I should ask this question, Mr.
Secretary. There's nothing in
these um workers working for a
contractor that would keep them
there other than
Themselve perhaps seeing
opportunity to increase their,
their, um,
position within the company, is
that right?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
absolutely they're, they're, um,
I mean, the state of New Mexico
provides, I mean, we're spending
billions of dollars a year on
roadway construction and so
they're incentivized to stay
with the construction company
because they're getting paid a
good wage because there's
consistent work available to
them, um, and they do see the
possibility of moving up within
the, the career pipeline to make
more money over time.
And so there's certainly
incentivized by, by that.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and,
and representative, I mean, part
of what I'm thinking about is,
is like a residency program is
where you're providing
Training for a prospective
teacher, but nothing's there to
keep them necessarily in a
public school. They could go off
and they could teach in a
private school, they could go
off and teach in a charter
school, um.
I don't know, um,
representative, this is
something that's kind of
analogous where we're kind of,
you keep talking about
increasing the the workforce.
Um,
I don't know if you would be
able to speak about that.
Mr. Charon and representative,
that is a good parallel. Um, I
think the advantage of a
registered apprenticeship is
that wherever you go in the
state, there's consistency.
Um, I think many of the private
companies, and they have
Options to these training, uh,
federally recognized programs,
they recognized programs.
When you have an established
apprenticeship with clear
guidelines.
Uh, it's kind of a guarantee
that goes beyond where you
worked in a previous company.
It's, it's consistency.
Just as in a teacher residency,
you know, the standards, you
know, the courses.
There's a uniform establishment.
Uh, and especially with the
safety issue.
Um
You get a lot of training
safety, you know, it's there.
Um, you have your journeyman
license that shows that you've
endured a certain number of
years, a certain number of
training programs, it improves,
I believe, the state skilled
workforce.
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative, that's partially
what I see in this bill too is
building the capacity for the
state for these sorts of jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh.
I'll be brief um I went through
a uh liger training program.
labor
Um
private
You know
They labor company that trade me
for that.
Um, Mr. Chairman, um, I have
Multiple road projects.
In my district on Highway 64.
Um
One thing I really appreciated
was
Uh, where in front of the uh
Sadak Khan chapter house.
Uh, project
Uh, the, uh, private.
Uh, a contractor did a really
good job in
ensuring that we hired a lot of
local.
Local folks, you know, I, I, I,
and I'm not seeing that
happening with this other
contractor that's working on the
bridges.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and, uh, but,
um, I never, um,
have seen, you know, this type
of apprenticeship training
program which I'm really excited
that you're bringing forward,
um.
Representative, Mr. Chairman,
um, my, my question is, Mr.
Chairman,
Representative, um.
To
With this legislation,
Would we have to go to
Albuquerque for training?
So
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
no.
Um, registered apprenticeships.
Um, require, I think 1000 hours.
If there's requirements for how
many hours of training you get
under a journeyman person. Some
training is online.
Um
So it's a mixture, uh, northern
New Mexico College started a
program in El Rito in northern
New Mexico. There's programs
throughout the state.
I just wanted to add Mr.
Chairman and Representative that
without the use of initial
programs on public works
projects over $60,000 that the,
the contractors mandated by law
to pay the full journey level
scale. So this presents the
opportunity for a cost savings
to the state while increased
opportunity on the job for
training and create local jobs
in the community, um, with
respect to our program, we do
have a program here in the state
at a center in Albuquerque, but
we provide the opportunity for
ours to come to us and we
provided them with the room, and
they stipend to.
State in that um other programs
throughout the state have their
programs directly in their
communities and those are
programs.
savings
while uh create opportunity.
Bicycles and what this
legislation will do is it will
increase safety for cyclists at
intersections and improve
traffic flows for cyclists and
drivers alike.
I, uh, Senate Bill 73 is
patterned after stimulant laws
in Idaho, Colorado, and 9 other
states plus the District of
Columbia.
So let me tell you about the two
specific items that it will do,
uh, Senate Bill 73 allows
cyclists to treat stop signs as
yield signs if there's no
conflicting pedestrian bicycle
or vehicle traffic with right of
way. The cyclist may proceed.
Excuse me, at a safe speed
without making a complete stop.
The second item is the bill also
allows cyclists to treat red
traffic stops and stop signs
after making a complete stop if
there's no conflicting
pedestrian by a bicycle.
Uh, vehicle traffic with right
of way, the cyclists may proceed
to the, to the intersection
without waiting for a green
light.
Just those two items, madam, Mr.
Chair, members of the
commission, uh, I'm sorry, of
members of the members of the
committee, uh, we are coming
before you today to allow New
Mexico to join the growing wave
of states that have adopted this
law, keeping our cyclists safe
with that, we will, I would like
to introduce my, um,
Experts and my uh senators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, that
was a great introduction. I just
want to add that in the states
that have adopted this, um, they
have seen bike fatalities go
down. So this is a bike safety
bill, um, and I, I think, uh, as
a bicyclist at me.
I see it as very intuitive, but
if you don't ride bikes, it may
feel a little counterintuitive,
but this definitely works
because you get out of the way
of cars much quicker and that
leads to bicycle safety.
Thank you. We are, we stand for
questions. I'd like to introduce
our experts, um, uh, uh.
Lynn, what's your last name?
Pickard but
uh, judge, uh, Lynn Pickard is a
former judge in the court of
appeals, and we have Eric Eric
Beiderman, um,
representing an alliance of like
advocacy organizations that
include Veloruss, Spike Santa
Fe, Bike ABQ.
Thank you. So do we have anybody
in the audience in favor of this
bill?
Raise your hand.
If you have, if we, do we have
anybody online that's in favor
of this bill?
Brian Roche
Did we lose him?
I do.
OK, let's go ahead and move on.
Is there anybody in the audience
in opposition to this bill.
Anyone online in opposition to
the bill.
Jim Wilcox.
Jim, are you there?
Yes, I am. May I speak now?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
representatives. My name is Jim
Wilcox, and I'm speaking today
from Las Cruces, a rise in
support of SB 73 because it will
increase safety for cyclists. I
currently serve on the Mesa
Valley MPO on the bicycle
pedestrian advisory Committee as
a cycling representative.
However, today I speak for
myself. SP 73 allows cyclists to
move out of intersections, which
are known to be the most
dangerous spot on the highway.
When they are
allowed to to move out. They're
only allowed to move out of
intersections when it's safe to
do so. What happens with
cyclists is the car pulls up to
the left side of the cyclist,
waiting for uh for the light or
for a stop sign and the motorist
turns to the right. They look to
the left for cars, they turn to
the right, and they run over the
cyclists, injuring and sometimes
killing them. Most dangerous
place is the intersection. This
allows cyclists when it's
appropriate and when it's safe
to get out of that dangerous
intersection.
And, and to literally avoid
waiting for an accident to
happen. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody else online?
Did we lose the first person.
Or in Pope
Hello, uh, thank you, Chairman
and committee members for
allowing me to speak with you
this morning. My name is Oren
Pope, and I'm a graduate student
studying social work at New
Mexico Highlands University, as
both a lifelong resident in
Albuquerque and a resident who's
often peddling the city on two
wheels, I urge your support for
SB 73, as stated in the stated
in the FIR, the law reduces
accidents. Well, I never let it
shake my love for the bicycle. I
was hit by a car about a decade
ago at an intersection, just
like this. Bike lanes are often
sandwiched.
between a car lane and a
sidewalk, drivers making a
right-hand turn, cut straight
through the sandwich,
determining who's turning is
more than just looking for a
blinker and determining who sees
you and has decided to yield is
an impossibility. This law
allows cyclists to avoid the
risk that comes with competing
for space against accelerating
lines of cars. This legislation
will allow cyclists to safely
clear areas where traffic
changes directions, and where
traffic is inevitably less
predictable. Thank you for your
time and I respectfully request
your support for SB.
Bran Branton Roche, we're gonna
try to get back to Breton Rouge.
OK, let's go ahead and move on.
Uh, any questions from the
committee Representative Lestro.
Mr. Chairman, when you're ready,
I'd look for do pass.
that
OK, we have to watch my
represent blood from a second by
representing now. Take the roll,
please.
Representative Armstrong.
And before I go.
Yes.
Sam Brown. Yes, and I'd like to
explain that.
Representative.
Yes.
represented Fernandez.
Representative Hoffman.
Yes.
Jones.
Yes.
Sanderstrom.
He's not from, yes.
about it.
Yes,
yes, 90 ranking revolutionary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator,
I.
I think this is kind of how the
world works already.
A lot of the bike bicycles that
I've seen, um, I just pointed
out the need for some education
at this bill makes it through
the process because you know the
drivers of motor vehicles, um,
to get license they have to take
an exam and know the rules of
the road, but bicycle riders do
not have an equivalent type
experience, so we have to make
sure everybody understands why.
care.
you were adjourned for today.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee.
Thank you.
