Representative Santa Cortez.
Representative Dixon,
Representative Garcia.
Pre
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Small, vice chair
Serana.
Jerry McQueen.
We have corum.
I did go back to for a test? Oh,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Present and if you could keep it
under the S's instead of the C's
at the top.
Perfect.
OK, we'll work on that.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
OK. Um, a little bit of
housekeeping first, uh, once
again, we have, uh.
Uh musical chairs, uh, I think
that's probably more common
earlier in the
session with members presenting
bills in other committees, uh,
so there'll be some, some back
and forth, some in and out.
Um
Uh, I also had a conversation
with the, the, uh
ranking member
Uh, looking at the bills that
are coming to this committee.
Uh, if we're we're doing 2 or 3
bills uh per meeting and we only
meet twice a week, uh, we will
not get through our bills.
Uh, so we are going to end up
meeting on Saturdays, but we
will not meet this Saturday.
Give you a little time off, uh,
but do you plan on meeting the,
the following Saturday.
OK, and I do appreciate um.
You know, in the past, we've
taken a lot of time on bills and
um there's some willingness to
be a little more concise. I
appreciate that. Um, we've had
some marathon, uh, meetings on
past Saturdays. So if we do, you
know, 4 or 5 bills on a
Saturday.
Uh, there's no reason, you know,
we can't do that in 2 hours
rather than 5 hours.
Um, so it's still, I still
appreciate that, but we will end
up meeting on Saturdays just so
we can.
Um, get through the the bills
that are coming to the
committee, uh, typically we're,
we're getting, you know, first
committee assignments, but we do
have some 2 committee
assignments coming to.
Um, any questions or comments or
announcements from the
committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, HAFC
will be meeting all three
Saturdays coming up, so we'll
just coordinate the times and
make sure it works. Thank you.
OK. And um I appreciate that we
we typically try me in the
morning. Do you know if you're
mean the mornings or all day or
uh we'll work through it and
I'll work through that soon with
you. OK, great. Thank you very
much.
Anyone else?
OK, great.
Well, let's get started, um, our
first bill this morning is House
Bill 109, Extreme weather
resilience fund.
with Vorte whenever you're
ready.
Chair, members of the committee,
members of the audience, um, I'm
here to present House Bill 109,
which is a crucial measure to
protect the health and
well-being of New Mexicans in
the face of escalating climate
related disasters. Over the past
5 decades or state his
experienced a 2.7 Â°F rise in
average temperatures, um, an
alarming increase in extreme
wildfire risk days and
worsening.
d r ough t conditions
These climate changes have led
to rising emergency room visits
for heat-related illnesses,
declining air quality due to
wildfire.
Smoke and growing threats to our
water supply. This bill, the
extreme weather resilience fund
established by 109 HB 109 will
provide much needed financial
resources to local governments
and tribal communities to plan,
prepare for, and respond to
these escalating threats. The
fund will support climate
adaptation projects such as heat
mitigation strategies, wildlife
smoke protections, emergency
response infrastructure and
flood preparedness over.
At least 50% of the funding will
be directed to small
communities, ensuring that the
most vulnerable vulnerable
populations, children, the
elderly, low income folks
received, received that support.
The grants are capped at $1
million each and will help
leverage additional funding that
might exist at the federal level
or even philanthropic dollars so
that we can make maximum impact
in protecting these communities.
I'd like to introduce my two
experts.
I have with me next to me Shelly
Manlove, and on the zoom, uh,
Nathaniel Matthews Trigg, and
I'd like to just.
With your permission, Mr. Chair,
asked him to speak for just a
little bit, 30 seconds or so.
OK, I'm, uh, that, that you just
find the zoom has been a
challenge, so we'll, we'll see
what we do.
Right
Thank you so much,
Representative Ortiz, chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Shelley Man Les. I am a
public health professional. I am
the executive director of
Healthy Climate New Mexico, was
a member of the public health
infrastructure Task Force and
currently serve, as I said, with
healthy climate New Mexico.
Mr. Chatter of Nathaniel is able
to speak or please. Yeah. Yeah,
are you able to hear me? Yes.
Great. Yes, um, Chair and
honorable members of the
committee, uh, really, thank you
for the privilege to be here to
speak to you today. New Mexico's
communities are experiencing
unprecedented and growing
challenges from extreme weather
events. And these events are
affecting our health, the health
of our families, neighbors, and
communities throughout New
Mexico. Our state, as was stated
before, has been seeing
intensifying extreme weather
from frequent and severe
wildfires driven by intense
winds and extreme heat to dust.
storms, Arctic cold fronts,
devastating flood events like we
recently saw in Roswell. These
aren't isolated incidents. They
represent a new reality that
demands immediate action. And um
the proposed extreme weather
resilience fund HB 109 offers
practical solutions to address
gaps in funding, and this fund
could be used for a variety of
critical interventions, decided
by the communities themselves.
And I wanted to provide a few
examples of what the fund could
be used for.
So for extreme heat, it could be
used for installing effective
cooling and air purification
systems in schools, senior
centers, or public buildings to
allow these community spaces to
act as safe shelters during
extreme weather events.
Could be used to purchase window
air conditioners for high-risk
individuals such as the elderly,
children and people with certain
chronic diseases. It could be
used to install shade
structures, misting
infrastructure, hydration
stations for farm workers,
childcare centers, schools, and
parks and public spaces.
For wildfires, smoke and dust,
it could be used for
distributing high-quality masks,
you know, for high-risk
individuals, for our first
responders and for volunteers.
Uh, it could be used for
materials to support home
reentry and inspection. Um, you
know, after a wildfire
evacuation, people returned to
their homes. They need to be
safe when they go back to these
homes, um, it could pay for
people to clear brush around the
homes of elderly and disabled
residents to reduce the risk of
fire damage to their homes.
Um, it could also be used for
critical planning and community
education. So it could really
help municipalities develop
comprehensive wildfire
evacuation plans. We know
there's growing attention to
this, uh, it could be used for a
community education around the
dangers of extreme heat. It
could be for community-wide
exercises to allow res uh
members to, to test their skills
and learn from first responders,
um, HB 109, the Extreme Weather
Resilience Fund really
represents more than just an
emergency.
fine. It's really an investment
in our community's future,
safety and, and our health. And
failure to establish this fund
will result in growing extreme
weather-related healthcare
service impacts, demand and
costs, which we know impacts
everyone. So I urge you to
support HP 109 to protect our
communities, our way of life,
and the health and safety of all
the Mexicans. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Chair, with that, I stand
for questions.
OK, um, just to show of hands,
people in the audience uh here
in support of the bill.
OK, that's great. Is there
anyone here in opposition to the
bill?
OK, so we're going to do a brief
uh public comment. Let's take
Um
5 people and no more than 2
minutes each and we'll, we'll
see online.
We'll go online, we'll ask for.
Comments online too.
Um
Do we have a
In the mic, we're in the mic.
OK, please uh introduce yourself
and you have 2 minutes. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Monico
Otero and I represent New Mexico
Voices for children.
As you might know, children are
one of the most vulnerable
populations when it comes to
public health emergencies
related to extreme weather and
other climate impacts.
These events can lead to
worsening health outcomes for
young New Mexicans, and can also
pose a threat.
To economic instability for
families living through the
worst of these events.
This fund is important because
it will help to provide the
community's most in need, with
the funding necessary to respond
to these increasing extreme
weather events and climate
impacts.
As an advocate for children and
families in New Mexico, New
Mexico voices for children
stands in support of House Bill
109. Thank you.
Buenos dias, good morning, um,
Mr. Chair, members of committee.
My name is Valeria Alarcon. I am
the executive director of the
New Mexico Alliance of Health
Councils representing all 33
counties and currently 10 tribal
health councils. This bill is
incredibly critical to the
intersection between climate and
health for our most vulnerable
populations, if we think about
the recent fires that took place
this year, um, it takes all of
us to coordinate, to come
together to mitigate in those
moments.
Of crises, and I think this bill
covers all all aspects of
preparedness and on-site
mitigation. And so the alliance
of the New Mexico Alliance of
Health Council stands in support
of this bill. Thank you so much.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Arturo Castillo and I'm
the director of equity and
culture at Conservation Roads
New Mexico. It is well known
that the impact of the climate
crisis is felt the most by
people of color, people in rural
communities, and low-income
families. More specifically,
people experiencing
homelessness, represent all of
those categories are the first
to experience the disastrous
weather caused by the climate
crisis. While we work to address
climate change in a more
holistic manner. We cannot
sacrifice public health or the
lives of these human beings.
Additionally, this funding would
Drive funding directly to
communities to address the
current impacts of climate
change, making our communities
more resilient for the future
and having a positive return on
investment.
Conservation voters strongly
supports the resilience fund in
order to create community-driven
plans for saving these lives.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino.
And I'm the registered lobbyist
for the public ofau
and Achema.
Um
So much of our worldview and
Belief system
And cultural practices at these
two pueblos is connected to the
land and the environment.
A
Many of these cultural practices
occur outdoors and sometimes
during
the peak summer season. We
noticed.
OK
in weather.
Um
It was hot a couple years ago.
And it's getting even hotter.
Uh, so the concern is, uh, the
impact of extreme weather
conditions on land.
An air and human life.
And we are in support of this
legislation, uh, primarily for
the real concern about the
extreme weather, but also any
mitigation efforts that would
address this. So for those
reasons, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, we ask
for your support on this bill.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
Representatives. My name is
Lavin Johnson. I represent the
Center for Biological Diversity.
Uh, New Mexico is the 2nd
fastest warming state in the
country. It's warm 3.3 degrees
in the last 50 years and is
projected to warm 5 to 7 more
degrees in the next 50 years.
We are in the middle of a mega
drought that has hardened our
soil and dried our forests, and
every day New Mexicans are
threatened by heat, fires, and
floods on an increasing basis.
For these reasons, the state has
to enable our communities to
increase their resilience for
the years to come.
The center strongly supports
this bill, but we do want to add
that we believe Indian nations,
tribes and Pueblos should be
considered political
subdivisions just as counties,
cities and townships are.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
um.
If anyone is online and would
like to speak in sport, please
raise your hand.
OK. Take the 1st 2.
Giovanna, are you there?
Yes, I am Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Giovanna Rossi, and I'm
here as a mother, and as the uh
New Mexico uh organizer for moms
Clean Air Force, which is an
organization of over 1.5 million
parents and caregivers concerned
about the impacts of air
pollution and climate change on
children's health. I'm speaking
today on behalf of the almost
20,000 moms Clean Air Force
members in New Mexico.
Parents across the state support
House Bill 109, the Extreme
Weather Resilience Fund, because
it will provide critical
resources to help our
communities prepare for and
respond to the increasing
impacts of extreme weather.
Families across the state are
experiencing firsthand the
devastating effects of climate
change, longer and more intense
heat waves, worsening droughts,
wildfires, and unpredictable
storms. These extreme weather
events disproportionately affect
the health.
Of pregnant people, young
children and communities already
burdened by pollution and
economic hardship. How Bill 109
is an essential step toward
ensuring that our state has the
tools and funding necessary to
invest in community-based
resilience projects protect
public health and safeguard the
well-being of future
generations. We urge you to pass
House Bill 109 to help New
Mexico families adapt to a
changing climate and build a
safer, healthier future for
families. Thank you so much.
New Mexico in her faith her
light, I think.
Yes, hello. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and honorable members of the
committee. My name is Claire
Sims, and I'm here as a faith
leader representing New Mexico
Interfaith Power and Light. We
work with faith communities all
over New Mexico around climate,
education and advocacy from a
moral ethical and spiritual
perspective. From this
standpoint, we strongly support
HB 109. There is no clear moral
imperative than taking
responsibility for our
community's health and safety
under any circumstance, and this
is especially true.
knowing we ourselves are setting
in motion these extreme weather
events through climate change.
Taking the science of climate
change and the adverse public
health impacts it spells for our
communities, especially our most
vulnerable members should not be
a matter of convenience, but a
matter of conscience. So we ask
you to please take the proactive
measure of protecting our
communities through the extreme
weather resilience fund and
please to do so for the
well-being of New Mexicans, not
only today, but for decades to
come.
Thank you.
OK, and I just want to check one
more time. Is there anyone in
the room uh who would like to
speak in opposition.
OK, is there, is there anyone
online who would like to speak
in opposition. I know we have
some hands up for people who
want to speak in support but
we're gonna do opposition.
No, OK, see that.
OK, great. Um, represent Hotez,
do you have anything to add
before we go to the committee?
No, I don't thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, first up we have
Representative Small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Representative Ortez, and
acknowledging your community has
been hit by uh some of these
traumatic uh weather events.
My really my main question is
asking if you're open to, as we
go through the legislative
process, uh, meeting with
Department of Homeland Security,
uh, and a few other agencies. I
noticed, so first question, I, I
don't see that they responded to
the fiscal impact.
That they didn't contribute to
the fiscal impact report.
Which is not your
responsibility, it's theirs.
To ask in the form of a
question.
Right? They didn't respond I
don't believe they responded.
OK, so would you be open for us
facilitating a conversation with
Homeland Security
representative absolutely. I, I
think we need to engage all the
agencies because it will take
all of us to help these
communities. Great. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Ortez. The main
reason I ask about Homeland
Security is that they've been
Certainly responsible for
immediate response, but Mister
Chair Representative in
conversations they're also the
entity that's one of the most
direct sort of pass-throughs for
blue sky grants that seemingly
could leverage the funding, the
state fund federal funding that
could leverage the state funding
you're setting out here. They're
one of the main entities that's
gonna help communities plan, Mr.
Chair,
um, we have to make sure they're
still in that role.
Um, and, uh, yeah, uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative, I guess
also as we go through this, um,
are sort of the thought would be
that the administration, uh, the
administering entities along
with community stakeholders
would sort of build out some of
the meat for uh the process by
which grants are, are awarded.
You're not diving too deep into
it legislatively, which is
probably appropriate.
Setting a cap
Giving a starting amount of
funding.
Um
Mr. Chair represent, but does
that sound right to you that we
would give explicit
responsibility for entities to
sort of build those parameters.
Uh, Mr. Tay and Representative
Small, I, I believe that the
Department of Health would be
engaged in developing those
parameters, but I can imagine
that we wouldn't be engaging
other agencies, especially those
agencies that have funding, Mr.
Chair Representative small like
uh Homeland Security, which I, I
believe really only focuses on
sort of what happens after,
though there is some funding for
some prevention. This is, this
bill is really focused on
preventative efforts that local
governments, uh, and tribal
communities.
can make to, you know, to
respond and mitigate those
events that might occur, um.
Yeah, that's great, Mr. Chair,
that sounds, that sounds good.
I, um, and Department of Health,
you know, they have offices in
many different communities.
Extension service and others are
entities in communities, and so
how we
I'm, I'm excited to sort of help
and obviously there will need to
be resources at the end of the
day for this to go.
So it's both a sort of process
and, you know, programmatic
funding and appreciate, Mr.
Chair, your willingness and
openness to
Really working to get the best
partners and make sure that this
can work. Because Mr. Chair,
representative.
Your idea, I imagine, would be
that sort of July 2nd, 2025.
There are grant applications and
we're in a place that maybe
money starts flowing out the
door to help folks during uh
during the summer season.
Mr. Chair Represented a small,
uh, that would be incredible, I
think it does, it's a process,
takes some time to establish the
rules and make sure that the
program is, is up and going, but
I, I would like to see uh the
process started as quickly as
possible, um, get these local
governments, the other political
subdivisions ready to apply for
that funding, which again is
pretty flexible and allows for
different um different kinds of
things that they can do, whether
it's planning or developing.
emergency, Mr. Chair, I'm not
sure what's going on with the
mic. I hope you can still hear
me.
sker cutting in and out, I will
be very focused on the mic.
The, the money is flexible and
it's enough to do a lot of
really good things, whether it's
planning, preparation.
Improving a facility that
already exists, building a new
facility, leveraging all these
funds, and I think the sooner
that we can do it, the better.
Our monsoon seasons have been.
challenging, sometimes coming in
May or April or October, not the
usual, at least in Taos July, we
can count on that. It's just not
happening anymore. And with high
wind events, um, we're, we're
seeing real danger. We're really
scared Mr. Chair Representative
Ortiz, thank you. I'm excited to
support this and to work
collaboratively to make sure
that the funding is the most
efficient, uh, and in
operational as soon as possible.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Ortiz.
Um
When I first read through this,
I, I really couldn't tell.
purpose
Um
And then when I
Listen to your description
initially and then when I heard
your experts speak. I'm even
Maybe a little more concerned.
That it, it, it, you use the
word flexible.
I'm not sure the use of these
funds from the standpoint of us
spending these funds is even
really identifiable.
Um, it appears that virtually
anything.
That a community or or a
political subdivision might
request.
is fair game.
Um, and Mr. Chair, the, the
reason that concerns me, I've
spent the last two years.
On appropriations,
And I started looking at bills
differently.
From the standpoint of how we
spend
Money and then how we
Hold those who are spending
money accountable.
I, I don't see that that this is
gonna be, this is almost
And please don't take this the
wrong way, but from, from my
standpoint, this, this would be
like if I had a
Slush funded my own.
Bank account that was
For
Anything
Um
And I'm really concerned about
that.
I'm also concerned that
The, the, the department, it
appears, would be the health
department would be making these
decisions.
And uh Mr. Chair, some of the
things that you brought up that
could be used for.
Uh,
flood flood prevention and
things like that that I liked
those things.
But when I heard the other
description.
I, I'm not, I don't, I wouldn't
like the idea of in advance and
cause this, that's what we're
talking about is preparedness in
advance.
All of the things that could be
purchased.
Under the guise of health
prevention. I even heard
You're an expert, um, Mr. Chair,
say that
The, it could be used for
putting an air conditioning
system in a school gym.
For
Uh, well, that's, we already
have money for schools. We have
money for infrastructure. We
have
We start to do this and now
we're, we're, we're duplicating
efforts, we're and we're
avoiding the people who are
really vetting.
That
I'm really concerned if I were,
if I heard this bill and in
appropriations.
This would be a very, very long
conversation.
I was hoping.
Mr. Chair
And representative where this
was going was some of the things
that you said.
I like the idea of how do we
prepare in an area where we know
there's a high fire danger, how
do we prepare?
Or what would be potentially
flooding and, and things like
that. Those are substantial,
those are worthy of our
attention.
Um
But buying
Buying a masks in case it gets
really dusty.
I heard that, that's
I don't know that that's
necessarily
Or, and if we're wanting to
protect, uh, you know, the
elderly and children and things
like that, why would we not just
put that in some sort of an ask
for.
Uh, folks provide services to
seniors or to or to children.
Seriously, that list that was
read by your expert really
concerns me. I was, I was
actually.
Thinking based on the
presentation, I might support
this.
Based on what I thought were big
things.
It doesn't appear if it's really
big things. It sounds like a
whole bunch of little things
that people could apply for.
Um, so Mr. Chair and and
representative is, is, was, is
that really the intent of the
bill is
Just to grab bag of anything?
Mr. Terrett represented Montoya.
I appreciate your concerns. I'd
like to get you back.
To supporting this bill. I think
that local communities, tribal
communities know best and what
happens in Taos and what's
needed in Taos is different from
what's needed in San Juan County
or in Chavez County. So I think
that's what's, when I say
flexible, that's sort of what I
mean that that local community
and tribal entity can really
determine what is needed.
respiratory masks.
Air conditioners for the most
elderly air conditioners for our
schools, save lives. We have
seen such an uptick in emergency
room visits because of
air quality. I'm so sorry, Mr.
Chair, and I am, I don't know
what the sweet spot is for this
Mike.
But I'm not needing it.
How's this? Is it a little bit
better
hole.
All right, hopefully that'll be
quoted in Santa Fe, New Mexican
Ijole um, I think what's
important to remember here is
that there are lots of things
that are needed in different
communities, flood control,
absolutely, you can use that
funding for that, um, for
planning, uh a local community
to ensure that they have the
emergency response system that's
needed. We saw with the Eon fire
that there were many, many
families that that never got the
call to to evacuate, and they
died. There
counties that just don't have
the funds to establish or, you
know, update their emergency
management and response system.
So I think that's what
You know, that's what this fund
is is intended to do is to help
local communities because they
know best what they need in
their communities. Plan for and
mitigate extreme weather events,
not just.
Fire and extreme heat, but also
extreme cold in Taos, I don't
know if you remember this, 2021,
we had a snow squall, um, many,
many people lost their roofs,
uh, the community of Penasco
didn't have electricity for 2
weeks, people died. That's an
extreme weather event, and if
Taos County had had some funding
for managing this emergency, we
would have been, we would have
saved lives.
So that's, that's where I stand
and, and I think we're open to,
uh, you know, to looking at this
and engaging other agencies, you
know, like Homeland Security,
um, other agencies that could
help us.
Ensure that the parameters are
clear, the requirements are, you
know,
More flexible
But I think it's because.
Local governments need different
things.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
representative for that answer.
I would be very happy to see.
Uh, I, I like flexible, and I
also believe local communities
know best, but I would also like
there to be some prudence on our
side instead of just making it
anything.
If it were this money would be
for uh you mentioned uh uh maybe
emergency services to be able to
have a better communication
system in case something I I
think that's a worthy cause. I
think flood preparedness is a
worthy cause.
But all of the things that I
heard, including once again, you
even you mentioned uh air
conditioning in schools, we
should be providing that anyway.
That's a problem year round.
And we are, and from what I
understand, we do that.
Through our public school, uh,
uh.
Funding committee
That and that we, we do that in
the in in the interim, we go
through all of that.
I'm just really concerned that
There are no definitions. This
is so flexible as to have no
definitions.
I, I really have a hard time
and, and Mr. Chair, I won't
elaborate any further, but I
have a really hard time
supporting something that is so
open ended.
And I, and, and once again, no
controls and no protections and
no reporting afterwards. What if
they buy a whole bunch of masks
ahead of time.
And they're not used, they're
not used for 4 years, they're
not, I mean, that's not that
they, that that's not a worthy
thing to have.
But it's money that could
And, and, and Mr. Chair and
As as to Representative Ortez
you.
Stated some of the things you
stated were kind of on the back
end, you know, if they were the
the emergencies that you
mentioned and some things that
You, you almost don't know what
the emergency is.
And so a kind of a rapid
response fund might actually be
a good thing for cause I, I know
when we had that extreme cold,
we had
Uh, uh, we had Representative
Chatfield in his community, they
literally used his restaurant as
a meeting place.
I don't know how you plan for
that ahead of time.
Now, if there were moneys ready,
but that's not what this is,
this is not a rapid response.
For those events, this is
pre-planning and putting in
money ahead of time.
I, I just, I'm really struggling
with that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Represent Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, um, I just have
one quick.
I guess comments slash question.
So, obviously I represent Otero
County. I was born or I was
raised in Clacroft, New Mexico.
So buyers are, are a massive
concern to my family, uh, and to
our community, um, but I also
know that we're surrounded by
national forest. And so I really
appreciate what representative
Small kind of said.
My my question is, is we hear
climate change, we hear all
those things, and I'm not
denying or or affirming that
that I'm not saying either way,
um, but it's different.
I also would argue that the fuel
load that we have in our forests
are an extreme level. Um, I, I
don't think climate change has
has.
Affected that per se. I think
that's a human um uh.
I can remember as a child, uh,
every time we'd have to go to
Alamo, which was when you live
in Cloudcroft, nearly every day
because everything is down the
hill, we would follow logging
trucks every day.
I can tell you probably in the
last 30+ years. I've not seen a
logging truck go down the
mountain.
So my big concern is, is how
does this help in a national
force reduce the fuel load so
that when there is
If and when there is a fire, um,
which hopefully there isn't, but
let's be realistic, fires have
happened everywhere. How do we
reduce that fuel load? Um, how
do we work together with other
agencies to make sure, um,
That that's taken care of. I
think that's my big
Question, and along with
Representative Montoya, I'm very
interested on the front end, how
do we prevent these and or help
um slow them down, because when
that fuel load burns, we're
sterilizing that ground because
it burns so hot now, when it
burns so hot, we can't bring
those forests back as quick.
Without addressing that fuel
load, um, I don't see how we're
going to help, um,
With the fire situation.
So, uh, Representative Henry,
let me jump in here.
This bill clearly is not a
forced any bill or or a fire
prevention bill. So, so I do
want to keep the discussion
focused on, on the bill and let
Representative Ortez respond,
but
like to direct the discussion,
not to like broader.
You know, societal issues that
we're facing, but keep it on the
bill, right? Well, Mr. Chairman,
I was just addressing because
they mentioned.
forest fires a couple of times
and I was just curious, how does
this address forest fires? That
was the whole reason the
question came up, honestly.
Henry, uh,
such an important topic we have
to spend a lot of time and I
think put in a lot of investment
and money into ensuring that our
communities are safe from forest
fire, some of that looks like
thinning, some of it looks like
replanting it, it, I think it's
going to take a coordinated
effort, this bill doesn't
address that specifically,
however, it does address.
You know, some very specific
things, um, for, you know, for
the, the ability for a local
community to help, you know,
elderly folks clear brush around
their properties. It helps a
local community develop a
comprehensive, you know,
wildfire like escape plan, you
know, to ensure that those
communities are safe. I, I
believe that there is money in
the budget that will go toward
um forest health, um, which may
also include thinning projects,
you know, I live right next to a
forest, I'm like half a mile
away.
From the Carson National Forest,
so I, I really truly understand
that there was a fire in my
backyard, um, I get that this
bill is really about helping
communities develop prevention
plans, safety plans, things like
that, which, which can include
brush removal in in key areas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representatives
representative Santa Cortez.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chair, Representative Ortiz.
You know, weather emergencies do
tend to affect health, safety
and welfare of activities in an
area and I don't think anyone
here is disagreeing with you on
that.
But it doesn't impact just a
particular demographic. So my
question is, why aren't we doing
resilience planning on a
regional basis, irrespective of
demographics.
Mr. Chair Representative Senna
Cortez, um.
I mean, I think that we are
doing regional planning. This
bill focuses on political
subdivisions that can apply for
funds for their for their
communities if a uh
To counties want to get together
and apply for funding, I don't
see anything in this bill that
would prevent that, but the
Department of Health, you know,
will be, you know, making the
rules and setting the guidelines
for what that grant program
looks like. I mean, I, I could
see that that could happen.
Right. That's awesome. Thank you
so much, Mr. Chair
Representative. Um, so that
would apply to the rural area
that I represent in southeastern
New Mexico.
Mr. Chair Representative Senator
Cortez, absolutely. OK. In fact,
rural communities are sort of
buffered by this or buttress
might be the best word uh by
this program because the
department is um is really asked
to spend more than 50% of the
money in those rural areas,
because we know that the rural
areas have less of a tax base,
not, not all rural areas, but.
Generally speaking, less funding
to tap into to do this kind of
planning and emergency
preparedness.
Thank you so much for clearing,
Mr. Chair Representative. I do
have another question. Um, how
are recipients selected to get
the money.
I know there's only certain
amount, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Cherry representatives, uh,
Senator Cortez, um, the, the
recipients of the funding are
the subdivisions. I don't know
what to do, Mister Chair.
Don't I can't stop talking with
your hands impossible. Mr. Chair
representative is Hispanic
women, it's really hard not to
talk,
Mr. Chairs representative Santa
Cortez, absolutely
um I will stop using my hands,
uh, the political subdivisions
are the entities that get the
funding, uh, and they're they
have to be really clear with how
they're going to spend that
money, whether it's for planning
or.
You know, um, you know, doing
all the things that they can do
with that money. It's not going
to individuals. That funding is
going to a local county tribal
entity, maybe a soil and water
district. So that's how that
money would would be dispersed.
So just to clarify, Mr. Chair
Representative, it in order to
qualify, you have to be a tribal
community.
Mr. Charroot represented Santa
Cortez, um, you have to be a
political subdivision of the
state. OK, so local counties,
municipalities, tribal
governments, um, soil and water
districts, Aseas, those are the
political subdivisions of the
state and they're, they're the
entities that are eligible to
apply for the funding.
OK. Thank you so much for
clarifying, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Thank you. You might want to
turn off your mic.
Thank you very much. Uh,
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, um, I'll be
brief here, I, I think. Um, I
think this is very
well-intentioned bill. Um, I
understand a lot more about it,
uh, given the questions and the
presentation. I think there are
some structural problems with
it. Um, and I'll just ask a
series of questions. Why 12
million?
That number just seems a little
odd to me, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Y 12 million.
Mr. Chair, Representative.
12 million is a start for a new
program, uh, there are
tremendous public health needs
regarding these extreme weather
disasters that are occurring on
a much more frequent basis, um,
and we believe the 12 million
gives the Department of Health,
which would manage this fund,
sufficient resources to do this,
we expect that the needs of
communities will be much
greater.
I, I would, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, um, I, I would
expect so too. Um, it's just,
um, can you give me some sort of
background as to why it's not 10
or why it's not 20, I mean, what
goes into the 12?
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
last year when this bill was
presented HB 104 to the house it
was 10 million and of course we
all know that there's been
significant inflation and we got
feedback, we increased the
amount of grants this year based
on feedback from communities,
counties, and others, and so it
was increased originally it was
at 250,000. It is now at 1
million because
These things to, you know, to
fit a community center, for
example, to be able to serve as
a cooling center, potentially
could cost an additional money,
so the hope is that we would
allow these projects to get
started and then based on the
evaluation of their impacts on
communities which we would
expect to be tremendous, then
there may be additional funds
needed or it can be replicated
in other ways.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, so the way I
understand the fund is there's a
maximum of $1 million.
The theoretically you could have
12 $1 million projects or
probably
20 or 30, realistically, right?
Um
And I want to follow up, um, Mr.
Chair, um, to.
Um
Representative Small's question,
and I think this is really
important and that's how long to
get this money out and this is
my to me this.
Governments are really good at
being reactive.
And but not particularly uh well
done at planning, so I, I, I
understand why you're, we're
trying to address that.
But, um, how long, I mean,
Will this process take? And is
it worth?
Um, assigning a full-time person
to this, I mean, we could easily
spend 4 or $500,000
administering a $12 million
fund.
And is that really
The best use of the public's
money, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Murphy,
um, I don't know how long it
will take to get these funds
out. I'm hopeful that we can
get, you know, funding, and then
we can get the program
established by Department of
Health, and we can disperse
funds as as soon as communities
are able to apply for those
funds, um, we, we hope that
there is funding for additional
staff at DOH that would uh
support programs like these, um,
and, and it's really, really
focused on.
you know, the, the public
health.
Issues that happen after an
extreme weather event, uh not
the fire isn't the only thing,
right? There are other things as
well.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, you know, recently Rossville
had a catastrophic flood, and
we've also seen instances in
Riodosa, Las Vegasarmington,
Tas.
Um, all over the state. And to
me, I think the priorities from
my experience, my recent
experience here, Mr. Chair and
Madam, um, is that the funds
that are really needed are
emergency upfront funds. The
city of Rosville expended about
4 to $5 million that they
basically had to take out the
water fund, the sewer fund, and
other things in order to just
basically get roads cleared, so
first responders could, right?
That money now has to be
replaced and so my suggestion
would be is, is at some point,
um, that needs to be looked at
very hard. I think, I think that
that type of funding is
immediate, it's needed, and like
while I share many of the
concerns Mr. Chair, I'll finish
this up. I think this is is
basically is it too little, too
early or too little too late,
but I think it's too little and
it and it needs to be uh
directed towards uh the Friday
of the not necessarily at the
back end. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I conclude my.
Mars.
Thank you, Representative, um,
representative Grola.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you to the uh sponsors of this
bill, um,
I believe this flexibility is
what some of the communities
needs and not only the small
communities, Mr. Sher, but I
think, I mean from Albuquerque
and being a school teacher with
a huge budget in schools. I
don't know how many days I had
to bring my own fan to that, I
mean, every year I have to bring
my own fan. There are different
needs, like you explained it to
to the different communities
and, and this is how we could
address these things that are
not in big projects I'm
assuming. So I have one
question.
About that, um.
Something that bureaucracy takes
forever. So how, how can a
regular family can apply for a
fund like this.
Mr. Chair Representative Goola,
a family can't apply for these
funds, the, the political
subdivision, your city of
Albuquerque, Bernaleo County
would apply for funds to help
that community, um, plan for.
What we know will happen. We
know that there will be more hot
days. We know there might be
extreme cold days. So that's
where the funding is going to
really help that community
understand.
Um, and plan for what will what
is inevitable.
So no individual, you know,
monies will go to community
members or a family, but.
funding will go to the city of
Albuquerque, if they should they
apply to um ensure that the
local school in your
neighborhood has, uh, what they
need, whether it's energy
resilience, you know, salts,
solar panels backup battery,
things like that that, you know,
they, they so that they can keep
the school open, um, if the, you
know, if the power goes out.
That's how the fund works.
Mr. Chair. So basically it will
the community input.
Feedback, and then they decide
what is needed. It's not my um
Which or what I need but
basically a community input
through other system, right?
Mr. Chair represented Coola, I
would hope that the, uh,
political subdivision is.
is asking for input, I imagine
that they will, um.
Yeah, we have a, you know,
another bill to deal with that
with the anti-donation clause at
some point.
We're not going to talk about
this here, Mr. Mr. Chair. It's
outside of the scope of this
legislation.
Thank you. Thank you so much. I
guess that's clarify my
questions. Thank you so much,
Mr. Cha.
Um, thank you, Representative
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, representative
for the presentation. I just
have um two questions, um,
number one,
I think it's interesting to see
the results and the effects of
the DFA matching grant fund.
Um, and sort of getting to the
question of speed and efficiency
with which.
Um, these funds can be
dispersed. I'm curious if you.
Anticipate or expect that the.
Um, this fund would operate in a
similar manner. And do you have
a way to sort of ensure.
That it would be done in a.
speedy and effective way.
Chair and Representative, thank
you for the question. Um, the,
we have met with the
administrative head, the cabinet
secretary of Department of
Health, and they had expressed
that they were willing to manage
the fund, and we would expect
based on their experience with
managing other funds, we know
it's challenging and it is
important that there's community
engagement, many aspects of
those rules that their
commitment would be to do this
as quickly in its efficiency for
the greatest impact is possible.
Of course, no matching funds
would be required.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that, um, that sort of
leads to my next question, which
is why um why how the fund at
DOH when we do have
Um, established funds for
Grants at DFA and we've seen
with the matching grant fund
that they're getting those funds
out the door very quickly, um,
and very efficiently with a
robust set of rules, so that's
one, and then, you know, if not
DFA, and I don't know that
that's necessarily the best
place, but this is why I want to
hear from you. Um, why not
Mnerd, which also has um similar
programs, and to that end,
This, I think, goes back to my
overarching concern that I have
expressed many times that we do
not have a.
Single unified authority on
climate, energy and water
issues, um, because now what we
would be doing is
Having something at health
environment.
Mner, DFA, etc. If you could
speak to that, I would very much
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair Representative Dixon, um,
I'll start with your last. That
is outside of the scope of this
bill, but I share your concern,
and I believe that the agencies
must work more cooperatively so
that we understand where all the
funds are going or coming into
being distributed, working
together to have the most
impact. Um, we know that DOH
does have the capacity to manage
these.
funds
This is really focused on public
health, the health effects from
extreme weather, we know that
people uh suffer, they die from
exposure from uh from air
pollution, uh, all that is why
we're focused at DOH truly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Beta.
Thank you, Chair. Representative
Cortez, thank you for the
presentation.
Might represent 6 counties and
one, probably the 2nd largest
district in the state of New
Mexico and my district
encompasses plenty of forest
land and then lots of very flat
land and in the past two years
I've seen my communities.
A high temperatures where
community centers have had to be
open and cooled as cooling spots
for elders and children.
I've seen that community members
have done their best to come
together in preparation for
this. And so I, I appreciate
this.
This bill, because it also
allows that creativity and
flexibility, also in my district
are 9 Navajo chapters.
Very different from one another
and very separate.
I also have 3 pueblossleta,
Laguna, and Akima also uniquely
positioned in very different.
So I have lots of respect for
this bill and it giving the
creative.
Responsibility to those health.
Professionals to decide how
this.
Grant funding can be used.
My first thing.
The other thing I want to talk
about and it's in relation to
Representative Montoya's comment
about overlapping of educational
costs.
If we're funding schools in one
way and and not the other, uh,
just a reminder that a lot of
schools in my district are
federally funded or 638 grant
programs, so a lot of times
they're not able to receive
funding for emergencies like
this and the response time is a
lot longer.
So
I understand that the, the
political.
Excuse me.
The political
Subdivisions that may request
for this funding, maybe those
who are state citizens, but
perhaps have never had an
opportunity to apply for funding
like this. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Abata, um.
You know, if you're a tribal
entity, you can apply for these
funds and you know that they're
considered a political
subdivision, and I think these
ones are really intended for
those communities that have not
been able to or have not had the
capacity to uh get these kinds
of funds for emergency
preparedness in case of extreme
weather, um, I think these this
fund is.
Exactly 4
The communities that you speak
of.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Ortiz, um, and
finally, I think that this is a
fantastic.
Bill for the city of Grants, who
I also represent that is
responsible as well for the care
of Mount Taylor and has had
certain scares and concerns and
past months and I feel that the
educational component for this
to educate our, our citizens on
emergency preparedness is one
that's extremely helpful for my
district and I do support this.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Ortiz for the
presentation.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
just had a couple of quick
questions. Uh, so it is, it does
go to the permanent health and
then DFA disperses the money. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chair, um,
I believe that's how it works,
but there are experts on your
committee that
able to like. So I'm uh OH
first, Mr. Chair.
OK, but it's dispersed by
warrants signed by the Secretary
of Finance Administration.
Representative Dickson.
Mr. T, that's uh how it's
normally done that's how it
works. OK.
Um
And um
Uh, represent Ortiz, do you
anticipate these grants will
generally be proactive or
reactive?
Mr. Chair, um, I think that the,
the intent is for them to be,
you know, proactive, um,
planning, preparedness, things
like that, helping a community,
you know, understand how to best
save lives in their own
community. I imagine they're
proactive.
OK. And um
Representative Ortiz, you get a
lot of interest from um members
of HAFC on this committee, we
have strong cross-presentation,
um, is, is the, uh
Is the money in the budget?
That's always a question.
Chair, we are still working on
that.
Um,
and Mr.
Chair, that the money be put in
the budget.
Um, and Representative Ortiz,
the cap on the projects is, is
uh a million dollars. Would you
generally expect the, the
projects to be smaller than
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, they, they may be
um a couple of years ago we had
this bill, um, we presented this
bill in committee and I think it
was set at 250,000 and what we
found from um from community
partners, tribes, was that that
money was, it was just too low,
you know, that there were, um,
projects that could be $750,000
or 999,000. So that's why we,
we, um, upped the, we increased
the cap, um, and we're
Hopeful that, you know, we could
get more than $12 million to
address these things and you
know, as we go through um the
process and make grants, uh, we
will have a better understanding
of what's needed in community.
OK. Thank you very much,
Representative Ortez. Um, any
closing thoughts before we go to
the uh
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
thank you for, for allowing me
to do that. I, you know, I.
Communities need funding for
planning. That money is really
hard to find, um, I think that
the circumstances are dire if
our local rural communities,
tribal communities don't have
access to the funding to keep
their keep their people safe.
OK, thank you very much. What's
the pleasure of the committee?
Second.
So we have a to pass from uh
represent a small on second from
representative gorilla.
Do you, uh, take the vote
please.
Representative Abeda.
Yes.
Representative Santa Cortez.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Small.
Vice chair Sonya, yes.
Sherry McQueen.
Yes, so you have a pass 7 to 4.
Thank you very much. Our next
bill is um
House Bill 35 with vice
chairerana.
step out for just a moment. I'll
be right back.
So.
OK,
your wife?
Oh
What is it? Tanya. OK, cool.
Thank you.
Would you like me to pass out
the sup? I'm gonna try,
and do it, I think he has to
motion.
OK.
Yeah,
I should use the whole name, but
yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Uh
So just a reminder to the
committee, we are still
webcasting uh
representativearana will be
right back.
Um
Mr. Chair, well, we have a brief
break. I'd like to, uh,
I'd like to recognize somebody's
in the audience today, if you
don't mind.
It's
Becky Fink, she is the
president-elect of the American
Council of Engineering
Companies, so.
wanted to say hello and thanks
for coming to our committee.
Um, sure, you've, uh, why don't
you step up to the mic so we can
actually hear you and you, I
mean, you.
Got like a minute. So that mic's
not on.
Yeah.
Thank you. A little scared of
the on earlier today.
Anyway, thank you for letting me
speak. I just want to let you
know a little bit about our
organization we're made up of
um.
41 and uh infrastructure.
As well as just general um
economic issues, unlike other
engineering engineering
questions or.
Thank you very much.
OK, as I mentioned, next bill is
House Bill 35, Children's Health
Protection zones, uh,
Representative Sarana, whenever
you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, like
you said, I'm here to represent
to present. I'm.
to present House Bill 35, the
Children's Health Protection
Zone.
There, is that better?
There's, there's a, there is no
happy spot. It's just do your
best.
Um, I have my expert witness,
Larin Johnson, and um,
And.
Can I get them to introduce
there what they do.
OK, you push the button when you
speak and then push it again
when you're done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Lapton
Johnson. I am an attorney with
the Center for Biological
Diversity.
I expected to have my colleague
Gail Evans sitting in for me
today, so forgive me if I'm uh
not a little nervous and not as
facile with the facts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Josie Zuniga, and today I'm
speaking as a community member.
Yeah.
Mr. Chairman, we do have a
committee.
OK, would someone like to move
the you said for discussion.
OK
OK.
Is there any objection to that?
OK, so we're on the committee
said, um, I'll remind the
committee.
Um
You know, if the motion, so this
is our first committee of the
session.
the proper motion, uh, if it is
a Du Past motion is actually do
not pass on the bill, and they
do pass on the committee. So um
if we get to that point, uh,
please remember that and you're
welcome to help me remember that
as well, Mr. Chair, this is the
first time we're seeing the sub.
Was it distributed?
Um
It it was emailed out and it is
online. It was emailed out.
Um,
my
that he never got it. I never
got it.
Mr. Chair
in Murphy? Yes, sir. I, I, I
note that the bill that actually
I analyzed is 29 pages and this
is 38. This is the first time
I've seen it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, hold on a second, we're
gonna check and make sure it was
sent out.
So the uh just so everyone
understands, um,
When we have amendments in
committee subs, we, we try to
get them out 24 hours in
advance.
Uh, according to the new rule,
we also post them online.
This definitely was put online.
However, if it was not sent to
the committee, I can understand
why, you know, you weren't
necessarily look online fora and
I don't think that's necessarily
your responsibility. So it
should have been sent out.
Uh, so we're going to check on
that right now and make sure it
was sent out.
OK. So,
We're not finding it in the
email.
OK
So it does not appear that we
sent that out, um.
My recommendation would be
reroll this bill and reschedule
it.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
very sorry for everyone who came
um speak on this bill. We do
have a committee sub. It is
available online, um.
And, uh, because it wasn't uh
sent out to the committee, uh,
the members haven't necessarily
looked at it and the analysts
haven't looked at it. So we're
gonna re remedy that and the
reschedule.
Um,
Before we adjourn, let, let me
just, uh, who, who here is uh
This is the only bill we have
left. This is everyone on here
on this bill?
OK, do we have members of the
public who want to speak on this
bill.
OK, so why don't we do um why
don't we do some public comments
since we have people here.
Um, uh, there will be a
committee set up but uh my guess
is there are comments, um.
In general, on the bill, so why
don't we do
Um, it was anyone here in
opposition to the bill?
You know, we have some of those
too. So, um,
Uh, why don't we do if it's OK
with the committee, why don't we
do 15 minutes of public comment
for each side.
OK. Um, let's do opposition
first.
So if you'd like to speak in the
opposition, if you could step
up.
Chairing members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley. I'm the director of
public policy for the Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, and we're
here to express Hospital 35, and
its potential impact on New
Mexico's economy, small
business, and the funding that
supports our schools. This bill
creates a one size fits all
restriction on oil and gas wells
within 1 mile.
Of schools, daycares, and parks.
While protecting children's
health is important. This
approach fails to consider the
economic consequences in the
existing realities of
operations.
This bill would increase
regulatory burdens and stiff
penalty penalties of up to
$30,000 a day. This creates
major financial risk and
discouraging future investments
in New Mexico and sends a
chilling message to businesses
considering expansion into our
state.
Oil and gas fund a significant
portion of our public education
system. If this bill reduces
production, it could lead to
declining revenue, budget
shortfalls, and cuts to
essential services, including
the very schools this bill aims
to protect.
Rather than broad drilling
bands, we should encourage
cleaner technology and enforce
the existing regulations. This
would be far more effective and
not sacrifice any jobs or
revenue. I urge this committee
to reject the bill in its
current form and work towards a
more balanced approach that
protects both our children's
health and our state's economic
future. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee sponsor. My
name is Mike Miller. I'm with
the Permian Basin Petroleum
Association, uh, while
protecting children's health is
an unequivocal priority. This
bill is a blunt instrument that
will have far-reaching negative
consequences. The bill's
excessive setbacks and
regulatory burdens amount to a
de facto land seizures without
compensation, opening the state
to legal challenges. Property
owners and leaseholders who have
long established mental rights
will face significant financial
losses due to an inability to
access their assets.
This approach conflicts with the
constitutional protections
against uncompensated takings
and will likely result in costly
litigation that divert state
resources away from more
pressing needs.
The bill fails to acknowledge
the strides made by the energy
industry and minimizing
environmental impact, advanced
leak detection technology
flaring reduction measures and
water recycling initiatives have
significantly decreased
emissions and waste.
Mandating broad operational
halts due to perceived risk
rather than actual measured
harm, ignores the effectiveness
of these innovations and
punishes the companies that have
proactively worked to reduce
their environmental footprint.
Finally, as mentioned, this one
size fits all is not the answer.
Local government. This is a
preemptive bill to local
governments. We have local
governments that have these
ordinances in place, and they
know best how to protect their
communities. For those reasons,
we ask that you reject this
bill. Thank you.
Mr. Chair
Represent Monterio, I would just
like to, uh, if we could ensure
that um depending on what
Cause it seems like there's
significant, uh, addition to
this bill.
That uh maybe there might be
further objections to this bill,
so maybe reserve the ability for
at least a couple of folks to,
if there's something beyond.
Substantially
that we could have.
So we do the
Montoya, when we do hear the
bill I'll invite people to make
comment on any of the changes,
any of the differences between
the two bills.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. OK.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition
because I don't, I, I'm, am I
correct there's no one else in
the room? OK.
If
OK, we've known people, so we're
doing opposition, uh, if you're
here to speak in support of the
bill, please lower your hand.
Uh, we'll do, um, buy people
online.
Just take them in order.
On the top.
Giovanna, are you there? And are
you in opposition?
Ashley
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
NAOA represents over 180 member
companies. NOA opposes House
Bill 35 because communities and
counties throughout the San Juan
and Permian basins already have
setbacks in place that have gone
through extensive processes for
approval at the local government
level, including input from
community members.
According to a 2019 national
emissions inventory
collaborative report, Oil and
gas development sites are one of
the smallest contributors to two
air pollutants, nitrogen oxides
and fine particulate matter.
While areas near oil and gas
development sites are likely to
experience higher concentrations
of other select pollutants than
areas further away, economic
sectors other than oil and gas
contribute more to pollution
levels, specifically mobile
sources such as cars and small
trucks contribute.
The most pollution. Oil and gas
companies are required by
federal and state standards and
reporting guidelines to
consistently model and monitor
any risk for human health, and
ever evolving and improving
technologies have allowed for
increased controls and
containment to reduce risk to
potential exposure of studies
that have been conducted on
setbacks so far. They all focus
on pre-production or early
production phases, which are the
phases of development within the
highest exposures. However,
Production phase comprises the
longest period in oil and gas
development life cycle and
epidemiological research for
determining the potential human
health impacts of oil and gas
development is still in the
early phases of research.
Current studies are not
sufficient to inform setback
requirements and more research
is needed. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, next up.
Was that
Good morning committee and
chairman. Uh, thank you so much
for the time this morning. I'm
Deval Westfall, executive vice
president of Policy and Programs
at the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, and he
respectfully to ask you to vote
against HP 35.
While the title of the bill
shows that the good intentions
behind it. The fact remains that
there are already local setbacks
in place in the Permian and San
Juan basins in all, in all
producing municipalities and
counties. These setbacks have
been determined through the
local ordinance process that
includes community feedback and
all oil and gas companies adhere
to the ordinances. Oil and gas
companies go through extensive
environmental sighting practices
to determine where a well? Will
we both safe and economical.
And it's important to note that
schools and communities in the
basins have not requested
additional setbacks. This
legislation was devised outside
of our oil and gas producing
communities.
The chamber supports and all of
the above approach to energy,
and it understands that we need
a reliable bridge to make the
energy transition Act work.
New Mexico's responsible oil and
gas producers are at the heart
of that, and HB 35 disregards
all the checks and balances
already in place that are
integral to their daily
operations. Please vote against
HP 35. Again, thank you for your
time.
Thank you, Carla.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We represent hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans, and we respectfully
oppose this legislation, House
Bill 35.
What we're seeking is a better
place to live and work with
abundant good paying jobs to
provide for our families and
We think that we've got an
industry.
That we, that provides the
lion's share of our budget, and
this is an industry we need to
respect and take care of. The
fact that this change has not
been asked for by communities
should be a red flag on the
legislation.
We've got setbacks that are set
in the community where they know
best what they need to be doing.
But when we do a blanket
statement like this or
legislation.
What we're doing is restricting
the amount of production that we
can do, and we're really not
protecting the health of the
children and the elderly and
everybody else was seeking to
protect. They're more at risk
from vehicles that are on the
roads than they are from the
drilling operations that we see
in our state, our community
partners in the oil and gas
industry are very responsible.
They're doing everything that
they can to take care of the
environment, the energy, they
live here, they.
this there.
They care about what's going on
in the state and for all these
reasons and the reasons that
you've heard before, I urge you
to say no to this legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Eddie
Yes.
My name's Eddie Rodriguez.
And I am a lifelong citizen
across Ba New Mexico. Um, a lot
of points have been made. I
don't want to reiterate, but I
do want to point out that I want
to present a firsthand account
of what we are discussing. Um,
I've experienced the March 20,
2004 Kai blowout. Uh, we had to
evacuate our home. We had to
spend a couple of days away from
her. After that, Mayor Bob
Forest at the time asked me to
sit on the committee.
Onsetbacks, and as a result, we
worked together with elected
officials, residents, experts in
the field of oil and gas, uh,
company reps over a period of
months come up with our local
current city ordinance off
setbacks. Uh, all the gas
companies wishing to grow within
the city limits must go through
a very stringent process of
permit filing, then appeared
before and presented to the
cross that City council for
permission to and to determine
compliance with setback
ordinances.
Most are fully compliant. We've
had one instance where a right
was granted, a building was
built.
Closer than the 500 ft that we
require and the oil company was
required to move their well to
outside their grill, to outside
of that set area.
So should a company want to draw
near a school. Our city council,
which, to which I am an elected
official, would have to decide
at that point what distance we
deem safe.
Um
A local control application of
ordinance is our duty and not
one I wish to relinquish to
people sitting in areas away
from my home and my neighbors.
Um, I'm a proud lifelong
resident of Carwed, as I said, I
want to do my job for my
constituents as elected to do
and will not willingly give up
that responsibility. And um I, I
appreciate the discussion of
what my I present to you the
discussion of what did happen,
and as a
Gladiator on the arena floor,
dirty and bloody. I stand before
you and uh ask that you vote
against this measure. Thank you,
Jason.
And we'll take one more after
this.
Good morning, Chairman and
committee members. Um, can you
hear me?
Yes.
Uh, I'm Jason Burns, County
public works director, um, thank
you for allowing me to speak,
and I apologize for not being a
person, um, kind of like.
Councilor Rodriguez and several
others I don't want to reiterate
what's already been said this
morning, but um
You know, this is, this is
something that we see and and
regulate here in the county and
that, you know, we have really
good partners down here in the
Permian Basin, and they really
are concerned with our
Everything that they do down
here and
And
and you know the other concern
is being down here in Carlsbad
in the Permian Basin. This is
not a concern we've heard from
the schools, from our community,
from our residents, and we're
really proud of everybody that's
down here. Um,
You know, along with that.
We would think that if this was
something that was a concern,
this would be a concern of the
county and something that we
need to regulate and have our
own processes in place that's
controlled locally, you know
what commissioner counselor
Rodriguez said they have a
process within the city, um, and
we have our processes through
the county to ensure that, you
know, we protect our citizens,
protect our county, um, and you
know it's not been a concern
thus far. We've been able to
really work with our partners
and they worked with us to
ensure that we take care of our
communities and, and they've
gone to the extra.
to make sure that's happened.
And we've been really involved
in that, but if it was something
that was a concern, this needs
to be at a county level and not
at a state level and a blanket
for everybody involved because,
you know, usually these
situations are pretty unique to
every instance, uh, as
Commissioner Rodriguez was
saying. So we're in opposition
of this bill, um,
And, and we really appreciate
your consideration.
Thank you for that. We're gonna,
we're gonna, with that, we're
gonna wrap up the opposition.
We're gonna come back to the
committee room. Uh, let's do if
we could have 5 speakers who
would like to speak in support.
Uh
So I, I see, uh, I see a family
here in the front. If you would
like to speak, I'd love to hear
from you and I also see our
state land commissioner.
Thank you, sir. Uh good morning,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Bilton
Marrito, and I live in
Counselor, New Mexico on the
greater Chaco landscape. I'm
here to speak about the health
impacts that my children are
having at Lightro school with
the air. Librook Elementary is a
New Mexico public school part of
the Hamish Mountain School
District, all the children in
the school are Native American.
Um, when I moved to Lybrook area
two years ago, my children's
general health was great.
However, since we moved back to
counselor, I've noticed my kids
are.
ing every day. They are coming
back from school with headaches
and being nauseous. I give my
children allergy medicine, but
it doesn't help with the
constant cough. My oldest son,
who's 12 years old, has the most
symptoms. He has itchy throat,
cough, headaches, and nausea.
Other parents have also told me
that their children complained
about headaches and the constant
cough. There were times when the
mice kids would forget and I
would have to drop stuff off at
school and I could smell
something bad in the air. There
are a lot of oil and gas
production.
sites around the school, you can
see them from the school.
Recently, I found out about an
air study that was conducted at
Labor School that showed large
amounts of bending in the air in
the early mornings. This study
was conducted by Doctor Tommy
Rock from Princeton University.
I understand that benzene is
poisonous, especially for
children. Doctor Rock presented
the results of the study to the
counselor chapter last fall, and
I have not received any
information about air quality
concerns from the district or
from PED.
I am very concerned that the
children are attending school
close to oil and gas operations,
I request that you put in place
a health buffer zone so that no
new oil and gas production sites
will be built near the schools.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Commissioner Garcia Richard.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So my
name is Stephanie Garcia
Richard. I stand before you, uh,
as the elected constitutional
officer with oversight on 13
million acres of public state
trust land, 2 million of which
is leased up for oil and gas
activities and as uh uh elected
official who is already put into
place a similar um restriction
and setback on state land. Um,
I'm here to tell you that in the
2 years that we have instituted
this setback.
Uh, we have not seen
An impact to our revenue and the
reason is because technology has
come a long way in the short
time that we have had, uh,
multi-stage, uh,
Um
Fracturing. But essentially what
We can do with the latest
technology is that the actual
oil and gas sites can be sighted
between 2 and 3 miles away from
where the resource actually
exists. For this reason, uh, we
have really tried to look at the
proposed sites with a fine tooth
comb and ensure that we can
still develop this resource
without impacting students. This
bill sponsor and myself are both
former teachers. We
have utmost in our mind as we
are, yes, supporting public
schools, drawing revenue for our
state budget, we have utmost in
our mind protection of the
families and students like the
gentleman uh who spoke before
me. So I'm here to tell you, Mr.
Chairman, that we have put into
practice this very um setback.
Again, it is not a ban on
fracking.
This is merely looking at
development with a scalpel
rather than a sledgehammer, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, commissioner.
Yeah,
a Bene up to Chavez in the kiss
a bashain aka just kissanella go
whathopakisuta.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. I am Osa
Chavez, ED for NM Native Vote. I
am Dane from Sannasi, New Mexico
and fromuhua Pueblo.
And I'm native vote worked with
Namoga and others last year on
setbacks as part of the oil and
gas bill. We are the communities
asking for these setbacks to
protect our youth, one mile is a
minimum. I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward, and I stand here for my
ancestors and our future
generations. This bill ensures
the protection of frontline
communities that we represent.
Our children and families live
near all of this development
under threat from
hundreds of abandoned and
orphaned wells, breathing in air
and eating from the land. In
Northwestern New Mexico, all
schools in the Farmington,
Aztec, and Bloomingfield school
districts have active active
wells within 1 mile, as this
gentleman mentioned, Lybrook
Elementary School is in the
greater Chaco landscape with 19
wells within 1 mile. I too was a
student long ago in the Navajo
Nation and now suffer from
asthma as do my son.
And many of my family members.
This has been our home for
thousands of years. You are the
representatives that have the
power to protect our people, our
air, our land, and water, oil
and gas have profited off the
expense of our frontline
communities and my family. These
children, your children, our
future generations, are the
people you are protecting by
voting yes on this bill. Please
show your strength and vote yes
on HB 35.
To protect our people.
Thank you.
Dear Sherman, vice chair, and
members of the committee. My
name is Ey Lopez and I'm the
policy campaign manager at
Yucca. We are led by young black
indigenous, and youth of color
who live on the front lines
across the state. We are the
ones who face the brunt of
environmental pollution and the
climate crisis. We are urging
you to protect our children and
our young people by voting in
favor of HB 35. Approximately
34,000 of our students in this
state are breathing toxic air
pollutants on a day to day.
basis as they go to school. We
know from our, from our members
in the premium basin, that they
are experiencing a adverse
health conditions such as birth
defects, childhood cancers like
lymphoma, respiratory illnesses
like asthma, heart diseases,
strokes, the list goes on.
Children do not consent to this
level of exposure to these toxic
pollutants or to this level of
proximity to these oil and gas
operations. Rather, these are
the decisions and sacrifices
that the elected officials in
this room are making today.
If we are truly, if we truly
want to prioritize our young
people and children and improved
New Mexico for the better and
for the future. A 1 mile setback
is the bare minimum to protect
these communities. We must work
towards the goal of a just and
equitable transition for our
communities, and the first step
is by solidifying a 1 mile
health buffer zone. I urge you
to hold the oil and gas industry
accountable for endangering the
public health, and the local
environments of our children. We
can no longer accept
environmentally racist policies
as acceptable policy decisions
for the sake of the economy, or
the sake of one industry, over
the health of thousands of
millions of people in the state,
ensuring the protection of our
children's health with a one
mile setback is a step to
deliver justice for our
communities who have endured
suffering for generations. We
must protect our future
generations, their environment,
and their health. We are
positioned to do that with HB
35, and I urge you to vote in
favor. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
my name's Odie Chapman. I'm from
Lybrook, New Mexico, um.
Pretty much born and raised
there. Um, my issue is, is that
this Lightbrook school's been
there for 50+ years. Originally
it was right across from the
plant there and, you know, I
worked in that plan. I worked in
the oil field, so I know they
test this breathing, hearing,
all this stuff because we have
dangers out there. Kudos to the
old field and the things that
I've seen improved for the
years, but we built a new school
because it was dangerous being
right next to the plant. And
right now, I go over there,
dropping off kids that had
missed the bus or raft or
whatever.
And it smells like I'm walking
into a compressor station.
There is a lot of air pollution
around there and I'm very
concerned about it.
My wife also worked as a teacher
in that school for 2 years.
And at least one time she.
Requested to have a gas leak
checked cause she can smell it
in there.
And they come back and they
said, well, there's no gas leak,
but there is pollution in our
area and there is way too many
wells around that school when
they originally built it, it
was.
Good. Now all of a sudden we've
got compressor stations and
wells around there. Thank you.
OK, we're just gonna do one more
in the room and then we're gonna
go online.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Shelley
Manle. I'm the executive
director of Healthy Climate New
Mexico, an organization of
healthcare and public health
folks all around the state, 250
members strong and growing. I'm
here to stand in support of HB
35.
Our children's health is now and
our future. As you've heard, we
both need in terms of any future
well at oil and gas extraction,
we need to protect, protect,
provide that buffer zone of 1
mile from children's sites if we
could do longer, that would be
great. That just like secondhand
smoke, which we're all familiar
with, those pollutants, those
toxic pollutants travel. They do
not stay located at that site,
and those children need our
protection. You have heard
there's issues of asthma, of
course.
many different respiratory
conditions, neurodevelopmental
conditions, pediatric cancers,
no one should have to suffer
that it both impacts the health
of our community and what we
haven't said, it deeply affects
our economic resilience for the
future. So please, on behalf of
the doctors, nurses, PTs, OTs,
public health professionals like
myself, please consider the
health of our communities and
our children, and vote in favor
of this.
Thank you for that. Um, so we're
gonna take 3 people online if
you'd like to speak in sport.
Uh, please raise your hand, and
we're gonna go from the top of
the list.
Natalie
Natalie
Natalie, are you there?
OK, let's go to the next one.
Jonathan
Can you hear me? Yes.
a quick shotusa.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
honorable members of the
committee. My name is Jonathan
Juarez. I'm 22 years old and I'm
from the Pueblos of Laguna and
Esleta. Right now, over 34,000
children in New Mexico attend
school within just 1 mile of
active or unplugged oil and gas
wells, but these aren't just
numbers. These are real kids in
Carlsbad Farmington, and Hobbs.
Kids like my little cousins, my
nieces and nephews who deserved
to
grow up healthy, not poisoned by
the air that they breathe. We
know that oil and gas pollution
is dangerous, but children are
especially vulnerable. Kids
living near these sites are up
to 7 times more likely to
develop lymphoma and suffer from
higher rates of asthma, heart
disease, and lifelong
respiratory issues. Infants born
near fracking sites are 25% more
likely to experience serious
developmental issues. Now maybe
these facts sit well.
with the Chamber of Commerce,
Namoga, or the Petroleum
Institute, but they absolutely
do not sit well with our
community we're not gonna attack
other
Speakers, OK?
OK.
This is a public health crisis.
And yet instead of protecting
these children, we've allowed
corporations to keep drilling
near their schools, poisoning
the air that they breathe every
single day. We have the science,
we have the data, and now with
House Bill 35, we have the
opportunity to act. HB 35 is a
common sense policy. It's not
radical. It's the bare minimum
backed by science. It protects
our kids from exposure to
harmful toxins like benzene,
toluene, and methane, all of
which are linked.
cancer and neurological damage.
New Mexico's children should not
have to sacrifice their health,
so the oil and gas industry can
keep making record profits. I
urge you all to stand with New
Mexico's children, not corporate
climate polluters and vote yes
on House Bill 35. Thank you.
So we
So wee?
Good morning Chairman, Vice
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Zoe Kraft
and I'm a 23 year old community
organizer from Albuquerque. I'm
here today because every young
person in our state deserves a
chance to learn in a safe and
healthy environment. But right
now, that isn't the case for
over 34,000 children across our
state who attend school near
active oil and gas wells.
Scientific studies make it clear
that oil and gas pollution has
long-lasting impacts on the
health of our communities, and
it can be particularly
devastating.
for young people whose bodies
are still developing, leading to
health conditions like asthma,
reduced lung function,
neurodevelopmental disorders and
even pediatric cancers. HB 35
offers a common sense solution
that protects the health of our
young people by implementing one
mile setbacks surrounding
schools while avoiding any
significant costs to the state.
LFC analysts estimate that the
bill's effect on state revenue
will be less than 1/10 of 1%,
which is a small price to pay
for protecting public health and
the well.
well-being of our students who
have no choice but to attend
school while breathing in these
toxic pollutants. Right now, we
have a critical opportunity to
prioritize the health and safety
of our children over the profit
margins of industry polluters,
and I urge you to vote yes on
House Bill 35 to put our
children first. Thank you.
Thank you. We're gonna take one
more online.
And now
Hello, can you hear me? Yes.
Greetings committee.
Community need has been
mentioned here. However, I'd
like to, I would like to
highlight the facts of this bill
inspect children. Every
rhetorical question preevolved.
Can children vote.
One of the previous speakers
used the metaphor of the
gladiator arena, calling himself
a soldier fighting around. We
the youth of America and New
Mexico are also in the gladiator
arena. However, we are not
soldiers. We've been tossed into
the ring with no weapons. So
committee either act to protect
our children or give us the
tools to protect ourselves, has
HP 35.
For the thousands of children,
thousands of students who are
suffering.
Each day
Thank you.
OK, thank you very much and
thank you to everyone who came
out to speak uh on this bill, it
will be rescheduled. The
committee sub is available
online, but we'll get sent out
to the committee as well.
Uh, any questions or comments
before we turn?
Once again, my apologies for the
