And we have a few and
announcements to let you know
that responser for house build
seventy two as as for that to be
rolled and we will not be
hearing that so the order that
we are going to hear the bills
is going to be house will fifty
two.
And then we will go to house
bill one twenty nine the firearm
sale waiting period and then
house fill thirty seven the gas
operate one thirty seven
the gas operated semi automatic
firearms and house bill one
twenty seven the eight twenty
one firearm purchases will do
last
and I think you heard some
feedback that some if they could
turn their volume off um
and so if you're here for house
bill seventy two we will likely
care that saturday.
Um just to let you know that as
we are setting up because we
have so many bills to get
through and it's already
too far
that we are going to.
Had fifteen minutes for both
opposition and support.
Um in the audience but we will
keep it to one minute each
person so you have one person
doesn't take up their whole time
and we can fit in that fifteen
minute allotment of time we'll
let more people speak
and then on the zoom we will
allow ten minutes and one minute
each person and
so that we can get through the
bill sydney.
Yeah.
So
start with a introductions of
our members
thinking about our reduces role
we can just do roll call since
we don't have much time.
Presented representative
present representative lord in
the house.
Representative here
representative thompson here
madam vice chair rubio medium
chair ferrari president and i'd
like to remind everyone to hold
their microphones close because
last our first committee a lot
of people couldn't even.
Yeah.
The.
Um.
Representative martinez would
you like to present fifty two
month chair members of the
committee
i'm presenting to you house bill
fifty two which sets a side
general phone dollars in the
amount of hundred thousand
dollars to
find a pilot project in san for
county.
This pillar project would
provide additional advanced
training in the domestic.
The.
And.
With this part of.
The.
Really show sheriff's office but
open up the to tribal agency.
And with that.
Will go to the audience now and
so again
i'll go in a position to this um
if you would raise your hand.
Okay no not decision is there
any one party.
The.
Be great those in support.
And we're really good microphone
system so I have to stand and
will go for the first fifteen
minutes but one minute each
person and also if you can try
and activate
something over a graduate people
have set so
someone here
Okay
no support
manager members of the committee
might just forget the executive
director for the commission on
the status of women and one of
the pieces of my job is to go
around the state and speak to
women about the issues that are
most affecting them
and what you're time and again
as one of the issues his
domestic violence and sexual
assault and the commission is
concerned anything that is
working towards more education
around these issues especially
with our enforcement officers
and poor personnel is a win win
for us off so the commission
stands from support of this.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
Okay.
The.
Okay about
all right.
I
can you all hear me yes
thank you madame chair and
members of the committee my name
is healies and I am the staff
attorney of southwest women's
law center
I am a simple legal service
provider from the state of new
mexico and I provide
representation and invice to
need a women experiencing
domestic balance and travel
court I believe that allocating
additional funds for training
officers is a crucial step
towards enhancing their ability
to address domestic violence
effectively domestic violence is
a devastating issue that demands
a comprehensive and well
informed response by providing
more resources for training in
our law enforcement officers
with the knowledge and skills
necessary to handle the handle
domestic violence cases
sensitively and efficiently
because of this without both
winds all center stands at full
support of HB one twenty thank
you.
Yeah.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee i'm retired police
commander paul zake i'm a
graduated financial academy I
have more in thirty years a law
enforcement experience with more
than nine years a specialized
experience investigating and
supervising hundreds of domestic
violence and stocking related
cases that i've seen playout
through
the command of the unit that was
focused on i'm just that
category of prime
officers need free access to
threat assessment training to
give them the tools necessary to
evaluately felony and then take
the practice steps necessary to
increase victim safety and real
time while officers are first on
the scene you know resources are
always available for this thread
assessment drives protective
action
during the time that I was in
charge of the massive mountain
stocking unit the nine years we
successfully mitigated a little
over eighteen hundred cases with
zero victim fatalities much of
those assessments were based in
in the value assessment prior to
our protective action.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
And soon.
Thank you very much madame chair
members of the committee I stand
and sit in support of further
training because it will provide
greater access to interventional
strategies that resulted better
outcomes in the short term in
the long term thank you very
much madame chair members of the
committee my name is natine.
Thank you now.
Where are there any other
comments that you'd like to make
sense
being a madam chair members of
the committee questions thank
you committee you have questions
okay
thank you representatives I
difficult few questions on your
bill.
I notice some people made
reference to stocking as an
included tour we just talk.
Thank you madame chair
representative lord
as I don't deeper into this
issue of domestic violence and
stocking seem to go hand
so i'd like.
Like mr
becomes a thread assessment and
being able to to.
Change that.
The.
Thank you representative what
i'd like to do is work with you
next year and working wind that
expands for the s.
I have a lot of friends are now
in law enforcement the training
is you know incredibly crucial
and especially stocking
a representative block and I
both have a stocker.
And unfortunately.
This way would be better if
there was more.
Key things to look for so next
year i'd like to work on that
with you so can you tell me
manager and.
Is there a specific type of
treaty that you'll be.
Think manager representative
i'm looking at a lot of
different trainings that are put
up by the fire academy some or
local law enforcement agencies
but I want to see is a
comprehensive training program
i'm into your previous common.
One of the reasons we're
starting at in san francounties
I would want to come back to the
legislature and sure that this
is this is affective it's saving
lives at men spread that out to
the rest of the s.
We do a study and we do another
study and four years later we're
doing another study in.
Rather see this common sense
approach to.
Yeah.
Been a survivor domestic
violence and also now being
stocked pretty heavily by
somebody who definitely wants to
kill me it it makes a whole
different.
Perspective.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chairman that's
that's loud thank you thank you
representative martin as I
really appreciate this bill I
think it's very important to
talk about domestic violence and
uh just violence in general and
some money into ensuring that we
have education program so thank
you madame chairman and
representative I just had a few
questions about the bill from
my perspective here so.
You mentioned it additional
training.
Mount terminal representative
martiners can you just tell me
currently what training is
available in your county and
what would this do to supplement
that current infrastructure
madam chair
madam chair representative block
there there is not a specialized
word back.
Long forcement officials when
they're.
Basic education on a domestic
violence through the assessment
i'm hudding.
The.
The item behind this a little
bit more advanced.
Are you see some of.
My hope is that even the smaller
agencies would dedicate at least
one or two officers to go
through this training.
Handle this because domestic
violence is not ju.
We're seeing it.
We saw it.
And that's also why one
tribal agencies also.
Thank you madam chairman think
you representative for that so
with this only exclusively go to
law enforcement agencies that
may be tribal county's city or
would it also go to any kind of
other nonprofit groups receiving
these funds madam chairman
representative chair ribs in a
block I I would like to see
victims and gets involved in
this training more.
The advocates from nonprofits
because the big play when.
In.
Thank you madame chairman
representative so I heard so
many stakeholders that gave
their testimony i'm i'm guessing
you did work with many stick
holders to craft his legislation
including law enforcement madame
chairman representative manager
representative I have talked to.
One of the fortunately more
who have been affected.
Ninth.
I I realize that it was an issue
but over the last ninety days
talking to.
The.
I feel even more of
an urgency.
Thank you madame chairman and
representative and and I agree
with you I think it's it's an
urgency that we need to put
forward especially because I
know people in my direct family
who have been victims of
domestic violence no I like
representative lord talked about
we have a stocker I have another
stalker who just sent me a
message last night saying i'm
coming to santa fe to see you
know it's it's it's kind of
scary stuff so I really
appreciate this really.
Pin point.
On this issue madame chairman
representative just a couple or
maybe a few more questions a
tribal collaboration have we
spoken to the tribes nations
waveless who may be in sand or
county about their collaboration
with this new effort with your
bill madame chairman
representative manager
had very informal conversations
with.
Some like enforcement members in
the.
Program I optus sit with uh.
Thank you manager thank you
representative I I really am.
Excited to hear that a lot of
the time we have these bills
that come forward and there's
not much tribal collaboration
and it's good to have that
because we need all the
stakeholders at the table like
we like we mentioned beforehand
madame chairman representative.
I and so regarding that tribal
collaboration
and the figure that you have
here to hundred thousand dollars
I know what a hundred thousand
dollars gets you and it's not
much madam chair representative
so can you just give me a
thorough breakdown of how you
arrived at this one hundred
thousand dollars figure madam
chair represented.
Of madam chair representative
lock.
I looked at some of the
trainings that have gone on
across the state and not only
law enforcement but when I was
with the department.
And I have always been.
The.
For one county.
The.
Tream is many people from.
Thank you madame chairman think
you represent it and I would
never venture to guess what
you're counting deserves or
needs because it's not in my
district but I I definitely
trust you and and your authority
to to get the right amount of
training and I appreciate that
so many chairman representative
regarding the appropriation a
hundred thousand goes to.
Local government isn't the efa.
So madame chairman
representative do we know if
we've spoken to folks on lfc
appropriations on where this
will be included in the budget
madame chair representative
manager representative I have
had some conversations.
The.
Work on an rsp to get this.
Manager representative you made
those magic words it's in house
bill to
I think madam chair
representative so continuing on
here madam chairman
representative basic education
for law enforcement agencies i'm
guessing this would probably go
to a national organization
that's been a credited with
providing this kind of services
do do we know if there are that
have reached out who wanted to
be included in this because I
know madame chair represented
there are many trades unions
different national groups that
do this kind of thing and it's a
very effective approach some
madam chairman representative do
we know what those energies will
be and if not have we had
discussions with those people
madame chairman representative
representative block I have had
discussions with two
organizations.
The.
And I I personally.
And it's written very specifi.
Stocking.
Because sometimes what we see is
that opens it up.
So I wanted to be a very
specific p.
That training.
Thank you madame chair think you
representative and I I think
that's so important to put that
training forward because.
Goodness me we have we have a
problem don't we manage to
represent it can you tell me
what that you're your county
real quick.
Do we know where it ranks
regarding the domestic violence
and and or stocking.
Do we know if we have any
statistics that we track on that
for county madame chairman
representative madame chair
representative.
But I will I will be.
Thank you madame chairman think
you represent it and I proceed
that and I like where I live
there whenever I go up to
linking county we have
billboards as well that say
domestic balance awareness and I
think that's also good that's
probably not included in this
but I would love to work with
you in the future to get that
may be a statewide campaign even
though one of our departments to
maybe d PS or someone like that
to get out across the state
cause domestic balances as a
huge concern to many new
mexicans so madam chairman
representative I believe I had
an amendment that I
The.
If we have it available manager.
We'll pass it out.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Represent martin is um.
Madame chair.
The.
I'm sure would you like me to
explain them in or
we have to have a motion for
that okay I will move this
amendment for discussion madame
chairman.
I'm just a little concerned
about the.
Any entered to your individual
that has provided domestic viol.
That seems kind of bri.
Presented that you know some
tiny towns police something in
there they don't really have any
credential so i'm i'm I want to
post the amendment but that is a
little concerning because it
feels like it's it's that so
we're in discussion yeah so that
did you want to present anything
more before we going to discuss
thank you matter what's your
thinking represent and I I
really proceed that I worked
with representative martinez on
this amendment because we really
wanted to target sure that they
did have some kind of training
rate currently in the bill I
don't seem necessary.
Any necessarily any language
that specifies that they need to
be.
An expert and I think this just
makes a little little more
targeted and I understand your
concern madame chairman and
representative thompson.
And.
But I I would definitely
deferred to represent martinez
to see if he has any thoughts on
that if if you can animature.
Manager and block and
representative thompson I
understand your concerns
when we actually write the.
Thank you the ability.
Represent can you other
microphone down it doesn't sound
like you're.
Yeah I think so
thank you
is there any other discussion on
the amendment.
The.
Minimum tear.
That would be manager I
ask
that we have adopt.
A moment.
Two two seven five four three
point one two house bill fifty
two madame chairman I make that
much.
Okay opposition to the adoption
of the amendment they seeing
none who have been amended men
did still.
So we'll go back to is there any
other.
Oh i'm sorry
thank you madame chairman thank
you representative and I that's
all the questions that I had but
I did want to just reaffirm that
I totally support what you're
doing I think it's very good and
I would love to see what what
comes forward from it because we
would love to see how this could
help us in a terror county as
well because I think domestic
balances one of the worst and
most.
And that most terrible things to
suffer through and a lot of
people supper in silence.
A lot of the time so madam chair
representative thank you I I
totally support house for fifty
two and I will look for it thank
you madame chairman thank you
represent.
Okay is there any other
discussion
I just have a question.
According to a the appropriation
of the purpose of the station
maybe
with some other programs that
are already in sand of all
county such as your coordinated.
Some multiple disciplinary team
that include fly enforcement and
advocates advocates that meet
monthly have you spoken to them
do you know and that they see a
need
madam chair I actually had that
conversation with a member of
ccr this morning i'm and they
they feel that the the need for
advanced training
would be beneficial.
To them as advocates
and the training for corporate
smell bit.
This will be available to them
it's not mandatory for them to
go through so if the court
personal feels that it's.
They can always opt out of.
But it it will be a little bit
more advanced usual.
Eight hour training.
And thank you representative
also
you don't specify you know how
athen they will conduct the
training.
For the various entity.
And.
Yeah that's a given so how often
do you you know did you not want
to specify how often people had
to do it like yearly.
Enlargements a year.
Madam chair because we're
starting the pilot project
incentive or county
I have one cbf efficacy of this
program but i'd like to see it
as an annual training that goes
on state wide for any law
enforcement agen.
Into the training ic it when we
open up the program state why
did it would.
See no further questions
a second.
Okay
or a.
Do pass for a house build make
sure I get the number rate.
Fifty two and we have amended.
Okay is there any opposition.
Okay seeing none you have a
department.
The committee and I will work
with you when we spread out to
the rest of the state.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Okay next we have
we will hear house build one
twenty nine the fire arms.
Representative run.
Dan happening here not here no I
think it I think she's into
another committee right now
madam chair.
Receive when you're ready think
you madam chair house for one
twenty nine is the mandatory
fourteen day waiting period on
the purchase of a firearm.
Uhm this introduction of the sos
legislation pretends to a number
of different problems that we
have right now in the system of
purchase one is the
it closes a loophole right now
we're after three days and you
haven't received notice from
next or the federal database
that is supposed to respond to
a background check we
unfortunately haven't opened a
loop where we the firearm seller
can actually hand over that
firearm without the background
check having been uhm
accomplished so this closes that
critical loophole were one could
obtain a firearm where
background track was not
completed
in conjunction with that this is
also a bill that we hope will
save a lot of lives we look at
new mexico one of the highest
suicide rates in the nation.
And when we look at what waiting
periods do it provides a
critical cooling off period for
those who might do harm to
themselves and certainly others
are we have a compiled list as
well of mass shootings that have
happened around the state i'm
sorry round the country where if
a waiting period was in place
that may not have happened where
perpetrators have gone and
purchased a weapon within a
twenty four hours to fourteen
day period they are have decided
to commit these mass shootings
had they had the time to wait
that may not have happened so
these are why we believe that
the waiting period is critical
for new mexico and why were
proposing that today madame
chair I would like to introduce
my experts
with me we have elizabeth
johnson with the department of
public safety and ben bower.
Public safety advisor to the
governor and with that we will
stand for questions.
All right we'll go to the
audience those who are in
opposition if you want to raise
your hands as we get an idea of
how many people
and does everyone want to speak
oh we have a list.
Yeah.
Several people signed up.
As in opposition.
So we'll.
The.
No.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
I think we got it
so
we will start and time the
fifteen minutes for those in
purse in person and if we get
done before that fifteen and
other people would like to raise
their hand and speak and they're
welcome to
and we will keep it.
Okay.
That sounds good elaine summer
hill.
The.
Working with going to cost
in twenty fifteen
of new jersey.
During the weight.
Personally years ago I was
with night on me.
This building
people who may be at risk from
acquiring yourself.
Law enforcement
and I refer to such as word
versus the district
council
aside.
Bill should be made on a legal
action to restrict.
Three days
for a little more please.
Myself included
next we have to be in a coppers.
Sorry.
Yeah.
Okay we just.
Have.
All right
madam chair committee members
terrimite so with the national
rifle association and opposition
to possible one twenty nine
that's one twenty nine will not
provide more through more
improved work or more enhanced
background checks it changes
nothing about how fbi
investigates potential gun
buyers if he twenty one twenty
nine I passed fbi will not
initiate a second background on
a gun buyer after fourteen days
of elapsed.
They will not search for any
updated data on the national
instant check system with the
spill will do those
unnecessarily delay law
exercise their constitutional
protective right purchasing
players.
If we want one twenty nine a
place to all fire sales not just
cases where a delay response is
received from fbi for further
investigation on the gun buyer
ninety percent of background
checks result in an immediate
proceed with the sale response
from fbi it makes no sense to
impose a waiting period on this
ninety percent of gun buyers the
argument that a waiting period
is a cooling off to it is
illogical.
You only have new mexico health
player and two thirds of those
two thirds of those going on
owners already own a fire so
cooling off period will not
impact.
Thomas skip is.
Hi which was okay.
I pose this proposed legislation
because
it was records.
Able to walk force
legal and was still offers no
guys to private sellers what
records what information what
there may be and how long
legislation.
Thank you my.
The.
Yeah.
Thank you very much
county
share in the state of the
mexico.
The forty days
citizens.
My experience
then their fire.
So if I see that basically
we need to pay fire such as
several members of the committee
here they have
had a firm.
Offset threat their lives and
that could happen
before.
One is not able to protect the
citizens we are on the first
line of the fence whether we're
preparing to do that emotionally
or not
is like people there's three
parties president every crime
there's a birthday treaty
there's one force of one shows
that
you.
Mr gardener gardner.
They manage their keep governor
of national sheets of these
as beautiful for several reasons
and early this is working
actually
because it's based on business
days so there's no way to get in
the fourteen days and is the
nexus discussed by the
next only thirty days you talk
about roman mexican makes sense
they have to wait fourteen days
they can come back or delay for
whatever reason
are something back into another
forty
vicious cycle and they probably
or at least other weapons and
there's no exemption for those
individuals
let's go back to what we talk
about
was actors not the normal
message
as.
The.
Thank you
the anthony.
Thank you
Thanks.
It is.
I will
have my background.
I have a.
And say she has
Yeah
for that
universe.
Yeah.
This is
background it was mentioned that
so.
People are right now
thank you.
Thank you
um we have a new.
Opposition.
My name is.
President the left of the the
mexican always association
twenty nine.
The fourteenth anyway period
will this proportion
get buyers and rural new mexico
fires retailers serve rural
areas may have a customer radius
above to a hundred miles silver
city for example twelve miles
away from sacrifice on war
options sixty three miles away
this legislation a gun buyer
from a rural area we have to
travel that plus miles
philosophy appropriate ones
against initiate the background
that even passed the background
check yeah gives it go ahead
they have drive back
to home
fourteen business days almost
three weeks later I will have to
make another two hundred plus
mile round received fire on
this bill on
mexico extensive
thank you.
Good.
My needs virginia goods also
private citizen former
correctional officer you tell
you criminals do not follow
citizens should not be penalized
for carrying plan education as
the solution for those who are
going to use a fire to commit
suicide we need to make sure
that there is
address but limiting ownership
is over to government and our
constitutional delivery.
Thank you.
Okay let's go to.
Your please insurance d.
The.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee net asking here
on behalf of over seventeen
hundred members of zero rifle
and pistol club in the
albuqueria waiting period delays
the ability of those who have a
sudden need for defense of fire
such as women fleeing and abuse
of relationship to protect
themselves and thought of an
abused person counting down the
days until they can have
infective tool hoping their
abuser stock or doesn't tack in
the meantime this horrifying.
We've seen a huge rise and
criminality and rets to people
in our society at large in the
past few years.
I don't know who on the
committee may or may not only
gone but if you do and you
receive a credible threat I
wouldn't wish any of you have to
wait two weeks to get a tool to
protect yourself on some
literatures after you sell to
fence as a human right and
everyone should be able to in
the time of need get the tools
they need to exercise it
awaiting period will similarly
prevent criminals from accessing
and using firearms a atf trace
data shows that the average time
the crime on a gun required for
excuse me recovers from a crime
scene is over nine years thank
you.
Perfect time thank you next.
Hello jim gazny from silver city
and I request you do not pass
this legislation
I mean reiterates in the think
the other people said about uh
we're are many people that might
need immediate safety but also
the sponsor mentioned about
suicide rates I believe the
studies show that many be
suicide by guns go down but the
suicide rate doesn't go down the
suits I still occur there the
person finds another way
thank you and please don't pass
this bill.
Yeah.
Hello my name is logan brown
directors of myself i'm just
like long to this and of new
mexico and so i'm very
appreciated that you guys just
recently passed her will voted
out this committee he's seventy
two and everyone was super
concerned which we all are about
domestic violence and now we're
talking about making potential
domestic violence picked up
victims away fourteen plus days
to receive a.
Equalizes their ability to
protect and find themselves on
the last day the last crime is
exactly regarding domestic
violence was back from twenty
fifteen in it saying that we
have a very high rate of
domestic violence here in mexico
one out of ten
and instances go unreported and
most of those are women that are
being affected though
give women the tools that they
need I was actually a police
dispatcher for
a year of my life in a past job
and I had to sit through many
phone calls of massive ten
seventies i'm all the option is
in the room there there the back
their hair pairs on their head
just went up there the plans and
active domestic violence called
no one wants to be on the all
and no she wants to be
responding to that call they
know that second account and
when the second count police
answers are minutes away I don't
ask this build thank you.
Thank you next.
The.
Hi my name is star for my I have
a comment that hasn't even come
up on us and you're concerned
about the f b I background check
after three days they have to
give the gun to the purchaser
but what you'd have and
mentioned is the fact that the f
b I has a clawback program and
if we then after that time
period they find something
suspicious in the applicant's
background then they literally
go out to the field and track
that person down and claw back
that gun last year they claude
back at least over five thousand
guns so that hasn't been
mentioned so I I would employ
you not to vote for that
fourteen day waiting to read
thank you.
Thank you next.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Next person who's on the please
go ahead.
Good afternoon madame chair this
is larry santag here i'm talking
to as a private citizen and was
not a flight of this issue by a
year and organization that is
encouraging people to make their
voice her called better together
new mexico I did twenty years
with the other courtesy please
department and prior to that I
was a nice other weapon security
specialist so i've got a lot of
experience with a variety of
firearms
I retired several years ago but
I still get calls from a lot of
people especially when it comes
to domestic violence and they
want to know what they can do
and taken away the opportunity
for somebody which I would
recommend to them that they take
steps to protect themselves
besides restraining orders
having a firearm is necessary
these days the fourteen day
waiting period as you've heard
numerous times only impacts
innocent while appiting citizens
I encouraged you to not pass
this bill thank you.
Thank you next time soon.
The.
If you're on soon go ahead.
The.
If you're on zoom please go
ahead.
Okay we'll go to the next
person.
If you're.
I think sometimes it would help
you call people by.
Okay i'm not sure
if I was called before urban
I wasn't called by name and I
don't know if I miss my queue
by here.
Closer to
her.
Stone.
Any mexico the fourteen weight
day period is not going to help.
With
criminal aspects in that.
How many criminals are you
catching
that are waiting the fourteen
days
and there goes into.
Well much are we keeping violent
criminals in prison and not
releasing them.
And I try to think about
why we need to have a fourteen
day weight period.
And is that because.
That's going to stop criminals.
Bids night.
It's not we have it.
Dude on a include monitor
robbing a windy store.
There was working for
thank you you're wondering if
that.
Okay next person on zoom.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
Next person.
Go ahead if you're on zoom you
have one minute.
Madam chair my name is
travesanchez and from reorange
show i'm speaking today to
address the implications in
mexico hospital one twenty nine
bill that mandates fourteen day
business waiting period for the
sale of firearms including an
extended period for the
completion of a federal instant
background check as a proponent
individual liberty in a staunch
defender of our constitutional
rights I find this bill to be
not only a missed up and
legislative judgment but also a
directive front of the
principles of individual liberty
and limited government.
The introduction of a prolonged
waiting period is proposing this
bills and misguided attempt to
solve a problem that through the
means of a bit infringed upon
their rights of law abiding
citizens this bill overstepped
the boundary reasonable
regulation diving headlong into
the territory of unwarranted
governments on choosing into the
lives of individuals.
The right to bear arms enshrined
in the second amendment of our
constitution is not just a
guarantee for the friends but
also a safeguard against the
overage of government power
libertarian principles hope that
the role of government should be
limited focused on protecting
the rights and freedoms of
individuals rather than imposing
burdensome restrictions that
impede those rights.
The mandatory waiting period
imposed by this bill not only
curtails those foods use me the
immediate ability of individuals
to exercise their constitutional
rights but also places an undo
burden on fire and sellers
creating a regular so regulatory
environment that is right for
bureaucratic overregion
potential abuse irish all stake
holders lawmakers and fellow
citizens are recreated.
Will go to the next person on
zoom is there any other thank
you can you
hear you go ahead
this is kenneth burning a mayor
of edgewood and i'm speaking as
a private citizen this this bill
which we have before today it's
it doesn't do anything to
protect anybody because anybody
who is determined to go cause
harm to another will always find
alternative movement motors to
do so they can use other
equipment other tools what this
is doing is actually penalizing
the majority the law bidding
citizens of our state and
penalizing them because their
small fraction you would be
better off with your time in
your money spent on bills like
house bill fifty two that you
just pass preventing violence
within the state in protecting
the people of our state thank
you.
The.
Thank you.
Alright thank you.
Would you like to present more
on your bill or
oh i'm sorry
yes
those in support.
House bill when twenty nine.
Others in support.
And then those who would like
who signed up to speak start
with.
Um I believe it's terra marcel
did I get your new hand writing.
The.
Okay
that doesn't bring a deli.
The.
Um if we get to the end and I
didn't call your name then and
you signed up you can tell us a
renewed abstention.
Hello
this bill.
Um
can be dropped sitting in a
prices especially for those risk
as a part of themselves or
others in mexico average the
average design.
Are two hundred sixty one for
the last year that's a pretty
big number that this bills will
help
and make this more thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you wilson.
Yeah.
Hello my name is wilson i'm
speaking on behalf of student so
many action through high school.
We're just here to say that
you'll seek her an iron
environment rather than so we've
been feeling unsafe at school
you would rather like to focus
on education
and not to mention there are
lots of kids at our schools
we're suicidal and with this
fourteen day
totally help
because you know they have a
cool off period think about the
decisions.
Um.
Overall this is just
as we feel sick of schools at
any help with some medically
helpless market
very ended
committee my new
president of the previous
balance we started strong
support possible watch way night
we got
problem
and that's exactly what this
real does as the representative
explained it from the suicide
prevention we know that bills
are those can be very important
I personally have had three
families calling in the past two
years old family member went to
the local guns or qualify on and
they died my son
and it didn't addition to that
are very high speed it would ask
the representative also talk
about
this close
let's set deposit process and
this week do exactly
purchases
come see transactions is
particularly cute in the context
of the islands because
agencies and this happens
waiting periods.
And
I believe
they have a cample.
For two
my name is
solutions and the within their.
And.
The the members of those
organizations are myself
but we have some spill.
The.
The purchase of the other gun
are any fire are there something
that su.
Yeah.
Alexis mess.
This.
We all read.
Hello everyone my name is alex
is him and i'm still finding
your actual standard
for one reason the help stopped
before and.
You've already two hundred
people in the mexico guy every
year from guns do a stay.
Now if you want waiting
shouldn't come for the vast
majority of them
but waiting for a few days
literally stay five by keeping
guns out of the of the strike
and restrict the price people
you may hear the person
contenting society
statistically that's incorrect.
Ninety percent of council
are reporting
where it's only
other attempts are successful
and most of those don't go on to
try again.
Extended reading period
Thank you.
And the association university
and we stand in strong support
for
the reasons why I personally
because they have easy access to
guns I think it's really
important to take which worked
in other states and use it in
the mexico
yes you know it's not gonna
solve everything but you can
protect a lot of what
on the side and accidental
injuries so thank you very much
for your.
Take
next we had indeed benefit.
Thank you
from reorange
I would like to echo all the
other pro points something else
i'd like to mention though
having dealt with domestic
violence victims these are
highly emotionally charged
situations and frequently
concept they can get a gun in
three days to protect themselves
they actually harm someone else
in the household because they
are not able to shoot a protect
themselves in a safe way because
of the emotional nature of tv
and so that done it's found by
children it isn't used properly
when confronting their
perpetrator and so I think it is
a misnomer to think that a dv
with them with a gun
automatically can protect
yourself anything we can do slow
down more guns on the street is
it why public safety
thank you.
We have more time if anyone else
in the audience.
Many my name is all
directly.
The vision will not
propose.
Our passional services
are real people with real
and if this can protect some
insurance numbers
we council the families we
cancel people
and you know something that we
want to die for a little while
permanent decisions and if you
can rust that one it's all
please
important to.
Thank you anyone else yes go
ahead
and secretary of the department
of healthy signed for a
different bill but my comments
like equally to the although
those mexico has the third
highest age adjusted gun
violence death three in the
country in twenty twenty two
violence was the number one
cause of the death of kids in
the state balance was the number
one costs of kids dying in new
mexico research shows the tools
like waiting periods and each
limit in one of the other bills
are associated with reductions
in gun desk particularly suicide
the information we submitted for
the physical impact report
includes more of that
studies for those reasons and
for others included in the.
Anyone else.
Will go to zero.
Good afternoon committee thank
you so much for loan me to speak
I strongly support a fourteen
day waiting period for fire on
purchase for its potential to
prevent self harmer home to
others that's the result of
impulsive act semi from
overwhelming emotion
it wouldn't have prevented my
brother and live suicide that
stand from unbearable pain from
a disease that was killing him
but our family doesn't fault him
for that action what what had
been unbearable as a loss of a
lot one to the intense but
temporary pain of a romantic
break it for example many of us
have experience that kind of
serious pain to come out of it
counting our blessings by
sometimes in the heat of that
pain a person is able to think
about the future for themselves
anything that would give them
pause couldn't save their lives
I also believe that this act in
particular would be found
constitutional yes and when it's
challenged thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee I am doctor
megan henry speaking on behalf
of the american college of
obstatutions and going to
college i'm from albuquerque and
now call the four corners area
of new mexico home on december
seventh twenty seventeen the day
before my son turned to I was in
clinic when we heard that all
schools in the area were
unlocked on because of the
school shooting and astech not
long after the nursing assistant
I was working with that day
about an urgent phone call I
will never forget her scream as
she learned that her family
member was one of the children
murdered her wales permeated the
walls of our clinic as we born
witnessed to her rogrief it felt
like a nightmare that such
tragedy had come to our small
community
unbelievably it felt like they
jave this past may I was once
again in clinic when I heard
that my own and now school age
children were unlocked down
because of a mass shooting and
affirming to neighborhood and
eighteen year old who had
legally purchased an air fifteen
style rifle shot a hundred and
fifty rounds in less than ten
minutes pitting seven houses
eleven vehicles and killing
three women in the hours and
days that followed we would
learn that my husband knew both
family of the victims and a few
of the brave first responders
unfortunately more and more of
us find our lives impacted by
gun violence these aren't simply
stories in the news they are
stories about our loved ones and
our communities at the community
member a mother and we do what.
Oh.
Sorry making the next.
The.
I'd say I think I just got muted
i've finished my last I thought
thank you as a community member
a mother and it will be doing
physician I asked that you
support house bill one twenty
nine one twenty seven and one
thirty seven legislation working
to ensure guns stay out of the
hands of those who intend to use
them and sense us acts of
violence helps to keep new
mexican communities safer thank
you
next.
I did ask her new a couple of
times but i've already spoken
thank you.
The.
Good afternoon my name is diana
viadian and i'm a survivor of
them violence in october twenty
twenty one I lost my eighteen
year old son to go violence i've
been a public school teacher
serving my community in the
south valley and west side of
alba tricky for the last twenty
three and a half years i'm here
with months demand action to
support the fourteen day waiting
period for fire unpurchases
every year thousands of firearms
end up in the hands of buyers
who are legally prohibited from
possessing possessing them
because more than two hundred
and eighty four thousand
background chips can not be
completed within three days the
checks that take longer than
three days are four times more
likely to be denied we are
losing too many lives to gun
violence
this consensus can help save
lives.
The.
And keep families and friends
and community members
from being impacted and left to
deal with this trauma and please
work towards making our
communities safer for our
children are you
thank you.
Thank you there any more.
Okay go ahead.
Better chair members of the
committee I built jordan with
new mexico voices for children
and we feel this bill is one
important step in a
comprehensive approach to
reducing gun violence which is
now that no number one cause of
death among young people so we
are proud and and honoured to
stand with the young people when
the students who have spoken
today it support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
The.
Hello my name is desert a
boyster and I am in domestic
violence survivor I actually
strongly urging to vote no
against this house bill and all
the other restrictive foreigns
and in regard to use getting a
hold of weapons they are now
required by law for cease secure
storage
as they survivor myself I would
have been killed
and it gave me the ability to
get away from my abuser.
I do not believe that
restricting our constitutional
right benefits anyone when we
have other actions that can be
taken such as public knowledge
and classes and courses that are
available to everyone in regards
to state storage and handling of
weapons thank you.
The.
Good head.
Yes.
Hi I just want to remind
everybody of something here
section two or exactly
constitution article two section
ship six is applies to all of
the gun regulations you guys are
pre- putting it out here no law
no law celebrates the right of
the citizen to keep in bare arms
for security and defence and for
law for hunting and recreational
use and other lawful purposes
but nothing here in shall
infringe the permit carrying of
concealed weapons no
municipality or county show
regularly in any way an incident
of the right to keep in bear
arms these are all in violation
of normally the US constitution
but the new mexico constitution
you guys are violating a growth.
Thank you.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Listen for questions voucher
okay thank you.
Okay representative.
Okay madam chairman thank you
representative thank you experts
could you just introduce your
experts again i'm sorry I miss
her name one of them on the
record thank you madame chair my
experts are lisbon johnson with
the department public safety
here for a legal and objective
of analysis on the bill and been
back order.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you represent it thank you miss
johnson mister bower appreciate
that
so
many chairman representative i'm
just gonna start on the FIR
usually end with the far below
start with it today madame
chairman representatives met
representative I see that there
is a physical impact according
to fire it looks like it starts
in f by twenty five and it looks
like nine point six to nineteen
point two thousand dollars
madame chairman representative
can you just tell me.
What this
where where the impact are is it
dps mostly which department is
mostly impacted by this
legislation manager represented.
Madam chair representative so
this is based on the fact that
we're creating a misdemeanor
for those who would
unlawfully hand over a weapon
within the fourteen day period
so it's just as
a budget analysis from lfc that
would potentially for those that
would violate the law
should they commit the committee
mister meaner would be an
increase cost to jails
thank you madame chairman thank
you representative so then with
this bill then increase
incarceration manager
representative matter chair
representatives not the lazo
think you represent but if it's
not obeyed as with most crimes
madame chair representative
folks would be incarcerated yes
thank you madame chairman thank
you representative so then in
the bill I believe you mentioned
it's a mystery I believe that's
on the page.
Page two some manager
representative i'm not aware of
the actual code could you
please.
Tell me what the statute says
regarding sentencing for this
misdemeanor madame chairman
represent this might be a good
one for miss johnson madam chair
representative that's going to
be section thirty one dash
nineteen dash one in a msa
nineteen seventy eight I have a
tab if you'd like me to read it
but it's essentially up to one
year in prison and I believe a
fine of the thousand dollars but
I could verify
thinking manager thinking
representative in the midst and
so in the bill it says on page
two here
line twenty.
Through twenty two it says two
or more offences.
Says two or more offenses may be
charged in the same complaint.
And the information are
indictment shall be put punished
as separate offenses so madame
chairman representative less
than this person.
I don't know how to have two
offences on this statute but if
if you had two offences.
Would that be prosecuted at the
same time madam chair because
it's on the same complaint
they're separate offences madam
chair representative it depends
on when both of the both or or
however many transactions and
occurrences occurred and what
the facts were leading into
those this mirror similar
provisions such as how we charge
forgery etc so one violation
equals one count a person can
have more.
Thank you madame chair think you
representative thank you miss
johnson so.
Like well with this bill i'm
just wondering how that would
apply practice how would someone
have two different
violations of this would have
got a two different gun stores
and madame chair representative
if a if a person violated this
would mean that essentially a
seller would have violated the
fourteen day period i'm in
handed over a weapon numerous
times so that would be for a
repeat violation that would be a
hypothetical on which and the
would have broken the multiple
times.
Okay.
And thank you madame chairman
think it thank you
representative so
then with the seller be the only
one responsible for this with
the buyer also be charged as
well madame chair madame chair
representative so we may clear
in the
who it is that would be
responsible um and i'm just
major sure
we're in section page two or get
your sections right leave it
still section
one page two each party to an
unlawful silver fighter fire
before the required waiting
period and violation of this
section so I would heat the
seller in this circumstance
venture.
Okay manager represented thank
you for that so in what
circumstance with the individual
find the firm be in non
complaints of this section
management.
So madam chair representative
block I think we're on page two
subsection d party to an
unlawful cell ie buyer I e
seller.
The.
Okay thank you manager thank you
represent and now like I know
what they say ignorance of the
laws and i'm skews rate so I
guess technically both people
would then be charged.
Is that correct according each
party madam chair representative
it's in fourteen through sixteen
if the person transacted and
received the firearm prior to
the fourteen day waiting period
and that was found
that would be correct the seller
and the buyer rip is required to
wait that fourteen days period.
Management chairman
representative so if if I go in
and I I get it immediately the
the seller gives me the the
going immediately after I have
passed my next
even if I can say I didn't know
that there was such a provision
I would still then be liable
alongside the seller according
to this okay thank you madame
chairman think you represent
that it helps me a little bit
i'm gonna be on the page and if
i've been campaigned awa.
Yeah that's good pitch one i'm
going back and forth sorry sorry
folks
madam chairman representative.
Experts at the bottom page two
it says the fourteen business
day period so include the period
required to conduct a federal
instant background check.
Manager representative these are
business days if I am not
mistaken is that correct from
line twenty three on page one
that's correct venture thank you
matter thank you represent and
so madame chair representative
do we know what other states
have similar provisions like
this was this
was under huaweis which is
fourteen days is that what we
kind of wanted to be in parity
with animature representative
madam chair representative I
don't have the exact language in
each of the startutes another
states but california florida
hawaii illinois rhode islands
and DC have waiting periods i'm
similar to this matter.
Thank you madame chair think you
represent it so according to
what i'm seeing here this this
is just to hand out the we were
given and ccj from senator.
I've soda regarding this it says
her wise fourteen days.
California's ten dc ten
washington's ten maryland seven
minutes so to seven new jersey
seven island seven florida's
three illinois three madame
chair representative so I guess
this would probably be as close
as possible to hawaii then
manager is that correct yes
managed here as far as the day
the waiting period in and the
amount of days that's cracked.
Okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative cause I
know in huawei they're waiting
period is not limited to
business days and includes all
calendar days some madame chair
representative why did we choose
business days instead of
calendar days madam chair
representative and anticipation
that this would be a business
transaction just feels
appropriate to follow just
standards of of commerce and so
we chose business days madam
chair representative.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative and I am I only
about concern about that because
like for me the only time I can
take off the work is I guess
right now during session and on
weekends and some adam chairman
representative I know of driven
down to sportsmen's warehouse
down and last cruises purchased
the pirate on a saturday and
those rules of commerce although
they are.
I guess it seems a little
archaic if he asked me madam
chair represented because I will
be doing that business on a
sunday or saturday
have we spoken to any of those
individual businesses that are
open all days a week to see what
they are thinking about this
manager repair madame chair
representatives are within
reason if the business is open
on those days that would be
considered a business day.
Okay thank you manager thinking
representative so
I I know the the venacular for
business day traditionally is
monday through friday so from
what i'm understanding now where
do we have a definition of what
a business day is then.
In this bill manager madame
chair representative we deal and
that was like.
To us when we received our
analysis I think late last night
so yes it is.
Up to interpretation right now
manager
thank you madame chairman think
you represent it so I guess with
the concern are we going to be
putting forward in the moment
maybe in judiciary.
Madam chair representative mary
very very likely great thank you
madame think you represent it
especially for folks like me who
have to drive really long week
as we're in rural new mexico and
we we need to do that so madame
chair representative I
appreciate that.
Would this also include days
where folks are.
Closed because of a holiday such
as I know sports means is
usually open on martin luther
kingdo it's a federal holiday
but not on christmas day so
manager representative how would
we determine what that would be
made which I represent everybody
happy to clarify but right now
like you said it's up to
interpretation.
Manager representative thank you
for that yeah i'm i'm always
horrified when it comes to open
to interpretation with the
courts because you know if you
thought well I thought it was
fourteen day business days and
you can you gave a firearm to
someone you thought it was just
fourteen days you give to them
but martin luther kingday
doesn't count so you know let's
just make sure that we take that
language up here madame chairman
representative I guess i'll go
back to page two here.
And that may be online eight c
manon chair representative.
Uhm.
It says unlawful sale of a
firearm before the required
waiting period madame chairman
representative experience
experts could you please tell me
the losses process manager.
Madame chair representative i'm
going to be clarification on
that question madame to
represent itself on line eight c
it says unlawful sale of the
firearm madame representative
johnson could you please tell me
what the loss of sale would be
that would not be invitation of
this portion of your bill.
Certainly a laugh will sell over
firearm as a sale of a fire arm
that includes all of our state
statute provisions and also
those in federal are.
And to clarify I think as far as
this lap as it pretends to the
slum adam chair the firm just
needs to remain in custody of
the seller during the entire
fourteen day waiting period so
within this the provision of
this
bill that's that's what we mean
by unlawful.
Thank you madame chairman think
you represent it so then I
appreciate that answer here on
line ten it says possession or
physical control of the firm
from the seller do we have a
definitist in here of control.
Manager representative no we
don't have a definition of
control.
Okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative do we
know if there's any current
statutes that define what that
is or if there's case law I know
miss johnson is very good at
caseload
no actually
madam chair representative block
in this case the courts will
look to plain meaning of control
and probably go to weather.
The.
Madame chairman represented
thank you for that
I will look at websites.
Okay going down here on the same
page.
Line twenty three on page two.
Section.
I don't know what section was
gene
section one.
Okay section one thank you
madame chair thank you
representative romero so it says
whoever violates the provisions
section is guilty of a missed
meaner yes and then it says
records of firearm sales shall
be made available.
The.
By the seller for inspection
upon request of war enforcement
agency madame chairman
representative could you please
tell me that the chain of
custody of those documents and
and how they.
Are made available president
section thank you madame charles
have our expert
madam chair and represented a
block actually this section is
totally unnecessary because my
officers if they have problem
costs to investigate can go get
those documents.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you represent so we're seeing
section each is unnecessary.
Is that what i'm understanding.
The.
Yes
it plays with already existing
line when my officers go to
investigate they already have
authority by other means so this
isn't necessarily controlling
law.
If that makes sense and to
clarify for the public madam
chair representative of it fire
sales are there's AAA record of
such doctor there's a
documentation of each fire i'm
sale in which case
law enforcement can go in and
obtain those records at any time
this is just reinforcing that
provision madame chair.
Thank you madam chair think you
represent it so yeah would that
require a warrant.
Depends how the records are made
of like how the investigations
on folding generally we would
need a warrant establishing
probable cause and specific in
articular bull reasons to need
the documents however there are
certain times that there could
be a different precedent.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative that is
helpful they are made a miss
johnson thank you miss johnson
as the better clean madam chair
johnson but that would not be
correct
madame chair representative
thank you for that i'm gonna go
back to the far.
Cause I did see something that's
stood out to me on.
Uh significant issues.
Minimum tear representative I
think they they say her gun
violence and waiting periods on
the fire do you all have a copy
I apologize
it is deal which reported five
fifty firm related debts and
twenty twenty two including two
hundred ninety five suicides
madame termin representative do
we have any data specifically
from the department of health or
any anyone who's some
independent analysis to see how
many folks in this pool of
people have.
How many of the folks the five
fifty.
Were indeed purchasing the
firearm.
Within the same day of the
occurrence madame chairman
representative so madame chair
representative this is very
difficult data to collect
however when we look at a law
that was passed in
with concern that was repealed
specific to waiting periods
there is an increase in suicide
rate and went that law was
repealed so when we look at the
data based on how it is this
effects the about cooling off
period we know that with with
wisconsin specifically the
repeal of that like uh certainly
me allowed for an increase in
suit was said.
I think madam chair think you
representative but so we're not
collecting that currently in new
mexico.
Madam chair representative the
the data that we have collected
is in particular regarding mouse
shootings and awaiting period we
know that there the number of
the top ten mash shootings in
the country were within a
fourteen day waiting period from
those who purchased to those who
used those weapons
and so we we can correlate a
number of things and cause eight
two the fact that without a
waiting period there's an
increase
risk to life for those that are
in a place where they might harm
themselves or others are in so
as far as what we have today for
for data that's that's all I
have been able to compile this
time given that constraints of
data collection.
Thank you madame chair think you
represent it so
I appreciate that have we done
any kind of study before.
No III know that the governor
always says we must be making
evidence based.
Legislation.
Madame tear representative I
just don't see that evidence
based.
Approach in new mexico because
as we all know the mexico is
much different than florida much
different than hawaii so I would
like to see that have we done
any kind of studies through the
legislative process to pass any
husband more for these studies
on the state of madame chairman
representative or maybe even a
department uh
task force that we've created
madam chair representative we do
take a substantial amount of
data on fire and death rate
around the state that's how we
know that we are number three in
the country as it relates to
fire on deaths in twenty twenty
two
we had.
Sixty eight suicide deaths and
sixty four homicide deaths
between for her children and
youth hundred forty fire and
deaths between twenty sixteen
and twenty twenty we know that
when we look at meta now sees
from the round corporation
and of another object of third
party organizations that these
are evidence based.
Policies that were proposing
today that conclusively show
that waiting periods decreased
suicide and fire must homicide
so again when we're talking
about big picture and what it is
that we're seeking to understand
about new mexico all of these
apply.
Madame chairman and
representative and I appreciate
that the answer but i'm looking
at the affair right now and it
it does cite the rant
corporation studies and her says
there's moderate evidence
waiting for his decreased
suicides and decrease overall
homicides enlimited evidence
which increases decreased total
suicides and is decreased
firearm homicides so madame
chairman representative we're if
we're talking about the same
study.
I'm not seeing
conclusive evidence that shows
this is an evidence based
approach madam to represent it
do have any other other studies
that we've seen.
That do indeed show that this is
effective.
Madame chair representative.
Any accessibility.
Madame chair representative any
ability for us to save lives
where within the evidence that
we do have arm is in particular
why we are here today even
saving one life due to i'm
access to a fire and within that
period is precisely why we're
here to save lives and to
diminish the current risk of
life arm to those who can obtain
firearms.
Madame representative thank you
for that and I agree on the
premise that we need to be
saving lives
but I know many folks including
folks who i'm related to have
taken their own life and it
wasn't with a firm so madam
chair representative.
Are we
are we next going to be doing
awareness trainings is there
anything in this legislation to
actually bring awareness to
suicide and homicide and and
those tools that are necessary
to have a cooling off as we
said.
Are indeed protected manager
representative matter
representative if you continue
reading in the f a r on page
three at the very top we do have
talk we do talk about recent
studies that have contributed to
the understanding and the impact
of the waiting periods in all
fifty states arm and with that
we know that those mandatory
waiting periods and incoupled
with background checks which we
do have in our state notably
lower suicide reads than without
these measures we also look to
the cdc
to that data as well again it's
right in the fire in front of
you about how these mandatory
waiting periods will
significantly decrease suicide
rates around the country and
certainly in new mexico.
The.
Madame chairman representative
thank you for put pulling.
Page three up because i'm
looking at it here and it says
it allows enforcement more time
to complete background checks
madame chairman representative
according to the background
checks or in the state
there essentially instant.
Madame to represent it isn't
that what next stands for.
I'm sorry you're you're asking
for the definition of next
manager yes manager national
instant criminal background
checks.
Isn't that what that seems for
manager representative yes
manager.
Mountain care representative yes
the word instant is in national
instant criminal background
check
members that are what are known
as brady states typically do
them within three days so not
three seconds but.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative.
For the answer and usually it
does it does go through at least
for me which is a nice you know
but.
I haven't done anything terrible
so that's nice so madame
chairman representative I know
that it usually does in the
event that it kicks it back.
Right.
That's usually remedied within.
1-2 days i'm not mistaken.
In most cases is that correct
madame chairman representative.
Madame chairman representative
black whenever something is
kicked back from nicks we
receive a specific code based on
buyers kick fact it could be as
simple as someone's fingerprint
night
being processed correctly so
depending on the code we receive
it depends on the amount of time
but generally if it's in the net
it's taken care of
within several hours.
Think you met in terms and think
he represented so then regarding
this this bill you know I know
huawei is much different than
new mexico new mexico was a huge
state compared to huawei and we
have people that have to drive
really long distance so my my
example earlier was myself I
live in almogordo driving down
other way to last crucials you
know I
would current gas prices and
everything I see this as a tax
on folks who live in rural new
mexico because they have to
literally go over to the next
county to buy the firearm that
they want to they choose at the
seller that they have available
so madame chairman
representative have we spoken to
folks and rural new mexico and
on these driving conditions and
is there anything in this
legislation to alleviate the
burden on folks who live in rome
in mexico.
Man to representatives of the
fourteen day period thank you
for pointing out how large new
mexico is and also how
challenging it can be to ensure
that these responses come back
as you noted from the fire there
so many background checks three
hundred and seventy two thousand
that remains unchecked within
the three day period in which
case we talk about the
difficulty of reality in the
states and how large our status
to ensure that we're getting
those responses and that law
enforcement is informed on a
flag is raised on somebody
purchasing a firearm that we
have that critical extra time in
order to ensure that bond
forcement can get there and for
anyone that we're a flight has
been raised so I appreciate you
pointing out the fact that in
order for us to be able to do
this properly with how large our
seaters in how we are and how
challenging it can be from
everything from broadband to i'm
some of the other challenges
that we're trying to picks this
will help us.
With the timing of insuring that
lawnforcement can intercede on
anything um that could be
potentially harmful manager.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative and I agree our
state is we're not as big as
texas but we're cooler than
texas in my opinion
much manager
some medical representative my
concern here is because people
have to drive long distances.
I would like to see a provision
here at least to say once that
individual.
Has passed their fourteen days
they pass their necks.
That that that the firearm can
then be transferred to a more
local seller who may not be
selling that firearm rate
because madam to represent I
have to drive all the way an
hour and a half to us crucial
traffic and got only knows what
else
how I just don't see how that
is.
Fiscal responsible to the
average new mexican that we
certain madame chair
representative so was there any
consideration of such a such a
portion of the bill to include
that kind of.
Alleviation of that burden.
Madame chair representative I
think i've answered your
previous question with my
response or your question now
with my response we know there
there will be you know a getting
used to any laugh in which we
would be
passing in the session and this
would be one of those
changes to current on practice
in which if it seems lives
that's precisely what we're here
to do today.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative.
And I think
that is commendable to want to
save lives I think that's what
we did with that bill with
representative martinez for
domestic violence so that's
good.
Can you tell me in the bill
regarding lesser samar i'm an
effical.
And there's a.
Transferred to a third party
another seller for example.
Madame to represent it is that
included in this or is it only a
private en.
Madam chairman representative I
think that would still fall
under subsection d
where we need a buyer and a
seller and because there's
criminal liability in this bill
we don't see the we don't
prosecute businesses we
prosecute individuals so no
matter if it went through a
chain infinite times all those
people would be honest.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative so.
Would this also include.
Such things as the states can
buy backs.
Because they literally are
buying back a gun that's a
transfer.
And it says the transfer here.
Of the phone to the buyer so
madam chair represented wooding
would it include gone by that.
Madame chairman representative
block I think it's reasonable to
conclude that i'm not sure if
that's the intent
but I think if it's individual
buyer individual seller uh it's
potentially falls within that
subsection.
Okay madam to represent cos I
know a lot of the folks who go
to those gun by backs they say I
just don't want this in the
house I don't want to get any
more someone passed away someone
because it to me I do not want
it anymore so according to the
current legislation I see.
Those folks would literally not
be allowed to give that away
within two weeks and I think
that would defeat the very
purpose of the of the bills
manager representative I do have
any thoughts on that from the
sponsor mancher representative
that's a good point you know
when we're talking about some of
the positive aspects of what we
see happening
with these buy back periods we
want to make sure that there is
no exemption to that for
somebody who does want to get
rid of it but we'll have you to
consider that manager and madam
chairman representative I think
I jumped on on that when there
is an exemption for transfers to
a law enforcement officer
enforcement agency which the gun
by backs would likely fall under
so excuse me on that one thank
you madame chair thank you
representative miss johnson but
this would not include.
Places like new mexicans to
prevent balance which are fibre
one something or other that
correct manager representative.
Can you reframe your question
i'm i'm not sure of course the
manager represented that's a
private entity right a
organization not law enforcement
cracked so as you say a group
such as new mexicans to prevent
gun violence they would not be
allowed to have this transfer
within fourteen days.
Manager representative is that
what i'm understanding from this
legislation matter chairman
representative they certainly do
not fall within the law
enforcement exception that's
correct however.
Again we would not we we do not
file charges against businesses
or five or one seat three as we
typically file them against
individuals so if the transfer
had an individual giving up a
firearm and an individual
accepting the firearm it would
fall under subsequential okay
thank you madame chair thank you
representatives of them that
would indeed be a transfer if
the person will give up their
gun in exchange for for gift
card or whatever it would be
secret.
Okay thank you madame chair
thank you represented that can
include that for me a little
bit.
The.
And so this would also include
less to say if I have a firearm
that I do not want to give to a
law enforcement agency I just
want to give it legislative in
my town we have dave's guns
owners sell david gun I would
still have to hold on to the
fire myself he couldn't touch it
until fourteen days after.
Would he have to go through a
new background checked it
obtained the firearm because
he's he's an epiphelority.
Would you.
I don't know how that would work
and.
I guess i'm not following the
hypothetical matter chair so
let's just say manager I was
selling a gunshot my firearm.
What background checks or checks
would they have to go through
since they're already in a fell
madamed her that's what within
the current line and current
background check loss
any transaction must go through
an false so even if
hypothetically the ffl owner of
the business was trying to sell
a firm they would have to go to
an f f l perhaps their own to
transact and they would have to
wait fourteen days before
providing that fire to a buyer
okay thank you madame chairman
think he represent it so as you
say a long officer who's off
duty since he's still a law
enforcement officer would hear
what he still be applied to the
fourteen days here madame
chairman radam chair
representative that's correct
it's only the agency that is
exempted.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative could
you point it to me.
Where in that where there is
that kind of written other
insurance current laws section
thirty dash seven dash seven
point one
this is our current law with
background checks.
Gotcha okay so just to clarify
unless it's it can be a person
it has to be agency that's
exempted such as department of
what is it justice nowadays
madame chair representative the
exemption is for the law
enforcement agency if if firearm
is provided to them their
exempted from a forty fourteen
day waiting period and a
background check in madame
chairman representative the
department of justice will not
fall under this third fall.
Okay managed her reps and
talking about the state
department adjusters I think we
just changed their name but it
would be probably dps which
would most likely be bind as far
as so the agency doesn't have to
go through the fourteen days but
the individual police officer
would.
Yes unless they're selling to
an.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thinking representative and so
immediate family member in the
bill can you tell me if that's
just like a sister brother
father mother correct madam
chair madame chairman
representative of immediate
family member is illegally
operated term meaning husband
and what or spouse and spouse
spouses thousand children or
thousands yeah now I covered
immediate.
Excuse me.
Okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative so then
the person was just in my
granded wine to give me a
firearm unless you say my
granddad passed where he did
pass me but she said he was live
you passed away I would so I
would have to go through a
background check then if my
grandmother wanted to give me
his pistol for example is that
correct.
Men chair representative that's
correct.
Think you member think you
represented and then.
Then I guess whoever's holding
his state would.
Need to hold that firm for
fourteen days would we have to
go to an ffl to get that so like
the local gun shop.
If there's not a local gunship
can we go to law enforcement
agency and said minimum chair
represent manager under current
law that that's correct.
Okay but this manager would make
it fourteen days instead of.
Immediately actually forgive me
madame chair
and perhaps
to clarify immediate family
member as per our current statue
within
our background checks.
Means spouse parents child
sibling grandparents grandchild
great grandchild nice nephew
first cousin and or ungo.
So madame chair representative
forgive me for the confusion
that list is who would be
exempted from the fourteen day
waiting period okay thank you
madame chair thank you
representative and you said and
or uncle did it have ants as
well and uncle correct manager
and again that's current
strategy.
Okay thank you manager thinking
representative would have that
individuals prohibited from
obtaining firm.
Forgive me can you repeat a
question of course what if the
individual obtain the person
that will be in possession once
the transfers completed
and they're an immediate family
member what if they are
prohibited from obtaining a
fireadmenter representative than
they would be breaking the la
thinking manager thank you
representative but there
wouldn't be no.
There would be no abs act there
would not be
a check though there wouldn't be
a next check on that person
since they are exempted right
madam chair representative they
didn't get a background check we
wouldn't know about that.
Exactly okay thank you madame
chairman thank you
representative.
The.
I appreciate that.
I think it's not something else
in the fire these things are
called oh here so i'm gonna talk
on page for the fire the top the
office of the attorney general
now the department of justice of
new mexico
states that.
He.
A g relt were as raises
constitutional concerns
especially pertinent to light of
the supreme court's ruling in dc
versus hello and new york ve
bruin twenty twenty two
can you tell me how this
would then stand up in court
on bruin madame chair
representative madam chair
representative what we can't
speculate how the courts would
manage any sort of law and
whether or not it would be
challenged we do know that in
twenty eighteen supreme court
decidedly did not review
awaiting periods bill coming out
of the night circuit court which
upheld california's ten day
waiting period in which case we
know that at this point it's
been upheld
in madame chairman
representative as i'm sure you
know the main holding and bruin
are that.
Restrictions that limit an
individuals ability to carry a
firearm for self defence could
potentially be and violation of
brewing again it's hard to
speculate with no facts and it's
hard to speculate when we don't
know you know where this would
be raised and on exactly what
grounds by
um what you're looking for and a
brew in analysis is whether it
hampers and individuals right to
protect th.
Think you made him chairman
thinking representatives of them
would have fourteen day waiting
period then hamperson wants
ability to protect themselves of
fourteen days following.
That madam chairman
representative that's a great
question and I think
um
when i'm thinking about how to
answer this
you know there's a quote that a
lot of attorneys live binary as
the power of an attorney is the
unfamiliarity and the weird
nature of the loss so if I are
certain I wouldn't have a job so
with that being said
an attorney could certainly make
that argument but they would
need specific articulable facts
which.
You know we're not raising your
question so it is possible but I
can't assess it with any amount
of certainty
thank you madame chairman
representative.
Well just from my assessment as
a lehman not as a law
enforcement officer or even a
officer of the court I could see
that list is the if I had a well
I do have a stocker so I my
stocker
once it up to them.
Unfortunately so this is the if
my stocker says i'm gonna come
to your house listed I don't
have any guns even though
everyone else I do but let's
just say I didn't
i'm gonna come to your house
today.
I call the police they don't
answer me they say okay we'll
send a cop.
To to be there at your house
but I have no physical.
Ability to stop his person if
they have a firearm so if they
previously have already obtained
a firearm before your laws even
come into place and I I file a
tro or something that persons
still has that gun so madame
chair representative
what am I supposed to protect
myself with a bat you know
that's the kind of my question
of can we stay on the bill and
madame turn representative if
you know that you stock her
right now and you're concerned
with him you need to be in touch
with law enforcement as soon as
you know and we have manager we
have we've already told state
police and capital security
their photographs of him already
and both of them and and the f b
I of course so representative
could you i've I present thank
you manager at the point was
mainly well let's just go back
to bruin about we kind of want
to know a little rather trail
there I apologize but brew and I
know it says a firearm
regulations must only serve a
public interest and also a line
with historical scope of second
amendments protections.
So manager representative could
you please sight me any kind of
historical scope of precedence
with this legislation and it
being
legal madam chair representative
as we said it's already gone
through the ninth circuit it's
also the law and numerous states
i'm as a said previously so
madam chair representative this
is already in practice and as
one of the best practices for
common sense gun i'm safety
legislation.
Chair and representative
regarding common practice you
may already know this but bruin
is actually referring to hello
in that case and hello has a two
actually a sort of a rational
question and then a two part
test the threshold question is
does this on its face filing the
second amendment if you read the
second amendment is it covered
or is it.
If you can't make a conclusion
then you go to the two part test
which is you need to prove that
the firearm is dangerous and
that the firearm is unusual and
both of them.
The.
Think you met him chairman thank
you representative and I I
appreciate that miss johnson for
the clarification cause I I read
the the case and I read the the
desert which was quite long it's
like a hundred and fifty pages
or something so.
I really appreciate that
interpretation of it and I would
I could make the argument
absolutely that this does indeed
violate the second amendment
then we would go down to the the
two provisions so I really
appreciate that and so would we
say madam chair representative
that there is no current
litigation on this states that
do have waiting periods is there
any current litigation on those
madame chair representative as
we stated the ninth circuit has
already determined that the
attendant reading period is
lawful
and that has not been um.
Taken up by the supreme court
the united states
thank you manager thank you
representative so.
What about a fourteen day
waiting period.
We said we said okay ten day
winning cards okay has a
fourteen day waiting period had
such scrutiny madamed her
representative the the date
number in question no is not
been challenged
and madame chairman
representative depending on the
case pertaining to ten days it
may be covered by virtue of what
that case says it may not so I
would suggest reading that to
answer your question
okay madam to a representative
but just to clarify the supreme
court not taking the case did
not say that the supreme court
can down necessarily the outcome
of that case it just did
declined to take it up at the
uperiod.
Thank you manager.
Okay thank you manager since the
bills about waiting periods I
assumed that would be correct
but I will continue here.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative so does the bill
define the word fire
not currently madam chair.
Okay think you manage her and
represent it I know other
relegislation that we have this
session does indeed define
firearm are we looking at a
potential amendment to make that
more definitive we would
entertain that manager.
Okay thank you madame chairman
think you represent it usually
the amendments I propose are
prewritten or ad hawk to like
one word or something so I will
let that be did a serious
problem as you were a member so
good luck in there madam
chairman representative
and closing I want to say you
know I just have so many
concerns regarding this
especially for rural folks like
myself who live in rural new
mexico and we already have to
drive an hour and a half just to
go to sportsmen's to pick up our
rifle after we've bought it
online or whatever we've made a
phone transaction and just for
me as someone who represents
ruin the mexico I see this is a
direct tax especially on the
poorest new mexicans in rural
new mexico so that's one reason
why i've such huge as hesitation
to support such such legislation
and I will continue listening to
the debate but I truly
appreciate the time today madam
chairman thank you for this
thank you thank you
representative lord
thank you madame chair
representative experts I want to
die wrote in on page two.
The.
So I twenty five records of firm
sales shall be available by the
seller for inspection upon
request of law enforcement so
will be asking our fells to make
a gun data registry in their
stores.
Chair representative of no or
not.
Okay medicare how do you how you
going to look at the next you
don't have a right to look at
that without a warrant so how
would you if you're asking for
them to keep a list of sellers
you do not have access to the
people who have gotten the
record you cannot have them
without a warrant so how would
you just walk in and look at to
see the records saying this is
only what the warrant thank you
for you thank you for the
clarification madam chairman
represented has nothing to do
with next this would be
referencing or receipt.
To determine the buyer and the
seller so you're asking for a
gun registry is that what I
understand was her
representative no we are not
okay so what is it that you're
asking for you asking for a
manner share.
The record to the fire she'll be
made available similar
to representative record of the
buyer.
I e a receipt.
The.
So you're asking medicare and
our fellows to now keep a gun
registry with the receipts of
what we're made of purchased and
sold and and representative this
is not a registry so as with any
transaction i'm sorry go ahead
so what your asking is our ffls
to keep in less of the person
who purchased the gun or
actually they haven't purchased
again so you're asking them make
a registry of people that are
patentially going to be able to
bad gun but they have to wait
for the fourteen day period is
that correct it's it's sellers
not happened.
And chair representative so
again as with any transaction
around the state there's
typically a receipt between a
buyer in a seller so when we're
looking for a legal sort of free
work surrounding with that
transaction look like it would
be essentially when the buyer
came in purchased a given item
out of any store around the
state i'm in order to verify
that that transaction took place
so it's not a registry it's
simply a receipt similar to what
you would get a tacos down so it
may be representative so you're
asking for the receipt after the
transaction but that doesn't
happen until after the fourteen
days so that's correct so they
walk in they fill it out but
then you want them to keep this
gun registry received so that
you guys can walk in and look at
it any time that you want to is
that one of my data warrant
without anything you just want
to come in and look at their
list of receipts is that correct
madam chair and representative
first of all I would have to
come out of the trans.
The.
It's quite common practice for a
businesses to keep receipts for
iris and other purposes so
that wouldn't be anything out of
the.
So it manager representatives so
you now have the serial number
correct you have the name the
buyer what they purchase cause
it couldn't just say bought a
fire i'm so you now have the
cereal numbers that correct.
I'm chair the committee
represent of lord in the
question you're asking it would
depend upon what record was kept
by that individual so for that
receipt so if you're asking is
it necessarily contained that I
think the answer is no could it
contain that I think the answer
is yes it is a hypothetic one is
difficult to speculate on a
hypothetical problem.
Well manager experts when you go
to cabellas it does have the
receipt has everything honor so
what i'm looking at.
You guys want to make a registry
i've received that law
enforcement can go in a look at
any time they want without a
warrant is that correct no
that's not correct madame chair
we're not asking for registry
were simply just if there needs
to be
a review of of record that that
needs to be made available to on
forcement.
Okay some managed chair and
representative because we're
going to run it circles on this
you're asking them to make this
list that law enforcement can
just walk in and say we want to
see your list without a warrant
unless you're saying there is a
warrant but it doesn't state
that here madame chairman
representative the roles are
criminal procedure absolute
regardless this is not a proper
means to an act and exception to
the warrant requirement so no
they could exist together so i'm
just trying to clarify for
everyone listening madame chair
they will make a list and it
will have the person's name the
seller and the fire and most
places have the sale number and
law enforcement could
technically just walk in at any
time and look at that list a
matter of chairman
representative incorrect law
enforcement still has to follow
warrant protocol or the fourth
amendment per case law and other
things so
I exist separate and
independently from this one and
is still applicable and that was
what I was getting at mentor so
they need a warrant to go in and
look at that so when they go in
with the warrant manager and
represent is going to be very
specific look like in a typical
warrant where it says we're
looking for information.
Just a smith or purchase the
fire on this date and that's the
only thing that look at or they
could be able to see every
single person's receipts how was
that going to break down madame
chairman representative of it
obviously um depends on the
nature of the investigation but
as you know per case law
warrants have to be specific and
articulable so depending on what
the investigation is if it's
against possibly the whole
business violating this multiple
times maybe they see all the
receipts if it's against a
particular person who has
received a firearm and properly
maybe they're investigating that
person it depends but caselog
mandates that are officers have
specific grounds articulated in
a warrant.
Yeah and madam chair the
principle of the points to be we
don't have hipper because of
some east purchase in a gun it's
not the right for anyone else to
see it even a blond force when
and if they're look for
something specific in the figure
there was something done with
that weapon but not to just walk
in and look at that so I had
some questions so you guys
picked and chair rips experts
you picked the waiting day of
eighteen days can you show me
the data and the difference
between a cooling off period of
three days.
Vs.
Eighteen which you're talking is
going to be could have given
fourteen versus thirty versus
sixty what's can you show me the
exact study that I could go
read.
No matter chair we cannot.
The.
So can I ask you our manager and
representative what was your
intention of making this the
longest waiting period in the
united states manager
manager representative again we.
Chose fourteen days as the
baseline for this not only
because of what we understand
about the reality of our state
but again the connectivity and
the ability to ensure that bond
force meant should anything be
flagged can be informed and then
of course take any action that's
necessary we talk about develop
how geographically rural are
state is how connectivity can be
an issue and also
that hundreds of thousands of
folks who have certainly
surpassed the three day waiting
period in getting a background
check around the country
that has gone unresolved.
And including the twenty five
hundred denial decisions that
were made with for prior
condition convictions of crimes
and so if we did not flag that
that that extra buffer gives us
that time to ensure that if the
flag was raised that law
enforcement can intervene.
Okay so man of chairman
representative so I want to
answer some question about ffl
delays ninety percent or not
their instead there's a thing
called a three day delay
from next.
And it's
at fourteen days.
So they have three days if it's
open.
Is that fourteen days going to
be after the country next to its
already be tied in okay so what
happens in this and establish as
not the latest open so sometimes
ffl does not finish their
investigation and then there's a
fort we have this fourteen days
so explain to me while you did
he said there's no real
difference to know whether
one date is better than another
day.
So they go in.
And it can be open.
And fourteen days guys have time
to go and do it ears you want to
do on your we're supposed to be
waiting
but technically on the dan of
federal law it's up to the
discretion of the fire of the
for felt correct after thirty
days they could just go and say
yes we want or how long they
want to wait they could still
say yes even after that fourteen
days that correct man chair
representative so again if that
two things first I didn't say
that there wasn't great data and
information regarding why this
fourteen day period would work I
just said there wasn't a single
study that we can point to um
second way manager
representatives the.
The period of the the fourteen
days is to ensure that there is
a back first of all background
checks are already the law of
the land everyone must have one
we're closing a loophole that
currently does not is not clear
in the law that after a three
days and you haven't received a
background check matter chair
representative that that fl
cannot just hand over the
firearm without that background
check so right now it's unclear
in the law that if somebody
didn't pass that after three
days and that information had
not been provided to that armed
firearm steeler that they could
just actually sell that that
firearm so we're we're closing
that loophole today manager.
Still then manager doesn't
really get you're looking for
cool court you just trying to
make sure to extend.
The time for an investigation
but here's the problem
fourteen days goes by what is
the next system doing during
that time.
How how would the investigating
because my information they're
not.
So what is that extra fourteen
day student manager.
Madame share representative.
If a background check does not
come back within the fourteen
day period that person cannot
receive that fire that sell that
transaction will not be made no
that's not correct management
it's called open.
When you go to buy a firearm
it's either instant delayed or
open instead means it's internet
that's ninety percent of time
there's other three day where
they come back we're still
looking at their go ahead they
can have it or prohibited but
then there is a whole system
called open where there is no
decision made so are you saying
that they're going to both
purchase a gun you're saying
they have to wait fourteen days
but it could still be an open
status which means they have not
done investigation or finished
our investigation but that's
okay is that correct madam chair
representative of what we're
clarifying within the law that
if fourteen days have passed and
that status is still open you
cannot sell that fire to that
person that's what we're
clarifying man of chairmens and
where can you show me in the
spell where it says that if they
are still an open status.
And fourteen days is passed
at the ffl cannot where does say
specifically because open means
open right now you could go and
be an open status ffl house of
rate if they wanted to a most
that I know won't
to transfer that farm so you're
saying that you supersede with
the atfas doing is that we're
trying to say that that you're
saying fourteen days goes by.
They haven't finished their
investigation.
Now you're saying even though
the fed say that you can you're
saying now you can't after
fourteen days because the atm
has not come back and said yes
absolutely that person can have
a fire as I want to m.
If I understand your question
correctly first madam chair
representative in the bill
section one a
clarifies that if a federal
instant background check has not
been completed you cannot
transfer the fire until that
background check has been
completed okay so let me go back
when i'm cheer and read with
what they say
sometimes the fbi never finishes
investigation in the status it's
open open means those non
cancelled transactions with fell
has not been notified at the
final determination cases open
responses the next continues
researching potentially looking
for records of prohibition of
their having a firearm and open
response does not prohibit the
fell from transfer in a fire and
this is on the website after
three businesses have a lapse
correct so now you're saying
that even though they're an open
status and the fifty says yes
you can have a gun that on the
fifteenth day they can't have it
that's correct manager that's
what we're closing with the
current loophole that if you did
not have a verified background
check in the state of new mexico
currently
federal firms after a federal
license dealer could just hand
over that fire and without that
background check and that
creates a potentially very
dangerous situation no not
necessarily madam chair there is
plenty of people who have
duplicate names if you have a
very common name it's not
uncommon for you to get poled if
you are survivor domestic
violence and you filed a
restraint in order that pops up
in there saying even as the
female that they want to
investigate what that was about
there's lots of interested
there's cases where they haven't
done their.
Job.
So now you're saying because the
eightieth didn't do their job.
You can't have a gun because
it's ats fault they didn't
follow through on this.
Manager representative.
We rely on the next system to
provide a background check for
every single sale of a fire in
the state of new mexico however
if they haven't gotten back to
you in that three day period
which is current federal law and
current statement and that say
that person how to flag raised
we don't have a sufficient time
not at least to check in insurer
that if we were handing over a
fire that that was safe.
And what we're trying to do with
this fourteen day waiting period
is insurer that we are able to
actually check and ensure that
every single perch purchase of a
firearm follows the background
check provision right now there
is a loophole after three days
that if the information wasn't
returned that that person could
actually receive that firearm
and that again creates a
potentially very dangerous
situation when we look at the
data and how many folks have
been not only unresolved but
those that were denied after
that three day period.
So manager I guess what i'm
getting to is whose checking.
Madame chair representative
under this law the state of new
mexico would be checking
some matter chair and
representative so you're saying.
The atm is supposed to be their
job you're saying they did some
now we're going to have a state
background check is that where
we're going with this were now
going to have a state new mexico
state run background
organization or not to me how
how are you checking madame
chairman representative we would
be prempted by federal law from
doing that actually so no.
Okay some managers and expert so
who's checking because I go to
dps and I get a background check
when I get my concert curry
which I understand w.
So is this now falling on dps is
dps happy about this there's
enough money to do all these
checks and I still don't
understand how you're doing this
check if you ok if you can't get
into the next system and do this
i'll properly do a background
check house is happening it
almost seems like you'd have to
set up a new mexico state
background check.
Madam chair representative all
we're asking for is a waiting
period at this point time and if
you look at what it is that
we're allowing for records to be
essentially looked at by law
enforcement should the need
arise that's all we're doing in
the sla.
Ok but again madam chairman who
who is doing the check and how
are they doing the check do they
have access to get I know they
can do for a stolen gum but do
they have an ability to do this
home next background check and
how would this be done and if
you falsely didn't allow feeding
a lot more to have a gun days
how do I appeal to you as I can
appeal any time I want to with
the feds but how do I do an
appeal of you guys are wrong
with the delay was taking so
long so it's it's a.
I'm getting back to hoo who is
checking us who and the state is
checking the.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if i'm following the
checking
part of your question the way of
this law works is that if after
fourteen days you've not
received a background check you
cannot receive a firearm
hypothetically on a fifteen if
someone was had yet had yet to
receive
a background check response they
could go to the same effl or
another fell and try again to
obtain that farm and start the
process all over again so that
or they could potentially raise
a lawsuit that the still hadn't
received their
background check and they wanted
to
go through the process of.
Maintaining that they should
have received a background check
okay so let me see if I
understand manager so going to
an ffl.
I going to open statistics at
hasn't done their job which is
not my fault.
So I go in they do a background
yet it didn't say yes absolutely
it says open but according to
the atflats as yes I can have
you in the mexico scene I cannot
have that firearm period in the
story is that what i'm
understanding.
Madam chair representative under
the provisions of this light for
the background check has not
come back verified that that
person should be able to
purchase a fire arm legally this
fourteen day waiting period
would ensure that that person
cannot obtain a firearm
okay then
so in other words manifest
you're so there is nobody check
in it's just you're saying.
Fourteen days goes back that's
it done the open status.
So.
So here's a problem the open
status days open should I need a
ffl to tell me thirty days
ninety days stays up and for
quite some time so let's say you
say fourteen days no you cannot
have a firearm it stays open and
on the fifteenth day they say
yes but you've now designed
tonight them of their sale now
what happens to start all over
again or what happens madam
chair representative
hypothetically as on fifty on
day fifteen that starts day one
of another fourteen day waiting
period in which case they can go
back in and try to obtain a
firehome under that next traunch
of fourteen days and get
hopefully get that background
check within that time frame but
manager rips in and they just
got the background check they
ready went through the next
system they paid their thirty
five dollars
you were saying they can't have
the firm for fourteen days
morning at the fifteenth day it
says absolute yes there is no
recourse for them they have to
start all over again and now
we're looking at eighteen eight
we're looking going into months
now so what if they are play
again and eighty up doesn't do
their job so that's another
fourteen days even though they
might get approved I mean that
i'm looking to continue loop
because if you don't fix it on
the federal level if you don't
fix on the fed level this is a
continual loop of somebody never
being able to purchase
madame terra presentative as you
stated previously ninety percent
of these happen immediately so
in that sort of new one's such
situation where somebody would
not
have received that information
back within that fourteen day
period
hypothetically yes they would be
they would have to wait or they
would have to potentially file a
lawsuit as to why they were
waiting there is a number of
recourses for action that they
could take but in that
hypothetical madam chair
representative yes they would
have to to inter into a new
process amount of chair i'm
looking at.
Some of our people in the mexico
who would not be able to have
the luxury of a forty and
attorney to do a lawsuit so
we're affecting the course to
the poor
um and I don't think that is
spare to do either my big
concern here is this fourteen
day.
No data no data that fourteen
days is magical number.
The fifteen day and it's not
uncommon for someone to get
approved after
so now they have to grow through
this whole process i'll over
again and who's going to pay the
thirty five dollars to redo the
ff.
I don't know matter chair
you mentioned that false back on
to the person are poorest to the
poor or our domestic violent
survivors or anyone who wants to
protect themselves because
that's what the second it says.
They have to go back and repay
that thirty five dollars because
it's not up to them to pay that
price it's not up to the for
fell.
The.
And you're saying start a
lawsuit and that affects the
course of the poor.
I'm talking about purely at
least ten percent of the people
who
could potentially.
I'm trying to say a bad word
yet.
Wrong
may get wrong over this and I
don't think that's fair at all
because.
People who are legitimately
trying to buy a firearm to be
punished with this fourteen days
that is kind of a random day
that we chose.
And I just want to manage to
represent what was the
reasoning.
For not allowing our wonderful
law enforcements officers to be
able to purchase a fire arm
white way of day
they should be exempt from they
should be able to go on by a
form as individual why was that
included in this bill.
Madame can you repeat the
question or refresh it that's
okay.
Madam share representatives
experts so I if I understand
correctly one forcement can only
purchase now what they can't the
organization can like the shirts
park this firm camp but a
individual
apd officer couldn't walk in and
go get a farm they're still
subject to the fourteen day
waiting for it and what why is
that what's a reason behind the
madam chair representative this
largest contemplates all fire
and bar buyers the same.
And any extension madame chair
for concealed carry anybody with
can still carry your spouse.
The.
Is that a question here
yes it is a question continue as
a sorry can you repeat the
question so so we made it so law
enforcement can't go in to
purchase a firm.
What about anyone with a
concealed carry permits they
still have to wait the fourteen
days even though they that's
crossed through the.
Okay active military same thing
they still have to wait the
fourteen days all fire and
purchases are purchasers under
this law created equal madam
chair are there any extensions
made of chair if you were
currently beat stock by a
stocker than wanted to kill you
would you with that be waved for
any reason you wouldn't have to
wait these fourteen days madam
cherry think of answered the
question.
Did you say was it all fire and
purchasers are the created equal
under the slow matter chair.
Umm man of chair representatives
experts are you aware that that
when.
Sorry manager.
Something that reps and block
and asked earlier the exceptions
are if it's immediate family is
that what I was understanding
that's correct manager okay so
let's walk through that manager
i'm sorry if we've already
covered it did you know I have
to be replaced
I just want to make sure i'm
understanding
so
this is equal to all people
it's.
If you're doing a fire transfer
to immediate family because we
know they're all good people and
they don't have to wait and we
know that there.
Can you explain to me the
process of why immediate
families
met her representative again
this is contemplated in a in our
background check in universal
background checks law
part of the ease of being able
to transfer fire on between
immediate family members was
exempted precisely because it's
not typically a buyer seller
transaction it's typically
a situation in which those are
just gifts or provided for those
immediate family members.
With the universal background
that we did I think it's
crapped.
Yeah.
Which is still weird to me
because you could have a uncle
that's just beat his wife up in
any ways.
So manager representative and
experts.
You you do know that some user
will far back you do know that.
And it may be incorrect on that
that.
If there is a gun.
Accidentally given to a percent
that should not have it.
They can go out and go back and
reclaim that is that correct.
Yeah.
Can matter representative if you
could clarify the question under
this provision that would be
helpful
while we're talking about doing
this fourteen day rate.
But the atm has the ability.
That if that if a firm right now
is sold to someone they have
recourse they can tell on first
they could tell the gun store
this is a person prohibited and
get that fire on back was that
correct.
The.
My fells are all shaking their
hand that is correct I really
know the answer it is well
madame chairman representative I
think the distinction here is
we're in state law what you're
describing is in federal law
they can exist together so
potentially or manage your rips
I just want to make sure to
understand there's already a way
there's already a process and
i'm gonna tell you I would never
have a problem with the next.
Our federal people to do that
because the fact that they put
you in as open status is not
fair to anyone it makes our
ffl's format lucky they use
really good discretion on that
they do have ways to go back and
get them but that needs to be
handled up there there's also
another interesting thing uh
they can't look under stolen
guns but that was past two years
ago and have yet to see the atm
thing about that they have the
access it has not been
implemented so that they can go
into the system to see if a
gunner stolen why in the
standards they not have that
ability there's like a stupi.
They should be able to change
that the next system does need
to be changed but I don't want
to punish our people and I don't
like the idea and lever law
enforcement but I think they
should be able to do should be
excluded.
And but I don't want them to go
in and look at records I just
it would have to be such a very
contained way of looking at him
that they don't.
The.
Future and representative.
And experts I i'm definitely
body knowing this because.
Having been a survivor of
dovestic balance and having a
stocker I would not want anyone
to not have the rate to defend
themselves for any reason and
there's lots of recent on a fire
is just not for your protections
just because you want to we have
that rate.
If you decide you want to have
one we have this next system and
check they ask a lot of
questions these guys I trust the
ffls is experts at your really
during the job manifect to hang
out gun stores quite a bit and
have seat to white so I can see
it first trust me some it's
getting they're not going to
work with them i've seen that.
I don't want
we talk about saving one life.
We also have to look at the
other side of somebody who wants
to save them life using a fire
that's the one life that could
be saved too we have to look at
both sides and I am very
concerned about.
Someone have to going back
repeatedly repeatedly repeatedly
traveling distance point back in
and I can't imagine being a very
scared.
Survivor or somebody who just
wants to purchase inner somebody
who is rurally going to purchase
the fire
and there was another
interesting statistic that was a
given by ivy sodo which i'm not
he wasn't he done the doors or
sport this is was presenting
this I need to throw that out.
That the average kind used.
It's nine years after.
And.
The waiting period issue with
that just being random but
mostly I have issues with their
are people of new mask of being
punished when they want to just
go in and purchase a fire pretty
reason I don't care what the
reason is other than harming
themselves or others they have
the right to do that and this
fourteen day loop because of
this open status that's the fall
to the atf and now we're going
to punish our people because the
at for not doing the job so I
would have to say full heartedly
absolutely will not support this
bill and be voting now in it
thank you manager.
I second.
Okay the motion has been made to
table the bill will take a is or
any.
Go ahead and take a roll call.
Representative one.
Yesterday table
representative yes yes to table.
Representative thompson no.
Oh.
I'm sorry I skipped a
representative of a mirror
notice.
And madame most your rubia
and madame chair for no.
Oh.
The motion was made to table and
vote of four to four against
tabling in two in favor of the
measure does not.
So we have a motion to.
For a due pass.
Motion did not carry for house
for a tabling.
We have a motion for a due pass
and a second.
Representative what
you know and i'd like to explain
my representative lord no and I
read explain my bill
representative of yes
representative thompson yes
madam vice are rubio madame
chair ferrari yes.
Okay so i'm a vote of four to
two we have a due pass on your
bill and I spilled one twenty
nine
yeah but
I explain your book manager
thank you for that I I voted no
understood from many reasons
also because of the
unconstitutionality as forth by
the department of justice here
in mexico as well as the taxing
of the poor with forcing them to
drive around the state so that's
all manager
thank you for paying as we
transition to the next bill.
The one thirty seven.
The.
This.
Yeah.
The.
This.
No.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Just nothing or if you can get
back
those who were going to stay
please
require it and or leave the room
and take your discussion outside
now
that you want other centuries.
One
the decorative of the committee
is.
The.
No.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Hospital one thirty seven gas
operating semi automatic
firearms exclusion act
representative for ramiro
surround to.
Representative robot sorry.
You're ready and representative
little little i'm sorry thank
you madame chair house but one
thirty seven is the gas operated
semi automatic weapons.
Regulation act in which case
what we're trying to do here is
prevent mass shootings and
regulate the weapon of choice
that we've seen around the
nation including our own
communities in new mexico for
those that are committing mouse
shootings
I personally have had my own
interaction with gun violence is
an eighteen year olds and
albuquerque with someone who
sprayed bullets into a crowd of
people after her concert I had a
two treat the bullet wound of my
class meet then sixteen from
santa fe high school where he
was worried that he'd be in
trouble with his dad forgetting
shot.
This was in between my high
school and college years in
which case I think about that so
many times in the youth that
have come forward today about
what would have happened in
history bullet would have hit me
we have received countless
emails calls photographs
testimony from victims and
students and fear of mass
shootings and that's why we're
here today this bill is the
first of its kind look at how it
is re regulate the mechanism in
place or these guns that are not
only dangerous but unusually
deadly when we look at how it is
that these high capacity
magazines can do harm to
shredding the human body that is
what they are built for madame
chair.
We seek in this regulation to
not only regularly gas operated
semi automatic weapons book to
create a registration system for
those who have these weapons to
be able to grandfather in not
only their high capacity
magazines but of course there
gas operated semi automatic
weapon.
And we prohibit any magazines
over ten rounds
for a semi automatic weapon that
are gas operated.
Most common fires under this
provision madame chair are not
gas operated and there's more
not subject to this law.
And as we know these limitations
work when we had an assault
weapons bound at the federal
level over the nineties we had
less smash shootings and after
that wait a seventy percent
increase in marsh shootings and
as both magazine limitations
went away and limitations on
assault weapons went away we
have seen the epidemic of
masherings across the country
with that introduce my co
sponsors representative little
and reply called broad right
ball comma to give some
testimony.
This.
Thank you representative.
Good afternoon madam to
remembers of the committee.
Not happy to be here actually.
Because I come to after my test
money my experience.
Of our family at the hands of
gun violence.
Some of you may know that my
younger brother my little
brother michael tenorio was
killed uhm.
In a movie theater this summer.
That was him.
And the impact that that one act
had on her family.
Both immediate extended.
In the community of sample if
you were blow.
His colleagues at work the
people who met through the years
is in laws.
The people who loved him.
We all evident the impact has
been indescribable.
That one touched so many people
and had such a ripple effect.
Through out.
Out and world.
And that world that I didn't
even know that he had as well
because he was beloved.
We are one family that that that
impact has been i'll have to
track of I was trying to
quickly.
Identify how many people were
impacted by his.
Undeserved death.
The.
An I lost track because because
I even look at my own community
of sample public and that.
Is in thousands.
They were deeply hurt so this
one incident one family's
experience.
I think all of the families.
In the city.
In the state in this country
that have been impacted.
And it's unfair mobile to me and
i've described it.
To close people closed me as it
feels like walking wounded
it feels like we are the
depiction of the zombies in
those movies that come out
because that's what it feels
like we're trying to move
forward luckily we are strong we
we have the support out.
The people in this audience of
our family members of strangers.
I have we have the support as we
were talking earlier today as
students.
Receiving messages from them
thinking as for carrying this
for doing something to protect
our communities them their
parents.
Their future.
It is not lost on as you know
there's one incident that was at
hand and I think of the impact.
That involved they felt and
hired community.
Of the victims and their
families in colorado again that
and movie theater.
Many of us at our loss we must
do something.
We must protect her children and
our families.
Forgive me my vision is a
little.
Again.
I am here to offer experience.
And.
I ask.
Yeah.
I ask that this committee
that this legislature.
Contemplate the impact that no
one knows unless you're there.
And you know i'm remissive been
remiss and not describing.
The first responders and the
medical staff who also worked to
treat these individuals that
have.
Since he comes to victims.
And I think them so much for
everything they do for the
respons.
With him and with others and so
that testimony I offered this
afternoon for consideration as
this bill is being discussed.
As all of the pros and cons come
forward there are families there
are communities there are
shouldered.
Whose lives are at stake.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee.
Yeah.
Can.
Thank you.
Think you made him chair members
of the committee and um thank
you representative little.
I am.
I stand with my colleagues today
and sponsoring house bill one
thirty seven out of my own
commitment particularly to
public safety concerns and also
coming from a very deep personal
heartdashwrenching reason and
reasons.
And I wish to share this with
all of you and i'm hoping that I
can do so.
Without getting to to emotional.
So we had a a beautiful.
Beautiful.
Nineteen year old.
Meal family member.
And I remember the day he was
born
holding him
and
helping to raise him.
Because he.
Ah was being raised with my son
my older son they were
cousins and dumb.
And I remember my parents been
asked because there were so much
joy when he was born I remember
my parents been asked to be as
good parents.
And because he was born into a
family of all women and he was
the only boy and.
My father was in the military
and they wanted my father to be
a strong male roll model for
him.
So from the moment that he was
born and he was baptised and as
he was being raised.
He was part of our everyday
lives.
And dumb when he was on spring
break.
Here in his best friend.
The.
Were.
Set up.
And he and his best friendly was
sh.
With the large capacity rifle
equipped with a bump stock
attachment.
They didn't stand a chance.
The.
That gun was so powerful.
That as they entered the door.
They both took brutal hit.
I don't know if you all
understand the impact of a large
capacity.
Weapon.
But it literally tears your body
apart it enters your body and
the territory b.
That beautiful.
Young man.
And his best friend.
We're
murdered.
Their bodies were so.
Damaged.
That we were not able to have a
viewing with open casket.
My mother
was absolutely devastated
because my son and he were.
The apples of her eye she would
turn the world upside down.
To have those two boys with her
at all times.
We were all torn apart.
You cannot imagine the
devastation.
That this type of murder this
type of large capacity.
Weapon has.
I'm tearing a family apart.
From um.
Curt ringing life long pain it
doesn't go away.
Every time he has a birthday
every time we remember.
This.
Something associated with a
family gathering.
It's just very hard to bear.
So this is why I have been
liberally.
Stability.
Introducing.
This.
And other legislation because
there's absolutely no reason why
large capacity.
Ammunition feeding devices
should be on the street.
At all.
Yeah.
No mother
no grandmother.
No anti no uncle no guide period
no family members should have to
go through the type of
devastating.
Anti hammer jean death.
That create such bodily damage.
I please also i'm from our
parcel.
And.
My son is living in our parcel
and.
In twenty nineteen he was on his
way because we all shop.
Every whenever we go there we
shop at the one word that's
close to our way
he was moments away from going
to that walmart.
And for.
No reason that we know.
He was spirit
he got a call and he pulled over
in the parking lot
to take the call because of
everywhere knows the delegal to
drive and beyond the phone.
His life was speared.
And as my parents would say
every time a life is taken a
life as warn or spared.
Until the only reason why we
think we believe that his life
was sparedless because of.
The life that was taken from us.
So I can only imagine what the.
Madam chair and colleagues.
What as is my colleague
mentioned there the parents and
families of wander feel.
I can't imagine the.
Devastation of the last vegas
novada mass shooting I can't
imagine.
Or I can imagine to a large
extent.
What they feel in what they're
going through and how their
lives have been changed.
For that reason.
I stand before you.
Sharing this personal story and
i'll end with the one that.
Was directly involved with my
life many of you don't know.
That a few years ago my home was
stormed.
My disgruntled.
Constituent.
And he came armed to my front
door.
The.
Through it name to kill me.
And it wasn't it didn't hit the
the press.
It didn't.
It wasn't a big media event.
But all the lawn forcement and
everyone else recorded he came
armed.
And ready to take action.
So.
We share I share these stories.
Because they're lift experiences
there are things that are not
just father and they're things
that really happen.
And they happen on a daily basis
so I asked at all of you.
Please.
The.
Listen carefully to all of our
stories listen carefully to our
justifications and please do all
that you can disapport passage
and finally get.
Guns.
And all the accessories and
devices that don't need to be on
the street out of the street and
protect our children in families
thank you madame chair.
Thank you call
me just want to introduce our
experts for today as well think
to my co sponsors also with me
as then power
special advisor to governor
michel christian and public
safety and
general council for the governor
kyle duffy.
With that madam chair will stand
for questions.
But it happened.
Will go to the audience
well start with those in
opposition and.
Those who are in the audience in
opposition and not necessarily
wanting to speak if you could
raise your hand.
And will start with those who
have signed up to speak in
opposition.
Yeah.
The.
All right first will have you
lane summer hill.
Thank you
for reference evidence.
Are school here in some time
someone saying that.
California
also
has to be market
i'm sorry
but
California
and the fault
charged roger
judge
decision supreme court twenty
twenty two
american traditional
and california
street.
All of them or far
as such their protected by the
second
quote what part of common use
or smith
policy.
Yeah.
Anyway our constitutional
restaurant
okay next week.
Still.
There is.
Yourself
chair members of the committee
it's bill fire
thank you
madame chair members of the
committee representative my
name's doctorally
retired computer scientist here.
A single opposition even worked
right in the bill introduced
last session now banning about
half of all fires in new mexico
instead of a but ten percent
like last year in direct
contradiction to the sponsor's
statements earlier.
These are the most commonly used
standard fires in magazines
every day for legal funding
target shooting and some
defense.
It will make about a quarter in
the mexicans into instant
criminals with l documented
reduction in debts our laws
should be based upon real data
overall experience.
Despite well publicized and it
and other states that have
passed these provisions does not
be all overall benefits and all
states are not tied up with
constitutional challenges as
even the states agency.
I ask you about pass on.
Next is
meladonia's.
Better term remembers the
committee
with the new mexico firms
industry association.
On behalf of the twenty plus
businesses that we have in the
over sixty thousand customers
that we service on the data
cases.
We are close house
the bill will do nothing to
prevent crime in our communities
police numbers this bill would
be many of the best available
for people to defend themselves.
This bill would create a bigger
black market.
The stone this build bands many
items that haven't even been
used in crimes I suggest the
sponsors in the code sponsors of
this bill do more research and
reach off the partner on the
community as a resource or
solution that can actually work
then gardens that have some
mexicans we have the right to
finally do is not the answer.
Thank you for your time to do.
Thank you.
Matt.
First off the scope of this bill
absolutely
my first questions come in where
would the funds come from to
create monitor certificate
program
they're early tens of thousands
of fires and
certified what agency you can
handle the volume of work that
this will essentially create.
Where was the funny town how
would all their registry
probably monitor it lastly
i'm only clear as to what
dealers are expected to do with
fires on the trade general's
list once a list is created a
certified bill system marketing
but it's not clear how what we
would do with them most one one
twenty five
what a few questions that come
from.
If it gets your
funding and what we have to
retail action do
one thirty one twenty four with
other counts.
They just.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Next we have a thomas.
Yes the letters
members of the committee
every provision of this proposed
but station in nothing
determined people price
criminals
legally at all.
Thank you
thank you and.
Keep guard
thinking about
it lottery shooting sports
foundation we pursue with the
sponsor attempt to do but I
think it was very clear from the
summer
hearing courts and corrections
committee we're talking about
weapons often spoken rarely
understood insurance we started
to discuss
you find that there's a lot of
the part of the rumour and but
aren't really a part of that so
would you
hear that
we know what the constitution
on the bands on such weapons and
I can ask you
with little bit buying a lawsuit
for the state using money that
you go to violence reduction and
so why are you going to waste
money and litigation we can
actually do something
something this constitutional
thank you.
And.
Harrogate.
I
guess your committee members
terrible national rightful
association in opposition to
hospital one seven based on a
recent national firm survey and
applying estimate a percentages
of us done on our ship to
mexico's population
it's estimated that nearly a
quarter of a million new
accidents fires that magazines
are more rounds and over a
hundred fifty thousand mexicans
own a r fifteen
solar lease style.
Those are people becoming
criminals overnight the
passenger one thirty seven I
wanted to give you an idea of
this bill
force to register their firms
and or magazines become
criminals under the bill
call rather than active magazine
twenty thirteen and it is not
reduced prime minister state the
number of fire related murders
rose every year for a decade
after passage of that magazine
limit law the exception of one
year and at the end of the
decade
that's to read the fire side
rate
still three times the level of
twenty thirty
field experiment colorado as we
expect it would be here thank
you.
You have the need.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We have.
Federal
probably fire.
Yeah
this will have seventeen rounds
one around this common use
I guess
right
I don't want to register this
because I
don't
read the state I would put
forward.
They suggest
the door.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
for registered lobbyists for the
mexican council
we took an opposition to this
legislation for many of the
reasons that have already been
stated we also agree that the
language is this bill is unclear
and really quite difficult to
read and understand your quick
example of this my voice have
paint all guns paintball guns
are
you used to a high pressure
canister gas to propel the
paintball bullet now I know that
are not the intention of this
bill but I can't find where they
would be exactly because they
are gas power
so it just lens an example.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else.
Yeah.
I think
for use
we're we're not looking at
thousands of times every day.
Yeah
I would propose a used part
I can pass the art fifteen or
some other type of weapons or
more on the daily basis the same
life three five injury.
Just closing.
In november last year found our
democrat households
forty one percent
thirty three percent twenty nine
and given the same
older on the other side of the
island and it's concerned for
the personal safety in their
home
based on the conditions right
now so these are too soon
sheets
of
the next person.
The.
That.
Alright we will go to i.
Could please
go ahead but my name is grad
goldman just wanted to say that
study earlier the federal
government's own study showed a
ban and assault weapons did not
reduce gun violence but
secondly
do we make it harder first over
people to buy cars.
Cause that's what you're doing
the law bidding citizens right
now.
This makes absolutely no sense
that i'm opposed to it it's not
my fault that all bad things
happen but it is my right to
defend myself my family and you
are removing that right from us
this is not okay
in no matter what we do it
doesn't matter you get a vote on
party line you're not going to
listen anything that we stay
you're just going to do what you
think is right and you're in the
wrong we all know it and you're
gonna make a saw criminals and
it's not going to work in the
way that you think
we are opposed to this come and
take it.
Thank you next.
Yeah thanks for getting calling
my name anyway my name is chris
i'm just a regular normal person
I know that you all hold me in
the up most contempt for owning
quite a quote a stall rifles but
I tell you what i've been
statistic at this statement that
life I found in the national
guard of this state I am the
perfect citizen as far as anyone
would be concerned and you know
i've been getting real upset
about this when you're trying to
do but the start of the matter
is that
you know I don't have to comply
and I won't so do what you're
going to do.
I'm sorry if you can make your
keep your comments to the bill.
Please.
Thank you madame chair member of
committee nave asking here again
on behalf of seventeen hundred
members is the arrived on pistol
club and the alkar karia when
reported of chandler and center
circantes discussed the kind of
bills that had no chance of
surviving their respected
companies in a post period world
let alone judicial review this
bill would have been a prime
example.
To be clear this bill flies in
the face of every single iodo
with supreme court just bruins
every issue on the subject
not bruin not hello not ketano
not mcdonald this bill would
fail the test laid forth in
miller in the nineteen thirties
beyond this already fatal
fallings i'm certain from their
testimony initially that the
sponsors do not understand the
technical concepts contained in
the bill the bill has written
wood ban almost all sent me
automatic rifles the number sent
me on mac shockings and the
number of semi automatic
candidates to detail the
technical failings i'll take one
tiny example from handguns blow
back up bringing straight or
fire semi automatic handguns
will be dant recorded single or
double action henys would not
the difference between these
categories is that asked
moderately technical thank you.
Next.
Hi my name is start for my i'm
speaking and opposed to this
bill this bill does not have a
chance of surviving
legal
legal challenge just a lot you
know senator heiner growth is
bill and he's afraid to present
it in a senate cause he knows it
won't go anywhere and is the
matter of fact the supreme court
was shooted down in a hurry also
I mean I really
offer the people who have
relatives who have been murdered
but then I would have to ask the
committee why don't you guys
really increase the penalties
for people who should have
people
that you have this legislature
has been reluctant to do that
they seem to be you know really
reluctant to put murders in jail
the guy a sharpening hard room
well the guy shopped any hard
government got six years so
there you go I mean thank you.
Next please.
Hello.
Hello
go ahead.
Yeah my name is john thousand
and i'm opposed to this bill
my wife my or law bidding
citizens we've never been
arrested and only got a club was
being tickets where average and
competitive shooters to spend
most of our week and that the
shooting range we regularly use
are fifteen is the large them
how they fire standard batty mag
things to compete with you bowl
violent commonly used if I make
pistols we heard what we might
make shock and and rifles.
May the firms that you are
trying to bear in this bill will
affect only lot but incidents of
the mexico and not their ability
to use the fire for lawful
purposes they'll do absolutely
nothing to react crime or your
legal guns now they can have the
criminals
go take a real effort and from
the test of order to the past
meaningful bills that really
would help her crime and punish
the criminals rather than a lot
of bike citizens the new mexico
every session for the last
several years representative
bill ring his introduced bills
but true they reduce crime and
our legislatures continually
bought him down why can we
please quit wasting time on
destroying a lot of buys insist
as right and path the real crime
bills.
Um
we have five minutes left for
people on zoom and there's nine
speakers so if you want to get
everyone in you might make it
really quick and not repeat
others.
Go ahead now.
Hi my name is I am from women
for gun rights and dc project I
post a spell
because we are blaming inademate
object.
Not just the gun that we are
also in the magazine itself
which magazine has nothing to do
with herming people by itself.
We should think about the way
more research in.
These times against the families
better spring that spell.
Before becoming out of myself I
always supported or research
more data about mental health
and helping mental health part
thank you.
Thank you next.
Take your man on chair thank you
committee for listening to me
this is kind of brendan mayor of
edge which begins a private
citizen I am opposed to this
bill are betting their semi
automatic weapons is not going
to help anybody the criminals
are still going to have those
weapons in the still going to
use them another thing it's
going to go ahead is hamper
those who live in our southern
communities as the borders are
stay in wide open we have cartel
members coming across the
borders these people need these
weapons to be able to defend
their property their lives
talking their families.
And I urge you to not pass hb
one thirty seven thank you.
Thank you next.
Yeah.
Yes my name is david being a son
retired air force I have a
couple comments about this bill
I wouldn't concern about the
definition of a high to pass it
in magazine and why there is a
ten round limit I recall as I
recall there was an incident
last year were a shooter had
fifteen camera magazines I don't
see how have an eleven on the
maximum capacity could have
helped in that situation I was
concerned about having a
registry of gun orders and as
far as as far as security of the
database or I myself as many
others have suffered a data
breach by a person if matched
husband evolved and so I have a
serious concern about how this
information if it comes to pass
but people haven't reached that
forums how are you information
that is going to be protected
but thank you very much I stand
up with switching to his bill
thank you n.
Hello my name's logan brown I am
in opposition obviously the
largest one with this bill that
hasn't been mentioned before is
that there's no grandfather
close to this bill making anyone
that currently owns and
possesses one of these in my
automatic ****
emberded their gas powered
rifles or firearms criminals
automatically there's lots of
data that is a
air fifteen is quoting close all
rifles or even the majority
made early majority use in
masshootings or
other mass murders but to be
honest it doesn't matter what
data statistics that any of us
say the democrat legit leaders
are going to pass the store
regardless along with other gun
control measures just because
you have to have the majority of
the vote.
With that said it's not gonna
hold in federal court and thank
you representative lord and
block actually upholding your
oath and not violating your own
like the other people in the
room thank you
thank you next.
Next.
The.
This was we bought from bloss
cruises can hear me yes you can
go ahead okay yeah former usps a
competitor shooting three air
fifteens and high capacity
magazine pistols.
Why too address a scope of the
bill in opposition to that if
ninety nine percent of the gun
owners are responsible in
society will never really have a
problem with us and not bad guys
doing bad things with guns from
nine or nine percent of the
problem with context than a
hundred percent of the effort
should be devoted there i've got
a problem with section of six
that forms a list culminating in
section seven would look.
Quite defect a registration
reforms kind of a small innovate
approach there which suggests
adding a credible metric or
settlement drinks and the sun
said clause if this bill moves
forward again I would recommend
tabling the bill and.
We're thinking it.
Thank you.
Thank you that includes our
opposition on zoom and we will
now move to public comment.
As proponents.
All of you who are in support of
this build you'd like to raise
your hands.
And then we have
people have signed a
pinelope smart.
High school and just purpose
being discussing it's sold from
questioning because I
also genuinely
friend
situations when there are actual
people that I I mean I believe
this country was built on
ridiculous and brave legislation
and action and this is it this
is it there's a crisis and I
want the american
and I want to take this action
right here because.
I I know
like i'm sure why people.
It's operated for fire groups
like there's a reason they don't
even use it because it
completely destroys.
I don't understand why people
move for soft defence it may be.
Right again
thank you i'm next we have
olivia.
That.
Hi my name is
legal council at every day.
I wanted to address that
proposed law first state that
contrary to
said earlier every single state
of which there are ten that has
been slot on its books has that
lot in an active state right now
it is not enjoyed this is true
even for california the nice
circuit state does
large past magazines consult
with.
Notably the second circuit court
of appeals just
two months.
That is a noise weapons could be
unheld because gasol breeded
seventy fires a large capacity
magazines are not completely
used arts and devices were self
defense and that the present
questions about recent dangers
were in a recent transcript
incredible increase in mass
duties and the number of people
killed her mass shootings over
the past few decades.
Chair numbers maybe my name is
going for president
violence very strong support of
household i'm actually in the
change.
The majority of the work we do.
Yeah.
And they are.
They are frustrated and they are
beyond confused why you're doing
so little keep them safe.
They live in fears and schools I
have been a school
we have seen the real fear we
have put tables against stores
constant.
And the reason why these
firearms are so
to children these because they
have half the blood then an
adult side by
so they cleared out much faster
unless you're near you and i'm
travel which is the only trouble
with
your chances of your child
thank you.
Thank you next we have susan.
The try
my name is stop to susan.
And i'm a friends excitement I
am also tired on speak up a
little tired.
And that
and I served in the middle east
and support operat.
Yeah.
Fence has described this web
thing now we thought the sign
human beings quickly and
efficiently this is what it did
in iraq.
Would you go to a gun shop and
say.
I need a phenomenal refund with
them designed people
quickly and efficiently
of christmas.
But in the story there are so
many other weapons.
You can still height you can
still target shoot you can still
defend yourself and
no one is taking that way
however.
This week has also been used to
feel school children and I echo
what you'd say school kids are
thank you and worshippers
and concert goers and people
get weapons of war
next we have.
Thank you
members thank you.
We know this bill is about
presenting sales of you
to kill weekly
before we know the speech cannot
be transferred at under house.
People
and that is something we match
because the purpose of the
government is the protect live
we have the right.
And we must know.
But nobody can take away our
lives.
Thank you.
Letter
my name is
twenty twenty three my
neighborhood
eight times until their neighbor
stopped him saving health lives
these all times you're two metal
sides of an air trailer and then
my neighbors yards why is the
civilian specially one belong
history of domestic violence of
the right weapons
why does his rights destruction
matter more than my saved piece
my tax chair community right
security at all defense classes
the children on my block did not
leave
the innocence of my save
neighborhood
I like wasn't taking that day
I refused to let my voice all of
its have no place in new mexico
let's make our statement
through.
Carefully.
And i'm speaking
to me in the action to support
he
professor and cleary was killed
this is professor.
That was people then one
life.
I'm here to ask this
death.
And that's banning high passing
when height has
used with somebody
shooter can fire potentially
doesn't round ever stopping to
be loved
university review
large capacity
to reduce battle
mash
and wasn't so
do some
forty nine percent thank you.
The committee my name's allen
sanchez
urged you to support this
legislation this bill is as many
other good bills
will be tested by the
constitution everybody comes out
any legislature in our
and we
constitution has to catch up
with the society as it
interpreted the interpretation
of it we see that
we cannot
do the right thing here
or not
your fancy
culture
this deal is counter cultural we
have a culture of this country
but it's the right thing to do.
Thank you is there anyone else
that w.
I never speak
or ask the service
on a school board and the.
And I was arguing that we should
not you
put around the middle school
that the money should go to the
classroom and make trends on the
port so you know we have a
problem with attendance.
My children are terrified we
have to do it and so
that.
This easy to get
children need to get to school
and
on the board what I want to help
people to re
it's all
so you know on that alone we
should do something thank you
thank you there are some hello
my name is
high school and I would just
like to ask the representative
looking in my eyes i'm student
because india high school
representatives
when I
coming a future present
because the boy not covering
over my
school shooter and mostly
he are used
on other people.
And that's what you know we're
here today to say that they
use yeah.
Thank you certainly one else in
support still that would like to
sweep
period.
All right we'll go to
we'll go to zoom are there.
If you'll go ahead.
Share woman ferrarian members of
the committee new mexicans are
not free when we fear being shot
every time we go to the store
theater concert or fear for our
children every time they leave
the hump we should not have
military great weapons available
to the public the ripple effect
of gun violence is devastating
my story was a perfect storm
that took five of my family
members all victims of mass
shooting committed by my trouble
nephew I wish I had been more
vigilant and knew that my
brother kept eight guns and
fifteen thousand rounds of
ammunition part of the reason he
had this arsenal including two h
fifteens is because he believed
he might have to take on the
government instead his weapons
were used against him which
happens regularly assault
weapons and high capacity
magazines were involved in at
least eight of the ten deadly a
smash shootings between twenty
fifteen and twenty twenty one
please stop the needless
slaughter of our citizens and
vote guess on hp one thirty
seven.
Next.
Better chair members of the
coverage I have built jordan
with new mexico voices for
children and we want to stand
today with those students and
families surrivers and victims
of those weapons.
Who are pleading with you today
to support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you nats.
The.
Because go ahead.
Hey my name is beckycox.
Hi my name is beckycok's and I I
live in application in mexico
i'm a volunteer with mom's
demand action for gun sense in
new mexico and i'm a public
school educator I support this
bill and ask the committee to
vote yes ten states and the
district of columbia already
prohibit or restrict assault
weapons new mexico should join
and passing these life savings
and foundation of done safety
policies thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you and i'm travel simple
question.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chairman.
Representative and experts.
So madam chair representative.
I'm just gonna I guess go
through the bill page one.
Yeah.
Has all the definitions what it
does i'm just gonna go to p.
The.
Minimum chair representative so.
From my understanding
you guys put some definitions
and hear you of ammunition cycle
the action gas operated can you
go a little little deeper into
it gas operated means regarding
the firms you intend to ban
madame chairman represent madame
chair representative we are
clear about the definition of
gas operated I don't want to
read it to you the of a specific
question about the definition
we've provided.
Okay manager represent okay so
gas operated so just tell me an
example of a gas operated
firearm and are fifteen madame
chair representative.
And what else would that be
manager representative.
We have a a list of gas operated
firms we could provide to you do
you want us to list it off madam
chair representative.
Thank you madame terra members
of the committee representative
block weapons contemplated under
this act include weapons are
style weapons that accept
detachable magazines.
These are at definitions of the
descriptions you require
a k forty seven style weapons.
Regardless of features all of
these weapons are regardless of
external features it's
operational so come in brands
associated cult and for daniel
defense ruger are smith in
western parmetto harmory.
Arsenal century arms collision
occur it's etc in the list is is
quite long but there.
The features related to the
weapon are the important parts
so hopefully that explanation of
a small part of a list of
weapons that would be included.
And and I can go honest that's
not enough no I appreciate that
madame chairman and thank you
for that so what rifles would
then be legal still.
Madame chaired representative
those that are within the fixed
capacity of ten.
Rounds or less and those that
are not at those that are
with that our gas operated and
those that.
Or not on the list that the age
you would then promise madam
chair representative madam chair
representative so we would have
both action
madame chair representative
that's correct.
All right manager representative
I precede that so both action
okay I don't I don't really see
myself defending my home with a
bulk action rightful but if
there's anything else that if
you have their certainly more
okay please go on then i'd
appreciate it madam chair
members the committee
represented block of the if the
question is now confined to what
are permissible weapons yes
plumbled action was what you
mentioned there are a number as
the representative mentioned gas
operated weapons with a fixed
magazine and a ten round
capacity so starting there I
think that's a good place to
start okay so manager represents
so are you saying every single
ar would be banned or in a r
that has ten thing capacity
that's fixed with still correct
madame chair so to clarify our
blight weapons are not bound
under this provision a fixed
capacity of tangrounds are less
would be allowable under the
slot.
Okay thank you madame chair
representative so fixed capacity
on the magazine so so if it's
that hatable if the the maximum
detachable it's not legal that's
correct with him to not okay.
All right I don't know how many.
Are fifteenth have fixed.
I mean i'm i'm just trying to
think.
I don't want to say what I have
but.
I have something that is ten
round capacity but
it is not fixed so.
Very interesting so I know in
the bill
it says it says a caveat for
twenty two so what if I had a
air fifteen there was a twenty
two called but it was a ten
round capacity and it was
detachable with that then be
excluded from this built manager
representative and I believe
that's on page nine
thank you chairman
representative you are correct
on page nine if the fire and is
designed to accept an only
capable of accepting twenty two
caliber room fire ammunition
then it would not by definition
under this act the gas operated
semi automatic firearm that
would be subject to regulation
okay thinking march I think you
represent it so and a expert so
we could have a thirty round as
well
if it's a twenty two with that
still be permissible under this
act.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair and
representative that's checking
here for our
capacity ammunition feeding
device I believe we do are
making exception for twenty two
is under that as well just
double checking that.
And when you get there would you
mind pointing me to the page
madame to represent it.
Oh yes it madame chair and
representative it's under the
definition of large capacity
ammunition eating device which
is unpage three uhm and it's
specifically addressed on a
lines nineteen through twenty
one.
The.
Okay thank you madame chair i'm
just going to get to that page
is one.
Thank you madame to represent
it.
Okay so.
I don't see a capacity here.
So if I if I had a twenty two
caliber are fifteen with thirty
round capacity this would still
be permissible for this section
since I don't see an a number
and the limit manager.
Madam chairman representative
yes that is correct.
Okay thank you representative.
I guess the
is helpful manager
representative so.
Any other **** would be allowed.
With higher capacity to to
what would be what would be
allowed other than a twenty two
minute represent them chair
representative block the only
exception.
That doesn't include the already
discussed fixed magazine
capacity.
The.
Medium to representative so that
but that doesn't need to be
fixed on the twenty two just to
be clear.
Okay.
Okay what.
Stay with me
manager representative
on page two we have the words
here to clarify all firms can
stay with you so long as their
certified under the under this
law okay well that that would be
great you'd provide me this
section where that resides
manager.
Madame chair starting on page
fifteen there's a certification
process under the ages office
that would allow for all
firehooms under the slot to be
grandfathered in should you
certify with the ages office.
Thank you madame chair thinking
representative where does it say
attorney general's office on
here.
Night three months
starting outline three the
attorney general
but not the office just says the
attorney channel so I just want
to make sure regarding the the
change of name of the department
of justice now previously the
office of the attorney general
i'm pretty sure that should
stand but just want to make sure
so this registry.
So we're putting folks on a
registry if you have.
An air fifteen.
That has let you say it's not a
teacher through listen states of
nato five five six.
You would
have to.
You'd have to sign a form
manager representative what's
the protocol here.
Madam chair representative so we
clarify what the certification
that the attorney general would
need to follow first they would
need to create a list of
awful semi automatic fires that
would fall under the exclusion
of the act they would also then
have to look at affirmation that
the person insured assurance
obtained to this fire and prior
to the act going into effect we
would have to identify the make
model caliber and serial number
and persons name address
telephone number and date of
birth.
All of this information is
confidential and wouldn't be
subject to
so none of this information
would be obtainable by the
public
except for those law enforcement
agencies that would have to
perform any of their lawful duty
i'm in that said manager
representative there's a the
protocol in place for how that
how that would work.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative so I just want to
be clear this this is indeed.
Keeping a list with the
government.
Of who
owns a firearm that is banned
due to this new statute that we
create is that c.
Madam chair representative so
the attorney general again would
obtain this information should a
person want to certify their
weapon if they obtained it and
its current it would be excluded
as soon as the act of going to
effect on january first twenty
twenty five so they would have
to have a certified that weapon
with the ages office provided
their information and that
information would be capped at
the ag and remain confidential
and not subject to epra.
Thank you madam chair think you
representative so.
We all know that there are
hackers.
And we all know that there are.
Some pretty gets you people
running about and they will
pretty much do anything to take
our data so does this stipulate
in the bill any specific
encryption of this information
to ensure that there is no
touching the names the dates of
uh
putting this forward no serial
numbers how do we ensure that
this is encrypted a reason block
chain technology what are we
doing manager madame chair
representative that's a question
for do it I don't know if
they're in the audience today
but as with all government
information including health
data to might knowledge all of
that is held to the highest
standard of privacy and
confidentiality as with this
information
thank you manager thank you
representative cause I know that
there have been absolute
instances even with do it where
they have had to pay ransoms for
our data to be paid back so I
don't want to be negotiating
with these.
I don't know if you'd call them
yeah I call them a terrorist
so I just want to make sure that
this is encrypted I would like
to see a larger definition of
what that would even.
M- representative we're happy to
follow up with you with do its
protocols for confidential
information government
information.
Yes thank you that would be
helpful I I just have super huge
concerns about that because
whenever the government asked to
start a list you know many
people do not necessarily trust
the government and they
certainly do not trust them
keeping a list of their data
secured so can you then
continue here we were talking
about two two three five five
six twenty two two two three
five five six ammunition is
still allowed that is still a
twenty two counter
madam chair members of the
committee a representative block
the only ammunition contemplated
for exclusion is twenty two
is discussed earlier or so this
limitation or these are proposed
items well we'll be consplated
irrespective of california
contemplated for weather
okay and it says twenty two
television rim fire that's the
only admissible.
Kind of a municipal rate twenty
two caliber room fire for the
bill madam chair representative
block I think I think they were
talking about two different
things I think your first
question was about the
difference between two two three
and five five six and something
else permissible the act doesn't
contemplate any other exclusion
except for the exception already
discussed related to twenty two
remir so irrespective of caliber
or type of ammunition with the
exception of twenty.
Thank you madame chair and
thinking representative and an
expert so on that same page page
nine we say a rifle that is a
single sat right for is a breach
loading rifle with the capacity
not to accede to rounds of
ammunition.
Is must loading.
Or smooth boards shoulder fire
firearm uses a bolt action lever
action pump action
so.
This is those are not to exceed
ten rounds.
A correct manager okay the
manager representative so.
Are we
a page on page nine a.
I want to make sure a does not
matter to be madam chair
representative let let me
clarify for that on page nine
that is for section three the
substantive section addressing
gas operated semitic firearms
that that is including all the
exceptions to the rule so all of
those things that are listed
there are not I definition under
this act I gas operated semi
automatic firearm that is
regulated so if it meets any of
those if it's a muzzle motor if
it's all action lever action out
it's not subject to this act.
Okay
okay thank you madame chair and
think he represent it so then on
c regarding a shot gun says ten
rounds of ammunition that cannot
be converted or changed to
accept more than ten round.
So.
Can you tell me specifically
what's what is the most common
sharp gun uh eminent amount
madame chair members of the
committee and representative
black would be hard for me to
say with any specific what's the
most common shot going type of
vamiation is that the question
you're asking correct twelve
gage would be my my best gas
difficult to know for certain I
don't finger on the pulse of of
the retail market related to
shock and that is certainly the
call or type of ammunition for
shockings that are familiar with
folks using for a personal
defence and that's certainly
what's used by law enforcement
officials in a lot of cases
that I think that's the best
taking.
Thank you madame chair think you
represent it and an expert I
proceed that so twelve gates
rate everyone knows what that is
can we.
I mean I hope I hope everyone
knows that that is but manager.
With this shotgun are we.
Saying that.
I cannot exit ten rounds of
emission and it without include
all seconds.
I mean like how how many soccer
i'm just wondering how many
shotguns on the market had ten
rounds like what percentage have
we have is studied that kind of
thing because I I don't really
matter manager members the
committee represented block I
also can't speak intelligently
about the entirety of the market
but what I think the the portion
of the act that you are
discussing right now has to do
with capacity of ammunition
availability that sounds an
offlight to me like the same
discussion that's being had
relative to high capacity
magazine availability so it's
limitation of eminent.
And I would say madam chair
representative that we do
contemplate the fact that a lot
of these weapons can be altered
and to it to have a higher
capacity over ten rounds so
again as technology continues to
be innovated around weapons that
we want to encapsulate the fact
that we're trying to limit the
the absolute the magazine
capacity overall.
Thank you manager thank you
representatives then i'm just
going to keep on going here to
page ten.
I believe we're talking about
and guns so like a pistol
manager representative so we
have fifteen rounds of
ammunition is the maximum
capacity allowed on line fifteen
is that correct.
You repeat the question I
apologize
i'm on page ten and i'm looking
at line fifteen.
The.
Change to accept more than
fifteen rounds of regarding a
pistol madame chair
representative so this this bill
then would say that that is the
maximum capacity of any personal
to be owned is that correct
that's correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative to are there any
calibers that are banned
of pistols.
Madame chair represented madam
chair representative now
okay so so in nine caliber you
know that's that's very standard
nineteen totally fine as long as
it has fifteen or less correct
correct manager okay manager
representative because they know
and always spoken about these
these mass shootings a lot.
And we talk about the terrible
horse that these families go
through and no one would ever
can do that whatsoever but you
know in in one of the cases
mentioned.
The gun was a nine caliber.
Nine millimeter rather there's
nine millimeter and it was
stolen so what what provisions
in this legislation would ensure
that a stolen.
Nine caliber cannot be used to
kill somebody manager.
Madam chair representative if it
is a pistol that it's subject
you would act then it would be a
separate fourth degree felony
which is provided for in section
nine however if it is you know a
regular pistol that is in
subject to the act which is most
personals than it would you know
be prohibited by general
criminal I don't have the
citation to that law by I know
it is illegal to steal a firearm
someone else with that.
Okay some animator
represented so as we've stated
the.
This build is not necessarily
target criminals the thirty
crime is that correct manager
representative
correct madam chair
representative so then we then
we've stated that it targets law
about these citizens if they're
not criminals right
perhaps i'm not understanding
your question madame chair
representative you're
contemplating folks that are
stealing weapons and using them
to commit crimes
that is super seeds I think what
we're trying to regulate here
i'm sure representatives so if I
understand your question
correctly if the intent was
always to commit a crime under
the laws of this active still be
a crime
so thirty legal to go stealing.
Even an a r fifteen and killing
somebody right
and my knowledge madam chair
representative absolutely.
Okay I agree I agree so I I
don't necessarily see the point
of legislation but i'll continue
here I was going to non
residents on page sixteen.
Soon unresident.
Can you just tell me in a
summary which non residents can
bring their guns to new mexico
and is it only for shooting
sports purposes or what are the
purposes with this before
manager representative.
Madame chair representative what
we do here is simply clarify for
those that could be passing
through new mexico
with a firearm that would be
needing to be certified under
this law that would then be
illegal so what we do is clarify
how it is they can interact with
that weapon in a twenty four
hour period and then would be
subject to the law uh
in the new of the state of new
mexico.
I see a manager representative
let's just say i'm i'm from the
state of utah and i'm driving
through new mexico to go to my
friends over and oklahoma
I don't know I took us a
roundabout trip so madame chair
represented fact if I own a
thirty round five five six are
fifteen with a detachable
magazine if I brought that
across state lines I would still
be allowed to own that and there
would be no penalties for me if
I was merely passing through is
that when i'm understanding
madam chair representative madam
chair representative yes so long
at it as it is transported in
compliance with subsection a
with subsection a section
which is that the the fire must
be unloaded and then they can't
be readily accessible they're
directly accessible from the
passenger compartment of the
transporting vehicle.
Okay so it needs to be I guess
in a locked container is that
kind of what we're seeing madam
chair representative that would
be reasonable madame chair
representative okay so manager
representative if I had some
some kind of less you said a
pistol that fit in the glove
compartment that was not in
complaints with this law.
And it was locked and I went to
my hotel room and I went to
check in and someone came and
store my my fire.
I would not be held liable for
whatever happened with that
phone that correct if I did lock
the glove compartment manager
representative that's incorrect
madam chair represented it we
specifically talk about glove
compartments not being
sufficient for protection of a
firearm that would fall under
the conference of the law and
that's online twenty one through
twenty four.
Think you met him to think you
represented but less you say I
had it laying on the seat.
Of mate pickup truck and I had
it in a case and it was locked
the case was locked and my car
was also locked madame chair
represented would that then not
fall under this provision would
it still be out of complaints
manager representative.
Matter chair representative if
it was parked and it's not being
driven then it would be in
violation of the wall
okay think you manage your thing
to represent it so if I if I
come from utah and I need to
check into my hotel room while
i'm checking into my hotel room
even though my my pick of truck
is locked and the case is locked
I would stop to bring that with
me physically into the hotel the
checking manager representative
and what it what if the hotel
did not allow firms this is kind
of my problem there yes to
clarify madame chair
representative you would just
have to keep it and compartment
separate from the passenger
compared to the vehicle so just
putting in your trunk would be
fine.
The.
Thank you material think you
represented them in a whole deal
to that this ever happens in
this state and his passes then
the trunk it's fine as long as
the car is locked I esim madame
chair.
Okay manager representative
let's let's go on to.
Sorry this bill is quite lengthy
I apologize for moving around a
lot but I did see something that
really caught my eye with this
piece of legislation and it was
regarding.
Families who you were allowed to
transfer to do you do know its
portion of the bill that was a I
believe you're well the
definition with media
matter chair representative of
page ten
provides a definition of
immediate family member and then
I believe
some other portions of the bill
including section three and
section a talk about being able
to transfer your regulated
firearm to those immediate
family members.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you representative so my my
issue with this one and page ten
line sixteen nineteenth is in
the last still that we just
passed we said okay well
immediate families already
defined in the law and we also
mentioned needs nephew cousin
grandparent but on this one it's
a lot more
my newt we only have spells
parent brother sister child of a
person or an individual to the
person stands in local parenters
or any other person living in
the household so I guess that
grammar lives in the household
it's okay but of grammar does
not live in the household it's
not okay that under my
understanding of this this text
manager manches representative
we appreciate the flag for the
conflict in the definition we
would be amendable to
taking the current law
definition within the background
checks provision
to the concert with one another
thank you madame chair think you
representative and I would not
venture and make that as well I
know that you doesn't judiciary
or notorious for being very
particular and I appreciate that
so please injuries here if you
can bring that forward that
would be helpful for me.
Manager representative.
Then I I believe I have your
fire here.
And I did see some things in the
further that I did want to bring
up animated representative
number one would be fiscal
implications that says the ag's
officer the department of
justice.
And I see citizen resort result
in litigation in new mexico as a
result increased operational
costs for the may be anticipated
and it says it would be at least
four hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for the attorney in
general manager representative
have you included it I don't
believe i've seen appropriation
on here are you discussing with
the attorney general's office
adding an appropriation.
Madam chair representative again
this is an estimate
as far as everything I
understand about both the
governors commitment to this
to enacting this law as well as
the attorney generals that this
would be something that we would
be able to find funding for in
order to make sure that everyone
was complaint with the law.
Okay think you manage her and
think he represented because I
go to the end of the affair and
page four and he says and the
ages office advises that brewing
like we said in the last bill
creates
creates issues constitutionally
for this piece of legislation
and it says right here
HB one thirty seven is clearly
unconstitutional so I know in
the past the attorney general's
office has refused to.
Represent the state or the
governor or any other entity
that it's forward
unconstitutional.
Legislation though madame to
representative if the age
refuses to support this bill in
court who would then the council
for this state madame chair
representative
manager representative if i'm
trying to follow your logic here
again any law that's passed by
the legislature of state of new
mexico and signed by the
governors below the land and
will be followed um.
As far as any sort of debate on
the constitutionality of an
assault weapons regulation or
a gas operated semi automatic
regulation which is a course
that the first time we've seen
this nationally that we're
bringing forth today including a
high capacity magazine challenge
under the lie have a long list
of courts around the country
that are both for and against
these types of uh regulations
and we believe very clearly that
under the second amendment the
type of
weapons that we are trying to
regulate here.
Are absolutely dangerous and
unusually deadly when we look at
what the statistics are in which
case we believe that we would
certainly take up the challenge
under any second amendment.
Chall.
I think you mentioned you're
thinking representative of and I
I hate to disagree with you but
unfortunately here on the far it
says the age comments that while
similar statutes have been
upheld in other states under
their constitutional provisions
governing firms the language of
those provisions differs from
article two section sixth of new
mexico's constitution some madam
chair representative
do do we want to comment on what
the attorney general's greatest
concerns are
madam chair representative um.
First I i'm looking fused where
you see on the last page of the
fire with the attorney general
saying this is clearly
unconstitutional I don't see any
do you have the fair environment
looking at it right now the
first it's paid for
your own wearing house but one
thirty seven
on my far here it says.
Ac reports the national suiting
shooting sports foundation is
there's the federal version of
HB one thirty seven is clearly
unconstitutional per the
attorney general setting a two
thousand eight you are supreme
court decision later on in that
section this is in a major
comments that while similar
status have been upheld in other
states under their
constitutional provisions
governing firms the language of
these provisions difference from
that found an article two
section six of the new mexico
constitution we reading the same
page manager so madame share
representative that is that
administrative office of the
court reporting that the
national shooting sports
foundation that search that this
is clearly unconstitutional the
age doesn't make such a
statement and in fact uhm pretty
much while every single court
that has addressed these post
bro
have either upheld tentatively
for preliminary injunctions
upheld the constitutionality or
the have had their decision
stayed by higher courts and to
address your question as far as
the new mexico constitution and
twenty fifteen the new mexico
court of appeals observed that
with regard to the standard of
scrutiny applied by our courts
to challenges under the right to
keep in their arms new mexico is
not offered greater protections
and federal courts under the
federal constitution that state
the mario
so and essence if the federal
courts which by large are
upholding this act then it's
very likely that new mexico
courts while similarly hold
thank you
thank you madame chair thank you
representative i'm just reading
with the with the analysis of
advisers that based on bruin the
act maybe found consistent with
with the the case we decided the
national student sports
foundation which found that it's
clearly unconstitutional right
so many representative I just
want to make sure
that we are not opening them up
to the litigation but we already
proved and fair that they need
about four hundred seventy five
thousand dollars.
Just to defend the state so
madam chair representative are
we again are we going to add an
appropriation to the ages office
for these imminent lawsuits
which will be coming madam chair
representative management
terrible and everything I
answered your question.
A man to represent what what was
that answer are we adding more
money to the department of
justice in the amount of four
hundred and seventy five
thousand dollars or four fifty
two.
Representatives too again madame
chair representative this is an
estimate as you as you and I
both know the cd's fires all the
time
that lfc staff will look at
with different.
Analysis this is something that
we disagree again on potentially
the cost we don't have any worry
that the egy would be able to
create a certification system
and again with the commitment
from the governor to ensure that
this bill
uh should should it pass
receives a signature that we
will get that we will be able to
enforce the law and get this
done.
Okay thank you manager thank you
representative I sir hope so I
wouldn't want to open up the
state to years worth of
expensive lawsuits
and so met into a representative
I want to continue here about
the bill itself so
we were talking about folks who
are on the registry right.
The folks who are on the
registry
if you fail to comply with this
registry request.
What date do you have to
complete a manager once this
doors in effect.
Mountain terra representative we
anticipate that the
certification of firms happen no
later than october first twenty
twenty four.
Okay thank manager thank you for
give me the majors correct the
record
it's actually january first
twenty twenty five as when the
when the certification would
need to be
completed by okay thank you
madame chair thank you
representative so let's just say
I have as many guns even just
one gun and I do not complain
what will happen to me madam
chair representative
madam chair representative the
penalties are listed on page
seventeen i'm an eighteen.
So those who do not comply with
registering
their gas operated semi
automatic firearm or a large
capacity ammunition greeting
device would be guilty of a
fourth degree fell any
following sorry sorry sorry let
me let me a miss demeanor
however if they were going to
commit a felony offense using
this device then it would be a
fourth degree felony so a
misdemeanor should you not
certify under the rule of the
law but if you used this weapon
it's it's a fourth degree
felony.
Okay madam chair representative
so if you use the weapon
at the shooting range for
example are we going to be
putting state police at the
shooting rains to ensure that
people are not suiting these
firms or if they are there being
checked to ensure that they are
in complaints with the list
madame chair representative if
someone was using that at a
shooting range that wouldn't be
an attempt to commit or
commission of the felony offense
so would be a misdemeanor but
managed to represent it you will
still be yourself a misdemeanor
of fence.
Right so i'm just wondering how
do we.
If it wasn't registered managed
share representative it would be
manager represented okay so if
it wasn't registered.
And I still had it
where is the enforcement arm of
this bill how do we enforce this
or we putting this to the state
police
local governments who is going
to be in charge of this manager
madame chair representative as
we do charge our lawn forcement
with enforcing
its the executive in charge of
enforcing the law.
Okay thank you manager thank you
representative so under the
executive we pretty much have
staples so are we going to be
going door to door and because I
don't how would you find out who
has these firearms if they're
not in complaints how would you
determine that manager represent
madame chair representative we
are trusting that those who have
these fires should they want to
continue to have them in their
possession and and in compliance
with the law that they would
certify them with the ages
office there's no effort in this
bill nor do we contemplate any
sort of effort to try to seek
out these
firehooms.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thinking representative so so
unless i.
Unless I go with the ag
I would still not really have
people knocking on my door at
all great manager that's not
contemplated in this legislation
manager okay so then it's you're
saying it's unenforceable
manager representative that's
what kind of what i'm getting at
no one's going to be enforcing
the law because we don't know
who has worked then how do we
find out those people if they do
not commit a felony with that
gun madam chair representative
made her representative that's a
question of philosophical of all
that for any laugh that for any
law that we put into place how
would we know who was breaking
it unless law enforcement was
involved
at the same thing applies here
madame chair representative.
All right thank you madame chair
think you represent that
I I see that is the hard pill
the swallow I I don't want
people's going towards the door
but I don't know how she would
enforce such a law because it is
so unenforceable and madame
chair representative we've seen
many cases brew and included
that have shown that these kind
of bands do not uphold in court
and especially with the our own
attorney general's office siding
case law to specify that there
is.
There's president here this is
super on constitutional and he
he does indeed sight that case
saying it is clearly
unconstitutional and that it
will indeed infringe upon
article to section six which
does say in full no also bridge
the right of the citizens to
keep and bear arms for security
and defense for lawful hunting
and recreational use and for
other lawful purposes but not
nothing here in shall be held to
permit the carrying off kinds of
weapons no minister county so
regularly in any way.
In incident of the right to keep
in their arms as amended
november second nineteen seventy
one in november second nineteen
eighty six so that really clears
it up for me madame chairman I
am definitely a big no one this
bill and I certainly will not be
putting my name on any
registries anytime soon thank
you manager
thank you representative
thank you matter.
As representatives asking
question.
It looks like.
So if the firm is a semi
automatic.
Is the firm and gas operated.
That's what we want to know that
the fire arm is required
operated handgun some automatic
sh.
Or less rim our weapon does the
rifle shock on how permanently
fixed.
Does the hand gone have a
permanently f.
The.
So that leaves us with this is
what I want to make sure that
we.
Items that would leave us with
would be bolt action.
A madam chair representative at
that that's a great question and
the answer is no
well first of all no
you can continue to have your
current firearms you know as
long as you certify them are but
for though there are many
exceptions of firearms that
don't fall under this act leave
a lot or listed on page nine so
so
terr to explain and broad terms
if you have a gas operated semi
automatic file if you have let's
say.
If it has a detachable magazine
then you know it falls under
this act if as a permanently
fixed magazine with the
capability of only accepting ten
arounds or less doesn't ball
under this act now on page nine
that also list other exceptions
to the definition of gas
operated semi automatic firearms
so every one of those uh
subparagraphs there list another
exception so if you know if it's
a recoil based higher arm so
like for example about smith and
western m and p two point that
wouldn't be subject to this act
because it is recoil based and
not ga.
So that leads me to so the rim
fire exception only applies to
twenty two california so a s.
Mancher members of the committee
represent the only exception
contemplated is a relates to
caliber specificity as twenty
two remir as we just okay so so
this panting right here the s.
The.
Depending upon the features of
that rate for it is likely
excluded from being a gas
operated semi automatic grateful
is my expectation I can't see it
from here but that is the first
test.
Okay
so if I had that one over ten
rounds and.
I have to go regis.
Madame chair representative
if it the magazine can be
dropped out that automatically.
If those are
madam chair representative
assuming they're not twenty two
there are higher caliber weapon
and assuming that they are gas
operated
then yes you would have to
certify them with the ag i'm
just i'm trying to very compete
there's a lot of moving parts in
this bill so if I gas operated
pistol like the bread three or
three two tom ca.
Representative only if it the
magazine was over ten rounds
so by ham can I still h.
Yes madame chair representative
but I can't have.
It depends also upon how what
the caliber of the um.
Okay of your ammunition would be
so without clarity on what the
caliber of the munition we can't
answer that question okay so let
me take let me just all
something solicit I have a
breather this eighty x.
And it falls under yeah.
But it has a magazine that is
bolted in I don't have to
register that or because it's
gas operated i.
Madame chair representative you
know if it is higher than a
twenty two caliber
so it would be over twenty two
and if it was permanent it had a
permanently fixed magazine of
ten rounds or less it would not
be subject to certification if
it had magazine that was bolted
and that was more than that then
it would be subject to
certification you guys are
better certain of her you guys
better have a class for
everybody and how because I can
see how we can.
The.
So if let's distinct with the
spread of here which.
The.
It's.
So I have this it's a nine
milli.
The.
Permanently fixed.
This.
To do and and what would the
expense and have to go to a gun
smith and.
The.
Convert this to being a
permanently.
Madame chair representative I am
not sure the cause but it is
certified.
And I dislike to remind the
representative let's keep it to
the bill yeah it it is that it.
It's very.
What I have to do because i'm
not going to register.
The.
So i'm trying to figure out how
and I can tell you.
Ever do.
So i'm trying to figure out we
have.
Approximately one hundred fifty
to two hundred and fifty people
that own modern sparks
i'm trying to figure out how
how.
If the majority of them are not
going to register them what are
the steps that they need to
take.
If they don't want to comply.
What what is that part even
called to make it madame chair
representative should somebody
not want to comply with the law
they are subject to the
penalties of that law and if
they didn't certify their
firearm that would fall under
the provisions of
this act they would then likely
be subject to a misdemeanor
should they be found to have to
have those weapons and they were
uncertified and they owned them
prior to uhm the announcement
or after.
What is that part called.
That is an option.
What is that going to cost.
Madam chair representative we
have seen that they're number of
abilities for folks to convert
their fires to fixed magazines
with a quick google search
you're able to see that they're
available on amazon
so madame chair representative
should have person want to
comply
when they want to comply with
the law there is an ability to
convert these weapons as well to
allow them to be fixed.
In which case they would be in
compliant.
Okay madam chair.
So there's approximately
I know you go to possible ****
but.
Hand guns there's other rifles
that would also fall into this
so it's not an assault weapon
it's a ban on specific rapels.
We have two hundred fifty
thousand approximately a r.
Man asked question is based on
this bill.
Where do you come to the
conclusion under throw and
because that allows.
You have to show its dangerous
and unusual and there's twenty
four million **** in america.
Million are.
Madam chair representative so
now you're getting into the new
ones of whether or not this
would be challenged
should it be challenged madame
chair representative
confident that under brewen it
is both dangerous and unusual
and again when we look at the
commonality in the way in which
all of our current assault
weapons bounds across the
country have been upheld because
they have not gone to the
supreme court there currently in
a fact
currently battled her
representative should it see a
challenge we can we would
continue to believe that this
would be upheld as well
well I know that the the problem
th.
The.
It like in california gets
banned goes court you can't do
that they make decisions to sa.
Specifically.
He said.
California yeah no it has to do
so right now we have in the
miller.
The.
Air fifteen also used for self
defense in the united states
four hundred and forty seve.
So that means this is point zero
zero zero zero zero one four
percent of the time.
And ninety nine point.
California
took the assault back.
So can you tell me where there
is.
To this airpan
yes madam chair representative
while first about their finder
the bruin framework it's it's a
two step analysis under the
first step you have to ask does
the conduct the proposed conduct
all within the protection of the
plane taxed the second amendment
and many courts a federal
district court including the
seven circuit court of appeals
how to help that these sort of
weapons and high capacity
magazines do not fall within the
plane text the protection of the
second amendment and that's
because not just because they're
common use because the courts
have recognized that it's a
circular argument that really
doesn't make sense under the
constitution if you know you
invent a gun in one day it's not
in common use its own
constitutional then i'd get
becomes popular than it does
what the courts look at is
whether it's in common use for
self defense and many courts
have found that these are not
really insult in common use for
some defense but rather they're
commonly used to perpetuate mass
shootings and none that less of
course have also perceived it
out of an abundance of caution
to the second step of the bruin
analysis which then goes into
the history and tradition test
and they have found analogist
laws from the seventeen hundreds
and eighteen hundreds i'm
looking at laws that were
addressing back then new
technology
such as you know smaller pistols
that could be concealed or large
bonus and these course have
found that these were a
sufficiently similar to to these
current regulations notably that
the seven circuit court of
appeals are the challengers in
that case appealed to the us
supreme court and the us supreme
court denied that when no public
descents that means none of the
justice is decided that it was
you know that they should spend
the time are reviewing the seven
circuits opinion in that matter
at that.
At that time so we have pretty
good indication at this moment
that that this law would be
upheld by the courts.
Enter to clarify madame chart to
this just happened in december
since very recent that they
denied wanting to hear this as
well.
Of these gas operated.
Because I had the the statistic
I got from.
The.
Was at ninety nine p.
The.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative again
when we're looking at bruin and
also looking at the statistics
that we have stated and will
stayed again that these gas
operated semi automatic weapons
that would fall under the
provisions at this law have been
the weapon of choice for shooter
seeging to inflict mass
casualties and they were used in
the ten deadliest mass shootings
between two thousand nine and
twenty twenty so what we think
about what we are trying to
prevent and why we have brought
this forward today the idea is
that should it have a challenge
we will explain that since the
lapse in a federal bound on
assault weapons the state of new
mexico is doing everything they
can to ensure that these weapons
aren't used in the context of
both the mouse shooting and harm
to numerous people at the same.
Yeah.
Pertinent to the bill yep.
Yeah.
The.
So anyone found a violation have
you quit prison for up to one
year or pay a fine for thousand
is that.
The.
Can you tell us where you're
referring to that manager
I have been making.
The.
I think you're referring to the
penalties provision from page
seventeen and eighteen as that
correct manager.
No matter that representative
that's the legal use.
The penalties maybe that's
that's in page seventeen and
eighteen.
The.
Okay
so from understa.
That.
Yeah.
Representative or this has
nothing to do with the bill
getting instructions on how to
do these things to go so if you
could please keep it actually
ill.
If we're man dating that
magazines are fixed inside.
How are they removed matter
representative we've seen
numerous you two videos about
how these fixed magazines work
with
would love to demonstrate that
we just don't have that premise
today managed her representative
but they would be by hands
essentially to be able to as far
as everything that we've seen
you would just reload like any
other firearm you just reload to
fixed magazine.
Out it just doesn't drop out you
can't push button.
Madame tear members of the
committee represent or there are
a number of different ways in
which magazines are fixed there
are fixed magazines in
production and use today i'm
used a couple of my think for
for some of your visual examples
loading through either the
objection court i've seen
breaking the weapon into parts
half the receiver away from the
upper
variety of their literally
thousands of videos online
particularly contemplating how
this is done in states that have
laws like this for example.
There's multiple steps to get
the madam chair representative
without pulling up specifics
about it given firearm you know
and understand he had here for
the new ones which really
depends.
So the airp.
First.
This.
Okay.
Then it would still be
applicable because.
Madame chair members of the
committee representative the
mechanism of that being a gas
operated weapon is the most
significant threshold to
contemplate in it in advance
what you're talking about is the
difference between having a
stock or not.
It's the function of the weapon
is the same so all of the rules
related to gas operator weapons
would apply to that analysis.
Because.
The.
I think when you're talking
about the machine gun
attachments.
The.
What what would you be with that
also include the air store
because it has a pistol for a.
But is there a definition
in here
and what payment madame chair
members the committee
representative lord page four
uh.
Line for section of machine gun
attachment definition.
The.
Line four page four machine gun
attachment okay.
On there.
Can you repeat your questions I
understand what you ask him.
So i'm.
Mechanism.
Can I still have a.
If you possess a matter of chair
of members of the committee
representative of a few
possessed in our pistol today
laughing.
You could certify that pistol
today lawfully as a gas operated
provided you owned it already if
you were talking about a future
air pistol it would need to
comply with provisions that they
act if an active okay that's
what I was trying to get cleared
in your michigan peace regular
separate.
Okay.
The.
Yeah.
Madame chair representative that
would be up to the discretion of
the judge okay so it could be
about that okay so m.
At any.
But this or anything if you.
Madame chair representative no
that's not currently
contemplated under this act.
Representative of so how this
so.
Is it going to be.
Madam chair representative it
would be the attorney in general
get the attorney general so so
this go.
Yeah.
And does it have an effort.
They're probably getting.
Is that.
Just until I was.
Madame chair representative yes
it is in the fire at the top of
page three
the a g.
Estimates that would be
approximately a hundred fifteen
thousand per year plus benefits.
Plus the salary for an
investigator at approx middle
eighty five thousand her year
plus benefit.
Yeah.
Paper.
Madam chair representative so
we ask first that the age office
would prompt with the law goes
into effect july one.
Then the ages office would then
have to come up with a list.
To my knowledge we've asked that
for that to be
determined by october first and
then my january first madame
chair representative folks would
have to certify those
firms within that time frame.
Before the locals into effect
for
then
those possession of those gas
operated semi autos would become
a legal.
Because this is a very.
I don't want grandmother get
around.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative
that's precisely why the ag's
office is involved when it comes
to consumer protections and
other abilities for them to be
able to put out
that information that's that's
where that.
That information typically comes
from
so madame chair representative
as with any the annoxment of law
you know we rely on
every government actor to to
make sure that folks know what
compliances.
What do they do with them on
january.
Madam chair representative they
can continue to sell those
firearms to those who paul
within the law enforcement or
government exception they can
also continue to sell those
firearms to non residents out of
the state who will be
maintaining that firearms out of
the state so they can offload
their inventory if they want
madame chair representative they
can also convert as you
discussed to
fix capacity as well and they
yeah I just want to add that
sorry no I would think you
mentio.
What they're going to do.
Madame chair representative
again I think respectfully
that's a misreading
by on the page for of the fire I
know the l f she is posting the
FIR analysis submitted by the
individual agencies so I think
i'm looking at the ages analysis
itself would reveal a different
answer if you look at the the
first line on page four it says
the major advisers that based on
the twenty twenty bruin decision
by the US supreme court the act
may need to be found consistent
with this nation's historic
tradition of our arm regulation
if it is found to address
conduct covered by the plane
text of the amendment and then
there's a separate sentence
where the aoc is reporting that
the national shooting sports
foundation a serve sads clearly
on constitutional okay thank you
I just got some tax at people
can't hear me I don't know how
the sinking.
So I guess
I want to conclude this is.
I tried to br.
And what that would have done as
it would have made.
Anybody who wanted to partake to
help defend our kids in school
that seems to be a big issue
that they would have to have the
same.
Because I know there's always
the people so will give the.
Um that deals with that safety
issue.
Taken more effort to prote.
I'm not going to be heck.
But.
I there's no i'm just not not
i'm not in for a gun registry
special california you know if
they did two years later the
band took them away so yeah I
know they.
They outlot of two years.
And it's not the air fifteen its
gas operated which leaves us
with limited options unless we
w.
I would also ask you a
philosophy question it's
retortable I don't need an
answer on that my informa.
It was half an everybody
due was their information was
sent out there as soon as the.
Now I can stay.
You're welcome to do it.
Okay then I will.
Thank you.
I moved a table
and chairman to table.
Emotion to table.
When thirty seven in a second
will take a roll call
though
representative block
yes to table representative lord
yes the table representative
remarried no
nota table representative
thompson
vice chair met and vice chair
ruby
i'm sorry.
Manager
no to table okay we have another
motion
yeah motion to table did not
pass forty two vote we have
another motion
to pass I do pass for house
build one thirty seven.
No and I would like to explain
my vote representative no one
i'd like to explain my b.
Yes representative thompson yes
that advised here
madame chair ferraro yes.
K
you have a due pass on your bill
one thirty seven thirty seven
with a forty two in favor
thank you
and yes representative blocked
to explain your boat briefly
please think you manage her
thank you my my vote today was
because this bill as we signed
the f a r is clearly
unconstitutional and is not
going to hold up in court and
it's going to cost the state
five hundred thousand dollars to
have to be in litigation about
it also madam chair
representative as as we still
before it would be available to
put.
Your your arm in your car but it
couldn't be in your glove
department but if you have a
truck you pretty much so that's
all madam sure thanks
point of order the house rules
at one minute for two explain
your ball and i'm terrible
within one night it's actually
less than one minute
when we're not
I was just making a point of
order that is non debate.
I made my own point of order
thank you manager thank you we
will make it clear that it is
one minute for.
Thank you so
yeah thank you madame chair so I
this is just punishing legal gun
owners ninety nine point nine
ninety nine eighty five percent
of us and not doing anything
with these fire arms not do
anything the fairest with them
and I don't think it's fair to
punish us it's not gonna do
anything criminal ticket care
less we got fully auto's walking
right across the mortar that's
what.
Coming over the border
constantly and there is no way
i'm ever going to vote for a gun
registry
I don't believe in that not now
not ever and I the fill subway
shows going to answer is my
information got leaked out
because i'm asking as he due and
it was sent to people that want
to kill me and how far is that
that I can't drop a mag quickly
to defend myself.
Thank you we will now go to our
last fire though
for this evening
twenty seven.
At each twenty one for fire
aren't purchases and
representatives so pans
zapansky i'm sorry I am so
tired.
Yeah.
Experts
had a question of the chair very
quickly
manager could you clarify for me
which rules were using to
oversee this this committee can
you please state to me
specifically web rules were
using the site
that's a good question
representative we are using the
house rooms for the new mexico
legislature and when things
aren't addressed in the house
rules then we refer to
the masons manual of legislative
procedure thank you madame chair
I just want to clarify regarding
the feet that in our house rules
there is nothing specific
regarding debate in committee
therefore it goes to the
masons rules which does say that
there are no motions to close
their limit debate allowed
incommittees madam chairman so I
would just like to reaffirm that
to the committee on the record
thank you madame chairman and
two on their points.
If the discretion of the chair
whether or not we do a second
round or not and after spending
almost two hours on what bill.
Decision madame chairman I I
respectfully disagree and i've
spoken to the speaker about this
and I will continue to speak
with the speaker on this and it
is not open up to debate for the
chair to do that according to
the house rules and the house
committee guide which states as
I will state right here madame
chairman no membership
interrupted when speaking and
also
there is no motion to close
debate and it should not be
allowed there should be no limit
on the number of times any
committee member is permitted to
speak to limit debate or the
number of times a member may
speak would defeat the purpose
for which the committee is
created handbook page twenty
madame chairman.
Thank you.
Yeah.
The.
Evening we're at evening now
whenever you're ready.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee present to you
today house bell
this legislation would raise the
age from eighteen to twenty one
where the perch purchase and
possession of automatic and send
me automatic firearms and large
capacity administration feeding
devices with a number of
reasonable exceptions I hope you
will find this legislation to be
both urgently needed and a
common sense measure that will
protect new mexico's children
and prevent tragedy far too many
of new mexico's children and
youth are dying from gun
violence and far too often they
are also the ones pulling the
trigger
as you know firms are now the
leading cause of death for
children under eighteen in
america.
And new mexico has one of the
highest rates of firearm related
dates among children and one of
the highest rates of suicide of
which most cases involve a
firearm
I believe that the need for
action is urgent
you know when my oldest son
entered kindergarten I can
remember getting a notice from
the teacher that they were going
to be practicing locked down
drills
which met them my five year old
son had to practice hiding in
the closet and being absolutely
silent.
We cannot accept this as normal
still years later as my son as
much older now which is hard to
believe
this is one of the practices
that are kids must endure on a
regular basis.
The firearms covered in this
fellow the same that were used
in the ten deadliest smash
shootings of the last decade.
And this bill is just one part
of the solution
I don't want to give you an
overly long introduction because
I know you've been here for
quite a number of hours but I do
just want to take a minute to
highlight the exceptions in this
bill
this policy will not impact new
mexicans between 1811 who are
piece officers and law
enforcement security officers or
members of the armed forces for
the national guard it also
permits new mexicans in this age
group to possess enuses fire
arms when they are legally
hunting at an established fire
range on private property and
under the supervision of their
parent or legal guardian.
Attending a firearm safety
course participating in a
competition or performance or
traveling with an unloaded
incentive restored firearm to
one of these authorized
locations or activities
this policy is about preventing
harmon respecting our traditions
of youth sportsmenship and
hunting.
To that and twenty two caliber
rifles are also excluded from
this.
I hope you will find this to be
a common sense policy I want to
also
just mention that we have been
having a few conversations with
couple of folks today regarding
some technical amendments and I
plan to work on those before how
studio
if
if we enter into that committee
as I want to introduce my expert
spend baker
from the office at the governor
or public safety expert as well
as elizabeth johnson from the
department of.
I would conclude my presentation
great think you representative
and I know that we've been here
for several hours all just
reiterate really quickly just
arm in terms of public comment
well we will do fifteen minutes
for proponents for opposition
and then ten minutes online for
proponents and opposition as
well also just wanted to say
that these are some really
important pieces the legislation
that we've been hearing today so
the emotions are high I know III
totally understand that but
please if we can just keep it as
respectful as possible I would
really appreciate it I know that
everybody here is just trying to
do the right thing and so just I
wanted to just make that pretty
clear so we're gonna go ahead
and start with opposition to the
legislation
if you can raise your hand for
those that are in an opposition
to this bill.
And then I have a list of books
who are on this list I know some
of you are I recognize some of
these names some books have
already left so we'll certainly
have time in those fifteen
minutes of their folks who feel
compelled to to speak so first
we have elaine summer hill.
Yeah.
Couple of personally ready for
the bill it doesn't actually
make exception for some.
And other types of funding right
just as twenty two california so
other bills have had great to
are and less.
So again
that's what you use
the other piece of this
the large redundance loss that
are already places automatic
firms
basically anything that balls.
Under the item or anything
registry.
This already
taken care of by the laws.
So those components on this
basically
shouldn't exist
so I think the redundancy.
And then also the
fact that it does exclude a lot
of pieces that we use out in the
field
that's why it would be a post.
Thank you.
Thank you sir
we have thomas cabits
I will I was going to make sure
that I pronounced it after the
third time
a bit good thank you
german committee I follow this
proposed legislation
as the representative mentioned
there are numerous and conflicts
technical nature with other
pieces of legislation I just
like to say thank you
sir I let it be hard to be in a
toppers
my name is
i'm from any county
on behalf of for each m
claim.
In our house.
One twenty seven will impact all
of us from high school division
to the forty
we've learned
come
durals we live you go against
him you're keep up every
organization against you
but it everybody
and my competitors as we come
into our colleges and.
Worst these days is the rest of
the state university.
Where we have been committed to
what underconstitutional parents
can't leave the
store.
The reasons.
We can use these are tools right
it's not the person it's up to
two hundred being used it's
first behind it.
And what I went myself and I
hope to oppose
that the household one twenty
seven from perspective that
we're not free no worries.
We have
become.
Okay
we'll get
the thirty days terrible from
the national rifle association
in opposition
the exception for possession of
the exceptions of the possession
of settlement automatic rivals
and shot in the bill for persons
under age twenty one are wholly
inadequate
you'll hear from some other
witnesses today
to that point the exceptions
don't even match up with
the exceptions that were found
in house bill nine from last
session
some members i'm one side of the
isle supported that was the hard
row of act there were exceptions
in there for minors using fires
or defense another
for any lawful recreational use
or any other lawful
exceptions that we're put in
hospital nine before it passed
and we signed into the law by
the counter those are not
exceptions that appear in this
legislation.
Thousands of minors in young
adults legally on their own
rifles and shot dones right now
today have for years without
incident.
And under the spell their song
suddenly going to be guilty of
criminal offence overnight for
owning the same rifles and chat.
I'm sorry if you your time is up
and go ahead and finish that.
I'll finish their please post
hospital
thank you.
We have anthony in a saver but I
think he might have also left.
Um carried on metal.
Good evening monetary committee
members carry romero again
lobbyist for the council about
our primary opposition to this
bill is a technical matter in
the output guide industry
individual a legally licensed
disturbed guide at the age of
eighteen and the duties of a
guide would require the
responsibility for the
possession of a firearm and of
course you would not be with the
parents or guardian and that
case I do I really do appreciate
the sponsor taking the time to
discuss our concerns earlier
today and hopefully that will be
an amendment.
If you think you have peterson.
Many members
the president left the new
mexico association.
Focus on section one
exceptions is not completely.
Especially for those of us rural
new mexico there's no general
exception for those hundred
twenty one percent in this
firearms result
of another
defense of property or life well
they're out you're working on a
remote
countries there's no exception
in the bill for a person age
twenty one traveling with this
my automatic firearm in his
round the family range for
between pastures are on federal
state
north section for the transfers
and you know
there's also critical gap what
happens the rest of the time the
person is not engaged in the
exception
if you can go and finish with
that
legal owners of firearms under
age twenty one supposed to do
with their property if this bill
takes it back
thank you.
Thank you sir
banner on the list again but I
don't know if you want to speak
again but i'm gonna go ahead and
open it up to anyone else we
have a few more minutes for
opposition is there anyone else
who wants to speak.
Okay if you go up where you're
out we have mikes sir go ahead.
Members of the committee my name
is doctor william fire
computer scientists here in
santa fe I stand opposed to like
the other builds her heart today
it presumes that the mexican
must be penalized to attempt to
control that apples I think
representative of florida quote
the ninety.
Sorry I didn't do that.
In this case it presumes the
eighteen to twenty one
though they are adults and serve
on our military and I think the
counter example that the counter
example that justifies the
ninety nine point nine percent
trust within this.
Can you sir
my own customer new mexico and
also a new member of the new
mexico fire
association I concur with all
the other comments in opposition
to this bill and I also build
you know respectfully the
question that the bill you get.
But what the dealers are in the
wool will get
on the mexico fire association
one of my concerns
people which one of our most
safe rights eighteen years old
and then we're going to deny
right.
Thank you sir.
Yes thank you for opportunity to
speak
and install type of something
crossed
grandparents
for age coach and mental health
offer different perspective to
not be responsible to get a
younger age i've seen kids
certainly from any count but as
we travel around the state kids
from all of the state just
for
just fine and other.
Yeah.
A negative connotation.
Thank you sir
as you can tell the speakers
mikes or a little little hot
just i'm just putting it out
there i'm just to be careful
with any sudden movements I
guess
in inappropriations they stay
turn as soon as you are finish.
The.
And do never never move it when
it's turned off.
So is was there anyone else who
wanted to speak an opposition of
the legislation.
We're going to go ahead then and
move on to proponents
oh zoom do we have anybody okay
there's.
So for those books
in terms of like this is great
more like
that
will
hear me
yeah of course I don't know how
to bring me it okay.
Yes you'll have one minute so go
ahead and start.
Hello there my name is horrible
I was there earlier but because
it went so long had a catch a
train right back to all bookers
being and I just like to say
fifteen to thirty five age group
in the top group for gun
violence and also eighteen to
twenty one year olds commit more
home comma said that a triple
the rate of adult twenty one
years or order and also papping
this would reduce suicide kids
are already bringing guns and
school from their parents and
from other places I get and so
eighteen year old would be
allowed to bring it to school
now that but they would bring it
in school illegally because they
can get it legally and I I just
like to stay for through twenty
twenty two and twenty twenty
three twenty twenty one fire
contributed to more than more
death through one three
seventeen
injuries or illness and yeah
speaking in opposition or for
the bill.
For the bill okay we're we're
not there yet but will call you
i'm so sorry i'm on the train
and it's cutting out so i'm very
sorry it's all good i'm glad to
take in the train
thank you very.
We're speaking on opposition of
the bill
yes thank you ma'am chair
members of the committee may ask
you here again on behalf of the
over seventeen hundred members
is the arrival of personal club
in the albert area
this bill deals with the dots
who have legally possessed items
and those items would be taken
from them that's no more lawful
than warrantless searches would
be to enforce the taking of them
nor suppression of speech to
prevent them from speaking about
the taking similar laws and
other states are rapidly being
challenged and failing in court.
Challenges similar laws are
having success in new york and
california as well as minnesota
and have recently overcome
somewhere was in tennessee and
texas amongst other states after
the legislative session started
here in new mexico so wouldn't
pass couple weeks later the even
check was decided in the third
circuit that's pennsylvania
delaware and new jersey in favor
of the young adult plaintiffs
about precisely the same issue
if the government couldn't
succeed on the same arguments
advanced no circuit including
new jersey in delaware I doubt
there's much other than doing so
here thank you.
I'm not is it jake.
The.
Jake up.
The.
Okay woman who can you can hear
me yeah yeah
okay this jacob weber and
outcooking in mexico
i'm strong opposition of this
bill and I will point out the
fact that texas actually said of
this here eighteen to twenty one
band and it's actually set of
law in that tenth circuit so
it's there is no appeal there
has not been any people to in
the higher circuits it settled
law in that circuit so if you
get it into this circuit and
even if it if they will for you
it's now split it's going to the
supreme court and also there is
no
young violence is not number one
for a dutch children it's number
seven it's that's a common
misunderstanding of of
statistics there
also the
this will not must mass shooters
are actually ages around twenty
five years of age not eighteen
to twenty this scoring the f b I
so I really wish there was and
there's no statistics here on
the on for to support this bill
thank you
thank you sir.
The.
Then are you on.
The.
I'm here good
okay.
But i'm going to bring up
that insurance committee members
my name is limit for dc right so
I would never get right project
as the spell many people across
the last eighteen
because you do not federally
considered an adult to the state
of in mexico to work better
school are just perceived their
dreams the adult bands young
adults play have just no from a
statement that they did not have
this profession in place but now
it's individual as coming in
mexico and you're going to tell
this federally identified adult
but they can not will not be
able to have a fire at all
recreation sport competition
work as that branch work or even
self protection and blaster
parents are here with them what
if there's individuals I would
federally go adult move out of
their parents call due to that
situation and the father was
making death threats to them
what that enforcement is not
going to be there the exact
moment into the that happens
criminals don't pause for a
moment wait for the help to
arrive I oppose this bell and I
look at you do you know thank
you for your time.
Thank you man.
Can hear me yes go ahead.
Thank you madame chair thank you
committee for allowing me to
speak today this is a kind of
burning mayor of television i'm
speaking as a private citizen I
am extremely opposed to HB one
twenty seven.
Our young adults have keen the
twenty one are extremely
responsible people we do have a
few individuals within the inner
cities that do break the laws
and cause problems but nor but
for you to go ahead into punish
the majority of our rule new
mexican young youth is a
horrible these people work hard
and learn hard and also there
are plenty enough people out
there eighteen twenty one that
do own their own property take
care of their own livestock and
they need to be able to defend
their lives talk and you're
taking that away from literally
you are removing their right to
perform their task thank you.
Thank you sir.
Next.
Yeah my name is john thousands
from raws on the mexico I stand
in opposition to this bill.
For all the reasons that already
been stated
age limit people mature
differently I was a for i'm for
each coach this point shot game
I think it's eleven years old
very responsible handling
firearms.
A twenty one eighteen year old
can go fight for his country
drink to bear in certain states.
And and he's very responsible
but that you're taking this
right away from him for no
reason.
It again it's
trying to control and hurt a lot
of budding citizens you're not
doing anything to reduce crime
thank you.
Think you've done.
We got one more go ahead.
Yeah hi my name is don for me I
just want to point out that the
third quarter of appeals federal
court of appeals and rule that
of course it's already rule that
this laws are constitutional.
And they also found the eighteen
plus is considered as thought
people so they have all the
rights and privileges of that
people in addition is this not
the same legislature it's been
trying to give the sixteen year
olds of out telling us how
mature they were so to me that
seems kind of hypocritical so
thank you very much.
Thank you sir
that's all for folks on zoom
we're going to go ahead to
proponents we have a list here
folks may have already left
first we had a show show up
hands and folks and support
first on the list is me they
are.
At least yelled at all.
Hi i'm really terrible.
The.
I'm strong supporter of the
second amendment but I also
support the.
The.
Under the age of twenty one.
And I would like to that most of
the fire.
Offenders accountable and I
believe that there will help
the way from the many that are
not responsible.
Or purchase.
Able to find stolen fire arms
used in crimes that can possibly
lead to.
Once from violence and I hope
this bill will pass
and help by finding finding
offenders i.
Yeah.
Your time is up but finished out
if.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Unless we have patrick.
Miranda.
New mexicans to provide good
viol.
Violence.
And.
So the farming to them.
A two months.
And had that young man not being
able to purchase legally that
you are fifty I honestly don't.
Next we have cindy.
Thank you so much city benefit
real rancher and i'm here
representing mom's demand action
there's two pieces of facts I
want to say very quickly of the
rate of gun deaths
in new mexico increased eighty
percent from twenty twelve to
twenty twenty one that's
compared to an increase
naturally up only thirty nine
percent it is clear we have a
crisis in the usage of g.
The other thing is one of the
other speakers said that it is
not true that the biggest cause
of debt in young people is gun
violence and he is incorrect
since last year the largest
cause yeah our children is gone
violence and that gives us back
to the concept of a teenager
having easy access to
research shows that kids
eighteen to twenty commit gun
homicides at triple the rate
when compared to adults twenty
one years and older it young
adults are not deemed mature
enough to consume alcohol in
this state legally I suggest
that they probably shouldn't be
allowed to purchase a leap of
weapon.
Thank you next we have merited.
We have a couple more minutes
for any more proponents.
We have four.
Hi my name is the lane miller
i'm in alba kirkin new mexico
and i'm with mon's demand action
for gunsense in america raising
the age at which a person they
legally purchase firearms is a
common sense public safety
measure that will help keep guns
out of the hands of people who
are likely to misuse them twenty
two states have raised the age
to purchase at least some fire
around a new mexico must join
their ranks and pass this
critical gun safety measure
thank you.
Thank you lane next
just
that.
It's
can you hear me yes
okay thank you
madam chair and committee my
name is josetto cherro and I am
a member of the new mexico to
saturdays for justice and I am
this bill and what i'm here to
say today is that.
You know the news back the
backgrounds that they do and
that under when they go in they
do not check for juvenile
records those that are aged
eighteen so they do not check
any of the ads and when they go
into june these arm background
so never the last they can
possibly pass it because they
don't look up the juvenile
records at all my son was
actually murdered in twenty
twenty by and eighteen year old
my son was only fifteen years
old at the time so despite her
on homicides that were community
in twenty twenty firm the ages
of their fenders that we do know
that forty four percent were per
pepper traders for individuals
the aged twelve to twenty four
so I do know that you know
indeed twenty twenty the rest
rates providing brings they your
time is up please.
Okay I was just seeing and
twenty twenty that their rest
rates for violent crimes peaked
between age just eighteen and
pointing thank you thank you
ma'am.
The.
Regina
my name is regina greekow i'm
from mam's demand action and
I am the survivor membership
lead and i'm standing in support
of this bill I know from
experience that
18-21 year olds do not exercise
long term thinking and are prone
to
peer pressure and if they don't
end up in prison they end up
killing people with guns
especially if they are from
dramatic backgrounds which is a
large portion of of our poor
families and I just I think that
it's it's not if if they can't
drink alcohol they shouldn't be
fire in guns they shouldn't be
and they can have these guns
in their sporting advance and
that's okay and as long as it's
well going
monitored but I just don't think
these young people should have
these guns and need these guns
three years out of whatever
years are going to live eighty
years is not something to give
up when their brains aren't
fully developed in fact they're
not developed till they're
twenty four.
Your time is up ma'am.
Thank you thank you.
Becky.
Hi my name's becky **** then I
live in albuquerque new mexico I
am a volunteer with mom's demand
action for guns and synney
mexico and i'm also a public
school educator I know a lot of
data has been shared by fellow
supporters I just want to re
iterate that firearms are now
the leading cause of deaths or
american children and teens and
the new mexico laws set a
dangerously low minimum age for
buying and possessing via arms I
strongly support this bill and I
ask the committee to vote yes
thank you.
Next johnny
engineer
well
hello my name is student
students to make action at
sending high school I did speak
earlier i'm currently on the
train home we missed a whole day
of school for this i'm just
gonna state my case required
men that shut up you volding a
couple years ago.
The day he turned eighteen he
bought those fire arms to go
kill those children and I just
want you to be aware that it is
a problem and people do do that
and so I think hiring the age
would really give people more
time to think about it but I do
think that's important because
your brain is also more
developed
i'm all do you get but again we
did missing to
talk today and I you know we
miss school wrong way back it's
late you have school early in
the morning tomorrow so just
stating our case again so thank
you.
Thank you all.
The.
Great that's it so
representative if unless you
have any final parts will to
committee.
Asked him for questions manager.
Great thank you representative
first we have representative
lord
thank you madame travel don't
want second move this salad
think who bought us food to
mate.
Yeah.
I just I don't want to leave
anyone I just want to thank you.
Okay so many term representative
absolute questions that tie in
with this bill
so you have on here whethe.
First out let me ask you what is
when you say fire are you
meaning all fire arms rifles
personal.
Manager and representative yes
except it does exclude
twenty two caliber rifles.
Is there a.
Mad madam chairman
representative that was based on
feedback this is a a bill of it
this is second year it's been
introduced and that was based on
feedback from.
Folks that engage in shooting
competitions as well as some of
our other partners I don't know
if mrperiod baker wants to add
anything to that.
The committee represented
florida said those in difference
the notional train be able to
accommodate folks who are doing
tartuting linking and some of
the other recreational
activities and then with
difference to the caliber and
the incidents of it being used
for the intent personal bill
which is great larger public
seat.
You're so evidently it's getting
very late
okay there is a ask because I
know when I looked at stats at
using use quite often in chrome
very high rate of crime with the
twenty two california so I just
wonder why.
Okay so we're talking about so
this will be all fire arms this
would be now rifle now handgun
and then you have automatic um.
I'm wondering why you included
automatic in there when it's a
ready
okay so to own a full auto.
You have to be perhaps you
cannot be a prohibited person
and you ready have to be twenty
one years of age and legal
resident it goes on you know it
can't be a fellow and you can't
be convicted of a crime kept
your future etc etc is there a
reason why you specifically
included automatic weapon when
they're very hard to get and you
have to be over twenty one
years.
The.
Because you have purchased an
po.
Madame chair members of the
committee a representative lord
there has been a increased
incident in new mexico
enforcement of us encountering
juvenile offenders and
unprecedented rate in the twenty
seven years that I have been
studying this topic
of young people arming
themselves with firearms to
include automatic firms um
iterated to learning in fact the
highest number of folks in
carcerated for being in
possession of firearms under the
eighteen is what we are
experiencing literally this
morning state white
up manager to hear that a lot
about an expert about these
fully autos especially they are
coming across the border and.
Okay.
And I guess i.
The thing that's really
disturbing is.
Record with new m.
So.
Um.
So the ability go through the
bill somewhere okay so i'd ima.
So when you're talking about a
standard capacity or you have in
here large.
The.
Madam chair and representative
yes.
And others going to be fixed.
Magged air members of the
committee and represent the
floor is not contemplated
similarly as the gas operated
actually independent of that and
so I know we have spent hours in
discussion down to the seventies
that are nuances the language of
the bill is the language of the
bill so if it is not included
relative to it being a fixed
magazine and or any other
feature piece that we had
spoken.
Think you're just want to make
sure was it missing next I
thought I read through a bit
it's all starting to b.
Madame chair experts so we go
here on.
The.
Okay.
So on more new material we have
unlocked the purchase of
possession.
By person under the age of
twenty one.
So we have is unlocked for
personal age of twenty one to
purchase automatic semimatic is
unlocked for person on the age
of twenty one to possess so
we're getting.
Within their exceptions so
people keep seeing the cat here.
Which is unusual.
Okay so
where they can carry this at
their under twenty one.
If i'm reading this correctly so
they can use it to attend a
hunter safety course or other
farm
course.
Engaging the use of automatic or
some firm for target shooting
and an established range author
at what.
Engages in competition
participates in a practices for
performance of organization.
Um engages and legal hunting and
trapping okay so let me go to
the.
And then it also has to be when
it's travelled and has to be i'm
understanding on line twenty.
Travels with unloaded automatic
or semitic well they were.
They can't under that age you
can't have automatic anyway so
that's kind of redundant they've
count have a automatic
semi make firm in a lot
container in the person's
possession.
So all of these applied to that
the unloaded automatic kind of
disearly place they can't have
but I guess you're saying the
kind of possession of it so I do
have a question.
So let's say they are driving
and they get pulled over and
they're on their way.
Do they have to tell the law
enforcement officer right away
like you do like I try to do
that but can still carry weapon
would you permit.
Would you.
Would they have to say to the
law enforcement under eighteen
but I have my stuff locked up in
the back to the after
administrative the law
enforcement officer pulls him
over for a speeding ticket
madame chairman the committee
represented word think the top
are prudent seemed to do but
that is not spoken to in the
language of the low what one
must do during the.
He draft violation over I do
agree with with some of the
statements relative to being as
expressive about your complaints
with the law as humanly possible
one force minu.
Yeah I was just trying to think
manager representative of a way
to keep them from.
You know could research your
vehicle oh absolutely and then
they open up the trunk and they
find that stuff I probably be
better for them just to say it
but the other question I have is
online eighteen.
Engaging and legal hunting or
trapping.
So would that mean.
That.
Turn a figure out because it
when they're driving there.
But they go out to hunt so how
would they prove that with the
boot showing their hunting tag
or what if they were just on
their property plinky in that
paradogs.
Madam chair
represented florida private
property peace would probably
come into the hypothetical that
you just.
So I don't scenario.
The one that that would unfold
but raised the first one I think
that you arrived at the place
where the legal hunting or
trapping is to be conducted and
then begin the process of equal
hunti.
Progression from my perspective
yeah I was trying to figure out
i'm trying to figure every
scenario with kids where they
would have these firearms in.
How would they show that but if
they have it locked up it's if
they don't have it locked up in
the net becomes mister meaner is
that what it becomes what
happens if.
If they're traveling and they
forget like you go hunting it's
been a long day or long couple
of days you've been camping
you're coming back you forget to
put to separate everything out
and you're under the age of
twenty one is that now a mystery
because they don't have a locked
up
adam chair and representative
yes.
The other question they have.
Oh I gotta go the property but
he didn't put down the p.
Okay so let me start with this
man of chairmen so on page three
where it talks about online six.
The provisions of subsection
athroc shall not apply to a
peace officer so.
If somebody was under the age of
twenty one they're ok to possess
and purchase or ju.
Madame chairman representative a
covers per just and be covered
possessed so both okay.
And then it goes on here and
eighteen men of chair so active
reserve around forces economic
s.
Security officer.
The.
The.
So on twenty three three e it is
unlawful to no only sell or
transfer manager ownership.
I'll skip automatic at semi
amount of farmer armor large
large capacity ammunition meg I
can't do the speeding to
disaster a person.
Under the twenty one who is
prohibited from purchasing such
animals so you're talking about.
Universal background check.
Hell how are we going to get
that information so cause you do
a universal background check and
you become would it be a mystery
if you sold that to a prohib.
Madame chairman representative
can you point me to the page in
line again sorry I was looking
at i'm unfor so it's three.
It's three e twenty three.
And then unforecontinues on to.
For a m.
So they can.
By that i'm trying to figure out
work for both party so you're
you decide you want to sell any
universal background check you
sell to someone and you didn't
know about this and they are
under twenty one what happens to
the person that are selling that
firearm and the fell does even
happen to them does it just go
to the ffl.
Who gets.
Just one second reading through
a one time.
The.
And maybe that might not be the
section but I know that was one
of my questions I was just
trying to figure out.
With the universal background
check situation if the person.
Selling that.
It would also have to go through
the f l s and f what about the
person this selling that fire
but they're also trouble that
also mister.
Madame chairman representative
it's certainly a misdemeanor I
think this is taking it all the
way back to what was it three
o'clock this afternoon
on that conversation about buyer
and seller however it it
is also clear that they have to
or see here
knowing seller transfers so
there is a little bit of item in
ray on that one so.
A mistake would not be covered
under that.
The.
Okay and there was also a part
how did I know with the number
you shouldn't really good about
putting the numbers on there so
I know exactly where it's at.
Um
So I do have a question I don't
have a lot more on this
so according to our six point
three one two point one three
care the new mexico
administrative code.
A person age and majority begins
on the first instance of his
eighteenth birthday so that day
they can move in the parents
housing go by home that get
entering legal c.
So this eighteen year olds
considered an adult inheritant
house by the house rental house
they're living on their own.
Are you saying there's no
exemption for this
person between eighteen twenty
one to defend themselves with
any kind of firearm.
The.
National check really the twenty
two is that correct matter chair
and representative with a not
with a semi automatic or
automatic with the exception of
point you to calibra semi
automatic right for
but this is not a dressing other
firearms outside of that okay so
just want to make sure so the
the answer that question ma'am
chairs representatives so they
buy a house.
They're only option is the
twenty two caliber rifle but no
more than a mag or.
The.
Madame chair and representative
this bill does not contemplate
any regulation of non semi
automatic automat.
If you're certainly correct
about this statute with
supersede whatever section of
the enact that is so that
assumption.
My so my problem is that I
always go back I know people say
will the preferential core texas
there's a lot of th.
I mean do you have the capacity
I love my lawn forcement with
the other capacity b.
Enough to have one and be
responsible with it.
And military.
My problem with this bill more
than anything else is that I
don't want anyone to not be able
to protect themselves and I
definitely don't want her
eighteen year olds going out
starting their life and have no
way to.
And i.
I don't think it's fair to them
that this is the only way they
can purchase and I live I have
torrents counting which is very
rural to so they need.
And that now means that this
person.
And that's really how some of
th.
Thank you representative whip
sapansky is that I get it.
Thank you madame chairman
representative that's fine I
just know people in their last
names I try to try to say them
correctly so thank you minimum
term and think you will support
so many chairmen representative.
With
i'm wondering do we have any car
belts in here regarding uh self
defence in the home madam ch.
Madame chairman and
representative
the one area point your
attention to
bottom of.
Um
describes an exemption that
occurs.
If the person is on private
property.
And that section continues under
page.
Thank you manager thank you
representative if they're under
their own private property
though.
They
the stipulations than the bill
would apply to being banned from
having semi out.
Madam chairman representative
yes okay thank you madame
chairman thank you
representative and I I just find
this language on the bottom page
two little little creepy or
little
creeky but a little unnecessary
because it says on the private
property
and this is online twenty seven
property under the control of
the person's parent
twenty four weather sorry number
seven twenty four says on the
property under the control of
the person's parent grandparent
or legal guardian.
Some adam to represent I don't
know many I don't know any
twenty year olds who have a
legal guardian other than maybe
folks who have development on
disabilities.
And those are probably not many
folks can you tell me why we
chose this language for legal
guardian and.
Medical chair members of the
committee represented block
my expectation relative to the
language choices to be inclusive
of all the situations regardless
of how slight that they may be
that come up to any parentage
any relational piece they stand
laws in mexico and the ones that
you described albeit.
Infrequently accurate are still.
Yeah.
Thank you representative I just
think this language it kind of
implies that most folks under
that are from eighteen and
twenty.
Live with her parents and
grandparents right.
Because it doesn't have a
stipulation for their own driver
property right.
So I just think that's a little.
A little weird manager
representative um other
otherwise madam chair
representative.
Can you tell me if the person
would be banned from phoning a
semi automatic pistol.
Such as a.
A while there pps james bonds
gone.
Let's should say they have a
wall of their people cares
that's a seven round capacity
not ten but it is a semi
automatic pistol would that be
banned from this individual.
Madame chair and representative
block.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative I find that
kind of
concerning because it since it's
a seven round capacity
it's it's really not
necessarily.
Going.
Going to be a problem the
manager represented but I know
that while there also makes it
twenty two.
That the semi auto.
Ppk
would that be banned as well.
Manager.
Man to remember the committee
represented block law related to
if you're describing what I
think you're discovered which is
the hand gun would be the
material analysis that is
consequently also for a person
and again it would be dependent
upon that person's e.
Type of weapon is handguns in
new mexico already w.
Thank you representative and
expert I appreciate that but I
do also think that it's
unnecessary in this legislation
to say automatic right because
we've already stated that the
problem and madame chairman I
did.
It did draft him an amendment
was not put in twenty four hours
prior.
But madame chairman i'm happy to
dictate it if that's what the
committee may desire.
I know this is the lengthy
amendment but I will provide you
a copy of this it's just simply
taking out automatic firearm and
then the definition you have for
automatic firm since authority
legal we don't need to re redo
it in the bill it would be
deplicative in the legislative.
But madame chairman I did have a
another amendment that's just
one line.
And it's regarding page five
line one and I am happy just to
dictate this one because it's
super easy to do.
Regarding.
The.
Yeah.
The.
It says a restored are converted
or accept more than ten rounds
of ammunition since thirty round
capacities are the standard in
the industry.
For these kinds of firearms.
I believe thirty round would be
more.
Palatable for many folks so I
would.
Move.
That we have an amendment to
strike the word ten on page five
line one and insert loop and
lose their of the word thirty
madam chair.
You could make the suggestion.
And i'm just making this as an
adhoc amendment not as a.
Formal amendment
that would be forward
you already had it submitted
through.
Okay madame chairman.
All right well then I will also
give you this amendment i'm not
going to be.
I'm not going to be labor this
point.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative so I guess
I will suggest that you make
that change on page five line
one taking out the word ten
replace it with thirty
and then madame chairman
representative i'm wondering if
this legislation is this being
carried in tandem with other
pieces of legislation to also
restrict folks from things such
as serving as.
Serving his police officers
things of that sort of madame
german.
The.
Madame chair of course manager
manager and represent if I
understood your question
correctly a piece officers are
enforcement officers security
officers are example.
So if you
were an individual thank you if
you were an individual that I
was under the edge of twenty one
but was interested in pursuing
that career this this largest
night a apply um if you.
The men and chairman
representative if you are
let's just say you're an off
duty police up through your
twenty years old you still would
not be able to only send my
automatic firearm per this
legislation that's correct
manager.
Madame chair represented every
actually if you look at page
three
line eleven
the provision does not specific
i'm sorry but actually line
eight and nine eleven
um
you will see that those
provisions do not have do not
restrict.
The possession to the time that
the person is on duty
and that is just to reflect the
understanding of what those
careers.
Thank you madame representative
so that's good i'm glad that
we're including those and now we
have on the record that.
If this passes those folks would
indeed be allowed to to buy
these firearms madame chairman
representative just regarding
the actual firm I just want to
make crystal clear anything semi
automatic is not allowed such as
what I said pps from other but
you could get less you say a
revolver
that would be totally okay
manager representative would
that be correct if it's not semi
automatic
matter chair members of the
committee and representative
block it again it's a little
more complicated analysis than
that I don't mean to be.
And make the answer complicated
is that scrabbler of over we're
talking about hand gun so the
material come upon it with that
would be the person's age
because it is illegal to possess
a hand gun certain components
within this what will be
requirement to understand all
the variables included by the
age of the person
the type of weapon that we're
talking about and then if this
law if this bill were to become
a lot and there would be also
the very.
We think manager represented so
I apologies
so i'm just looking at a letter
I have here from the widdington
center and the folks there they
they do a lot of sports
competitions they welcome folks
from all across the country it's
a huge tourism boom first state
and what they they contend is.
Um
the exceptions outlined in one
twenty seventy nine percent of
programs activities in
circumstances there currently
legally support over there at
the widdington center and so
madame chairman representative I
would certainly be happy to
provide you a copy of this if
you'd like to speak with those
folks at the winter center
because I do think that's super
necessary to
keep that commerce in the state
we want that we definitely want
folks to continue to
legally use firearms and I think
that would be some.
I have a lot of pieces of paper
to give you manager
representative so i'm just
continuing here on the FIR
I see that there is not a real
cost here in determinate
minimal.
Madame chairman representative I
do see that there's probably
going to be an incarceration
cost though regarding the folks
who may be breaking this do we
have we spoken to department of
corrections on those numbers
madame chairman representative.
This.
Madame german representative
and.
And i'm glad you asked that I
was just looking at the the
senating authority that his
reference to this legislation
so that penalty for a
misdemeanor is AAA term less
than one year or the payment of
a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars
that is at the discretion of the
girg miss johnson may want to
add but I think that had some
complexity to the fiscal
analysis and probably would be
case dependent.
Okay thank you madame chairman
and.
Madame chairman representative
that characterization correct
and addition
as an agency staff myself I know
that we are always scrambling to
get these fires done so I can't
speak to why that's not in there
but there could possibly be
some cars though I can't speak
to it
okay thank you madam church
representative i'm just flipping
over the page here in it I think
I got my answer it's is based on
a martin marginal cost of each
additional inmate.
To the new mexico jail system
each offender sentenced to jail
for this crime would increase
cars so by approximately nine
nine grand to nineteen grand to
counties so madame chairman
representative I think
definitely want to speak with
the counties mexico counties
association potentially to see
what we can do to live those
those potential costs because we
don't want to be putting it
unfunded mandate on them and.
Men and terminal representative
regarding the the bill itself I
didn't see any real grandfather
clauses for currently owned
firearms so what would the
individual have to do with that
firearm
since it's not grandfathered in
madame chairman representative.
Madame chairman representative I
will start to answer in mr baker
miss johnson wants to weigh in.
The the interest that the person
before the effective date of the
law could transfer the firearm
to someone who would be
illegally permissible honor if I
am after the effective day
that fire and could be sold
before that time
however after
this legislation is effective
that they were no longer be able
to laughly possess it.
Thank you madame chairman
representative I can see a huge
question about that because you
know once this past is
legislator
now eighteen or something and
you you you get the firm legally
and then by the time that you
pass this law and it comes into
effect and there's just a few
months there there's like a
little gap as you say.
I would see maybe tightening
that up because I don't want to
criminalize folks just for two
days before they turn twenty one
or something this goes into
effect so I think that's a huge
concern
madame chairman representative
north does it allow that person
to use protection of these firms
during that time especially what
you say they're being stocked or
or whatever it is that we're
we're going to talk about that
person would not be allowed to
have that firm so I see that.
And in terms of representative
you know I we've had a lot of
discussions in this body over
the years about who is
mentally capable of having a
firearm who is not mentally
capable who is mentally capable
of voting and who is not and
some people are saying all we
should have sixteen year olds
voting i'm sure even some of the
folks and the committee would
would agree with that and then
we would also tell them you can
have a semi article automatic
weapon and you also you can bite
for your country you can open a
credit card you can.
You can get married you can have
medical procedures without the
printer consent.
A lot of cool things you could
be one of our founding fathers
who was eighteen so I just think
and he became the president
later on so madame chairman
representative those are the
reasons I just cannot support
this bill and I think it needs a
lot of work but i'm happy to
give you some amendments and
some input from from different
stakeholders so.
That's all I had madame chairman
thank you so much
manager to move table a second.
The.
We will take broker for we have
emotion for a tabling ocean
if you'll take roll call.
Yes the table
represents of lord yesterday
table representative
representative of thomson
madam buys.
Okay we have next
motion for do pass on house bill
one twenty seven and a second by
representative rubio.
No representative lord know what
the explanation represents a
remarried yes representative
thompson yes madam vice chair
ribio
madam chair for all yes.
Or how spill one twenty seven on
a vote of four to two and
representative lord
think you are my main harbor
with this a lot I think if
you're eighteen in your old
enough to get married on how she
should be able to own a fire I
understand why.
Thank you and yes we'd like to
think the
sponsors for our dinner on this
long afternoon and
many and staff in
for hanging in there with us
and the audience and people who
