test
Morning, everyone. Uh welcome to
the House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources, uh, Nina,
could you take the role?
Representative Aveda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry.
Here.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy here.
Representative Senator Cortez,
here.
Represented small.
First year.
Chair McQueen.
We have corn. OK. Um, I don't
think, uh, this, this might be a
first, but I don't think we have
any changes to the agenda.
So this year,
um.
Any questions, comments,
announcements from the committee
before we begin?
OK, so the first fill up is
mine, so I'll um switch tables
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, good
morning, everyone.
House Bill 259 oil and gas
violation penalties is pretty
simple and straightforward. Uh,
it's simply raises.
Uh, existing penalties and fees
to
Um, a more modern uh current
rate, so.
It's important that our
penalties be sufficient to
discourage the behavior that
they're intending to penalize
and aren't viewed as just a um.
Cost of doing business.
I'm joined today by Ben Shelton,
who's general counsel at Energy
Minerals and
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members.
This bill does a few things.
First off, it increases by
statute the fees which are set
in statute, which is a little
unusual, uh, at least in the
divisions for Emner generally
speaking, our fees are
administratively adjustable by
the divisions.
It also makes that change
allowing OCD to adjust the fees
by rulemaking going forward.
Uh, based on
Sort of cost of living increases
and finally, it makes a change
to the OCD.
Systems and hearings fund, we
call that so and you'll hear me
refer to it as the fee fund in
short just for the, for the rest
of today, uh, it expands the
acceptable uses of the fee
funds, notably it allows the fee
fund to be deployed to address
uh a growing area of need for
OCD, which is IT staff as we get
more sophisticated with our data
collection management as we work
to make.
The data that we do collect more
readily available to the public.
We're seeing an increased need
for IT staff. So this lets us
dip into the fee fund for that
purpose.
The legislation also raises both
the daily.
Penalty levels that is able to
assess.
As well as the overall cap that
the division can penalize up to
before the case must be
basically removed to district
court for.
For higher penalties. This is
important.
Because we use penalties as a
corrective tool.
Um
When we assess a panel since
2019, when penalty authority was
restored to OCD, we have
assessed a total of $29 million.
Penalties
We've collected a little over 8.
the way we use penalties is we
assess them to get.
action, the violation, the
polluting action to stop.
We get the operator into the
table.
We basically trade dollars for
compliance and clean up.
It is important to have the this
cap raised because currently.
too many violations, too many
polluting actions are seen.
As a business proposition.
And if the penalty amount does
not match.
The projected gain, there's
really no incentive.
bring that operator back for
that operator to come back in
compliance.
Based on our penalty assessment.
So raising the penalty does not
necessarily.
Um
That will not necessarily yield
a.
Great.
Returned to the state. I get the
penalties that we collect don't
come back to the division,
they're reverted to the general
fund.
Uh
This will just be a more
effective tool, uh, unless
administratively burdensome tool
for the division to get
operators to the table so that
we can start getting.
Back into compliance
Right, first we'll go to the
audience. We're gonna take 3
people if you're in opposition,
raise your hand and go ahead and
sign up.
You'll have
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Jim Winchester with the
Independent Petroleum
Association, um, as Mr. Shelton
alluded to back in 2019, the
legislator did give the
administration authority to
issue civil penalties for
violations up to $200,000 per
violation. We did have some
concerns and um because our
members were.
This shift in philosophy from
enforcement.
and actually helping achieve the
client uh compliance to
essentially writing tickets. Um,
since then, to be fair.
back that there are mixed
reviews since that law has
passed. There have been
instances where operators and
inspectors still do work
collaboratively to fix actual
compliance issues, but I do hear
from my members many more
instances of inspectors in Santa
Fe looking for violations not to
fix the problem, but to punish
operators for simply being
operators and to pad the monthly
and annual stats of fines issued
because environmentalists
demanded.
$200,000 is already enough to
limit or significantly hurt if
not threaten the solvency of
many.
There
Let's not continue to send a
message to operators that this
administration does not want
last year
with this nearly 2,000% jump in
penalties. That's beyond
excessive. We stand opposed.
Thanks.
Thank you, madam.
The committee, I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
Nimoa opposes House Bill 259. It
is not clear how the increased
amounts were determined, the
penalty increases are punitive
and the suggested amounts
arbitrary. For instance, some of
the penalties would increase by
300%.
The proposed penalty cap would
increase over 1,700%.
There's a cost of doing
business, and that is not
disputed.
However, a capricious impulsive
increase does not create
regulatory certainty for current
or future businesses looking to
operate and benefit the state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Mike Miller,
Permian Basin Petroleum
Association for the reasons
already stated, we also oppose
this bill. Furthermore, in
indexing those fees to inflation
without clear limits introduces
an uncertainty and
unrepredictability. This could
deter investment in our state's
energy sector and drive
operations to other states where
there's more stable regulations.
HB 259.
Punitive approach rather than
encouraging responsible
development through balanced
regulation. For these and other
reasons, we oppose this bill.
Thank you.
Right, thank you. Next we'll go
online, raise your hand if you
are in opposition.
All right, let's start with
Terry Cole.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole speaking today on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
in opposition to HB 259. The
fees and fine increases are
pretty staggering. We're
wondering what the basis for
such sizable adjustments might
be. If the basis is to adjust
for inflation, and we would
appreciate seeing what the base
year is and the calculations
that lead to the proposed
adjustments. It's our
understanding
that fee structures are designed
to at least partially offset the
cost of administration. So are
the fees based on the cost of
doing business, so to speak. If
not, why not? And on the pines,
they are presumably designed for
punishment and deterrence.
What's the basis for the fine
increases. So what justifies
these extraordinary increases.
We are very concerned that the
proposed adjustments should not
be arbitrary, but rather backed
up with some kind of
evidence that explains the need
and the presumed effectiveness.
At this point, therefore, we
oppose HB 259, and I appreciate
being able to share our point of
view. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair.
Sontag.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Sontag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We strongly oppose House Bill
259, these fines are
disproportional to what is going
on in the industry and they're
punitive. When we look at this
industry, we should be looking
at a partnership with them
because they are 40 to 50% of
our state budget.
We need to take care of that,
and I think we would prefer to
see
Alternative positive approaches
where we're looking for
compliance assistance rather
than punitive measures where
we're encouraging technological
and procedural advancements
through incentives rather than
penalties.
For all the reasons stated
earlier, and because we would
rather see a positive
partnership and positive
approach to this industry. We
oppose this bill, and we hope
that you will vote against it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we are going in
support. If you're in support,
raise your hand, and we will
take 3 for 2 minutes. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
My name is Travis Kellerman. I'm
the senior climate policy
advisor for the governor.
And I stand in support of this
bill. I want to emphasize that
this update is about
modernization.
This is providing sustainable
funding to the oil conservation
division.
It lets them streamline
administrative and regulatory
operations.
It's about improving
administrative efficiency,
including an expedited
application processing, which
will help the industry and
improve reporting which helps
everyone.
It reduces general fund
dependency.
And it expands eligible uses for
the fee fund to include
improvements for data reporting
and also hiring more IT staff,
which is sorely needed at OCD.
On the process improvements. I
wanna mention 3 important points
here.
It implements predictable annual
fee adjustments.
Predictable adjustments, and
that starts January 1st of 2027.
It provides transparency through
the, through basing this on the
consumer price index.
And it also ensures industry
awareness by posting updates on
November 1st of every year, so
they know in advance.
It makes sense, this update is
overdue.
And I urge your support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tanis Fox,
and I'm a lawyer with Western
Environmental Law Center.
Assessing civil penalties for
violation of environmental laws,
promotes two important public
policies.
First, civil penalties deter
future violations and protect
the public interest by
encouraging compliance with the
law. Second, operators who do
not comply may gain a
competitive or financial
advantage over operators who
comply.
Civil penalties level the
playing field for operators who
are compliant.
The proposed increases in HB 259
would bring penalties under the
Oil and Gas Act, more in line
with penalties incomparable
environmental statutes in New
Mexico.
Those penalties were enacted in
the early 1990s, and are quite
outdated because they have not
been increased for inflation
over the last 30 years.
Under the Water Quality Act, for
example, the maximum penalty for
a violation of a permit is
$15,000 per day while under the
Oil and Gas Act, it's 2500.
HB 259 would bring that daily
maximum to 10,000.
And while the Oil and Gas Act
has a cap on the total penalty
amount of $200,000. There is no
penalty cap in any other
comparable environmental
statute.
We urge you to give 259 a due
pass to provide more effective
deterrents against violations
and level the playing field for
operators who follow the rule of
the road, the rules of the road.
Thank you.
I think you will take one more.
Chair, committee, my name's
Athena Christodoulou. I'm an
energy and environmental
engineer.
This um this law would actually
be a good thing for the industry
because it addresses the bad
players. The bad players need to
be brought into compliance. This
will keep the industry from
being continually perceived as
looters and polluters. Not sure
how well. In any case, I agree
with this law. I wish that it
would also include the air
Act and help NMED bring their
fines and fees into line, um, to
address an odorless invisible
gas methane in this global
emergency. It is under reported,
undervalued, and I hope this law
makes it passed this body and
into the field. Thank you.
All right, next we will go
online. We'll take 2 people for
2 minutes.
First will be Charles. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Charles
Goodmacher, registered lobbyist
for Earthworks, and we strongly
support this bill and thank the
sponsor for bringing it. Um,
Earthworks does have staff,
field staff in both the Permian
Basin and the northwest corner
of the state where with digital
imaging devices we regularly
record violations that
What actually mean health
impacts on the people of New
Mexico. So the current status
quo where 60% of wells have been
found in violation in the past
60% certainly justify uh the
increased fees and fines and uh
I wanna echo what Tanis said
about no other environmental um
Rules, restrictions like this
have, uh, caps as this does. So
this is actually a moderate,
very thoughtful approach. The
industry is thriving in New
Mexico. We constantly hear them
saying, this bill is going to
threaten the health of the
industry. The industry continues
to thrive no matter what the
state does, please pass this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next is Alyssa Corri.
Good morning, uh, chair and
committee members. My name is
Alicia Carris. I'm from the
Pueblo of Santo Domingo, and I'm
a registered lobbyist for New
Mexico native votes, and we
stand in support of this bill as
we are conducting, you know,
relationships with our tribal
nations and um native
communities affected by oil and
gas, and so we are committed to
uplifting a future that will
advocate for a cleaner and
brighter um environment for all
to enjoy. Thank you.
All right, thank you. Next, go
back to the sponsor for
additional comments.
Thank you, man, um.
I just wanted to respond to a
couple of the comments that were
made in opposition.
Uh, first of all, Mr.
Winchester.
Suggested that the division was
trying to punish operators for
being operators.
And that environmentalists
demanded that.
And that's both absurd and
frankly offensive.
Um, it was suggested that the
penalties are punitive.
And that's
Idea, right? Penalties are
supposed to be punitive.
If penalties aren't punitive.
Then they're just a cost of
doing business.
Penalties are enacted to deter
companies from a certain
behavior.
If they don't serve that
purpose.
be
And finally, um, couple of the
uh.
Commentators, you know, played
what I call the percentage game.
And I've seen this numerous
times in this session in other
bills.
And the argument is that you
can't possibly increase.
Whatever
To a current level because it's
currently too low and the
increase is a large percentage.
But the reason the increase is a
large percentages because the
current levels are too low.
And so instead of playing the
percentage game, instead of
looking at the percentage
increase should look at the fee,
the penalty, you know, whatever
it is in relation to the
economic activity.
You know, and is it appropriate
in today's market.
Not is it a certain percentage
compared to an artificially low
amount we had before.
And so those are just things I'd
like the committee to keep in
mind. Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Thank you. Do we have any
questions from the committee?
Representative Murphy.
Madam Chair, um, Chair McQueen,
Mr. Sheldon, good morning, um,
as you might guess, I've got
some serious concerns about this
bill. Um, but I'd like to make a
couple of observations.
Um, I've lived in this state all
my life.
And I've traveled all over it.
I've seen its resources and I
See the wonderful people that
all live here and that basically
are reflected in this room.
And um
I've come to conclude that
Um, well, I've wondered when I
look across the state and I
compare to our resources and our
peoples and our and our
capabilities to the adjoining
states.
Texas and
Colorado and Arizona and others
and wonder.
Why we're so poor.
Why is our education system so
shattered.
Why do we have so many social
issues that plague us.
And I can only conclude that
because Colorado and Arizona and
Texas and these other places
don't have any better resources
or people or opportunity than we
do.
But what we do do.
is we don't do policy very well.
We're a poor state because of
poor policy.
And that's reflected in the fact
that we don't have an MD
Anderson.
Or Mao Phoenix or Denver
Children's Hospital.
And I think that
Um
Madam chair
Chairman McQueen, Mr. Sheldon.
Um, when we look at the big
picture, we have to look at the
cumulative impacts.
Of all of our policies.
Now
When it relates to oil and gas.
I've only been here a short
time, about a month.
To what?
Coming up.
And yet, I've sat in this
committee and I've sat on the
floor.
And I've seen a slew of bills.
The target one industry.
Target the largest private
employer in the state.
That target the largest
My calculation, revenue
generator, and I have to ask
myself why.
Because it's these policies that
send a very clear message
whether you're talking about the
state.
Or any industry.
And the cumulative and chilling
impacts of these bills.
Will eventually and does have an
impact. You may not recognize it
right now.
I thought it, quite frankly.
Offensive Madam Chair.
Mr. Chairman
Mr. Sheldon
That
There was a public comment that
no matter what the state does,
the industry will just keep on
going.
Well, we better all pray that
that's true, because we
certainly need the revenue.
Now, California thought that was
true.
Now they have essentially no
industry.
And their one remaining large
producer Chevron has moved to
Texas.
So all of these things are very
chilling to me, and I think the
impact on the state and our
population.
Um
Or worrisome
I'll move into my questions. I
had worked this morning to try,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Mr. McQueen, excuse me,
Chair McQueen.
And Mr. Sheldon to streamline.
And organize these so I can move
through them, and then I
received the the flyer.
Which actually helped me do
that. So I'm gonna largely track
this, Mr. Madam Chair.
Uh, Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, I assume a lot of the
questions will be directed to
you, Mr. Fielden, Madam Chair,
and so I'll try to track this
and refer to the bill as I go.
Um
The first thing I think that um
as a general question.
The
Madam Chair Chair McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon.
Um, we talked about the fee
increases, Madam Chair, uh.
Chair McQueen, Mr. Sheldon, the
percentage game as you.
Uh, called, uh, Chair McQueen,
Madam Chair.
And
On one hand, we have
These fees and penalties
primarily tied to CPI.
Or going forward, two questions
with respect to that, Madam
Chair Chair McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, one is, and I know I'm
probably jumping ahead a little
bit, but I think it'll.
It'll take care of the question
across the board. Why did those
fees, Madam Chair Chair McQueen,
Mr. So only increase.
Based upon CPI.
Men er and Murphy, we haven't
seen a decrease in the CPI in a
while.
Um
It
they only increased to preserve
predictability.
If there was ever a substantial
increase in the CPI, certainly
the legislature could revisit
that.
Madam Chairman, uh Chair
McQueen, uh, thank you very
much, um, Mr. Sheldon, um,
Can you, can, so the, the Madam
Chair Chair McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, the fees have have
roughly increased.
And I don't mean to get into the
percentage game but between 3
and 1900%.
And uh
Madam Chair McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon.
Um
Chairman McQueen, I believe that
you said that those really you
shouldn't base those those upon
a percentage or.
say a CPI, but we're doing that
going forward.
Why are we doing that going
forward if we haven't done it in
an adjustment, Madam Cha Chair
McQueen from over the last 6
years.
Ma'am cherubs and Murphy, that
the goal of this bill is to set
Uh, the fees and penalties to an
appropriate level and then have
them keep pace with inflation.
So we won't be back here in 4 or
5 years saying our fees are way
too small, our penalties are too
small, and people are basically
just blowing right through him
ignoring them because it's
easier to pay the penalty than
to correct their behavior.
So the goal is to set them at a
level that's appropriate and
then keep them there with the
CPI adjustment.
Madam Chair, uh,
Chair McQueen, Madam advice
here, excuse me, Chairman
McQueen and Mr. Sheldon. I, I
would have to push back on on
that.
That presumption a little bit.
It's been my experience that,
that
No company, whether it's an oil
and gas company or any other
company that's a good corporate
citizen, which I think most are.
Um, views, penalties as a, as a
cost of doing business, not
something that that that uh
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Chair McQueen and Mr.
Building that has been in my
experience, something that we
want to avoid it at all costs.
Um,
I'll go into the uh Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair Chair McQueen,
Mr. Sheldon, the key changes on
your sheet.
And one of the things that it
talks about under number one.
Is the business risk and
industry operational cost, and
that aligns the penalties with
that.
And Madam Vice chair uh chair
between Mr. Sheldon, could you
speak to that about how this
aligns penalties and how you
assess business risk and
industry operational.
Madam Chair Representative, that
kind of goes back to the
conversation we just had, uh,
which is right now.
I I think that
What you said
It's mostly accurate for
neighboring states that no
industry would think of a
penalty as a cost of doing
business, no neighboring state
has a cap on their penalties the
way we do.
So we allow it to be considered
a cost of.
The um
The
Assessment of business risk,
those things that the increasing
the penalties is designed to
acknowledge that that.
Madam Vice Chair, Chairman
McQueen, Mr. Sheldon. So if
you're, are you saying then?
That
Because we're, we're currently
Madame Vice Chair of Queen
Mister Sheldon, the industry is
currently experiencing larger
production volumes and so forth
due to the activity and the
price that they're for then that
the
Penalties ought to align with
that.
Madam Chair Representative, I
wouldn't say that this penalty
amount is exactly aligned with
that, it's uh designed to get us
closer.
Madam Vice Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, so that if we
Experience what we've typically
experienced.
In the oil and gas industry
being very cyclical.
Um, and these penalties and fees
would be way out of line.
Uh, with the level of activity,
profits, and business risk at
that point in time, that might
be correct.
And I share chair McQueen
building and would therefore we
need to be adjusted downward.
Madam Chair, Representative,
you're talking about that by
that point in time you mean
where the price to go down to
some.
Some low number.
Madam Vice Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, if I understand.
The logic behind it.
Is that
Because the level of
Business risk or perceived love.
Iry operational costs are
perceived low profits are
perceived high along with
production and price.
So therefore, we have to align
Madam by Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, the penalties in our
line with that, if I understand
your testimony, my question is
then,
If we go through
This upcycle into a down cycle.
And these penalties would be
grossly out of line at that
point. Is that not correct, Mr.
Madam Vice Chair.
Mr.
Cherry McQueen, Mr. Selon.
Madam Chair Representative, no,
these penalties are maximums.
Um, so even during boom times
where the price is very high,
most of the penalties we assess.
Um, Madam Vice Chair, Chairman
McQueen, Mr. Sheldon I'll move
on. I, I think we're talking
about two different things. I'll
move on to number 3 under he
changes and it says it reduces
the general fund dependency.
Uh, on your department.
Madam Vice Chair Chairman
McQueen, Mr. Sheldon, how is,
how is, how much of the general
fund does your department
require?
Administer these activities at
this time.
Madam Chair,
Representative, you're asking me
to pull my OCD general fund
recommendation for this year off
the top of my head. This is.
was last week's hearing, um.
Our our general fund.
And you know, I would say that
most of our operating dollars at
OCDs general.
So it's
Uh, I'm sorry, I don't have the
number for you. I can follow up
with.
Madam Vice Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, um, is my understanding
that that at least a substantial
portion of the budget actually
comes from the oil conservation
fund. Is that not correct?
And last chair of chair McQueen,
Mr. Sheldon.
Madam Chair Representative, are
you thinking of the reclamation
fund?
Perhaps, yes, OK, so the
reclamation fund is a recipient
of oil conservation tax dollars,
about 10.5%.
So that's not operating for the
department. We do, we have the
ability and statute to pull a
little bit of salary and things
like that out of the reclamation
fund, but we generally keep that
number right around 1 or 2 FDE.
Madam Vice Cha Chair McQueen,
Mr. Sheldon, thank you. I I go
back and I, I believe you
testified as to this uh.
Madam Vice Chair Chairman
McQueen Mr. Sheldon, I think you
are, or, or perhaps it was the
chairman 29 million assessed, 8
million collected.
And decent penalties, I believe,
Madam Vice Chair Chair McQueen.
Sheldon, does that sound right,
Madam Chi Representative, yes,
that's since 2019.
Um
Of the 8, and vice chair,
Chairman McQueen, Mr. Sheldon of
the 8 million, what have you
done with it?
Madam Chair Representative, all
that money gets reverted back to
the general funds, so every year
you'll see a budget reversion
category for us that.
two biggest drivers of that are
fees from oil and gas penalties
and uh.
FEMA dollars that we get back
from our forestry.
by shared chair McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, one of the things that
I noticed under
Um, application fees updates and
of course it's contained in the,
in the legislation as well.
Um, but let me ask you some
general questions about that.
Um,
Madam Vice Chair Chair McQueen,
Mr. Sheldon.
I'll start with the non-federal
non-Indian drilling permits
adjustment 1500 to support
faster processing.
Administrative approvals to
improve response times.
Uh, fluid injection permits to
enhance review efficiency.
You're talking about efficiency,
faster processing.
Faster response times.
Um
Madam Vice Chair, Chairman
McQueen, and Mr. Sheldon, what
are those?
This is where my question goes,
Given that you're increasing the
fees, would it, wouldn't it be
reasonable, madam Vice Chair
Chairman McQueen and Mr.
Shelwynn.
To expect some of those
efficiencies to occur and what
currently are your, are the
various response times and given
these fee increases, how would
you see those improve?
If a drilling permit, madam vice
chair, Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Shell, I'm just gonna pull a
number and example out of the
air. The drilling permit takes
over a month to approve. We now
expect that could, Madam Vice
Chair Chair McQueen.
Uh, Mr. Sheldon, we now expect
that much quicker and how much
quicker.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, are most of our
permits are already now issued
in a matter of weeks though.
The impediment to getting
Wells drilled is almost never.
A state permit
Um
So we wouldn't necessarily look
at a performance.
Increase for this just to be in
in turnaround time because
that's usually just, that's not
the pain point, um, what this
allows us to do is just increase
efficiency administrative
processes generally.
Remember it wasn't that long
ago. It was a few years ago when
OCD was collecting paper
permits.
A lot of this stuff.
Uh, so we're still in the
process of getting that permit
process, you know, streamlined
lighter weight both from from an
operator's perspective, we would
like to do more and better work
to make sure that the data that
we collect from operators on
production of uh.
Hydrocarbons and water is clear,
more available to the public as
well as make it easier and you
know I know fast is sort of the
sort of the question you were
asking, but just easier
generally in the lighter weight
process for operators.
And my sheer Chairman McQueen,
Mr. Sheldon, um, I've been in
the business long enough and uh
to recall a time.
Um, when we worked very, very
closely with OCD and there was,
there was a, and a division, um,
and by we I mean collectively as
an industry. And Madam Vice
Chair Chairman McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, and, you know,
beginning, probably a decade or
so ago that seemed to change.
And
The attitude seemed to shift,
madam last year and Chair
McQueen and Mr. Sheldon from one
of compliance, working hand in
hand in glove to
Address issues in the field or,
or in our paperwork or whatever
to one.
Uh, that has become very
adversarial, it seems, and um
Madam Chair and Chair McQueen
and Mr. Sheldon and quite
frankly, punitive um in nature,
um, and I don't think, uh, going
back to my opening statement,
that that's really in the best
interest.
Of the state or the industry.
And I don't believe it's in the
best interest of the state, not
only because of what it does to
existing business.
The
This incentive to relocate,
especially in oil and gas
company to in Mexico, but I also
would suggest that um it's a
disservice to the state in the,
in the fact that other
businesses.
We'll look at that type of of
punitive attitude, perhaps make
the same decision. I conclude my
thank you, ma'am.
I surepresentative
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Chairman
Um
I'm not gonna repeat, uh, what
I, what has been mentioned
several times uh about what
appears to be
Somewhat arbitrary.
Uh, increases.
Um, rather, I'd like to go to
the
To Mr. Chairman, to somewhat to
your, your description of those
changes, uh, not being
arbitrary.
Um, but what you
Um, Mr. Chairman, have stated
that you
are basing this on.
Um, so
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, uh,
you stated that
That it's matched to what is
appropriate.
In today's market.
Could you
Give me the correlation. What
specifically in today's market.
Um, are we comparing this to,
uh, what, what, what was the
baseline?
And what is the market today.
Um
It, it appears to me you're
saying the market, but I think
what you may be talking about
is.
The increase to the general fund
and the, and how much has come
in.
Um, as far as market, the market
has fluctuated and and
In reality, um, the price of
oil, um, Mr. Chairman, has been
much higher than it is today.
In in years past. So I'm trying
to figure out when you say
Modernizing
And making it for today's What
is the correlation?
Uh, men cherubs and Maya, uh.
Two things before I turn over to
Mr. Shelton.
First
We need to keep in mind we're
dealing with both fees and
penalties.
So the, the fees are to help
cover the administrative burden
at the agency.
And there's more administrative
burden with more activity.
And we've had more activity.
Penalties are designed to
discourage inactivity we don't
want to happen.
And with profitability in the
activity, whether, you know,
it's through the price of oil or
Uh, improved extraction methods.
Uh, that needs the penalties
need to keep pace with that.
So these, these fees and
penalties were derived by the
agencies Mr. Shelton address
that.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's, that's basically the
correct answer, this isn't.
In a specific
a barrel of oil. This is just um
catching the division up
somewhat.
I would add if we were tracking
the market exactly based on
with our administrative needs
are many of these numbers will
be much higher, the challenge
here is just to try to close
some of that gap.
So thank you, Mr. Madam
Chairman, Mr. Chairman and
And Mr. Shelton, I, I believe
you just proved my point. It is
arbitrary.
It is not tied to a number today
in the in in a year past, this
was the number, and because the
market, as was stated,
is different
Because the market is not
necessarily different
everywhere. It is different in
New Mexico and Madam Chair.
And uh Mr. Chairman, I would say
it is specifically
Because of better extraction
procedures, which I believe is
what you stated.
Um, which really means we are
extracting more.
While disturbing the earth less.
Um
And
It, it, so I, I do believe this
is arbitrary. I don't believe
there's any way to say that this
is tied.
To a specific increase of any
sort, whether it is
Um
We could say more activity.
In New Mexico.
Um, but that's specifically the
New Mexico market. It's not the
market in general.
So I, I don't believe in any way
we can, I think that's a
fallacy.
On multiple levels to say this
is tied to market, uh, uh.
Predictors, let's say, I think
that.
Yes, we've seen increased.
Activity in New Mexico, we've
seen increased profits that
shows specifically in our
budget, I think that is true.
But to, but to
State that the market has
changed in some way. I don't, I,
I don't see any way to be able
to say,
This is a correlation to that.
I, I believe the chairman wants
to respond.
Maner Motoya, I'm not sure I
would use the word tide.
to the market.
But I think it reflects market
activity.
And we have seen record
production.
So thank you, Madam Chair. And
so this is tied to production
then.
We're, we're producing more.
So we have to charge more.
Ma'am chair represent Montoya, I
would not use the word tide.
OK, well, so it's not tied to
anything, therefore, Madam
Chair, it is arbitrary.
Man er and Montoya, I mean, we
can quibble about this I think
reflecting and obviously
increased level of activity is
not arbitrary.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, I, I, I do believe.
I do believe that proves my
Um
It
Madam Chair and Mr. Chairman,
and what we're talking about
here,
As far as violators, we're
talking about.
The concern over methane
emissions. Is, is that
The big concern as far as I
mean, when I hear
When I hear, Madam Chair, uh,
let's say advocates stand up and
talk about it. It's always about
methane emissions.
Is that
Our, our, our major concern,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
I would say generally.
As part of them.
Uh, the biggest concerns that
we're dealing with out in the
field today are groundwater
contamination.
Round groundwater contamination.
OK. So, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Shelton.
A violation on site.
We're we're talking groundwater
contamination.
Talking methane emissions.
Beyond that, what are other
things that are violations on
site.
On a well site that could be
cited as a
Um, Madam Chair.
Representative, the rules are
pretty exhaustive. There's all
sorts of things. You can have
everything up major releases,
liquids and hydrocarbons and
contaminate groundwater down to
signage violations, um, things
that you think of as being
closer to your smaller sort of
speeding ticket type of.
Type of violation of the rules.
OK, so a, a
A sign, signage, uh.
Overgrowth of weeds.
There's all kinds of things that
are violations.
So
As I've heard from
folks
That uh have that say they've
gotten on the bad side of OCD.
That they get fined for those
things.
And
The violations
And the fines to them.
That's where we hear punitive.
I don't think there's anyone who
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, who
complains about
An obvious violation of
Uh, methane emissions that are
for one reason or another, just.
Not controlled or there's not
been an effort to when when
somebody's
caught robbing a bank, they know
they've been caught robbing a
bank. Um, but
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
where, where this seems to be
out of compliance with or out of
touch with.
With, uh, uh.
Some of the concerns.
In industry is that
Violation on top of violation on
top of violation, and now the
cap is 18 times over.
It, it appears, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, that, that someone
could be targeted.
And there could be violation
upon violation, and now, now we
A cap, especially on.
The producers
just put them out of business.
I believe that's the concern.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Shelton, I guess this
question is really for you.
Um
Give me an idea of percentage of
violators.
Uh, if you have the idea in
let's say that the
San Juan Basin versus the
Permian Basin. What, what
What percentage of violators
would you say is in each?
Um, different basin.
If that's, if you have any idea.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'm sorry, I can't give you a
number. I would say that roughly
speaking.
Violations tend to occur where
most of the activity occurs.
I'm sorry, can you repeat that?
I'm sorry. Violations tend to go
with activity, Madam Chair and
representative, so to the extent
that we're seeing a lot more
activity and and.
Hermian, that's where we would
see most of the violation. Thank
you. um, so.
Madam Chair, um,
Mr. Chairman
Um
I'm concerned about these
violations, uh, in
In particular, methane.
Uh, uh, capture.
Um, I believe we've done a lot
to
To uh
Alleviate that particular
violation, at least in San Juan
County because it's not a lot of
new activity.
Um,
I am concerned that we could
Um
Prematurely
cause with
Increased scrutiny.
Uh, the premature.
Tapping of whales or abandonment
of wells if, if with with
application of these violations.
So I'm, I'm, there is a concern,
just so you know my reason the
questioning about methane.
What what type of violations is
because of that.
Um
I would ask um
Mr.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
Time future increases.
To the cost of inflation is
concerning to me. I believe uh
representative um Murphy.
Pretty much captured that, but
I, I would just ask, is it
possible?
For inflation
To go up
While the price
Of a commodity to go down.
Madam Chair Representative,
I imagine it's possible.
So I, I, I do have a, I, I have
a problem with tying this.
Uh, to inflation going forward.
I, I also have a hard time of
just completely
Uh, giving over legislative
discretion.
Uh, to
a department and on top of that,
that's not the only legislative
discretion I think we're giving
away here.
But on page 8 where
We're, we're talking about some
of these fees will go to
Hiring necessary.
Personnel
That once again is a function of
appropriations Committee.
For a department that wants to
increase personnel to go to
appropriations and ask for an
increase.
And that is usually met with
scrutiny. It's met with
OK, last year.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
your department.
Ha
20% vacancy, that's an arbitrary
number.
OK.
Uh, but there's these number of
vacancies.
Why are you not using those
dollars?
To fill vacancies.
Why are you not using those
dollars to?
For new positions.
And Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Chairman, what I found when I
sat on that committee was
Every department
Seems to hold vacancies.
And then they use those
vacancies.
To do bar adjustments for other
things.
That is all outside of.
The vetting process that
appropriations tries to manage.
And I, and I, I believe this is
going around our process.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
I, I think that I, I don't
believe this is proper
legislation. I, I believe that
Every department
Within the administration,
whatever whoever is in charge of
that administration needs to go
to the legislature to ask for an
increase of personnel and make a
case for it.
If there's a case to be made
because of a necessary uh
information technology personnel
that are needed, I believe.
It is the
Uh, responsibility.
Of the administration to go and
make that case before
appropriations. It also, I
believe, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman.
It also creates
A
A bad incentive.
It allows in this legislation,
If I know that there are fees
that I can charge.
Or if there are violations, if
there's money that comes into
the department because of our
Active
Use of
finding violators.
And
The number of personnel that I
want to increase.
Is somehow paid for by that. I
believe it creates a perverse.
Incentive within a department.
To do so.
Um
I, I, I believe, Mr. Chairman,
I'm not saying, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman.
that
Increasing fees is not
necessarily somehow warranted.
I just know how we got to where
our fees are now.
And there was input from
industry.
This completely shows zero input
from industry.
This also
I do believe is really very
arbitrary.
Not tied to anything
specifically for justification
purposes.
Just because we have a surplus
of money right now doesn't mean
the industry will be flushed
like this forever.
And there is no mechanism in
here except for Madam Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, what you
stated earlier is the
legislature could come back in.
And revisit.
The problem with that, Miss
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, is,
I've been here now for 11 years.
I've never seen a single
department go with less money.
Then they had the previous year.
So I, I don't see.
At any point, even if the
market.
Circumstances change. I do not
see us.
Going in reverse.
So, um, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Chairman, for all of these
reasons.
Um
I cannot support this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Good morning, Madam Vice Chair,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Shelton, um, I
know the focus of this bill is
increasing penalties for
violations and increasing
application fees due to
inflation, is that correct? In a
simplified form.
Madam, chair, and
representative uh inflation is
not the only factor for the fee
increase, but yes, so basically
you have it. OK, I do have some
clarifying questions first,
Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Chair, and
Mr. Shelton, um, on page 4, line
10, the bill mentions a criminal
penalty of $5000 or
imprisonment, not to exceed 3
years if they violate the
provision of the Oil and Gas Act
or any rule. I believe that is
already a statute. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
So as a clarifying question,
Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Chair, and
Mr. Shelton, so they become 3rd
degree felons if they violate.
Madam Chair, I can't speak to
the degree of the felony, but
there is that criminal piece in
there, yes. Well, if it's 3
years in prison, so that's what
I was referring to. So Madam
Vice Chair, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton. So of the literal
hundreds of men and women that
are involved in a single
drilling operation, who exactly
is charged with that crime.
Madam Char representative, I've
never seen this provision used
in my time with the department.
This is a question that maybe
somebody from the Attorney
General's office maybe better
than that.
OK, I was just really curious
about that.
Um, I can move on to my next
question, um, Madam Vice Chair,
Mr. Chair, and Mr. Shelton, um,
so just to clarify again,
applications for hearings before
OCD and the OCC increase from
$500 all the way to $1500 which
is a like a 300% increase. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
So I know that it costs $500 to
go before a district judge.
Why would we increase all the
way to $1500 to have a hearing
before OCD or the OCC.
Madam Chair Representative, when
we have hearings for the OCC
technically very typically very
technical in nature. We are
pulling technical staff off of
their desks.
Um, to come down and and testify
they are frequently coming in
from um our flowing parts of the
state where they're, you know,
in the field regulating so that
the administrative costs to the
division is fairly high.
So, madam, Vice Chair, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Shelton, so that is
due to administrative costs and
it's not due to inflation.
Madam Chair, representative
primarily I'd say administrative
costs.
So regarding going back, Madam
Chair.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Shelton,
regarding the 300% increase of
civil penalties is the proposed
increase fine of $10,000 a day,
Thai tech, actual harm caused by
the activity.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's tied to a couple of
things. One is that deterrent
effect, so is it effective to
make the operator stop
violating.
Uh, and then it's also candidly
uh kind of contextually based
around every other environmental
statute in the state.
intended to catch it up to those
as well as oil and gas
regulators in neighboring states
trying to get our daily maximums
kind of closer to where. Madam
Vice Chair, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton, so can you identify the
actual harm and who or what is
being harmed.
Madam chair, um.
Representative, the type of harm
like the nature of the harm is
absolutely something we consider
when we're putting together uh
penalty assessments, yeah.
So Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Chair,
and Mr. Shelton, are you
concerned that if this fine is
challenged in court and you
cannot prove these acts caused
actual harm, then a court could
reverse the fine.
Madam Chair Representative, no,
the penalties.
Uh, that we
That we are assess
Basically for violations of the
Oil and Gas Act, the harm is a
violation of the law. So Madam
Vice Chair, Mr, Mr. Shelton. Is
there any other industry in New
Mexico that faces $10,000 a day
noncompliance fine. Um, Madam
Chair, yes, um, the Water
Quality Act is a $10,000 a day
maximum air quality Control Act
15,000 hazardous waste act,
$10,000 a day. So just about.
a pretty similar regime
that was gonna be my next
question. Thank you for um
answering that and bringing that
up, that in vice chair Mr.
Chair, Mr. Shelton, are you
concerned that
Companies being assessed at
$10,000 a day fine could
challenge that fine as
excessive, at which point the
court would likely to have to
conduct a constitutional due
process analysis and possibly
reverse the fine.
Madam Chair Representative, we
calculate these penalties pretty
carefully.
when we're
Be careful to show all of our
work, generally speaking, courts
will give discretion to
administrative agencies as long
as there's some rationale and
reasoning for the penalty
assessments that they choose.
So Madam Beer, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton, um, could this possibly
assess costs and fees to the
state.
this go to the state. These
costs and fees.
Madam, the fees that are
collected by the department go
into the fee fund, the penalties
that are collected going to the
Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Turn, Mr.
Shelton, I know, um, BMW versus
Gore in 1996 was a federal case
and it said that if there is a
penalty excessive, um, a court
has to analyze the penalty under
the 14th Amendment due process
clause, and that case is often
used to challenge punitive
damage claims.
And that opens up the door for
other challenges that are
required, um, that have required
excessive penalties. Um, are you
concerned about that at all?
Madam Chane, a court assessed
punitive damages is pretty
different from here is that we
use assessment. Again, remember,
I think it's important context,
Madam Chair you don't wind up
collecting the overwhelming
majority of the penalties that
we assess, assess the penalty to
get the operator to the table,
see if we can get them back into
compliance. We don't want
anybody going out of business.
We would much rather them stay
in business operating their
wells, reducing the minerals
and.
plugging a banding there was
responsible man. Well, Madam
Vice Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton, that's, that's a relief
because we want the smalls and
bigs to all stay in business
too. So thank you so much. That
concludes my questions. Thank
you, Representative Next is
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Sheldon.
I've got a couple quick
questions on
what you had started out with, I
wanna make sure I understand the
20 $29 million assessed. Is that
penalties plus, uh, all the
other fees or is that just
penalties that have been?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is just penalties, assessed
since 2019 when division got the
administrative penalty authority
back.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman and and Mr. Sheldon. So
out of that,
you have collected $8 million.
Am I, am I right on that? That's
what you have collected from
those assessed penalties.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Mr. Sheldon.
And so through that,
The reason that that number is
so so.
Different
is because you, you use that as
negotiations to get them into
compliance. Is that correct,
Madam?
Madam Chair, if, if we're using
those to become in a compliance,
how many of those oil field
industries that have had those
penalties.
Do comply.
Madam Chair, we, we have varying
levels of success, I mean, most
of our penalty action, most of
our enforcement action is
reserved to about the same 5% of
operators in the field, so, um,
we certainly have trouble with
think of as a very small
minority of the defenders with
that said, generally speaking.
Rolling those penalties together
the way that we that we hope to,
we are usually successful in
getting folks to the to the
table. You're not with us how to
get back into compliance.
effectively in sort of
officially producing those
minerals.
Oh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Representative or Mr. Chair and
Mr. Sheldon. Uh, so if you're
negotiating those down.
Really, we're looking at
increasing all these numbers.
Because earlier you said it was
a cost of doing business.
So it's the cost of doing
business for just 5% of the
industry, is that what I'm
hearing?
Madam Chair, I would say that
there are 5%.
That 5% operator's number is
kind of what you think of as the
problem children. We, that's not
the only people who wind up
getting penalty assessments you
wind up to the table.
Um
Certainly some of the larger
operators, we have some
precedent for large operators he
would think of as very good
neighbors in the state and
important parts of the sort of
production scheme, yeah, blowing
past our penalty caps because.
Candidly stopping or shutting a
well in to get your well back
into compliances.
Less profitable than simply
continuing and paying the
$200,000 maximum penalty.
So Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Chairman, and Mr. Sheldon, I
guess that's where I'm really
confused if we've negotiated
down by $21 million.
Only 5% of the industry is
really your problem child. 95%
tend to
Be good neighbors, as you say.
I'm sure there's violations that
can be found. Out of those
violations, how many of them are
what we would call maybe
egregious and how many of them
are what you would call, I think
you used the word speeding
ticket.
Can you tell me where we're at
on that?
Madam Chair, the overwhelming
majority of the penalties we
assess are more like the
speeding tickets, smaller
penalties that we will um assess
to try to get somebody to fix
something and then when they fix
it, we waited.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Chairman, I guess that's where
I'm gonna go back to the numbers
of, of how we're growing these
penalties. Obviously, the
penalties are working.
It's not a matter of how much
they are because we're
negotiating down anyway. So I'm
a little confused on why we have
to raise them, you know, 300%,
and, and I guess that some of
those are fees. And so, so I
guess I need to separate that.
Some of the penalties that were
jumping so high, I'm not
understanding why we need to do
that when, when we're already
assessing over 20 or about 29
million. We're only collecting 8
because of negotiations. That's
for 5% of an industry. So we're
punishing 90, 100% of the.
Street
Or possibly 5% of the industry
who are, who we're going to
call.
Problem child, is that the word
you used?
Madam Chair Representative,
again, what we're concerned
about with raising the cap.
is if we have a really, you
know, one really, really
egregious release.
Um
Can cost the state
Many, many, many millions of
dollars.
So, uh, certainly far more than
we would ever, than we would
ever collect in penalties. What
we are looking to do with
raising that penalty cap is just
getting ourselves closer to a
dollar figure that will compel
them to stop doing that right
away, so it's not really a
numbers game about how many
operators, uh, penalty assessed
again, most of the penalties you
get are well, well below the
maximum, but when we get those
really top tier cases where we
need to get them to stop right
away.
Um, this is the proposal in
front of you is designed.
Cap
Don't matter vice chair, Mister
Chairman and Mr. Sheldon. How
many of those actually happen?
Mhm
Thankfully, Madam Chair and
represent our extremely harmful
and extremely expensive.
Thank you Madam Chair, and out
of those that that do happen and
are extremely harmful.
Do we do the full penalty or do
we go to negotiation?
Madam Chair represented both.
Um, what we will generally do is
uh.
Assess multiple penalties under
the rule to work under multiple
caps, get that operator to the
table and get them to start
remediating, to start updating
their equipment.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and Mr.
Sheldon. So they do become very
compliant very quickly to try to
rectify the issue, is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative,
usually not always.
Usually not always. So what
percentage are not always?
Madam Chair, we don't track
exact percentages of what we
think of as bad actors who don't
have an, um, I would say roughly
speaking about 5, that 5%
number.
That's that tracks, I would say.
OK.
Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Chairman,
uh, Mr. Sheldon, I guess that's
where I'm just going to continue
to to.
In my head, that's why I just
can't get behind this because
I'm seeing these major
increases.
There's already fines being
assessed.
Oil and gas industry is already.
Apparently very responsive to
those overall, you're gonna have
a few here and there, and I
understand. I think that's any
industry. You have a very
responsive to that responsive to
the point where $21 million were
negotiated out so that they
would do that. So I guess I'm,
I'm just not going to understand
why we need such massive
increases or
Or very, very small percentage
whom you, I think you just said
we could do multiple different
violations. So you could
probably get somewhere pretty
fast, um, to make sure, and
they're pretty responsive,
right? Um, and, and pretty, I
get it, some folks are gonna,
well, that's not enough, you got
to be 100% responsive and, and
hopefully they, we can get there
at some point. But if we're
already negotiating it by $21
million I'm not understanding
why we need such a massive
increase to make them more
compliant when it looks like
they're already comply.
were just
Pulling out a small percentage
that may be not. How do we
figure out how to fix those
small percentages.
Madam Chair, and that, that
small percentage is exactly what
we're trying to tackle with
increasing this penalty cap.
Those, those violators where
it's like administratively
extremely tricky to get the
penalty amount to uh.
point where it's going to be a
meaningful deterrent.
So, Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Chairman, and Mr. Sheldon, um,
On, on the ones that that we
have had a major penalty. Has
there ever, how many have
actually exceeded what you would
consider where you get the the
top maximum penalty you can get
to.
Madam Chair Representative, the
process right now, uh, if we
really need to compel more than
$200,000 is that we, there are
basically ways of assessing
multiple different penalty caps
on some violations.
Um, so we were able to roll
different penalty. I mean we
consider different violations to
be to operate under a different
cap.
And it effectively just turns
around, increases the turnaround
time for the operator.
OK, Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Sheldon, so I
guess I'm just gonna, that's
where I'm gonna land, is it, it
feels like we have the correct
fee structure in place.
Um, we're assessing the fees.
Uh, the, the industry is
responsive to those overall, um,
to the point where, I mean, if,
if we feel comfortable enough
that they're responsive enough
that we have reduced that by 21
million. I feel like industry is
very responsive.
Um, I would also argue that.
You know, when I look across the
industry, again, I'm, I'm from
Eddy County. I'm very familiar
with the industry.
Um
It
I, I think when we continue to
see and, and I, I can't remember
if it was Representative Montoya
or Representative Murphy that
alluded to this, but when, since
I've been here, I think we're 30
days today, so for the last 30
days when I see one industry
continuously being targeted in
all these other industries
continuously.
Getting things, I, I feel a
little odd that
Punishing an industry that is
actually probably one of the
cleaning is the cleanest
producing industry in the world
in oil and gas. Would that be a
fair statement, Madam Chair.
Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Chairman.
I mean, it looks like
A vice chairman doesn't agree
with me, but is that a fairly
Fare statement that we are one
of the cleaner producing oil and
gas industries in the world,
Madam Chair Representative OCD
doesn't matter.
OK. Well, I, I think when, when
I hear it over and over, I do
hear um from a number of
different agencies and
industries that oil and gas is
obviously one of the or is one
of the cleaner producing in this
region in the Permian Basin. And
so when you have an industry
that is
Every time we pass a re
regulation, they're meeting and
or exceeding what we have put in
place.
Um, they, they are making those
uh.
Big moves to try to to be
compliant.
Um, I just don't understand why
we need to continue to punish
them in these types of ways when
it looks like it, it, to me, it
feels like it's already working,
um, considering the numbers you
just gave me. So with that,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman and,
and Mr. Sheldon, I do appreciate
your time and thank you.
Representative Dickson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you. I just have a.
Couple of questions, um, about
the penalties.
Um, I think I would say in
general.
Um, I can appreciate the need to
increase fees.
Given, uh
Additional demands on time,
technology, things like that.
Um
So I have
Um
So I'm gonna focus my questions
on the penalties, I guess. Um
First off, based on earlier
discussion, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Mr. Shelton, how many operators
Just blow past penalties and
continue to operate. Madam
Chair.
Representative Dixon
Not many.
Madam Chair, um,
Chairman, uh, Mr. Shelton, do
you have a defined number.
Madam Chair, I'm sorry, I don't.
Um
Madam Chair, Chairman, um, Mr.
Shelton, how long does it take,
uh, how long does it normally
take for an operator to resolve
an issue once they've been
notified of a violation.
Madam Chair Representative,
sometimes it can take a matter
of hours.
Sometimes it's many months and
sometimes it's never.
Madam Chair
And, um,
Mr. Shelton.
The rest of my questions are
sort of along those same lines.
And I think that fundamentally
my.
Issue
With the discussion about
penalties. I don't have a
problem with penalties.
I think if you are in the wrong.
You should be penalized
appropriately.
What I am concerned about is.
As a member of this committee to
make a decision.
I would actually like to have
specific information in hand so
that I understand how many, how
many operators are we talking
about? What is the length of
time?
In one of the analyses.
Amner states.
Um
Madam Chair.
Um
Chair and Mr. Shelton.
Uh, to be exact.
Um, in the analysis.
Provided by Ener under
significant issues.
Given that most notices of
violation are resolved in
settlement.
The existing daily and overall
caps on penalties tend to result
in enhanced bureaucratic
workload for OCD to justify
proposed penalty amounts, rather
than limiting the penalties that
9 non-compliant operators incur.
Can you explain that to me.
What, so what is the process?
Because it sounds to me.
Like
The penalties.
are
Put forth, but most cases are
resolved in settlement.
And then what is this about
enhanced bureaucratic workload.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Sure, Madam Chair,
Representative, the challenge
there is that.
Um, if we are under $100,000 cap
in order to get the penalty
volume, if we're going to get
that penalty number.
To get them to the table.
We have to
7 penalties, 8 penalties instead
of a single one, instead of
writing them a ticket that is
commensurate with the violation
that stops it from happening
and.
Basically delineating and what
we're talking about, we have to
process 7 to 8 of these at a.
Fairly a fairly hefty, um.
costs to OCD staff, it is
administratively burdensome for
our legal team, and it candidly
increases the amount of time
that it takes for us to get the
pile of paperwork before we can
get them at the table.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Shelton. So,
Most notices of violation or
resolved in settlement though.
So
Walk me through how the cap.
Plays into that.
So, Madam Cha, for instance, um.
We
Is issue the notice of
Notices of violation and we kind
of determined that because for
instance, say this is a flaring
violation because of really,
really high production.
That in order to get this
operator's attention in a way
that is going to get them to
actually stop doing this, we
need to basically get a so we'll
write up our 5 or 6 or 7 notices
of violation for the different
stacks that are flaring, we'll
get them in.
And generally start walking
through here the stacks that we
are assessing this against.
Um, here's when, when it
happened, here's, you know, we
kind of go through the paperwork
and then start talking about
what it's gonna take for us to
start knocking that.
the assessment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Thank you, Chair, and Mr.
Shelton. I guess I'm still
Unclear though if.
How long it takes, you know,
once you notify an operator.
That they are in violation.
I mean it sounds like most
operators are going to comply.
Quickly. And so for the few I.
I would really appreciate data.
For this, I mean, this.
I don't disagree with the
premise or what we're trying to
do.
But I find that it's very
challenging to
change statute.
Without actual facts and
figures.
So
It's just very
I think it's more complicated
than it sounds, uh, broadly.
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Shelton, um, how many, uh,
what has been the percent
increase in violations over the
last
Um, 5, Madam Chair, um.
Sent by that that's a little bit
of a misleading number because
again, we got our administrative
penalty authority back in 2019.
Um, I would say.
In fiscal year 24, um, and then
the 25, we have about 12 NOVs
issued in fiscal year 24, um,
we're at 14, uh.
Right now in fiscal year 25,
still being processed and sort
of some of those penalty
assessments are still on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton. Um, our penalties and
the settlement negotiations made
public.
Madam Chair.
Representative Jason er.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton. Um, I appreciate um.
The additional, uh,
conversation.
Your representative next
representative small.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Uh, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton.
Couple of quick questions
Um, Mr. Chair or Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton.
You said that Texas, who sort of
our very much our peer in all
things Permian. Do they have a
cap on my.
Madam Chair, Representative
Smallville.
OK. Um, and Madam Vice Chair,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton, do we
know, is that just sort of how
they got started and we got
started under a different
system. Was that changed?
At a certain point.
Do we have any sort of context
and history on Madam Chair, not,
not for Texas, no, most
comparable states do not have a
cap on fines cap or sorry on
penalties, capping penalties
sort of undermines the.
Basic concept of penalties, the
most.
Common multiplier that we assess
penalties on is time.
is a violation, so the issue for
us is that under $200,000 cap,
there comes a day at which your
days of violation means there's
just no point for you.
Stop your violation.
Got it. OK. Um,
OK. Uh, and, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton,
sort of our
As I recall, this was part of
legislation that was brought
last year.
Um, at that point, there were,
there were varying perspectives,
but my recollection,
Madamevison, is that there were
operators who saw these finds.
As sort of as
Um, not an egregious sort of
outlandish stuff is men and
small, that's correct.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Vice or Mr.
Chair, Mr. Shelton.
On the other hand, um,
You know, we're used to a
certain system of operating in
New Mexico for 10 years until
2019, uh, that penalty, the
penalties weren't there to be
enforced.
Um
Were near sort of the changing
of an administration, uh, so
where I met him vice chair, Mr.
Chair, where I want to go with
this. I actually want to
propose.
A uh very minor um technical
amendment.
That Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Uh
I feel is important in order to
ensure
That, um, while we take needed
steps forward.
We're also ensuring Madam Vice
Chair, Mr. Chair, that at a time
of record production that is
supporting
A vast array of
Uh, advancements by the state
and in a very much a shared way.
Uh, and then a partner way with
uh production that we do that in
As mindful away knowing that the
legislative process is
challenging.
Madam Chair.
If I could sort of direct your
chair.
Right. And simply it's this,
Madam Chair, I want to reduce
the currently the cap, this is
page 3, I believe.
Of $3,650,000.
To
Uh, 2650.
And I would make that uh.
the amendment. You need a
second.
We vote on the
uh.
Typly we ask if it's friendly
and typically we have some
debate on it.
So, um, thank you, ma'am Chair.
Thank you representative small,
um, uh, obviously we've
discussed this before, uh, it
would be my preference not to
have a cat, but uh we do view
your amendment as friendly.
do we vote on the amendment? No.
You might ask if there's any
opposition to the amendments.
Opposition
To the bill?
Do we have any other questions?
One question, um.
We're done, we're done with the
amendment, right? What type of
violations would incur the
higher penalty?
Madam Chair, the kind of
penalties that get up into that
escort what we think of as
repeat offenders, you know,
egregious penalties also
penalties that present
significant environmental or
health risk.
Uh, for violations of releases.
environmental health risk or or
just.
Egregious in their scope, we had
a flaring event that lit up the
city of Karl's best OCD
director, so um events like that
are the ones that we go.
Any more questions, Mr.
Chairman, for uh to close?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you, um.
Yeah, I, I've heard uh a number
of times so far the session
that.
We're sending the wrong message
to the oil and gas industry.
And I think the message to the
oil and gas industry.
should be clear.
And to me, the message should
be.
Uh, you're welcome in our state.
We appreciate what you do for
our state.
And we expect you to follow the
rules set by the state.
Thank you man.
You're ready to take a vote on
the.
On the amended.
Meaning emotion.
Madam,
I move a motion to for a to pass
on House Bill 259 as amended?
OK.
Right, we have a motion in 2nd.
Take the roll.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
As
Representative Garcia.
Corolla, yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Represent a small.
Representative Dixon.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
First year, yes.
Cherry McQueen.
Yes.
A vote of 7 to 4, you have a
pass, you pass.
59.
Representative Dixon to explain.
Thank you, um, thank you, Madam
Chair, um.
As I said, I, you know, I think
that uh fees are useful tool,
um, I noticed that this bill is
scheduled to next go to
judiciary and then
appropriations. Um, and so I
would just say that before it
comes to appropriations, um, I
would certainly appreciate some
of the data that we've discussed
that I think would justify, um,
the penalty increase because um
I can't guarantee that.
Um, I will support it in
appropriations without that
data. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Sorry.
OK, our next bill is House Bill
91.
Uh, public utility rate
structure in terms of Hotez
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I promise
not to wave my hands.
Feedback. Um, I'm here to
present House Bill 91, um, which
seeks to address the pressing
issue in our state, um, which is
that many low income families
and people in the state pay uh
disproportionately high utility
costs.
Relative to
Um, their income, um, many New
Mexicans living below the
poverty line, poverty line spend
20% of their income on energy
bills alone.
Um, and they're faced with the
impossible task often of paying
for their light bill or um the
medicine.
Or heating
Or food, um.
What this bill does is that it
empowers the public regulation
commission to consider proposals
for low income utility rates by
investor-owned utilities, which
we hope will reduce the energy
burden for our most vulnerable
populations. There are 20 other
states that, um, that have low
income rates or programs, um,
including our
Neighbors in Arizona and have a
uh an expert here, Doctor Anna
Lindon Weller, uh, who's the
senior policy advisor, Clean
Energy with the water resource
advocates and um my my
co-sponsors representative
Patricia Robert Caballer and um.
No representative, I think you
covered it with that, we stand
for questions, Mr. Chair.
OK, um, we'll go to the onions
first just by a show of hands
who's here in support of this
bill?
OK, who's here in opposition to
this bill?
OK, uh, we're going to do
opposition first. Um, you have 2
minutes.
Thank you, Chair.
Committee. My name is Athena
Christodoulou as an energy and
environmental engineer, I
applaud this bill for looking to
um help the those with poor
income, however, I do wish to
bring attention to one item I
don't believe that gas bills
should be subsidized by the
state.
OK, we're gonna go online.
Uh, is there anyone online who
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
Uh, Carlos Sonte.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Carlos
Sontag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We're opposed to this bill. New
Mexico is one of the poorest
states in the nation with a
poverty rate of 18.4%. Soaring
inflation and rising energy
prices are taking a heavy toll
on New Mexico families. This
bill will only make that
situation worse for many because
they will be forced to subsidize
the utility rates of others.
House Bill 91 requires a utility
to provide lower gas and
electric utility rates for
low-income residential
customers. We don't want anyone
to suffer.
From a lack of heating or
cooling. But when you force
increased rates on others to
cover the cost for the low
income, you create additional
hardships. It doesn't matter
where you draw the line for
poverty in this state,
subsidizing costs for others
will push many of those who are
barely making ends meet and
poverty.
Consider those on fixed income
budget who can
Scarcely afford their utilities.
Any additional cost for these
folks that are just over that
line that you've drawn, maybe
the difference between barely
covering their daily expenses
and skipping meals or
prescription refills.
The state has an option to take
care of them, to help these
people with their heating and
cooling, and it's light, light
heap has been around for a long
time, and the state has budget
surpluses right now where that
could be completely taken care
of, where you're not putting an
added burden on other
ratepayers, but you're taking
care of those people that need
help. I'm very sympathetic to
the utilities needing to be
paid, but I think the state
needs to work this out.
Through li heap and not on the
backs of our poor New Mexicans.
Thank you.
OK, is there anyone else in
opposition?
OK, we're gonna come back to the
room. We're gonna do 3 and
support.
So just
Stand up in the middle for the
1st 3 and uh for the record, so
I'd like people watching at
home. I, I don't think they can
see the audience. There were at
least a dozen hands up, so we're
gonna take the 1st 3 in line.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Rico Gonzalez. I represent El
Paso Electric.
This elegantly written piece of
legislation provides the
opportunity for the public
regulation commission to provide
um rates that they see as fit
for our low income customers.
All utilities have different
profiles of customers.
And in our territory, 80% of our
Revenues are on a residents and
small commercial.
And so from that perspective,
Our low income rate
opportunities may look different
than those of our uh uh
colleague utilities.
And so this provides that.
Opportunity
It's put into a portion of the
statute, the discrimination
statute, which is properly
placed where all of our uh
discrimination type rates are in
there, economic development,
load retention.
Energy efficiency.
And so from all of those
perspectives, this bill, um,
which I wanna give uh kudos to
our sponsors.
Uh, for working on this bill
for, for as long as they have
and rising above politics to
good policy.
I just want to say thank you to
them and thank you to the
committee for hearing this.
Hey, good morning, um, Chairman
McQueen, members of the
committee, Carlos Lucero from
the public service company in
New Mexico.
And
Rico Gonzalez from El Paso
Electric stated a lot of what we
were going to say as well in
support of this bill, because it
really, it's, it's about the New
Mexico PRC.
Um, being able to allow
Um, or approve rates for, for
the utilities that file these
low income rates. So as, as, as
um Rico, Mr.
Gonzalez stated,
Each utility can have different
look um whatever really fits the
low income for our customers and
at B&M, you know, there's a
large portion of our customers
that are on low income and
living on fixed income and this
low income rates will be able to
be able to improve their
financial situation and offering
a low income rate will help
customers ensure they can manage
and afford their bills while
maintaining a continuation of
service.
And we, we also thank the
sponsor and their expert
witnesses, you know, for really
bringing this bill to our
attention and working with us to
make sure we have a bill that we
could all agree on. So for these
reasons PNM supports um House
Bill 91. Thank you. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Amy Barraby, I'm
the registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Gas Company. It has
been my great privilege over the
past 3 years. Although I know
it's been running longer to work
with the sponsor and all of the
stakeholders.
on coming up with a bill that is
before you today. I, there has
been a tremendous amount of
compromise and listening and
learning from each other. And I,
what I will say is throughout
all of it, we share the
commitment to our most
vulnerable populations and our
low income customers as a
company, nothing is more
important than serving all of
our customers and making sure
that they have the safe,
reliable, and affordable energy
that they can
Rely on every day to feed their
families, so, um, for these
reasons, and with deep
appreciation for the sponsors of
this bill, we support this.
Thank you. We're gonna take 2
people online, uh, if you'd like
to speak in support of this
bill, we have, I see some hands
raised already, uh, Felicia Ian.
Good morning, Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Felicia Guille and I am here on
behalf of Yucca. Yucky Yaka
strongly supports House Bill 91
because energy is not a luxury,
it's a basic necessity.
Across New Mexico, working
families are struggling under
the weight of rising energy
costs, and these burdens fall
hardest on low income
households, indigenous
communities and communities of
color.
HB 91 takes an important step
towards energy justice by
allowing for straight rate
structures to reduce the burden
of high energy costs on low
income customers prevent you
also preventing utility debt
from becoming a permanent crisis
and promote affordability and
continuity of service as we
transition away from fossil
fuels, we must ensure that the
shift to clean energy is
equitable. Expanding access to
energy efficiency programs and
implementing fair rate.
structures will not only help
families stay afloat, but will
also make our energy system more
resilient and just. Yucca urges
uh lawmakers to pass HB 91
because affordable energy is a
human right, and we must ensure
that our public utilities serve
the people, not just corporate
interests and that every New
Mexican can access the basic
energy services they need to
thrive. Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have
Aliciarez.
Good morning, chair and
community members. Um, I'm using
Alicia's computer. My name is
Bernadette Hardy. I'm a lobbyist
with NM Native vote. Um, I also
live in the International
District, uh, where we provide
community services for our, for
our families there and our Title
One families. Um, it is more
important to be poor. What we've
seen in our communities is, you
know, sometimes you, you have
subpar heating, you have to use
electric heaters. It raises the
utilities more and more. Uh,
we've filled out the light.
It, uh, application, you only
can get it once a year. Our
families need support right now.
They need electricity, they need
heat, um, and this would really
help our communities just, just
a little bit of relief to help
them through the winter and, and
the, the summer. Thank you for
listening.
Please support HB 91.
OK, thank you for that, that
will end our public comment. We
still have a couple of people
online with their hands up, and
as I noted previously, we, we
had a bunch of people in the
room who want to speak. So thank
you for turning out.
Um, Representative Ortiz,
anything to add before we go to
the committee. Thank you, Mr.
Church very quickly, the state
will not be subsidizing.
gas or any utility he mean, this
is um strictly in the hands of
the PRC.
Thank you.
OK, thank you for going to the
committee you represent Montoya.
Thank you, Matt, uh, Mr. Chair,
get used to that again, Mr.
Chair.
And representative, um.
What is the need specifically.
At this time for this bill.
Um
We, we've not heard this.
Nesarily in years past, what,
what's going on currently?
Mr. Chair Representative
Montoya, thank you for that
question. I think over the last
20 years, utility rates have
gotten increasingly more uh
unaffordable for uh.
Our low income populations um.
Since I came in in 2021, I have
been carrying this bill, and you
may not have heard it in other
committees, but we, we've been,
we've been tweaking this and
working on this bill for a
while, initially we said, Mr.
Chair Represent Montoya, that
utilities must are hearing from
lots of members and and the
utilities, we realized that.
Chile is really just one of the
options to be able to do.
Something to support their low
income, um, customers, right,
and, and so what we're doing now
is allowing the PRC to look at
the utilities request um for
either a low income rate, which,
you know, we're not prescribing.
Um, or a program, which we're
not prescribing. It's really up
to the utility to define what a
program or a rate looks like for
their service area and what this
bill does is allow the PRC to do
this without this bill, um, the
PRC cannot.
Look at that. They cannot allow.
Uh, a utility who may want to do
want to do that.
So thank you, um
Mr. Chairman, representative,
um.
I know when we went through the
ETA.
Uh, several years ago we were
told that rates would
would go down.
And we know we've not seen that.
We've, we've
In some instances we've seen at
certain times of the day, a rate
is lower.
But overall, uh, New Mexicans
have seen.
The utilities dramatically
increase their bills.
Some of that has been
Not in the form of a rate. Some
of it's been in fees and other
things.
But in, in the last
5 years.
Utility rates have gone up
dramatically across the state.
So I do believe there is.
Justification for being
concerned.
Um
Mr. Chairman represented about.
The cost of utilities on the
poor, I think it is.
Justified probably now more than
ever.
That being said, um, Mr. Chair
and Representative.
The, the, the cost, um,
is going to be transferred to
the middle class.
Um, we don't have
Um
A
Assuming, once again, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I'm actually
glad that you're not prescribing
that they have to do this.
That that is
As far as I'm concerned,
advantage to this.
That being said
Assuming that
Uh, the PRC follows through.
With creating a program or
Uh, or a
Rate, uh, some sort of a
limitation on rate increases on
On
Low income. I would be.
Very interested in how
PRC would determine what is low
income.
Uh, do you have an idea as a
proposal as to what
We are asking here, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Chair represented Montoya,
thank you for that question. I
want to clarify a couple of
things, um, the utility, the
investor own utility will be
bringing um the the case to the
PRC and they're going to
determine based on their service
area, what the rate or a program
or both will look like for their
service area. It could be that
they um.
You know, they say that if you
meet a certain threshold, 100%,
150%, 200% of poverty, it's
going to be this.
50 cents off per kilowatt, I
don't know some amount per
kilowatt hour off or a flat rate
or uh an energy efficiency
program. It really depends, um,
and it's sort of tailor made for
that utility, and the PRC is not
going to bring the rate.
They're just going to, they're
gonna look at that request and
say, you know, um, as we're
doing the rate making case, you
know, is this, you know, just
and reasonable, can we allow
this based on sort of the the
whole universe of what the
ratema looks like.
And that that's really what it
is, so no prescription from PRC
saying you have to do 200% of
poverty or only like customers
or only snap if a utility wants
to do that.
They will have, you know, within
their, uh, request, um, you
know, they will have to
demonstrate that they can um
certify those folks that those,
you know, that whatever their
threshold is that they can then
qualify those those members who
will receive some kind of
support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative.
Um
I am, I am concerned, um,
because the
Because we are seeing
Utility bills go up. I am
concerned that
Uh, the energy transition.
That is prescribed the Energy
Transition Act is not finished.
So we're not done seeing
increased rates or increased
bills.
Um, and I've, I have requested
just because I, I'm wanting to
know what that increase has been
since
Um, Mr. Chair, since the ETA I
have made that official request
from the PRC and I'm just
waiting on the documentation as
to what bills
Utility bills, how much they
have increased since the ETA and
uh
That
Um, I, I believe we need to know
what we're dealing with, uh,
when we make these decisions,
so, so going forward, I'll have
that as we go into the rest of
the session. My concern is
Wherever we draw that line.
There are people above that
line.
That are struggling as well.
And we will be
Transferring the burden.
To, to them.
And in, in New Mexico, we know
that
Uh, less than 5% of our
population.
Uh has a household that makes
over $200,000.
Uh, so, so there's a lot of
folks.
That can't afford
Uh
The continued increases, but
that's what we're seeing.
So I, I just going forward, I, I
appreciate.
Uh, your legislation, I think
the poor are obviously much less
equipped to be able to handle.
These increases to bills.
Um
But I, more specifically, I'd
like to talk to you and Mr.
Uh
Mister Chair.
This is already, is this.
Um.
Ribs and I believe the bill was
amended in its prior committee.
OK, so the I I
Through through this to make the
Substance amendments here. So,
um, Mr. Chair.
And representative.
Um
On page 2 line 6 through 11, all
of that language was just
removed and replaced with.
Online for
rates and programs. So and
programs.
Essentially
Removes the more prescriptive.
So I actually think that's an
improvement.
Mr. Chair, uh,
And uh representative to allow
for
This, this, I think was too
prescriptive.
For them
So I do appreciate that.
Change, I'm, once again, because
of my concerns and not knowing.
Specifically, how this is going
to affect
The middle class
Uh, and particularly the lower
middle class, um, I'm
I'm sure this is gonna move on,
but I'm not gonna be able to
support it this time, and when I
get that information, as this
bill move forward, I'll provide
that information to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Montoya represents
small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair, and experts and
uh representative.
Um
First couple of things, my
understanding, or Madam Chair, I
apologize. Your chairs and
chairs,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, presenters,
my understanding is that uh
The energy Transition Act was
passed in 2019.
Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Represented a
small, uh, yes, before my time.
Uh, Mr. Chair, presenters, it's
also my understanding that since
2019 in the service territory
that I reside in El Paso
Electric, electric rates have
decreased. Is that your
understanding?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
small, I, I don't know exactly,
but.
Someone in the room does.
And
Mr. Chair, Representative Small,
um, that is my understanding, at
least for the residential rate
class. Got it. OK. And I take it
that we're focusing your, your
legislation.
Matt, uh, Mr. Chair, presenters
focuses on residential rates. Is
that right?
Yes it does. OK. Uh, secondly,
it's my understanding, Mr.
Chair, presenters that since
2019, uh rates, residential
rates have declined in the PNM
service territory.
Mr. Chair, Representative, it is
a more complicated question, um,
the because of rate riders and
tariffs, but if we're looking at
the per kilowatt hour charge,
yes, absolutely they have.
Great. And Mr. Chair, uh,
expert, the
Those great riders and tariffs
are not related to renewable
energy.
Mr. Chair Representative, most
of them are not, some of them
are.
Mr. Chair, presenters. So, um,
safe to say then that uh rates
since 2019 have not
dramatically expanded again in
my
Service territory that I reside
in, was residential rates have
declined.
So, Mr. Chair, presenters, is
this legislation seemingly maybe
more focused on the the um other
things that we're seeing now.
Uh, Mr. Chair presenters.
Mr. Chair represents small, I,
uh, I think that would be the
case, but what we do know.
For sure, is that low income
people pay, they have a high
energy burden upwards of 20% or
more, so of their take home pay,
they're paying 20% more, uh, 20%
of their take home pay on on
utilities, right, and for those
states that do have uh low
income rates or programs, you
know, where they're looking at
um an energy burden of something
like 6% for those uh low.
Income households, so what we
really wanna make sure is that
low income people have more
money to pay for medicines and
food, um.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chairs and uh
expert, um, sort of the, the
approach you take in this bill
combined with the legislature's
investments in the PRC that give
them more capability and the
focus of the bill, I think.
think he represents small.
Other questions in the
committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
We have a Du pass in a second,
um, Nina, could you take the
vote?
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gorola.
Represented Henry.
Represented Montoya, Represented
Murphy? No.
Representative Santa Cortez? No.
Represented a small
Viana.
McQueen.
Yes.
You have a pass.
OK, we're gonna give you just a
minute to clear the room, but if
you could, uh,
Go outside for any
conversations, I would
appreciate that.
Mr.
Oran Murphy. I point of personal
privilege, but it's really it's
not a complaint it's more of a
question.
So I think that's the proper.
Motion perhaps.
Um
One of the things
That I'm struggling a little bit
with is
When we have presenters, it's
clear that in many cases the
representative or whoever the
official is that's presenting.
It is also accompanied by an
expert.
quote unquote expert.
I've been in
Situations where where I've
testified either legally or
administratively.
And in those settings expert has
a very specific meaning.
Either qualify through education
or experience.
There's some amount of dialogue
about
Um, that level of expertise, be
it scientific or legal or
whatever.
Yeah, that term seems to mean
something different in this
setting.
And it's unclear to me at times
if the expert.
is the expert on the bill, what
it's trying to do.
If the expert is the expert on
the underlying.
Issue at hand, be it scientific
or administrative or whatever.
Or as my mind goes, is they are
they experts and perhaps the
subject matter material and by
that I mean more scientific, um,
so could you talk about
That a little bit, Mr. Chairman,
and also,
Mainly about how I respond to
that and is it appropriate for
me when
Confronted with an expert to ask
them some of those questions.
Uh, Representative Murphy, I
think an expert can be any of
those things. And I think at
times they aren't any of those
things typically we uh ask our
sponsors to introduce their
expert, um, in my last bill, my
expert was the uh general
counsel of Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources.
I, I
Don't know where he went to law
school. I don't know his
background. I don't know how
long he's been practicing.
I do believe he's an expert.
Um, so, you know, I, I suppose
we could do more on
introduction. I, I, I don't
think.
It would really be appropriate
to sort of like ask to see their
resume as part of their
introduction.
No, I, I, um, Mr. Chair, I, I
agree with you in, in, in your
case it was very clear and I
think in many cases it is, but
sometimes it's not.
And so I, I just want to make
sure that in my ability to ask
questions that I might ask that
expert for, for a little bit of
background as to their
expertise.
Do you see that as being
appropriate or not being
appropriate, Mr. Chairman? Uh, I
don't mean to Rosanne Murphy,
uh, I think, uh,
In the appropriate context on a
limited basis, that would be
fine.
Um, Mr. Chairman, the, the, the
other point is, is sort of the
public testimony point, and
One of the things that I've
noted is that many times.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, when.
We asked to either and it's fair
on either side, where oppose or
or uh be online in the, in the
chamber here, um, whether you
oppose or support a particular I
see many times the same hands go
up, and I'm wondering, uh, Mr.
Chairman, if it would be
helpful. It would certainly be
helpful to me.
And I believe they state their
name they usually state if
they're with an organization
sometimes I may miss that but I
certainly appreciate that if
they would do that and then the
last thing I would say is,
Um, if they're in New Mexico
resident.
And my point there, Mr.
Chairman, is, is that if
somebody is here and living on
the ground, they're seeing this,
that's that testimony and that
support me weighs a lot more
with me than if somebody is here
for the legislative session and
there are now the state
resident.
And so, if that's not asked,
could we ask that it be asked,
Mr. Chairman?
Uh, Representative Murphy, so
We, we generally do a show of
hands, uh, for two reasons. One,
so, uh, people in the audience,
everyone has the opportunity to
participate at some level, to,
uh, so we on the committee.
Have a sense of the audience in
3, so I was the chair, have a
sense of how many people want to
participate.
And so there may be some
variation in the number of
people I call on, depending on
the nature of the bill, uh, more
controversial bills. I'm
inclined to call on more people
for each side.
Um, I, you know,
I don't want to go around the
room and ask everyone to
identify themselves, just an
interest of time, uh, and it's
entirely possible that there are
people here watching the process
who aren't interested in
identifying themselves and I
think that's permissible.
If people want to speak
publicly, we asked them to state
their name, uh, whether they're
in person or online, it's
appropriate for them to state uh
whether they're with a
particular organization. And I
think that probably gives you a
pretty good sense about whether
or not they live here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the explanation.
Any further questions on the
committee?
OK, um, Roseanne Murphy, uh.
Those are good questions. I
appreciate you bringing that up.
Um, so our next bill has bill
361, uh, inner conversion of
certain wells uh representative
Romero, whenever you're ready.
Thank you. Thank you, members.
Um, the bill before you, which,
um, hopefully, um, we've spoken
to a few of you about it, um,
allows for the opportunity for
um innovation to come into
orphan wells and those that um
may be out of commission. This
allows for the practice of
energy storage, um, such as
battery storage, geothermal.
op port un ities to convert
these wells, capture, um, any
emissions, clean them up and
ensure it, thank you, um, and
ensure that um we have an
opportunity to utilize the
infrastructure that's currently
there for another purpose. Um,
with me is my expert, um,
Jennifer, uh, um, Brad few and
Evan, I forgot your Toronto, um,
to be able to answer questions
about some of the uh
technicality of how these
systems operate and certainly um
any of the legal framework for
that we're dealing in. Thank
you, Mr.
Cher will stand for questions.
Tiny ribs have uh your experts
will field questions you want
to, OK,
so going to the audience, show
of hands, uh, who's here in
support of this bill?
Who's here in opposition?
OK.
We'll start with support then in
the audience, um, we'll take, uh
Uh, 3 people, if you would like
to speak in sport, you'll have 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Mike D'Antonio
with Xcel Energy. I'm a resident
of Albuquerque, New Mexico, uh,
wanted to support this bill. Uh,
we just were aware of it this
morning, uh, in our service
territory, we have an extreme
need for power and uh we've got
3300 megawatt accredited
capacity need by 2030. So any
kind of opportunity for energy
storage, uh, for, uh give you
again, this, this bill just
gives the opportunity or energy
store.
and and wells and geothermal, we
see that as a real positive to
give the optionality to uh the
energy industry. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman, committee
members, again, Athena
Christodoulou. I'm an energy and
environmental engineer and maybe
little known, I also owned an
energy storage company, thermal
energy storage, which I recently
sold.
Um, I am in support of this
bill, and it seems to have a
good boundaries with fees and
financial uh assurance because
one of the things we do not want
to happen is for wells that are
leaking methane to be left
unplugged and this seems to
address this. So I wanna be in
support of this and New Mexico
is open for business, not
exploitation. Thank you.
Chairman McQueen, members of the
committee, my name is Matthias
Sayer. I am a New Mexico
resident. I don't think we can
claim to be New Mexicans yet
because we've only lived here 10
years. Um, but I live here in
Santa Fe. I'm an attorney,
former deputy secretary of the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, um,
commenting on this bill in
support of this bill. It's
relatively rare as this
committee knows better than I,
um, that, uh, policy concepts
are presented, um,
that both that are that are
agreeable on both sides of of of
of the the divide of an issue,
um, and in the context of energy
development state of New Mexico
so often, you know, these are
fraught conversations with, with
advocates who advocate, really
advocate really aggressively in
folks who oppose very
aggressively in the context of
this bill, um, it's a, it's a
real innovative opportunity and
solution to a problem that I'm
sure this committee has looked
at um over the years, which is
inactive well.
the opportunity to, to repurpose
an active wealths solves the
problem for the state, for the
agency, um, and as Mr. D'Antonio
mentioned, it helps with some of
the energy shortages we're
dealing with in the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
go online. Is there anyone uh
online who would like to speak,
uh, in opposition to this bill?
Please raise your hand.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in support of
this, OK? Seeing none, um.
Uh, uh, representative Romero,
would you like to add anything
before we go? I think just the
unique opportunity to I think
bridge a certain gap that we've
identified both to be able to
offer the opportunity for
entrepreneurship and, um,
innovation to come to a position
where um we're also trying to
clean up the environment
surrounding these wells and and
it provides both opportunities
here, Mr. Chair. So thank you.
OK, members of the committee.
in Moto
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Representative.
It's a very interesting bill.
Um
I, I wish I knew more about it.
We have had extensive
conversations.
Um
I, I kind of wish this bill had
gone through the interim.
As to be able to
So potentially more questions
could be asked, cause I as
As Mr. Chairman and
Representative, as, as I've uh
Had the one interaction.
Uh, with the
The, let's just say that the
group bringing the bill forward.
Um
I'm not sure all
Answers have been
are
Not that they're not available,
but that I, that I don't.
Have them. So I'm gonna ask
Kind of some open-ended
questions, some of the ones that
I asked when we spoke.
Um, and that is
Mm
Specifically
Mr. Chair, Representative, at
this point.
And maybe going forward is
different, but at this point
we're looking at
Wells that are not in
production, but have
In some
Level of
Or in the process of being
capped or or are abandoned or or
something to that effect. Is
that correct, Mr. Chair
Representative, experts.
Mr. Chair Representative, we are
looking at wells that are in
temporary abandonment status,
which means that they've got a
steel bridge plug that plugs off
the hydrocarbon bearing zones,
um, looking at wells that have
been abandoned, um, and so they
might be fully abandoned or
orphaned where no operator or
working interest owner wants to
take on the financial burden of
going in and plugging the well
or wells that are nearing the
end of their productive life,
where they have marginal.
production, uh, uh, so then in
those cases, the mineral owners
might find it advantageous if
they don't want to rework the
well to go ahead and convert the
well to energy storage, and that
would involve capping off the
hydrocarbon production zones and
installing methane monitoring at
the surface of the well.
So thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Representative, um.
So
Beyond the
Abandoned or or.
Whales that are in the process
or scheduled to be plugged. You
are looking as well at marginal
wells.
Maybe not immediately, but
But in the future, is that
correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Representative, yes, that's
correct, um, it, it's a
voluntary agreement from the oil
and gas operators if they want
to pursue that path, but yes.
Thanks for that.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
so.
The question I have is,
Does the
Owner or operator of that well.
Do they maintain liability is
liability.
Transferred
Um, is, is that case by case.
Yeah, thank you. And I'm just
going to introduce, introduce
myself quickly. I'm Evan Toronto
with Renewal Energy and
And I am not a New Mexico
resident, I live in California
where where our company is um
doing these all conversions and
we would like to enter the New
Mexico market, so we'd like to
do business here.
Um.
In terms of ownership of the
well, our current business
model, and I can only speak for
renewal is that we work with the
operator and the operator
maintains ownership and is
ultimately liable for the full
decommissioning of the well at
the end of its beneficial
purpose as energy storage.
But we would, we would, um,
Provide the service for them.
If I may add to that, Madam
Chair, Mister Representative, so
the bill authorizes Mner to
permit the conversion of the
well and then put in financial
assurance requirements. It also
says that if the well is not
used for energy storage for 12
months, then plugging will kick
in. It doesn't ultimately
dictate um liability in that
sense as to who uh because Iner
is gonna go through a rulemaking
process, as indicated in their
analysis of the bill.
Um for one business model, you
can have a a contractual
arrangement where the oil and
gas operator wants to maintain
that responsibility for another,
you know, commercial arrangement
you could see the transfer of
the the responsibility at the
get go at the beginning of the
energy storage project. So it,
it leaves it open for Emner to
set those technical details of
what the agency would prefer.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative and experts.
Um, so,
In the instance of an abandoned
well.
The state would maintain
liability.
On the well.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Representative, uh, in the case
of an abandoned well, um, I
envisioned that the state would
go through an RFP process for
purchase of those well bores by
an energy storage company.
Um, and there has been some
initial interest from inner
where companies could, you could
have those well bores
transferred to other entities,
and they would own the well
board.
OK. So thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, uh, so.
It would be case by case. It
would not be.
It's, it's not one size
necessarily fits all, Mister
Chair, Mr, uh.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
yes, rulemakings are going to be
needed.
To implement this bill and so,
um, you know, I don't think that
I think that agencies have been
very thoughtful and their will
makings about responsibility
and, and when plugging and
abandonment will happen and how
it should happen and so that
will be a very technical
conversation at the rulemaking
stage.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
Representative
Um
Just so
Folks who understand the process
a little bit better of
How
Energy is generated here.
Um, we're talking about a
A borehole
Of whatever depth
Capped
Above wherever.
The
Products
That that borehole was created
for.
Wherever, wherever that
geological area is above that.
And then there is
A weight or something.
That
At a certain point
During the day.
Will drop slowly and as it drops
down the borehole, however far.
5000 ft.
That
It, um,
Creates friction
Which then
Powers batteries or goes
directly to the.
is that somewhat what we're
talking about here?
Yeah, sorry, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, so renewals
technology uses the vertical
drop of a, of a well that's been
plugged at the bottom. So we
install a weight that's
connected to a wire rope and
then a winch, a motor generator
at the surface, and when
Excuse me, when power is needed
on the grid, we lower the weight
down through the well, which is,
which is full of water. It
doesn't go very quickly, um.
And that turns the motor
generator and puts power onto
the grid when it's needed and
then when electricity is
abundant and inexpensive, we
pull power off the grid.
pull the weight back up to the
top where it stays.
You know, ready to be discharged
again. So there's no
electrochemistry, there's no
lithium lithium ion, it's just a
mechanical battery essentially.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative, uh,
You, you stated that that is
your business, your business
model or is there a different
business model? Is there anyone
else involved in that could.
Do this that has different
business model.
We've heard that other other
companies are interested in well
repurposing, but we're the only
ones using gravity-based energy
storage
to add to that, we've received
emails about uh geothermal
opportunities using similar um
sort of uh similar technology,
but obviously a little bit
different using geothermal,
can't get into the technicality
of that. I know that there's in
the bill as well uh will allow
for that innovation to come in
as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative in a
given.
Scenario 5000 ft well.
How much uh in in megawatts or
in kilowatts, I guess I should
say in kilowatts, what can be
generated?
In a single borehole of let's
say 5000 ft.
Yeah, that's a great question,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, we believe in in in our
California well that it's about
35 kilowatt hours per well, and
the idea obviously is that you
do a whole field, um, so that
you scale. Thank you.
Representative
It would be
necessary for these wells to be
probably in some sort of
proximity to
Power lines to be able to and
What what else is needed besides
power lines, a, a transformer.
What, what else is needed?
On site
Yeah, you're exactly right, Mr.
Chair and Representative. Um, we
just need, we need an existing
power connection and most of
these fields that we're looking
at are electrified, um, and then
we look at the weight, I'm
sorry, the depth of the well and
the width of the casing.
OK.
So, like I said, I, I wish this
had gone through.
Uh, the interim because, I mean,
frankly, I don't even know what
other questions I have on this
because it is
So different.
Um, also, I'm, I am curious.
If there is geothermal.
Opportunities for this. I, I'd
like.
To know a little bit more about
that as well. Um, it's not very
often, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative that a bill.
Especially with something brand
new, a brand new concept goes
through its first year.
Um
I, I don't know. This sounds
like a really good idea, but I
don't know what I don't know.
Um, so I'm, I'm
Let, let's say I'm
Supportive of the concept.
I think it does potentially
answer.
Questions
Uh, that
That we have
Maybe with some of these.
Wells that um
Let's say at least in our minds
at this point, our ending our
end of life or are in
abandonment.
Um, but I would like to revisit.
Conversation that we have.
As to whether or not
These
Wells
Assuming
Mr. Chair Representative what
was discussed in your business
model, at least, at least some
of these were a well, could be a
marginal well, let's say.
But the
company that
is responsible for that well.
And there's an agreement with
your company or a company.
And allows for this repurposing
of that well.
And I would imagine as I, as I
heard there's a length of time.
That that contract would be
entered into, but they would
still own the rights to that.
But
At some point
In that agreement
As we've had in the past in uh
New Mexico and across the
industry.
Uh, we know that
We've probably extracted with
current technologies.
Up to 70% or up to 30%.
Of available
Oil or natural gas or whatever
is being extracted.
With current technologies, but
we know we have not.
Taken the full amount. So at a
certain point, another
technology, another round of
technology comes like
horizontal.
Drilling has had
And then that well could be
repurposed.
There is nothing in this that
would
Prohibit
The repurposing or the.
Repurposing back for its
original purpose that well.
Or extraction of natural gas.
Oil or
Something else
Is that correct, Mr. Chair?
Correct, Mr. Chair,
Representative, this merely
provides the opportunity for um
to repurpose the wall for or
energy storage purposes.
So thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair. Um
seriously, I've
I'm very curious on this. Uh, I
think, uh, providing it, it just
appears as if this is very
similar to
Windmill technology to some
degree.
That the turning
causes
Electricity generation.
It just
Appears as in this instance.
We're able to do it on demand.
Which for me
is one of the main
issues I've had with renewables
is that it's not on demand,
which therefore requires a
backup.
Um
I can see this technology.
Mr. Chairman
Could be an answer.
Or
On demand
Electricity.
Um
I think the problem is
Mr.
Chair potential in the future
problem is.
The next round of technology
that shows
How to then
Oh and um
Uh, extract more oil and gas
from
borehole
A lot of those, I, I could see
the, the problem of
Someone or a business.
Re
Upping or or continuing with a
Whatever the contract length is
going back in to do another
contract. I, I could see there
could be a problem. So I'm, I'm
wondering if
Is there uh
The model you have
If
Uh, it were justifiable.
Or let me rephrase that.
Is it at this at this point cost
prohibitive, I guess is the way
to say it.
To go and for
And purposely drill a borehole.
For the purpose
Of this, cause I'm, I'm afraid
in the future that if it
competes with
surge again in production in oil
and gas, I could see where
Or it'd be hard to do that to
continue replicating this.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
so you're asking if we would go
and just drill holes for this
purpose on our own or or would
you see that in the future that
it would become
Financially justifiable to do
that.
We do not see that at this
point.
But it's financially justifiable
to do that. And we're trying to
repurpose the infrastructure
that's already there.
OK,
this is for conversion, not for
new drilling.
No, I, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative, I, I
understand that I'm just, once
again,
Trying to figure out our
In my mind, the, the problem we
have with our current electric
generation, I'm
I very much like this idea.
I, I'm just worried in the
future if it becomes in
competition again with
where, where
Marginal wells are not seen as
currently a liability in the
future, I could see them.
Considered as a
Potentially profitable asset
again.
And at that point,
So Mr. Chair, I, I, I, I
appreciate you indulging me, but
I know nothing about this as, as
I believe nobody else on this
committee does or anybody in the
legislature, so, um,
I, I would actually
I, I don't want to hinder
progress, but I, I would like to
see this.
In an interim committee.
So that
More questions could be asked.
60 day session to try and vet
something like this, not that
I'm seeing any necessary.
Issues with it right now except
for
The, the, the main issue that I
see is
If you have a, if you have a
The oil and gas company,
especially a small company.
That
enter into a long-term
agreement, the concern is if
that
Company
Maybe at a certain point becomes
Insolvent, who's who then
I responsible to the state for
that I, I don't, I don't want to
create more abandoned wells.
Just by the mere fact that a
I'm just gonna give you an
example. You have a company that
maybe doesn't go insolvent, but
you have, it's a
Let's say it's a single
proprietor, and that person
dies.
Who then becomes responsible.
for
The cleanup, does that become
the responsibility of the state.
These are some things that I
don't think we have the
opportunity to vet right now and
I'd, I'd like to vet that.
Representative, so again in the
bill, we talk about the um, if
there was if the storage ceased
for 12 months or longer, in the
case that it's being used for
this purpose, again, it's
subject to the um oil
conservation district, um.
Rules, um, state law and rules
that they would be promulgating
for that purpose, so.
We wanted to make sure we closed
the loop on all of that as well,
so thank you. I, I appreciate
them.
Once again, I, I just wish I had
a little bit more time to
understand this better. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
I also just forwarded you an
email from a geothermal company
that reached out to me if you
wanted to.
Flow
Thank you, Representative
Representative Murphy.
Mr. Chair presenters, uh, thank
you very much, um, I think this
is a good bill and a good idea.
Um, I'm not going to vote for it
today because of one issue which
I'll explain here in a moment.
Um, first to a couple of
technical questions.
Mr. Chair and presenters.
Let me just
I apologize to the committee in
the room, um.
Mr. Chair and presenters, it
looks like.
That
You addressed geothermal very
well in this bill.
And um in a, in a sense, um,
knowing the differences and
Ambient and downhole
temperatures it would probably
lend itself to heat pump
technology and that sort of
thing.
Um, my question though is, do
you feel like you have
adequately address the other
types of technology that you
might be employing in this case,
your technology, which for lack
of a better term, I'm just gonna
call gravity.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
so as gravity-based technology
and other energy storage
technologies developed, this is
an emerging field, and so
typically what the legislature
has done, I'm, I am a New Mexico
based attorney of practice law
here for 14 years and I'm from
Albuquerque, native New Mexican,
my husband's from Portales, New
Mexico, in-laws live all across
the state along with my parents,
um, so just to put that in there
representative, um, but.
You know, what I've witnessed in
laws passed over the years in
New Mexico is with emerging
technologies is that you do
leave that initial term of what
is energy storage, fairly broad
and open because it is going to
develop rapidly as energy
technologies develop rapidly
over the next few years. Um, but
you do authorize an agency to
kind of move forward and here
Iner would have that
responsibility. Emer has a few
new bureaus under it looking at
advanced energy.
steps and then you have the
bureau that handles geothermal
separately, um, so the
definition of geothermal is
actually a current statutory
definition that was in law prior
to this bill, so we're avoiding
any inconsistencies with
existing law.
Mr. Chairman, uh presenters,
thank you. That makes perfect
sense to me. Um.
The, the issue that I have with
with this bill is this, is that
it creates in my mind, and Mr.
Chairman and presenter some
regulatory uncertainty.
And
I'll go now to the bill itself.
Uh, beginning at the top of page
3 where it says department.
They established fees and
financial assurance
requirements, so forth and so
on. I think everybody can read
that.
If you've listened to my
concerns and testimony over some
of the bills that come through
this committee.
It might not surprise you, Mr.
Chairman and presenters, that I
am very sensitive to regulatory
uncertainty, and when I see this
doing.
And many of his colleagues in my
industry see this doing or has
the potential of doing is is
actually giving to the
department.
Additional authority to oppose
more fees and financial
assurances on the oil and gas.
Because that in itself is pretty
open. Does it say it just
impacts.
Your side of the equation.
Very well could impact
The oil and gas side of the
equation. So therefore,
Until there are Mr. Chairman
presenters some additional
discussions.
Between, um the,
Um
The author of the bill, um, and,
um, the department and the
industry, the oil and gas
industry, about what those fees.
Uh, and financial assurances
might look like who they'll
apply to. I, I simply can't
support it. I hope that you'll
address this before it gets to
the floor because I believe that
you would find broad support in
my industry, um, over this.
Um,
chair presenters.
Thank you, uh, for the questions
from the committee?
OK, I have a couple of questions
myself.
Um
So I, I think I understand now
that the mechanism for how
you're creating.
Um, energy, um, and.
I, I guess you're not really
creating energy, you're using
the differential production and
pricing to store energy, so
there's, there's actually
probably at least some net loss
of energy, but
A more adventitious timing of
use is that.
Sure.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Members of the committee, yes,
that's correct. OK. And uh how
much water does this use for
the, for the gravity.
Our technology uses between 700
and 9000 gallons per well
conversion, and that's a
one-time use. It's enough to
fill the well. It depends on
the, the depth of the well a
little bit. That's why that
number varies.
And, and so there's
Because the will is lined,
there's no seepage.
Mr. Chair Representatives, yes,
that's correct. So the case
integrity of the well bo is very
important, um, and that is why
to work with the oil and gas
operator too or independent
records at Imner and the
rulemaking currently for
geothermal wells, there are
extensive requirements for
caseing same with oil and gas
wells, um, but you're gonna want
to ensure that the casing
integrity is in place before the
water's put in and that avoids
seepage. OK. And you mentioned
um
Uh, methane monitoring.
Uh, but I don't see that in the
bill.
Yeah, Mister Chair, we do
methane monitoring at renewal on
the surface, and I imagine that
environmental protections would
be a part of the rulemaking
process, but I can only speak to
what we do at renewal.
And Mr. Chair Representatives we
have worked with inner. I think
that they would be compliment or
contemplating having monitoring
requirements at each of these
wells and part of the
rulemaking.
As we spoke with Mr. Shelton.
OK, that's fine, um, let me ask
you a question about the
financial assurance and
The financial assurance on page
3, says specific to the energy
storage or geothermal
development uses. What does that
mean?
Mr. Chair Representative, so
there would be a separate
financial assurance requirement
for the energy storage operator.
So these wells would in essence
become double bonded. Um, you'd
have a financial insurance in
place from the oil and gas
operator and then a financial
insurance in place from the new
energy storage operator, which
gives the state more protection.
OK, so the, the financial
assurance from the original
operator would still be in
place.
Um, Mr. Chair representatives,
yes, as long as the oil and gas
operator wants that to remain as
an active well, um, and the oil
conservation division system if
that financial insurance has to
stay in place under OCD's
current rules.
So this wouldn't be like a
transfer of wealth from one
operator to another. Um, Mr.
Chair Representatives uh.
There you could imagine a
rulemaking that can give a
transfer, and then you've got
bonding in place. You can
imagine a rulemaking where you
have, you know, the operator
maintains the oil and gas well
and the plugging responsibility
at the end of the life, and then
you have two sets of financial
assurance in place, but this
gives the flexibility for either
fact pattern.
OK. And um, so in, in 71-9-6.
Uh, there's rulemaking authority
to
Yeah.
Energy and minerals, I believe.
It looks pretty broad for
geothermal.
is, is this new? Is there
overlap? What, what's the
difference between these?
Um, so the Mr. Chairman
Representatives, the rulemaking
authority for geothermal would,
um, you know, if this is gonna
be converted for a geothermal
well, nothing would supplant the
the provisions and statute
related to the geothermal wells
and rulemaking powers that are
in place, um, I think
rulemakings under the geothermal
statutes uh do require MR to
consider protection of the
environment in the rulemakings,
um, so that's, I think some
provisions provided.
For under statute that would
still apply. Nothing in this
bill overacts or overrides that
requirement.
OK.
Thank you very much, um,
Representative Romero, do you,
uh, do you have anything to add
before we get to the committee?
for your vote, Mister Chair. OK.
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
Awesome.
Second.
I heard you pass from Dixon.
Is that right? The second from
the gorilla.
Um
uh, could you
Are we missing and we're missing
a small, but I think he has uh
departed, um, could you take a
look, please?
Representative Ubeda.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Represented Montoya.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Murphy.
No.
Representative Santa Cortez.
Represented a small
First year saidana, yes.
Sara McQueen.
Yes
Um, so you have a you pass or
Montoya to explain so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I'd
like this bill. Um, I am
Concerned about uh scenario
where
Uh, someone who owns and is
responsible for that well site.
or multiple, let's say a field.
And during the
Uh, time that there's an
agreement in place for the
electric.
Utility provider
To that there's an agreement
there, but during that time
either that.
Uh
Owner or responsible party.
Either dies or becomes insolvent
during that time.
That it's not clear.
I believe that that that would
then come back on the state.
The responsibility of
Dealing with that. So, I, I
understand that you're talking
about rulemaking, addressing
that, but I'm uncomfortable
going forward with, with that
loose end. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Um, or
Uh, san Dixon.
Um, Mr. Chair, I need to go back
to uh HAFC and so I'm wondering
if uh perhaps uh we should do a
joint memorial for on Thursday.
I don't know if there's gonna be
a lot of conversation on it, um.
Uh, and Dixon, uh, we have the
sponsors of the bill here. It's,
it's up to you. Um, uh, if I put
on Thursday, I, I will put it
the end of the agenda then too.
Uh, because it's a memorial.
Um
That would be uh it since uh
Joan Romero is uh able to do it,
that's great. OK, so we'll go
forward with that, OK.
OK, our last, uh,
item today is House Joint
Memorial for uh direct air
capture technology.
Uh, with Representative Romero,
um.
Whenever you're ready.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. This
House Street Memorial, um,
requests and support of
essentially our um technological
center at New Mexico Tech to
help us do, um, direct air
capture, um, and just look at,
um, the need for.
Ongoing research and development
in the air, um, in the area of
the air. Um, so with this, uh,
Mr. Chair, we're simply
requesting that to be done, um,
and we know that the in
partnership with New Mexico Tech
that they're also asking for
this,
um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee and
that all stand for questions.
OK, um, by show of hands and
audience who's here in support
of this bill.
OK, who's in opposition?
OK, we're gonna do opposition
first.
Um, please come forward. You
have 2 minutes.
Chair, committee members, I'm
sure you love seeing me come
forward. My name's Athena
Christodoulo in energy and
environmental engineer.
This is, this direct capture is
a subsidy and acknowledgement to
try and keep the oil and gas
industry going and give it an
excuse. Direct air capture
doesn't benefit anything. What
we are saying is that we now our
oceans can't accept any extra
carbon are vegetation isn't able
to accept any extra carbon, and
the extra carbon still being uh.
in our air because of fossil
fuel is going to have to be
addressed by us.
And the oil and gas industry
wants us to support it. It's a
state supported university. I
believe the the industry needs
to be fully, fully responsible
for this. I, I cannot.
I cannot support this joint
memorial.
OK, is there anyone online who
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
Alejandria alliance.
Hello, committee members, can
you all hear me? Yes.
Hi, my name is Alejandria Lyons.
I am part of the New Mexico No
Fall Solutions Coalition. I'm
based here in New Mexico. Um, I
come from Los Luna and our
coalition has for a long time,
uh, been raising the flag about
direct air capture and carbon
capture sequestration. A lot of
these advanced technologies were
being promoted by the Biden
administration and specifically
through the IRA. We are not sure
where that funding is going to
happen. Uh, we don't want New
Mexico to be left with the bag.
And like the other opposition
stated, we're we have an issue
because the technology shows
that it's not viable. It's going
to use more energy to do direct
air capture. And as we
understand this house joint
memorial. We're not afraid of
research. We know that we want
to see what's going on in New
Mexico, but there are already
research here, and I hope that
that's considered with this
bill, that it already shows that
this is not viable, and we don't
want to put our geology in any
kind of steak and
So I ask you all to vote no and
to consider um what this would
really mean if New Mexico was
left with the bag with
experimental technologies. Thank
you.
Thank you for that. We're gonna
come back to the room for, uh,
Uh, speakers and support.
Uh, we'll take, uh, no more than
3, and you have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Chairman McQueen,
members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with the Public Service
company in Mexico, and we thank
the sponsor for bringing this um
house Memorial for to our
attention. I think with more,
um, you know, direct Eric, and
our carbon capture, that's gonna
help the emissions across the
state to reduce those emissions
and it also can help PNM and our
goal to be 100% carbon-free by
2040. So for these reasons, we
support the memorial. Thank you
for house.
Memorial.
Good morning, members of the
committee, uh, Mr. Chair, Mike
D'Antonio, uh, with Xcel Energy.
We serve electricity to the
eastern part of the state, uh,
you know, the ETA requires us to
be um
80% renewable by 2040, but it
all of a sudden switches to a
carbon-free goal of 100% carbon
free by 2045. So we really need
to look at other technologies,
just not renewables. We have 40%
renewable on our system right
now, but uh we cannot
closed the door on other
technologies that reduce carbon
and we think this study is
important and we support it for
that reason. Thank you.
Uh, chairman in the committee,
uh, Mark Pedrotti, president of
CO2 rescue, um, I'm a
Professor emeritus in psychology
at the University of New Mexico
in uh Caryingley Hospital, I'm a
psychologist on the side, I
guess you could say I lived in
uh Albuquerque for uh 26 years
now. This is my 2nd rodeo. Uh, I
was here in the 80s at UNM.
Um, I'm a huge proponent of
this, uh.
Having this studied is, is
already too late for what it's
worth. We're
The world is emitting 36 billion
tons of CO2 a year, depending on
how you want to look at it.
There are 29,000 fossil fuel
power plants generating
electricity in the world, and
they need to be capped using CCS
and that will double the cost of
electricity, but it'll be still
less than the cost of
renewables.
So, um, this technology is here.
uh, there's already 3
Use of this technology being
applied or about to be applied
in the state.
Jack, director of capture is
expensive. It is the most
expensive, um, solution to
climate change, but it's
necessary, uh, the IPCC has said
that we're gonna need 80,000.
tons of 80 million, 80 80
million tons of CO 80,000 tons
of CO2 by 2030.
In a billion tons of CO2 through
DAC uh removal by 2050 to keep
us under 2 °C warming. We are
right now at 1.5 °C warming.
And we're going to 2 °C warming
by 2030.
So you can do the math, we'll
hit 3 °C by 2050 if we do not
support that. So I'm I'm all in
favor of this. I would love to
see us have 10 to 30 classic 1
million ton wells. Thank you.
I'm past my 2 minutes. I support
this. Thanks.
Sorry. OK, we'll, we'll take up
to 2 online. Is there anyone who
would like to speak in support
of this.
Bill, please raise your hands.
OK.
Seeing then we'll go back to the
sponsor or anything to add
before we go to the committee.
Um, just, uh,
As a why I'm interested in this,
Mr. Chair is that this is a
supplement to, I think so many
questions that we have about
what direct air capture may do,
um, this is about studying the
costs and benefits, um, and
understanding how it is that we
as a legislature can um look at
the responsibility that we have
within this realm. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representativearana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for bringing this forward. I
have trouble with this bill, um,
as far as sequestration and
especially because we just had
an earthquake in the Permian
Basin, a 5.0 I think earthquake,
and how would earthquakes
affect?
Sequestration.
Uh, to be fair, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, vice chair, um, I don't
know. I really don't know. Um, I
think is a practice since we
know we're engaging in practices
that may cause additional, um,
earthquakes, how that combines
with air capture and looking at
CO2 emissions, I think we could
is part of what this we could
benefit from understanding the
perhaps the nexus between the
two at this point you know that
um a lot of the um injection of
well water is what's causing
most.
the earthquakes, but there's
been over, I think 2400 small
2.0 or less tremors and if this
continues in the path it's
going, it just it.
It just seems like it would, um,
We would lose more of what's
sequester, but I'm, I'm not an
expert, so it just.
That worries me on that and and
it is expensive, but I know in
Mexico Tech is doing.
Um
That is already, so
I'm not sure the questions from
the committee?
Um, so I, uh,
I, I personally think um
Direct air capture is possible.
Um, but we'll never be feasible
to solve our climate issues.
Um, uh, that being said, I'm OK
studying it, uh, I think
studying things is a good idea,
um, like I would study.
Uh, cold fusion, um.
Don't think it's gonna pan out,
but we should check. Um, that,
that's, that's my take on it.
Um, do you have any idea how
much this would cost?
Um, Mr. Chair, there's no
current appropriation attached
to this. What we understand is
there's a number of projects
that New Mexico Tech is already
engaged in, um, this gives them
an impetus to at least continue
um with that with that effort
and obviously the endorsement
from the legislature, we get to
have that response in the
interim, to be able to
understand what the opportunity
presents to it. There's also a
federal dollars and for direct
air, um, capture, so having this
endorsement, I think engages in
that opportunity for them to do
further research as well, Mr.
OK
Um, what's the pleasure of the
committee.
We have a motion with to pass.
Do you have a second?
And the second, um,
Nina, can you take the vote,
please.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? Yes, I'd
like to explain my vote.
Representative Santa Cortez,
yes.
Represent a small
Representative
Corolla
Yes.
Viana.
Yes, and I'd like to in my vote.
J McQueen.
Yes.
So you have a do pass, um, it
was at Murphy to explain this
briefly.
Uh, yes, very quickly, Mr.
Chairman. Um, first off, I fully
endorse the idea of carbon
capture, something one of the
many tools that we need to use
um to address climate change.
Um, what I, I will also say in
full disclosure, I'm a graduate
of New Mexico Tech, and I think
everything they do, they do
pretty well. So there that is.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Observed Seanna to explain her
vote briefly. Um, I, I do agree
it's just a study and hopefully
we find out one way or the other
whether it really works and how.
OK, uh, thank you, everyone, uh,
