Representative uh Romero.
Representative Thompson, I'm
here. Madam Vice Chair, here,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, we
have a quorum.
OK. Um, we, um.
Did not get a official referral
and then it was brought to our
attention that, um.
We had this bill and so we're um
meeting um for Senate Bill 18.
And um.
Senator Brandt, if you'd like to
go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I really
appreciate uh you getting this
heard for me and uh
representatives, it's always
good to be in the house.
Uh, we haven't run into each
other much this year, some bills
together.
So anyway, Senate Bill 18 is
dealing with the crime of
swatting. Um, if you don't know
what swatting is, it's, it's
actually fairly simple. It's,
uh, you know, calling in a false
report to 911 or directly to the
police station to try to get a
response really by the SWAT
team, which is why it's called
swatting.
That's very dangerous. It's
happening more and more, and we
don't have a law in our state
that covers it. So, um, you can
get
Charged with a false report, but
that's a misdemeanor. Uh, this
does make it a felony. Um, we've
had a lot of actually citizens
been shot and killed over this.
Um, and we've actually had law
enforcement shot and killed
because what, what you do is you
call up and I heard gunshots at
this address.
But when the police respond to
an active shooter situation,
they come in.
You know, with their SWAT team
and they kick open the door.
Nothing's actually happening at
that address, and if the
homeowner's armed, then.
They can be shot or being more
and more often, especially to to
become quite.
A favorite thing for people to
do if they don't like the
politician.
And that's, that's all the build
up.
I stand, well, I'm gonna sit for
questions.
OK, we'll go to the audience.
Uh, do we have anyone in the
audience too.
OK, is there anyone
Is there anyone in support?
No one person?
In support. Good morning, uh,
Madam Chair and committee
members, Adrian Gomez from the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce here to support Senate
Bill 18. Nothing is more
terrifying to a student than to
be threatened with violence,
especially our youngest and most
vulnerable.
Swatting is a form of violence
and intimidation that can leave
a lasting
Emotional scar. For those that
commit such crimes, a slap on
the wrist.
Misdemeanor is not nearly enough
of a consequence for
perpetrating violence. SB 18
would bring meaningful
consequence by making it, making
swatting a felony. It's what we
should do for our children.
As you can see, this is a big
problem and a growing problem.
SB 18 is an important tool that
can help. We urge your support
for a Senate Bill 18. Please
vote yes.
Thank you.
Um
Anyone else? Yeah, OK. Is there
anyone in opposition on Zoom.
I'd just like to mention I
should have before, but um we
need to be um out of this um
committee room before 10 so that
the next committee can come in.
So if we can keep it to 5
minutes each.
All right,
um, from.
OK, um, I have some questions.
Um, the language in um the
existing section, um, it was
clear that a person was making a
false report, had to know that
the report was false and you
changed the language so that it
doesn't require the person
making the report at the time,
um, to know that it was false.
Can you explain why that was
changed,
um, are you on the committee
sub?
I have it.
Sorry.
Madam Chair, I'm not on page one
line 2, it says intentionally.
But I don't know if that's
knowingly.
No
Oh
Yes, uh, she threw me off with
that's got a little mixed up on
this one I'm sorry about that
madamage on page page 2.
This just to clear up any
confusion, this bill started out
with the shooting threat and the
shooting threat portion, uh, Joe
Garrett ran that, so that was
already done and through, which
is why we subbed this to just
focus on the swatting.
Um, and so that is why it's
probably there's a little
confusion, it, it did go through
the fund of Senate Judiciary
where um it was amended a little
bit and then that's where the,
on the top of page 2, line 1, it
is unlawful for a person to
knowingly make a
to be a felony.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, senator,
the, the just a false report by
itself remains a misdemeanor.
Um, uh, in page one right at the
end.
So if you're just doing a false
report, so that would, that
would be, you know,
Uh, you know, someone just uh.
And make any kind of report. The
swatting itself is dealing with
the raised condition of your
calling 911 and you're eliciting
a response by the police for
something that you know, which
creates that very dangerous
situation. So a false report
would be, you know, um, you see
a car accident and you
Falsity report
I mean, that's probably a bad
example. I'm trying to think
about getting into relationships
cause that's probably some.
It's, it doesn't get prosecuted
very often. I hope that was
clear as mud.
My concern is that someone.
Um. Might be caught up in this,
you know, that is not
Sure that they're um making a
false report.
And being um
prosecuted on this, especially a
young person, um, to make it so
that it becomes a 4th degree
felony.
Um, um.
Um
Just pranking.
Um, are there any other?
Good Lord
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. So I think I
understanding if somebody just
calls and they make a false
report about something that's
still the misdemeanor. Like even
if something I see a dog, it's
all support, but have you seen
uh Meam Chair and Senator, have
you seen some of the swatting
things are happening. It's
horrific. Have you seen it it's,
if you are on X, there have been
quite a few people that are
swatted and it is frightening
because it's somebody that is
calling in with the intention,
and this is what they're usually
saying and
For you, they're often using in
Google uh Google burning burner
number. They're saying, oh my
God, I'm in the house, this
person just shot the other
person. They killed the dog.
They're shooting guns in the
air. They're going to, they say
they want to shoot cops. They're
saying things like that. There
was a huge difference between
making a report and making these
level of reports because what
they're trying to do is have
this unfortunately have the law
enforcement came in to kill the
person.
That's the intent to swatting.
It's not just, oh, I, I heard
gunshot of the house. It's, this
is what's happening. I saw it
with my own eyes. They have
killed everybody in the
household and they're going to
kill cops when they come to the
door.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry you saying Mr. Speaker
now, Madam Chair and senator. So
there was a huge difference
between those two things, and
that's why I agree with this
cause honestly, I'm scared to
death of being swatted because
if somebody says I'm do, I just
shot everybody in the house. I
shot the dog. I'm shooting the
neighbors. They're gonna come in
hot and I actually talked to
state police about it. They said
that's our job. Our job is to
come in hot thinking that
somebody has killed people and
they want to shoot law
enforcement, and they take it
very seriously. Guns are drawn.
pointed at your face.
And it's a much more serious.
So thank you. Uh, I think I did
I make my point on that,
um, you've got it exactly
correct. It's a misdemeanor. If
it rises to this point where
they're trying to get a law
enforcement response is why it's
nickname was from years ago. I
can't remember the exact case,
but there was.
4 or 5 years ago when there was
a big national cave and shot a
woman, um, and killed her.
Who had a gun that actually
happened in Farmington, um, a
couple of years ago with this
exact same scenario where
someone called in, so there was,
you know, a domestic violence
situation, which there wasn't
life for.
Sleep in the bed. It was 3
o'clock in the morning. The
police come busting in the door.
He's got, you know, he grabs
his, um, that's what we're
trying to,
Madam Chair, sorry, madam, and
yeah, there's um I actually my
name is Catherine Representative
Cullen, so, um, there's also you
would you say that again? Cullen
yes.
There's actually YouTubers that
when they're doing live streams
as well, they'll get uh swatted.
So that has been um um.
YouTubers and uh streamers.
And Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
and Senator Representative.
The swatting is above and
beyond. It is not because a lot
of times when I'm seen because
it's been happening every day,
if you go on X, it is happening
every day to people have any
notoriety.
And politicians were all
vulnerable to this too, as you
know, it's not just their
calling and saying there's a DV.
They're calling in and saying,
oh my God, this guy is beating
the Halliburry. He's got a gun.
He's gonna kill her. It's far
beyond because what they want is
law enforcement to come in with
their firearms drawn and
somebody end up dead. That's the
end game of swatting. The end
game of swatting it's not just
the fear, it's the end game that
they hope that that person will
end up dead. They'll go to the
door at 3 a.m. because it's
often at 3 o'clock in the
morning.
Madam Chair and senator at 3
o'clock in the morning,
somebody's banging on your door,
kicking the door open. You have
no idea as a person, if you have
a firearm to protect yourself
and you pull that, there's a
good chance that you may be
killed. There's a good chance
anybody could be killed even
without a firearm, depending on
how they react to the situation.
And it goes the same with law
enforcement, they're putting
themselves in a horrible
situation, and that makes it
vulnerable for our law
enforcement as well to walk in a
household who someone thinks
this is an intruder, they also
have the gun drawn and not turns
into a very
So Madam Chair and Senator, I
appreciate you bringing this
forward because this should
definitely be a law, and if
you're calling in and saying
such egregious things to someone
in the hope of someone ended up
dead that should call for a
felony. Thank you.
You, um, Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator and thank you
Representative. I just have a
couple of questions and, um, and
I'm not a lawyer, so I just need
a little bit of clarification.
Um,
Can you explain why, um, the
line 21 was removed on the
committee sub.
I think the committee felt like
it was redundant.
Because
In the line preceding it, it
has.
person intentionally, then you
say the report, you know,
repeating the same thing.
Intentionally and knowingly.
I'm not a lawyer either, as you
know, and I never played one on
TV.
Thank you, Senator, um, I always
wanted to play a lawyer.
I have a lot of movies memorized
as a lawyer, but I can never do
it. Um, so I, I, the only thing
that, so.
The, the issue around knowing,
um.
How, how did you all come to
the, the language that you all
have now because from it, it
seems rather broad based on what
you're trying to tackle.
Specifically, so I'm just
curious why you didn't be why
you weren't more narrow than um
because this, this looks rather
broad and so, um, for example.
On the knowing
Can you share a little bit about
that.
Peace, I know that there's um,
on section B, it says it is
unlawful for a person to
knowingly.
Um
That doesn't
It doesn't read clear to me, and
so can you share a little bit
more about that?
Um
Madam Chair, representative.
Uh, I'm, I'm, I'm guess I'm, I'm
a little bit confused, so.
In the in section A, it's more
cleanup language. That's already
a misdemeanor. We're leaving it
as a misdemeanor.
In Section B, we're dealing with
the swatting.
Um, so it's unlawful for a
person to knowingly make a false
or misleading report.
The public safety agency, so
that would be your 911 or
directly calling the police
department or directly calling,
you know, no, I don't, I don't
even have the number for my
direct police department. I
would call 911.
I'm in the rural communities.
That's all they have is the
number for their, so that's why
that's in there that way, um, an
ongoing emergency or threat of
violence with the intent to
cause an immediate response. So
that's where you get into the
SWAT.
Response, right? Or the police
response. It's, it's called
swatting because they try to
make it a big enough issue to
get the SWAT team.
In the rural communities, they
don't have a SWAT team. They
only have the sheriff's
department or they only have the
state police.
Um, but to get that response.
Um, and a person who violates
the provisions of this section
is guilty of a 4th degree
felony.
So the difference is,
In a in a false report.
You may be going into the police
department to report something.
Or maybe you're, you know,
they've come to you and said we,
we think you're an eyewitness in
this situation, and they report
falsely what what happened.
If they have enough evidence to
charge, they can charge that
person with a misdemeanor. That
one's actually really hard to
get charged with.
Because you have to really be
able to prove that the person
knew that there was no doubt in
their mind that what they're
telling you wasn't true.
So with this one it's, it's.
That portion's the same thing
that knowingly is, is a high
threshold. It's, it's hard to me
is what I'm told. Again, not an
attorney, um, there might be one
in the room, I don't know. Um,
but that's a high threshold to.
If the
purpose
Is that I'm trying to get a law
enforcement response. Again, I'm
calling in a domestic violence
that isn't happening. I'm
calling in my neighbor because,
you know, they built the fence
too high and I, I, are we
getting in fights all the time,
so I don't like them. And I'm
calling in saying I heard
gunshots in their home.
Why are you saying that? Because
you're trying to get law
enforcement to kick the door in.
Um, you know, another way you
can look at this is, and it's
been used for this is, you know,
you, you've heard of uh suicide
by cop. This is assassination by
cop.
I'm trying to kill someone or
hurt someone.
By having the police do it
instead of me.
Um, that's your intention, so
they've got to be able to prove
first that you knew.
And then they've got to be able
to prove that your intention was
to get a police then it becomes
a felony. So that's where it
rises to that higher degree,
whereas with a false report, it
can just be you're going in to
report something that you saw,
um, but it's not an active
situation that you're trying to
get a response to.
I hope that explains the
difference a little bit better.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Senator. Thank you.
Thank you.
So, um, some of our analysis
talk about.
Schools and there's a um
included is the LESC, um,
analysis.
Was there
Something about schools in a
previous version, yeah, the
original bill again started out
with the shooting threat.
Which has always been directed
more to schools, so that the,
the bill that Joy Garrett
brought was, was that first
section of my of my bill that
I've run for 5 or 6 years now.
Um, we wanted to, she wanted to
run that separate, didn't have
any problem with that. That's
already law now. So when the sub
came in, you don't want to put
that in because the last thing
that's signed by the governor is
what actually becomes law.
And so, you know, to make sure
it didn't.
There was no conflicts between
that and this. I didn't know
exactly what had been amended.
We didn't, we.
Mitty subed this to just cover
swatting. That's where there's
some confusion in the analysis
that keeps in it. OK. And then
I, I do have some concerns about
it, um.
Perhaps sweeping up folks who
just were.
We're being pains in the neck as
opposed to trying to get
someone. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Senator. Quick
question about
Is this illegal federally?
And the feds go after
This federally, cause I looked
and there was a bill in 2015
from
Now minority whip Catherine
Clark.
To do something like this, and I
just didn't know if it passed or
not. So, Madam Chair and Senator
Representative, do we know if
this can be charged?
Federally.
Madam Chair, representative, um,
I'm not 100% sure if if that's.
illegal federally. You know, one
thing, you know, we want to do
is make sure that we don't
always have to rely on the
federal government to.
To charge things. They, their
docket's limited like ours.
a lot of times. Now this has
already been made law when I
first started carrying swatting
5 years ago, we would have been
the first state.
now 45 other states have adopted
it.
We're one of 5 states that don't
have this.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, that's good to know.
And I, I looked at California,
theirs is a felony in
California. It's a felony
everywhere.
addressed it.
That's good to know. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you, uh,
Representative and Senator, and
especially because currently
with the current events that
have happened, uh, there have
been people who've been swatted,
congress members, independent
counsel, Jack Smith, Michelle
Wu, the Democratic mayor of
Boston.
A lot of people have been
swatted and I think if we're, if
we're just joining 45 other
states that that that's a good
thing. I think that we want to
protect people and uh, so thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Yeah
Taking that. OK, I just wanted
to make you um comments too, um.
Senator, um.
And representative.
Um, I was just wondering um.
If there is no emergency
response and no actual harm with
um they still be.
Um, able to um
I don't believe so because
you're, I don't think your DA
would reach this.
Um, I, I believe that they would
false report.
Because you gotta prove that
intentionality.
And so if there was no response
ever made, how are you going to
prove the intention out the
intention was to do that.
I think because of the way they
said you just reported, um,
something knowingly.
So that could be.
You know, prosecuted, whether it
turned out to be harmful or not.
Um, my concern is that this is
still very broad and um you
know, there could be someone who
is in a domestic violence um
situation is trying to report
without it really being, you
know, going back to them.
Um, but to try and get help. And
then that person would be, you
know, intentionally giving a
false report about something to
just get help to them, um, if
it's human trafficking or
domestic violence, is that
something you've considered.
Um
Mount, uh, Senator, you know,
with
The attorneys in Senate
Judiciary, they really felt like
this was, was narrow enough to
keep any situation like that
from happening. My sister's a,
a.
You know, domestic violence, uh,
victim, um, and I've, I've been
one of the ones in the Senate to
really stand on anything.
That would affect people that
have been affected by domestic
violence, um.
So I wouldn't put anything in
law. I think what's one of the
reasons why we do pro pro
prosecutorial discretion. Sorry,
my mouth doesn't want to work
today.
Um, is to, to make sure that the
prosecutors, so I, I couldn't
see a single prosecutor charging
anyone in that situation. I just
don't know of anyone that would
do that.
I think at some point we have to
trust the justice system some.
Even though there's a lot of
times I don't.
with you
But I think at some points we
have to.
Oh, I don't think a judge would
allow it to go forward that way,
and I don't think a pro. Thank
you.
I'm still concerned, um.
That it is broad.
Um
And especially youth um make.
And, um, a mistake and um.
do this, that, you know, they
would be prosecuted.
I understand the concern, but
that is not what we've seen.
We actually, you know, we've
seen youth doing a lot of bad
things, you know, yesterday we
just had an 11 year old, a
13-year-old, and a 15 year old
picked up for killing someone.
In Albuquerque.
Um, so we've seen you through
some really bad things.
This has not been a pattern with
youth.
All across the country, this has
been adults using it as a
weapon, and honestly, the most
common has been.
You know, public officials.
That's been the most common. It
didn't start that way.
You know, the first situations
that we've seen in the one we,
we have evidence of in New
Mexico and Farmington wasn't a.
But that is where it's gone to.
And it's both sides. It's, it's
Democrats getting hit, it's
Republicans getting hit. You
know, we have one senator that's
had it happen to them. Um,
Senator, um, then why didn't
you?
Well, Madam chair, I think
mainly because I don't believe
we should.
Uh, you know, if, if it's a, if
it's something we don't want
happening to us, I don't think
we want it happening to the
public either.
does not only politicians,
that's just
The most common that we have
seen.
But we haven't seen youth doing
this.
We've seen you doing a lot of
other things. They're mostly
calling in the shooting threats
and the bomb threats to the
schools to get out of school for
the day.
OK. Or get out of the final that
they have, they're not ready
for.
And that would just be a
misdemeanor still.
Hey girl.
Representative Block.
Representative Lord, yes.
Representative Ramiro.
Representative Thompson. I'm
sorry.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Vice
Chair.
Uh yes.
Madam Chair, no.
