Representative it's here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Lara.
Representative Matthews here
Representative Zamora here
Representative also here
Representative here.
Four of.
That federal this last.
This is the first time.
We're here to.
thank you thank you.
Share thousand and thank the
members of the committee and and
I hope that we again I think we
begin our Senate Bill.
Our ending with the Senate bill
three three seven and I'd like
to say those.
Outcomes of the water task force
that was a symbol of during the
interim and we had all these
agencies can really aren't.
And how we're going to preserve
water hit the state and do it
fairly and equitably for
agriculture for a second store
for all all of our water systems
state
with the coming climate change
issues and issues and however
you get a strict than water
systems that's really kind of
what the world has force was
about a half the state engineer
come in present the you know
that one task force
recommendations and there and I
just want to point to that we
are online so people can hear us
this thing is just flashing off
and on I said go ahead
everybody's got a huge agenda
and running built around like
crazy in this point and I just
heard from Gail Armstrong she's
running a little late but she'll
be here so just wanted everybody
to down that before we started
so I want to say the we had a
some kind of the water summit in
a lot of people are invited.
Representative Zamora was there
along with the representative
Armstrong and I of the people
who were there were included
besides three members of this
committee included and I'm sure
I don't have everybody's name
because we just trying to do
this from memory as
Representative nine or
Representative small Senator
Wirth Senator Stewart Senator
Diamond Senator Woods senator
Thomas I know they're at least
ten of us there but the
important part of the meeting I
thought they were probably one
third legislators but two thirds
the scientists and they were
coming came together and we were
listening to all the
recommendations that these
agencies have worked on together
over the interim should trying
to come up with a plan that made
sense for the state and this was
the first recommendation that
the the water security planning
Senate bill three three seven
as we're hearing today.
And these for the
recommendations twenty two
recommendations a hundred and
twenty action items I said boy I
don't know if we can get that
done but this is a pretty good
start this is a pretty stark and
with that I want to introduce
you to expert witnesses today we
have had a racially white the W.
director of the I different
states Interstate Stream
Commission of course rob
Peter since the is the Prashant
Peterson who is the head of the
Act intersects Commission so
with that we'll go ahead and
present this set.
And have a conversation and
thank you Representative and
thank you chair and committee
members again my name is Hannah
rise the what and the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission
deputy director I want to
congratulate you on your last
meeting and we issue the mental
and physical fortitude to get to
this last week and thank you for
your service for New Mexico we
really see this bill as a
critical path forward for
communities across New Mexico
and for the state as a whole in
confronting the challenges of
increasing our education
associated with climate change
you should have just received we
handed out just a little one
pager summarizing the work that
we did with the New Mexico
bureau of geology and mineral
resources in support of the
fifty year water plan and you
should also receive earlier in
the session full full report if
you really wanted to do it
and so as you know we're we're
facing some significant
challenges I think wildfires we
experienced last year were a
real wake up call for us to New
Mexico in terms of increasing
education and the implications
of that for our water systems
and water supplies across the
state so as Representative
Herrera said this bill largely
came out of some recommendations
from the water policy
infrastructure task force is
also recommended by the fifty
year water plan and it is a
revamp of our regional water
planning statutes that original
statute that was enacted in
nineteen eighty seven has
largely met its purpose and so
we need something new we need to
take a new hard look at the
region's themselves and how
they're delineated and how we're
supporting communities across
the state to prepare for the
challenges ahead
so they said really this bill
essentially transforms regional
water planning for New Mexico in
a way that supports and empowers
local communities to craft
viable and implementable
solutions of the planning
process that's proposed in.
The bill will involved robust
public engagement every step of
the way including in the
rulemaking and guidelines that
are called for in the bill it is
intended to build on and
incorporate existing planning
efforts so not be redundant
which offers that are already
happening in municipalities in
your nation districts across the
state really bring that planning
to the table to craft solutions
that that that really work of
course this would be background
in state water law also doesn't
have any implications for
existing water rights or our
system of prior appropriation
out of course stand
it also provides an opportunity
to really support planning
through scientific integrity so
making sure that communities
have the data science and models
they need the most best
available data to do planning in
their regions
and what's also exciting
anything you'll be glad to hear
about is that what's called for
in the bill is really looking at
how do we craft plans that are
then implemented so they're not
something that sit on the shelf
but there's actually a way that
that can inform decision making
around funding for water
infrastructure projects and that
there be accountability and
reporting back to decision
makers in terms of outcomes
coming from the planning process
and so largely we see this as a
as a critical path forward for
New Mexico something we need to
work together to craft solutions
and of course communities no
better than anyone with the
challenges are that the station
so bringing those folks to the
table with the right resources
to plan seems like a critical
way for us to get out ahead of
these challenges instead of wait
until it's too late and then
Landen lengthy and and prolonged
conflict and I think with that
all see if Ralph wants to add
anything and then we're we'd
love to answer questions and
discussion with you all thank
you
chair and members of the
committee I just have two things
that I wanted to point out to
you inability committed a great
job of framing what the what
it's about.
but that we in the regional
water planning process that
we've gone through since
nineteen eighty seven we've
learned a lot from that in the
implementation of him to talk
about I think it's a critical
piece because a lot of times we
have plans and then they didn't
carry through to projects and
implementation and and with the
way this bill is framed we we we
seem to be able to provide the
authorization to tap
implementation within individual
reaches of the fire and and the
and the.
The building because pass the
projects on the ground support
local communities in doing that
the other thing that we heard
was that that the issues of
public welfare and I think
you've talked about public well
for probably of the state in New
Mexico and other things in this
committee in different times
there's a provision in this bill
that that that allows the
regions that are newly developed
to put forward issues are of of
public concern public welfare
concern for their region that
then can be transmitted to the
legislature and the state
engineers office so when the
state engineers office does
transfer of cations they have
something more to look at in in
that specific aspect of the
Water Rights transfers and then
in addition
the there's a requirement in
here for these local bodies to
look at prioritization of
projects and we've heard from
the water trust board through
the capital of process and
someone that in also the
meetings that we've had with the
water task force this idea of
really not just having a list of
everything that everybody wants
but having that was with
priorities tied to it could be
very helpful and so this
provision in the statute that of
that has that requirement for
those regions and then that
information is transmitted to
the legislature to the inner
more.
ET the legislative finance
committee and then two other
state agencies that provide
funding like the what some might
the state agency like the water
transport to NMFA work in the
Energy Matt natural resources of
the ISC for acequia projects and
with that also information
sometimes I'll just comment is
just of to provide for you all
that this bill was drafted in
collaboration with the number of
folks including water task force
members some folks from the
middle Rio Grande of water
advocates and then it was
amended to exchange with our
tribal communities in order to
more efficiently highlight and
all out tribal consultation as
an important component of this
process and so with that.
Yeah stand for questions.
There will.
The ex economic production.
They get the standard roof we
will go to the audience.
A
very brief call in support of
the concept before we go to the
pandemic.
We'll start with the slide the
young lady that I.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Ali
Parker and high in the water
associate with conservation
voters New Mexico we stand in
support of us three three seven
such a program will have the
benefits not only for drought
but also for understanding
community water systems and
resources so we urge the
committee question as.
Thank you so much.
Okay good morning Mr chair
members of the committee was co
chair of after we stand for this
legislation of the southwest is
facing a call funding your route
robust of regional water
planning is the single most
effective tool available for a
lot.
We have to elevate regional plan
increasing water scarcity the
remote equity to build capacity
to government
the planning process would be
community driven which we.
Science based focus on
resilience and sustainability
and we stand and support thank
you for that.
The young lady on the good
morning members of the media
thank you for hearing test at
this point of the Legislature
members sure if you're over here
from us that thank you for
taking a moment to intelligence
on the side of the very at this
legislation and other content
purchaser of this for you at
this legislation is the inspired
is inspired by the water check
task force consensus
recommendations which were
developed in the process of
diverse water stakeholders from
across the state EDF is
especially interested in
partnering with the stakeholders
to develop guidelines that
supports approved and senator
Gramm wanted management the
still strong support of this
bill.
Thank you for that of the lady.
Senator.
Good morning my name is Eileen
requests for research at.
Has
more than thirty seven this is
really important for staff to
ensuring that PED's have a state
of their water features.
It's just a great market we
critical to the server was just
that clarifies Department
cultural economic values can all
be for a consensus basis but we
really want to think by you for
all the work they've done so far
including our communities.
Thanks thank you.
The gentleman here.
Mr chairman share
thanks for the opportunity to.
Of COVID.
My name is Bob Wesley as
president of the Rio Grande
water averages were stronger
than this of the reason of the
bill
of one hundred dollars
everybody's spoken but for.
Thank you.
Other and so.
The.
More news chairman members of
the committee madam chair
I am the rest of this is black
and jobs and stand.
Of this piece of legislation and
we truly appreciate the fact
that language is included and
and.
I just to be able to be part of
any regional planning addresses
drought climate change of course
recognize this to work an
average of ties to the land and
water and natural resources and
cultural sites across the state
so those reasons Mr chairman and
madam chair of we urge the
committee to fast for
it reduces those are.
Secretary you Mr chairman
members of a thank the sponsors
both the Senators thanks to the
for this go forward also want to
congratulate her on.
Signing of SB one hundred.
Of the they're complementary.
This legislation with.
The system regional though and
of the staff.
water yes foreclosures or task
force and we we wanted to focus
on a number of building blocks
to at the hands of the agenda of
with the legislature.
Office to to build a better of
water.
Of system of a group of the
legislative bills and then the
first filter the water of
community up to build the of
water workforce the cross our
state to help all of our rural
communities to better.
Planning process is a key piece
of that to build a whole mix
together as teacher of the
relative to getting properties
illustrated from the regional
perspectives so they can form
the Legisla- going forward so
it's it's putting all these
pieces together that vision of
the task force and our agency as
well as and we need that.
And Energy mineral natural
resources first time that we
worked so closely together as
agencies for advancing the water
and energy agenda they're kind
of their link so so that that's
our effort this year you wanted
to continue building that going
forward with the legislature the
interim and and sessions thank
you for.
Secretary of before I go to the
committee I want to share my
thoughts as well very quickly in
our indigenous communities we
always say that water is life
what is sacred.
When I was younger with recent
travel with my parents anytime
we come upon a lake or stream or
river.
My parents would always make
offered to the water whatever's
wrong maybe
San Juan river the Rio Grande
and when we took a little trip
to the.
West coast they made an offer to
the oaks simply because others
standing water is.
And when I say that maybe our.
It was going to go into court
Paul and they offered it to the
water body is our culture it is
only right that if you takes
before you take something you
have to give something back in
return and what they did with
the court called in those with
this prayer thank you for
blessing us with the abundance
of water and we have to give the
corn calling back to the water
body so that we could continue
using so I am glad that of madam
chair is bringing this four year
part of these discussions are
for is your date for this
committee and I learned so much
for all members of this body I
think we have to we have to say.
This is probably one of the best
committees that I was on so
thank you for that with that
we'll go to the pandemic.
There are a few calls from our
all our listeners will start
with the.
And of course.
And your old.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is Sam
the currently and co chair of
New Mexico interfaith power and
light which is a faith based
group addressing climate change.
Robust water planning and water
shortage sherry negotiations and
implementation are past due.
We have seen what has happened
to lake Powell and lake we.
We appreciate that at the.
Our state Stream Commission and
the office of the state engineer
supporting this bill through the
and the efforts of the water
task force.
The policy group to bring for
these important recommendations
we stand in strong support of SB
three three seven and ask that
you vote for it.
Thank you Mr Carty Mexico go to
Representative.
Or will go that route for on
this.
Casey this shaky screen.
Representative good morning.
Vice chair Allison and members
of the committee thank you for
this opportunity COVID my name
is Ralph Franz resident of
Albuquerque I am a board member
of middle Rio Grande water
advocates I'm a thirty three
year resident of New Mexico.
And I do believe water is life I
want to echo the excellent
testimony.
the excellent introduction by
sponsor Representative Herrera
and the testimony of deputy
director and director of the
Interstate Stream Commission I
fully supports are I urge this
committee to up vote do pass to
unanimously vote to pass and
send a strong message to speaker
Martinez that this bill needs to
be scheduled on house calendar
as soon as possible thank you
very much.
We'll go to and Rogers.
Everyone I am here not provide
usual capacity are assisting Mr
chair now as the attorney for
the bara I am here because in
the nineteen eighties I was one
of the team.
What are yours engineers
economists and planners.
Who helped New Mexico adopt
regional water planning.
Can I just and fully in support
of this bill because this bill
comes closer to realizing the
potential and the intent of what
we did in nineteen in the seven
then anything else this
legislature could do.
And I strongly urge you to.
Our.
Yes this bill I do pass because
without this bill all you get it
ended substitute form all you
get our wish lists.
And not real discussion and not
real collaboration so I strongly
with the soldiers Mexico go to
process Snyder.
Morning
good morning my name is Tricia
Snyder and the senior water
policy analyst for New Mexico
wild for all the reasons already
outlined we stand in strong
support of this bill we believe
that at regional water planning
is a critical component of
ensuring that communities have
the resources needed to build
resilience for the challenges
ahead and we're due to ensure to
pass thank you for.
Thank you for that.
Mexico was first of three
percent of.
The staff is of the thank you Mr
chair and thank you for Senators
All the commentators I just have
a couple quick questions of
leader of bill that is being
sponsored by Senator to work.
Of.
Point.
A number of people to all kinds
of different
Water districts overlapping
districts and for planning
purposes is this bill in any way
related to that bill.
Are you type one.
Changes.
The number.
Fifty eight all that money on
that plan okay seven.
Mr chair Representative Matthews
they're they're not directly
related but I do think that that
there is a tie the for senator
Wirth and and what he's seeking
to do with the Senator fifty
eight a which I believe is the
one that that you're referring
to is provided for consistent
long term representation on the
Interstate Stream Commission
itself about wanted members to
consider various types of
requests proposals policy issues
that come before the Interstate
Stream Commission now in that
regard if this bill is
successful the the new regional
planning entities that are
developed through the whole
process would essentially
prepare plans and reports that
would go to the Interstate
Stream Commission that group for
their approval and and
acceptance and before these are
transmitted to the legislature I
think that would be the process.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
That is it just brought the SB
fifty eight is in the process of
passing not.
But but but my I guess my
question was that had such a
detailed would require
additional requirements for
different districts and so forth
it was sort of a you know.
And and I'm just is.
Is that if that passes.
Is.
Does that work with what you all
are doing it sounds like it does
for the I'm just trying to
understand how this Courtney so
Madam chair representative
Matthew say I would have to
agree with you that there are
multiple layers
yes in that bill that that will
make it you know at least a
number of more steps of required
before.
We T. can be made to the
Interstate Stream Commission I I
still believe in looking at that
they'll that it's possible to do
that and that there is a number
of really good things in the
bill that relate actually almost
directly to some of these
planning efforts and other
responsibilities of the I. S. C.
and and most specifically I just
want to mention a few the the
tying in with the tribal what
little representation that they
all would add a specifically a
tribal member and the problem
number right and given the
implementation activities that
the this season falls in we we
support the state cost share for
implementation of the water
results and the biggest ones
we're working on now are they
not help water supply pipeline
project with the Navajo Nation
and hickory Apache nation and
then the Pojoaque valley
construction project and these
are what up two point five
billion dollars worth of
projects that we're working on
they take decades of consistent
effort so you know we make these
ties between those types of
projects the appointees and then
this planning process that
actually helps to prioritize and
implement additional projects.
Thank you Mr chair and of thank
you very much for that that
helps me understand a little bit
better how the school system
operates together and my next
question is
the we're in just a few days
before we.
great
and I'm wondering this bill has
we're looking at today is made
to the scent.
And it doesn't have another
committee in the house or this
is an and
I told the speaker that this
would be a priority bill that we
need to get this past New Mexico
this committee.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
In at the other end of the table
and.
With the new.
Percent of our thank you Mr
chairman my apologies for being
late
You know it's a little crazy
here in.
I have several bills madam chair
that I told
not.
Anyway.
To help whoever.
I'm just giving you.
Of the.
I told Senator serve office FY
need inspection bills that were
enacted Mr chairman excuse me I
would offset some.
Anyway with that being said I
was curious if I I know what is
the date of implementation on
this.
Well I see it right here June
sixteenth twenty twenty three.
Does the state engineer have the
money in the budget because I'm
seeing that it's going to cost a
million dollars they would need
at fifteen FTEs.
Our men and Mr chair and
representative we picked really
hard to fill that budget
I I worked really hard with that
appropriations to help them get
that they needed to do both SP
one and SP three three seven I
don't think we got everything we
wanted but I think
I could refer to the state
engineer.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
The representative or so we've
got a good there's a million
dollars.
Planning budget the the it was a
million to start in about a five
thousand I think it's a million
the final of what they're seeing
so that's that's not to kind of
get the wheels moving this
coming session and then we
should be able to get the
rulemaking identified and also
take a look at we really like to
staff each of the regions power
we we structure them I think
sixteen reaches way too much in
terms of I appreciate all of the
needs for the state but we will
go through making to take a look
at a better consolidated regions
and get that more collaborative
and more of a basin wide kind of
approach and then that way you
were hoping that we can actually
provide direct staff really I
just need to use one of those
regions to really make this a
very successful process okay
thank you Mr vice chair and
madam chair and so one of my
other questions is how does
this.
Regionalization coincide with
your regionalization of your
other bill madam chair.
Will be will the conflict if
Magaly that decides to region
wise with Sapporo and then maybe
they're different regions on the
big state match.
Mr Chairman representative
Representative
My my regionalization bill is
really about smaller local local
water systems Regionales I mean
I they probably wouldn't go
beyond that they they could
because they cross over new
districts maybe but I'll let the
state engineer answer that but I
think we're going from like
sixteen money district back down
to hopefully line which will
make it more manageable and I
think these these smaller region
my regionalization is really
about
like I said in the in the
village of Dixon there's
important usual domestic water
systems for five hundred
households so I'm talking about
by bringing at the Q. we L.
retail maybe together things
like that but all at the state
engineer because that's a bigger
question.
Your the.
Mr chair these are very
complementary in my view we get
that region all of this of bills
for the region's formed and
working together no actually
health.
The system regionalization more
more focused because everybody
will be collaborating.
The region and the concern of
the of the for expressed I agree
Lujan bill if you were gonna be
required to do the stuff K. five
but the idea that that use
members of this regional
planning process are working
together will help them form
look at regionalization as the
more efficient in the way they
manage or systems of the able to
apply for funding and stuff so
we see this very complimentary
okay thank you Mr chairman and
and Representative that's I was
just curious about that because
I in order regional lies in a
lot so
one on page three line to it I
think he is as well at the
bottom there
It says consider environmental
laws economic values and the
needs of future generations of
New Mexico my up my.
Defense mechanism Mr Chairman
goes up because I wonder about
when we're talking about
nonsense
Non economic values and the
needs of future generation New
Mexico's I worry about the Saint
Augustine Water planes issue
because you know it's it's non
economic there's not a lot of
people and everyone wants that
water for those for this is the
rural urban divide going on here
and so I I would I worry a
little bit Mr chairman that
rural New Mexico will be
affected negatively.
and can you.
Call my worry for.
I'm sure that if you to the
staff.
Mr chair and representative
Armstrong thank you for your
participation in the water task
force as well I think the intent
of that language is to support
each region of those communities
in determining what they value
most do not be entirely driven
by economics but to to think
about what the what's important
and that could be sustaining
agricultural communities as a
priority for that region and so
wanting to build in recognizing
that there are different value
sits across the state and that
those need to be part of the
conversation and in determining
what the priorities are for for
how we forward I think that's
the intent and not language
thank you Mr chairman and and
and then because I do then see
on page four six provide for an
inequitable the needs of rural
and at risk communities so I
appreciate that language in
there as well.
And
And then on page seven hundred
says nothing in this section
shall be construed as
permitting.
Or condemnation of water rights
or for the determining a bridge
or affecting in any way the
Water Rights Indian nations
tribes or pueblos.
I appreciate that language in
there but I I also.
For a doctor.
Should I worry about combination
of water rights anywhere else
other than not in those areas.
Mr chair and representative
Armstrong I'm no in fact that
language is actually the only
piece of the original statute
that's left in this total revamp
of the statute I think you'll
see if earlier in the process it
says that in the building I'm
not sure it's exactly it's so
the the this process must be
grounded in state water law and
so that that's that's protecting
all existing water rights.
Share it can I absolutely that
just a little bit of context for
this but this that that section
that you just referenced
refer to Representative actually
goes back to the Seoul based.
or originally and when the state
of Texas was looking at of the
you know basically putting wells
and just across the line the
water there and attention coming
into New Mexico to do the same I
am not not sure this was late
nineteen nineties that that came
into place and so this this
these past parts of the statute
these authorizations to
appropriate groundwater perches
water rights and the the section
all payments at that time and
we're just we're not proposing
to change those you think that
provide value thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you all
for your answer so I appreciate.
Thank you for that the the the
representative of all thank you
Mr chair shared presenters.
So.
Madam chair that meeting was
sold.
informative we learned a lot.
What can we just leave it at
that and have legislators are in
people learning like we did now
we make commission and somebody
else is going to be at the
meetings that we could have been
that thank you for asking that
question because I was I was
going to say what I want to do
certainly with this committee
in probably any other members
who would like to come I want to
start off our interim committee
with a recap of that are needing
to say okay here's what we said
in this meeting you know this
was what we plan what have we
accomplished what's left to do
how do we and then get the input
from scientists again on you
know how we go about you know.
overseeing and and and helping
that process along so I would
love to start after interim
committee with kind of that
session once more saying was
interested who had legislation
about water or is interested
just certainly protect the
certainly get the agricultural
community involved get are sixty
eight community involved and
keep going from here because
this topic is not going to end
you know it the this is what
will protect our state for the
future and we have to figure out
how we're going to do that in a
in a collective action so thank
you for asking that question
that was hi there my plan I was
going to come in and then said
as we wrap up the meeting and I
would like.
Because it was such an important
message.
And Mister chair I believe the
the state engineer would have
has a comment about this I don't
think he's gonna let us in on
the V..
of those of us
one of the things we learned
through going through this
process having legislative
advisors recreation gauge in the
planning process is really
really important and very
helpful and the and then some of
you participated on that process
and I think it was in line both
sides.
Me just say it too Mr chair that
this is this is also my anchor
Committee.
Within your own work and then
you ask great questions and and
and and really gives us an
opportunity into things a little
paper but we hope to implement
regional funding efforts along
the same lines so this worked
our to our task force members of
creatures continue to be
ambassadors for their regions so
I'll be very engaged in the
original funding process so
we're gonna build on this work
and take it forward that will
include gauging the legislators
at all the results and just
wanted which is Representative
Lara that remains we're we're
we're we're gonna need to do
that yes we have a the Los
crucis area and the lower Rio
Grande because of the settlement
issues and that will be probably
one of the areas we're gonna
start off right away in the long
line the age the legislators not
process as well so that's sort
of that's the approach that I
think is the only way to make
this successful thank you Mr
chairman thank you for that and
Mr chairman and madam chair I
just I just don't want that to
take away from our education and
and trying to do better and
finding you know fine tune
everything and.
But I'm sure the state engineers
and the Interstate Stream
Commission everybody will to
create job with that and that
that's all my comments and
questions thank you madam chair
Mister so I don't see any other
answer questions is that we
committee.
Access all segments.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative yes.
Representative L..
Representative yes.
The managers yes Representative
Zamora yes.
Representative Representative
Allison yes Representative yes.
Thank you.
For this session I I you know.
This committee to and I I really
was kind of worried lacking in
here and this is an important
committee big responsibility and
we now was second to we are
going to be able to do the work
and I'm so grateful to the
members of this committee and
that you should all know that
can be Ezzell is over and and
Senate to conservation
representing us on the the water
transport project bill that's
why she had to leave which shows
you she caught it before I did
on the floor and we have a
conflict which it would would
you like me to take care and I
said okay that's.
This committee works it's pretty
admirable and.
And I hope to of course with all
of you in the interim get your
our collective ideas and I'm I'm
gonna go talk to service about
that meeting specter that wasn't
really important bill on project
so so we'll take you if we don't
have that that's a huge deal so
I guess I'm going to adjourn for
