The girl to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
More happy birthday thank you
Representative Khan is here
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative bunga.
Yes Representative bunga is here
Representative Cadena.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here
Representative Harry Garcia.
I hear happy Valentine's day to
all the leaders in the house.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Percent.
Representative Miguel Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
Representative non this.
Representative Lane
Representative Lane is here
Representative land there.
Representative Lente is here
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend is here.
Members roll call is closed we
have a quorum.
Members please rise for two days
in vacation offered to us by the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative dealer Cruz.
Thank you Mr speaker lease and
gentleman lows Bob our heads and
that each of us contemplate in
our own way the same Valentine's
day.
Our father was in heaven thank
you for allowing your son to pay
it forward for us so that by his
sacrifice we might live indebted
to our redeemer there are time
and work in the people's house
the marked and remembered as a
time when we came together use
our heads hands and especially
our hearts so that his will be
done.
Me we by his example also while
in this chamber as well as out
sure kindness respect charity
and in so doing exemplify his
Sacred Heart.
Further on the work of this
session soon to end is complete
let us walk in sunlight with
peace of mind and soul having
fulfilled our duty to family
community and to our beloved
state New Mexico.
So in the name of the father and
son a man.
With the generated million of
representative Gallegos please
lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
And with the gentleman from
grant Representative SS please
leisure and saluting New
Mexico's flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker good
afternoon good afternoon members
of Happy Birthday to our beloved
chief clerk
Mr speaker and we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
airing no objections so ordered.
Today's a very special birthday
in the house.
One of the gentleman from
Bernalillo might want to do
anything to.
A nice or commemorate the
birthday of our wonderful chief
clerk Lisa Ortiz McCutchen.
Speaker.
Jennifer live with the speaker
but only if all of our
colleagues doing me in singing
class million need those as loud
as you can.
On three.
As staff as soon as Monday.
Does good done.
Of those rural judges will need
the state laws gun gobbles soon
this is the median this could.
The money is.
Those
bills gun the statement do you
happy birthday then to put.
To be clear glitter.
The gentleman from Colfax more
Rio Arriba and San Miguel
Representative Roger Montoya Mr
speaker and members of the
One of the chairs of really
wonderful news on this day of
Valentine's day Leo this on
Wellington.
My love of my life of my husband
some of the release I just got
news was honored.
All across Latino television as
the name yes you on the audio
for twenty twenty two.
Is the ability of moving arts
Espanola fund award winning
after care program for thousands
of children it's fifteen years
old I.
Twenty nineteen I was given the
CNN hero award for the same
organization.
And I stated then and I hold it
now that it takes a team to do
dynamic work for I'm so proud of
my partner for finally having
his day of glory with and I see
on television and that's my
moment thank you for the
Valentine's graduates the song
please watch.
Thanks to the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Allison.
Members of the.
On your desk you know a small
piece of ribbon and that was
that is to commemorate the honor
of missing and murdered
indigenous women and their
relatives was sent across by
Senator Shannon Pinto this
morning who is sponsoring a bill
and we would like your support
on that thank you very much.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker on everybody's desk
you should have received a
little bag here it's of nineteen
thirty four on it I am
incredibly blessed to be able to
represent house district fifteen
everyday that I'm here and this
is a little piece of HD fifteen
for everybody it comes from Los
poblano sardonic and farm I know
I'm biased Mr speaker I think
that HB fifteen is one of the
most beautiful districts in the
state will serve on this is a
very big important part of that
they've been in existence since
nineteen thirty four when a
jungle memes original designs
and now they specialize in
lavender fields the product of
which drugs of which are in this
back so enjoy and thanks so
much.
Thank you generally.
We love most program us.
Hey the gentle lady from Santa
Fe thank you Mr speaker also
happy V. day
to those in the gallery for
those that know about this day
it commemorates its a global
activist movement to end
violence against women and girls
it was started in nineteen
ninety eight and so have you
give your views today for for
the women who have continued the
fights and and again thank you
to Representative Allison for
presenting the pen we have a we
have a bill today on our house
floor to be able to discuss how
we are going to continue to end
violence against women and girls
thank you madam Mr speaker and
thank you buddy.
Thank you generated.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Bernalillo and Sandoval.
Right now thank you Mr speaker
first of all happy Valentine's
day to everyone I do have some
good news our law enforcement
officer that was shot I talked
in this morning he's a good
spirits and recovering really
well and I would like to say a
prayer for the eleven people
that were stabbed last night in
Albuquerque and two were in
critical condition and I pray
that they heal up quickly thank
you.
Thank you generating.
Are there further announces the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative remember thank
you Mr speaker and members of
the house I wanted to talk about
maybe about our crime control
legislation what's going on when
we look at the state police
officer was shot last week he
was shot by Katie Katie of the.
L. ridge in he's a convicted
felon and was in possession of a
firearm.
He also was on court released
with an ankle monitor that a cut
off so that is two of the three
provisions I had in my
legislation that was tabled.
But I think that this is showing
us a big problem how do we deal
with repeat offenders well we
passed out house bill sixty
eight the other night.
In the brandishing of a firearm
the second conviction.
That legislation lowered it from
five years in jail to three
years in jail.
And that's not being tough on
crime and particularly are
repeat offenders.
I wanted in like the gentle lady
from Bernalillo said we at
eleven people stabbed in
Albuquerque yesterday so I'm
just wondering if we're going to
have legislation this next year
to go ahead and restrict the
carrying of knives thank you Mr
speaker.
Are there further nonsense.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I will go to the
next order of business committee
reports.
No objections order.
Click to read.
Mr speaker your taxation revenue
committee to is been referred
house bill one sixty three has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
a do not pass but that house
taxation revenue committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty three do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr Chairman Mr speaker move
adoption we are on adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
on house bill one sixty three
but a favorable committee report
on taxation and revenue
committee says to for us to one
sixty three all those in favor.
Cutting taxes on social security
income signify by saying aye.
This was a.
Canadian forces offered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr Gramm we go to the
next order of business messages
judges ordered surgery.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill thirty four
as amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
offices will be entered message
from the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate as passed Senate
finance committee's substitute
for Senate bill one forty as
amended Senate bill two forty
three and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
Mr chair.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker will go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation your
interjection it's so ordered.
to read.
Senate bill thirty four
introduced by Senator Brandt and
act relating to crime making a
threat of a shooting unlawful
Senate bill thirty four
introduced by Senator Brandt.
Senate bill thirty four having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
forty an act relating to higher
education and acting the
opportunity scholarship after
repealing in enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight making appropriation
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
forty.
Senate finance committee says
two percent of the one forty
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Education
Committee.
Senate bill two forty three
introduced by Senator Stewart
and act relating to public
school finance providing more
flexibility for uses of family
income index distributions
Senate bill two forty three
introduced by Senator Stewart.
Senate bill two forty three
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Education
Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo our
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I will go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing no objections
so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
alerted Representative Chasey do
you have a certificate.
You would like to be read.
Mr speaker and I just I
certainly do and I don't it's
not on the table or anything so
I'm just a I just want to alert
everyone that this is the
fiftieth anniversary of P. B. NJ
family services and the
certificate when it is read by
the chief clerk will tell you
why we should celebrate.
Thank you generating the clerk
to read.
Keeping a family services also
known as peanut butter and jelly
and congratulations on its
fiftieth anniversary whereas in
nineteen seventy two Angie by
geo and Christine Ruiz founded
P. B. NJ family services also
known as peanut butter and jelly
in Albuquerque southwest value
in response to the scarcity of
services and support for young
children and their families and
whereas PBN J. mission is to
serve at risk children to ensure
they grow to their full
potential with nurturing
families in a supportive
community and whereas the
services provided by Peavey NJ
are rooted in the experiences of
this first children and families
served by Peavey NJ whose
mothers were receiving county
mental health services and
whereas Peavey NJ has helped
countless child serving
professionals in New Mexico
recognize that families should
be honored and supported and
that children must always be
viewed with their environmental
contacts and whereas Peavey NJ
has collaborated with thousands
of children and their families
in New Mexico learning together
to create safe and nurturing
homes for children and whereas
over fifty years P. B. NJ has
continued to support communities
and families embracing families
where they are including in
prisons and jails and responding
to the needs of children and
their families that have emerged
in changing society and grant
Peavey NJ has developed programs
to support unique families
developing home based programs
to support parents with
developmental disabilities and
those who substance use affects
their ability to care for their
children and whereas PBN J. is
unique in its commitment to
offer ongoing cutting edge
comprehensive developmental
wraparound services for half a
century.
And whereas P. B. NJ has been a
beacon of hope for thousands of
at risk children and their
families serving in many
instances generations to re
unite and re store environments
where children grow and loving
healthy and secure families and
for as TV NJ's leadership has
contributed immeasurably to the
state I sharing what they have
learned from children and
families advocating for policies
that support nurture and heal
families facing challenges and
we're as P. B. NJ has been a
leader in designing policies
that support families connection
family connection and stability
now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to the
Peavey NJ family services for
the organizations community
activism and for serving at risk
children to ensure they grow to
their full potential and that
congratulations be extended on
its fiftieth anniversary.
Thank you.
A
copy of the certificate will be
delivered.
Two PP NJ.
Are there other announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Matthews Mr
speaker if I might as someone
who worked at the BJ's family
services for a number of years I
just want to add my
congratulations to the fiftieth
anniversary.
And share a couple things PBJ
dealt with extremely challenge
families worked in prisons it
was not an easy atmosphere but
it was probably the most
supportive work environment I've
ever worked in and that was a
great part of its success
And I want to commend the
dedicated staff and I also just
with add that to P. B. and J. I
was able to make lasting
friendships with people who had
been homeless who had drug
addictions who had been
imprisoned for violent Act and
violent crimes and it was a
testament to the ability of
people to overcome and.
And Dr and nurture and it's just
a great institution thank you
very much.
Thank you generated.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker and I wanted to
just close by saying I always
appreciated PBN J. but when I
started practicing in the area
of court appointed work for
abuse and neglect cases both
Sandoval County in Valencia
County I I saw how much it meant
to the
development of children and
families and quite frankly Mr
speaker and I just general of
the house there's just no way to
over estimate how much wonderful
work this agency is done thank
you.
Thank you generally.
members item fifteen on the
calendar.
Item twelve rather house bill
one fifty one hundred twelve has
a one fifty one Representative
Hochman Vigil that the that
matters taking part of the
legislation I am removing house
bill one fifty one from the
calendar of placing on the
speakers table.
Okay members we're gonna do
we're gonna go to third reading
in a moment we're going to take
up item one on the calendar.
Senate bill thirteen.
I believe the gentle lady from
Santa Fe is the for sponsor on
the.
And then we're going to take up
item.
Fourteen Senate bill one forty
one I believe the gentle lady
from Rio Arriba Representative
head of that is on that and then
we will break for committee so
we'll just do those two bills
and then we'll come back and
take a more legislation on third
reading this afternoon and I
discussed that with the floor
leaders and we should be able to
do those and get to committee by
one thirty.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation no objections so
ordered.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe that
the record reflect all action
necessary for placing Senate
bill thirteen as amended with an
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker this
creates a missing in New Mexico
events annually.
See no debate gentle lady
because thank you Mr speaker
this genuinely helps indigenous
people and those who are missing
their family members work with
law enforcement those around the
state to have a commemorative
day where they can bring forth
that information this is truly
of the big work of those who've
been dealing with this for since
two to twenty nineteen when this
began as a really grateful to
have this moment thank you Mr
speaker with that I move that
Senate bill thirteen as amended
with an emergency clause do now
pass we are on final passage of
Senate bill thirteen as amended
with an emergency clause the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative will go.
Yes Representative book of both
yes representative Cadena.
Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative and on
this.
Representative Hernandez both
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen both yes
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Present were yes votes yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes.
Representative close by a vote
of sixty three in the
affirmative zero negative Senate
bill thirteen as amended has
passed the house with an
emergency clause.
Next we will go to item fourteen
for the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill one forty one with
an emergency clause on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
I'm Mr speaker will you give me
to that point adjusted excuse
me.
Mr speaker of the Senate bill
one forty one simply provides an
emergency exception to who may
fill up a propane tank and it
declares an emergency when that
can be done.
There is debate the gentleman
from Clovis critically
resembling you.
Thank you Mr speaker I I think
this is a very important bill.
In our area there was one
company that came in and bought
our propane comes all of our
propane companies we had one in
Clayton one into computers of
various ones little home
companies around the country and
one company brought out they
bought out the gas companies
that before we got our guests
and our diesel but out Senator
the propane company all all the
propane companies this last
extreme cold snap that we had
they were unable to get to the
school we had to call off school
for one day because they would
feel the school thank they're
part they have a pretty relaxed
attitude in when we got to dig
into why.
We found that they were not only
honed out of state they were own
from a company maybe in
Switzerland or somewhere
overseas they don't care about
us in New Mexico and when you
have an emergency and.
People.
Sometimes elderly people who are
on the verge of freezing.
That we need the legal right to
put gas in their tanks I support
this bill whole heartedly in the
past you guys to do the same
vote for thank you.
The gentleman next to the
gentleman from the.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I
gladly yield.
Understand
It led to this piece of
legislation in northern New
Mexico.
Personal problems with gas
supplier.
Because people.
Go without is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman yes if you
remember when we were in the
redistricting session last year
the huge storm hit the North
that not trailers off the
foundation not for itself I'm
that we were with little
extricity we're doing everything
we could to restore that
community in the meantime if the
provider was not filling up
propane tanks and we couldn't
get anybody else in New Mexico
that was the problem and so this
this legislation kind gentleman.
Traditionally has not been able
to from time because of their
owners.
Facilities is that correct Mr
speaker kind gentleman that is
correct to make a contract with
the propane company that
delivers propane gas to your
house
it is not allowed for another
company to come in the least
that tank and is not allowed for
another company to come in and
fill up that gas tank so that
was a problem we faced.
Legislation address the
potential liability issues that
might arise from one children's
supporting roles for one month.
A kind the Mr speaker and
gentleman yes we did a take care
of that the the new companies
and that they would take on the
liability if they put that gas
in their tanks.
It's a
and this is also backed by the
New Mexico prochain Association
so they're in complete agreement
with this legislation
emergencies happen and we have
to be able to help people in
trying times.
Speaker gentle lady I can
appreciate that so for example a
link reform or social
circumstance would result from.
So far the phone up somebody
else's track is accounted for in
this legislation Mr speaker and
gentleman yes.
Thank you much for your answers.
Next generation Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you will the
gentle lady here please Mr
speaker I gladly to the kind
lady from Travis I understand
what you're trying to do here
Mister speaker gentle lady.
But if we're talking about a to
declared emergency.
Obviously that will be the
county making that decision if
there is an emergency situation
is that correct.
Mr speaker behind lady it's a
the the the tribal government
the city government the county
government can declare that
emergency okay that's very good
to the madam speaker I know that
people will say well I with the
company not go out there and
fill the tank several years ago.
Dealing with the lie he of and
you understand what that's
about.
These propane companies are
being reimbursed under the lie
he program I do understand that
Mr speaker gentle lady also when
they were talking about one
company fill in somebody else's
thank whoever has that taxed on
their property they do have to
lease that time from the
provider in an emergency
situation I understand the for
there might be more of a let's
go ahead and get R. done because
these people are needing it
right they had.
I just want to make sure on that
emergency declaration it did not
have to be a statewide declared
emergency it could be tribal
city or county and to me that's
very important madams Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you very much
for your responses.
Generation X. ray of the
gentleman from Colfax more Rio
Arriba and send me go.
Mr speaker thank you and with
the gentle lady from recovering
the tiles and Santa Fe please
you Mr speaker I gladly L. to my
neighbor.
Thank you so much Mr speaker
gentle lady I want to just
commend the response time from
you then Senator a meal.
You got on this with dedication
and sort of a
and and emergency mode if you
will and got an awesome result I
think that this situation in
northern New Mexico is rather
emblematic of how rural areas
are left vulnerable.
When we look towards
catastrophic fire.
The effects of climate change we
will see more of these issues
happening.
The remedy that you're bringing.
That has minutia dealing with
this you know this propane issue
points to the need for.
Us to bring infrastructure to
rural areas but I just I want to
applaud the scrapping this in
your heart that you can forward
and got such an immediate
response and that's all I wanna
say I want to vote for this as
soon as I can.
Thank you.
Thank you gentleman next we have
the gentle lady from grant
Hidalgo and this year.
Thank you Mr speaker originally
yield Mister speaker I gladly
yield to the lady from grand
Hidalgo and Sierra thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady I just I
I I appreciate this bill on a
supported I just wanted some
clarification on the declaration
of emergency and it's it says
that there's finding that in
whole or in part there's a lack
of LP gas and so I guess my
question is we had a situation
that arose in my district where
the owner of the propane company
local owned up passed away and
there was question the the his
his spouse didn't know who was
going to run the company was
gonna happen they had over four
hundred customers and so in that
case could it wasn't a lack of
access to the to the propane it
was not having the proper
licensure for delivery with that
could they declared emergency in
that case.
Mr speaker a kind lady the the
county could declare an
emergency and you could go for
that okay thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I'm so
glad that you brought this
forward the death occurred in
late November any it was at a
time when people needed propane
and so it was a it turned out
that there was an employee who
did have the L. P. five but
there is uncertainty for a
period of time until they were
able to find out so thank you
this is a really important
really important bill thank you.
The general index to the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant
and Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind lady please feel.
Mr speaker I'll gladly yield to
the kind gentleman thank you
very much Mr speaker gentle lady
the the I looked love that
legislation understanding again
I just wanna make sure this is a
local government.
Agency
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
my only question that I have is
I know that that the company
that provides for leases that
equipment the tank and so forth
is responsible and liable for
that
for that tank is there any
language in the bill that
protects the second company
coming in from liability for the
for for the protection of
liability for the first company.
Mr speaker kind gentleman that
that's taken care of in this
legislation we allowed for the
liability issue it's it's set
and it's approved by the New
Mexico prochain Association so
they made sure that we have the
lab right language in this bill
to protect everybody thank you
Mr Madam speaker first is Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you so much.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close Mr speaker I move
adoption and Senate bill one
forty one we are on final
passage of Senate bill one forty
one with an emergency clause the
vote is now open.
Members without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Alcon vote yes
votes yes Representative bash.
Representative bash votes yes
Representative will go.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes representative Cadena.
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative could votes
yes Representative Eli.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative baby so.
Representative Garcia votes yes
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew votes
no Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes.
The vote is now closed.
The sixty two in the affirmative
one in the negative Senate bill
one forty one has passed the
house with an emergency clause.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections so
ordered.
members I've got two more bills
to move to the speakers table.
Item number five.
Yes the one to seven.
Is placed on the speakers table
house bill one two seven
speakers table.
Item sixteen.
This bill two two eight.
Sixteen house bill two to eight
is placed on the speakers table.
there is an additional bill on
the hearing for the commerce
committee today members take
note house bill two twenty
leader Townsend.
Will be heard in the commerce
and economic development
committee today did make on the
go the wrong house bill two
twenty chairman me just this
will hear that bill in the
commerce committee today house
bill two two zero.
that's it for this portion of
today's floor action if there's
anyone that would like to
announce committees.
The general if you
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker I just a
reminder for folks from the
transportation committee we're
hearing to P. the two bills
tomorrow from the Senate so
we'll start at nine AM tomorrow
morning thank you.
Members signaled the Jennifer
Dona Ana Representative small
thank you Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet today at two
PM to PM today house
appropriations and finance thank
you Mr speaker members take note
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker of the
house Judiciary Committee will
meet at one thirty today and I
believe that I indicated earlier
and if I hadn't we are going to
try to meet tomorrow possibly in
the morning and afternoon and
we'll have that those agendas
posted later today and I look
forward to seeing everyone
there.
Members take note and thank you
for the balance the Valentine
roses Mr speaker you're very
welcome gentle lady.
The.
The leaders said he didn't get
one sorry stuff on the road.
Jennifer of Rio Arriba Sandoval
in San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker good happy
Valentine's day members your
active cultures Echizen water
resources committee will not be
meeting or we have no referrals
so enjoy your Valentine's day.
Members take note are there
other announcements.
Members we have a few questions
about the government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
meeting this morning will work
with
the members of the committee and
with the the Judiciary Committee
to try to find a time for the
government affairs committee for
governor elections in in the
first the make up that meeting
sometime tomorrow
hopefully before the floor
session.
So we will try to get those
bills back up now.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house and in recess until
six thirty.
To this evening
this evening sorry thank you and
enjoy the reception initiative
all the work for committees
house is in recess until six
thirty PM.
