I'll start.
Representative Armstrong.
Present
Representative Barrago,
Representative Brown.
Representative Dowd.
Here.
Representative Hernan
representative.
Harman Hill.
Here
Representative Jones.
Here
Representative Lindstrom.
Here
Representative Romero, Mr Vice
Chairman.
Alright.
And Chairman De la Cruz.
We have a quorum.
Thank you. So,
Welcome everyone to your
committee.
I think we're gonna have a great
time on the.
We have some very, very capable
people that are part of the
committee, and so what I'd like
to do now is have everybody
introduce himself we'll start
with Representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative Doo, I represent
uh the city limits of Socorro
down south through 75, a little
bit of tearC only east of the
business loop, uh, on the exit
where the one where y'all know
where it is. And then at the
northern parts of Donana north
of Highway 10.
A lot of the unincorporated
areas and happy to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Jennifer Jones. I represent
District 32. It's Hidalgo
County, Luna County, and part of
Donana, the rural area around
Hatch north and south of Hatch.
Rebecca's
Represented.
Good to be here. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Gail Armstrong,
House District 49, Sierra Catrin
Socorro and Valencia. I um live
in the big town or on a ranch by
Magdalena, New Mexico. I have 3
districts in my.
Uh, district. So I'm excited to
be on the committee, learn a lot
and uh.
Help make uh New Mexico roads.
Flush.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, I'm
Catherine Brown, I represent a
large portions of Eddy and Lee
counties where we love girls.
Take note.
Thank you.
Bena, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee.
My name is
Joseph Hernandez.
And um
I am the representative for New
Mexico House District 4,
Northwest New Mexico.
Uh
US Federal Highway 64 runs
through my district.
Um, and it crosses uh.
Highway, uh,
Or 91, well.
Um
I have 10 Navajo chapter houses.
In my district, as well as the
town of Kirtland.
And City of Farmington.
Morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm a
representative Representative
Day Hoffman V Hill of District
15, North Valley of Albuquerque,
um, I really love orange bars
right now because the Montgomery
project runs square through my
district, so we're having a good
time. Happy to be here. Thanks.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Patty Lindstrom.
This will be my 24th year on
this committee.
When I was elected in 2001, this
was the first committee I asked
for, and of course I served on
another committee for a ton of
years also. I represent House
District 9, that's the Gallup
area and Navajo chapters looking
forward to working with
everyone. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank everybody for the
introductions. I think you
gather that we have a very,
very, uh.
Powerful committee with the
members that we have present. My
name is Representative de la
Cruz. I represent House District
12. I always like to describe
and you're gonna hear it all the
time.
I represent the heart of the
South Valley in Albuquerque.
Very proud of that.
Uh, this is my
3rd year on the committee.
And I'm honored to have been
appointed as the chair.
We're going to be doing a lot of
great work, but before we talk
more about that, I would like a
secretary Ricky Sernadu to
introduce himself.
Is that everyone, Mr. Secretary?
If, if it's OK with the members,
I'd like staff to introduce
themselves that way you'll all
know who everybody is and what
their roles are, but let's start
with Joey.
Thank you. We'll start with over
to my left.
You'll introduce yourselves and
what you what you do.
Ja.
Thank you, Richard.
Thank you ladies.
I thank you everyone. I want to
take a moment to thank former
chair, uh, Dan Hochman Viheel.
She did an outstanding job in
the previous role as the chair,
she is and we're I'm very
appreciative that you're a
member. So if you would say a
few words about last year, I
would appreciate that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
really appreciate that, um.
Mr. Chair, you
Uh
have the luck of inheriting what
I believe and I may be a little
biased, the best committee in
the house, if not the
legislature for a many, for many
reasons, not just because um we
work well together and we have
good relationships with one
another, but, um, you know, we
all have the same goal, which is
to improve transportation and
infrastructure throughout the
state. We have fantastic
relationships with DOT and all
the critical people there. We
have a fantastic budget analyst.
Joey Simon, um, a wealth of
knowledge and experience, uh
represented Lundstrom here, um,
Representative Brown is the
ranking member, um,
transportation, I think is one
of the most important issues the
state is facing and um I'm so
glad to see it and you're
capable, calm.
Hands and um I'm very, very much
looking forward to a good.
productive year.
Thank you.
Thank you and and uh.
Representative Hochman v. Hill
is also the majority whip.
We're gonna be doing some
really, really important work as
you know, but we're going to
start that work and I've asked
the secretary to have his staff
do presentations on the status
of all the projects in the
various.
Districts and so starting on
Tuesday, I hope you're up and
running for us that time, we're
gonna try to get through at
least 2 presentations for
meeting. Now as we go on, it
gets tougher, so I'd like to.
Get that done as early as
possible.
I know you're gonna have
questions about projects in your
district or pending projects,
where are they at? Where's the
funding and those sorts of
things and so that'll be very,
very helpful.
And we'll take time to make sure
and do that.
Also
One of the things that I want to
mention that I'm proud of that I
saw as a member on this
particular committee is that.
This is, this is bipartisan
work.
It's bipartisan work and we try
to always make sure that every
part of the state is taken care
of and that we have funding that
is represented well in those
districts, and so I just wanna,
you know, thank you all for
that, that have been members in
the past and the new members
that we continue that long
standing tradition.
One of the things that uh I
wanna remind new members, not,
not the veterans that are here,
but and and staff is that you
always go through the chair, so
if you wish to speak.
Let us know that you wish to
speak and each question goes.
I would like us, this is
probably the last bit of meeting
unless someone wishes to speak
about something or request
something. I, I would really
like us to to start at 9 o'clock
sharp.
I know that there'll be
occasions like today where the
snow can be a bit of a problem.
And it'll be difficult, but I
really would like to do that. We
would, we did that in the past.
It's worked well. It'll be
Tuesday, Thursday, 9 o'clock as
we get into important business,
time's gonna get really, really
short.
And so we're gonna need to try
to start on time.
We get through all of our work.
As timely as possible.
And
As a favor.
to the membership, please try to
keep your questions focused and
concise and and not, I would
appreciate that, you know, staff
would appreciate that and
certainly your your colleagues
on.
And the committee will
appreciate that as well.
So members if there's anything
you'd like to say.
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
wondered if you introduced the
lady.
Right
I apologize.
Kelly, Candy, would you
introduce your.
Good morning everyone. I will
be, I am your committee is
assistant.
I'm really excited briefly, I,
the last two sessions, I know
bills really well.
And last year I'm really proud
to be here. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Representative Lustrom, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to
ask the cabinet secretary, if
you could provide a state of New
Mexico district map for everyone
a a large one that is laminated,
so we can have it for our
offices.
I think it's important that
everyone understands what the
boundaries are and uh what the
districts are, and I'd
appreciate it if you if you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Lindstrom. Yeah, that'd be
great. I have one, the only
request that I have is make it
would, you would all check that
it's up to date, that it's a
current map, and it's good.
Thank you.
Anyone else
So just briefly, and I apologize
to Candy, thank you, I remember,
bro. Um, yesterday we met, it
was Richard and I and and Candy.
And
We all feel like real newbies
and so we're like, oh guys, I
hope we don't, we don't screw
up, so we're gonna need all of
your help, your advice, uh,
we're always open. I, I will
always maintain pretty much an
open door policy. Anybody needs
anything, our office is
available to you or anything.
So, welcome to the committee
andless there's anything any
anyone wants to say, we're going
to adjourn at this time.
Thank you.
