Thank you, Representative Kates,
um,
Thank you. Will you please
present House Bill 39 juvenile
record in firearm background
checks. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you committees. I
have, uh, an amendment.
I like to
Enter
Would you like the
The motion on the floor to
accept the amendment. Um, I'll
move the amendment for
discussion, Madam Chair. OK.
Thank you. Now we can have
discussion.
Madam Chair, would you like me
to
Read the number
OK, it's a 0.230063.2.
Great. And then if you want to
explain your bill or the
amendment first, however, which
way you want. All right, thank
you very much. um, this is House
Bill 39, so, uh, one of the many
issues that have been brought to
me, um, by law enforcement.
Is that currently if we have a
scenario if we have a a 15 year
old who has committed a crime
with a firearm and um they serve
their sentence or convicted,
they serve their sentence.
They are able to purchase a
weapon, uh, yeah, a handgun at
21, um, uh, because they're
juvenile record is sealed.
The bill in front of you, um, we
now have the technology and the
bill in front of you says that a
licensed gun owners, I'm sorry,
Gleason's Gun brokers, um, are
able to open up the juvenile
record just enough to um
disqualify them for gun
ownership.
From, uh, a 10 years.
At disposition.
I have 2
Uh, expert witnesses here, um,
uh, first is uh Mark.
Uh, Lovato from corrections and
then I also have Benjamin Baker
from the governor's office of
policy at endless, and he would
like to make an opening
statement as well. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'll be very brief,
uh, mindful of the time. I'm
grateful to be back in front of
this company.
It's working OK?
Grateful to be back in front of
the committee on this very
important topic of how we make
our communities safer from gun
violence and um.
Grateful for the sponsor for her
leadership and willingness to
bring this forward. Firearms
have become the leading cause of
death for our children and
adolescents in America, the same
follows in New Mexico, sadly. We
spoke earlier at Nasim about
whether or not the federal
government is a solution to this
problem, and I wanted to offer
this committee a very useful
statistic that was offered by
our chief during the state of
the judiciary to um only 1.5% of
cases filed in the state of
Mexico or done in federal court.
What that means is 98.
5% of our cases are done in New
Mexico State court. And that's
critical because that, that
fractional ratio is not getting
any larger, um, adjudicated
delinquents, which is what we'll
be talking about here today are
prevented from possessing
firearms in over 20 other
states. These restrictions are
usually placed upon those youth.
adjudicated delinquent acts that
would be considered felonious
offenses had they been adults.
Some of our neighbors
participate in this statutory
language.
Really important detail that is
material to New Mexico has since
declaring a public.
Health emergency related to gun
violence in September of 2023,
343 juveniles have been charged
and detained for gun-related
crimes. That means more than.
out of 3 days, a child in New
Mexico is charged with a
unrelated crime statewide.
And I think that's material, um.
Consequences related to
establishing the status quo, um,
I think we're untenable. We see
this problem get worse. You
heard from law enforcement
experts in the last testimony
and from your constituencies
that they're encountering
encountering juvenile violence
at a rate they have never seen.
Um, this impacted me and my
family as well, so I've seen
many of you have shared your
stories with me. A couple of key
factors related to intersections
with juveniles and the juvenile
justice system, and I agree and
I've heard from the vice chair
and other members of the
committee, juvenile justice and
involvement more than triples
the likelihood of adult violent
felony arrest. We, we understand
and appreciate that, and people
with felony equivalent juvenile
convictions are 9 times more
likely to be arrested.
For a firearms-related crime.
Then the general public. We
think this is important because
This is a spectrum of tools
needed for law enforcement
agencies for prosecutors, and
for
Uh, and sellers of firearms
within our community to help
keep us safe. We have no
interest in squelching the
opportunities for young people
to be able to go to college to
be employed. This is simply for
the purposes of point of sale
background checks for firearms
and establishing who.
is a prohibited person and for
what period of time. Thank you
very much for your attention in
this important matter.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. We
stand for questions. But, excuse
me, but.
Was that explanation on all of
the different um.
Amendments
That's what we're gonna be
voting on the amendments first.
Um, uh, Madam Chair, so, um, so
should I read uh.
I'm sorry, sorry, hold on for a
moment, Madam Chair, did they go
through, did they go through
this amendment with this
specific 202 numbers, it's only
the 2 amendment.
Right, the 2 amendment, if you
could just make sure that
You were
Your witness, your expert was
talking about all those things.
The amendments is what we need
to make sure that you explain,
Yeah, yes. 00, OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um,
representatives.
Um,
yes, the, the amendment simply
um
Amends a provision of the
Children's code for judgment of
non-criminal nature.
Uh, and exempts out subsection D
of this section.
And subsection D reads as
follows a judgment in the
proceedings.
On a petition under the
Delinquency Act results in a
juvenile disposition for a
delinquent act that would
constitute a felony if if
committed by an adult shall be
considered a conviction for a
crime.
Punishable
By imprisonment for a term.
Exceeding one year for the
purposes of the federal gun
Control Act of 1968.
For a period of 10 years
following the disposition.
Uh, regardless of whether the
judgment results in an adult
sentence, so the amendment, um,
gives a time period of 10 years
after following juvenile
disposition of, of the charge.
Thank you, we stand for
questions.
And I'm sure there's an issue
with this, this 202 number was
entered yesterday at 5:18, so it
did not.
Be reviewed by us or by the
public.
Um, I accepted the amendment,
um, so that we could hear the
bills as we're seeing them
because we don't have extra time
and it was, I think closer to 4
o'clock at it.
Um, came in, even though that's
after the 1:30, but I mean, we
were here the other night until
8 o'clock, so I don't know if
that changes.
amount of time.
We already moved the amendment
for discussion. OK, well, Madam
Chair, just for a record, I
would say I don't agree with it
because it was not heard and
that's not fair to the people.
They need to have 24 hours to
review these. I would ask it to
be rolled, but if that's gonna
be your decision, I'm not happy
with that. Thank you.
OK, we do have a motion.
And uh we'll take role on the
amendment.
Accepting of the men.
Representative Block, with an
explanation.
Representative Lord, no.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Thompson.
Represent, excuse me, Madam
Moisture.
Uh, Madam, yes.
OK. So now, uh, you're, um,
Amendments have been accepted,
so if you would like to um
present anymore or.
Oh, with that
Oh, with
an explanation, yes. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
uh, so yes, I have the same
concerns as Representative Lord.
I got this last night at 5
o'clock.
And I got the original one. I,
I'm sure it hit the, the shared
drive or whatever at 4:30 or
something. And it was not 24
hours. So I didn't really have
time to get this back to my
district. I didn't have time to
get it to the sheriff and to
folks who would be.
I mean to implement such
changes. So I find this to be
out of order and uh that's all
madam.
OK, so no, um, representative,
did you have any more to say
about the bill?
Um
It itself
A man of chair representatives
uh we're discussing the
amendment currently, I believe
is that we, we, OK, thank you.
So, um, uh, for those of you,
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Um, I just to reiterate
what my expert subject experts
have already conveyed, um, I
have uh had uh many careers
working with individuals coming
from corrections. I'm very
believer in second chances. This
bill does not hinder second
chances for housing, education,
employment, what it is is a
public safety and so that, um,
uh.
I stand for questions.
OK, we'll go to the audience.
Uh, is there anyone in
opposition?
OK, we'll get the mic to you and
you have 2 minutes, please.
My name is Jacob Maladonos and I
oppose this bill, mainly
because, not because we disagree
with looking at juvenile
records, but we have a problem
with the implementation of this
as an FFL how do we implement
this? You guys say that as a gun
broker, we can actually see back
10 years. I'd like to see how
that's done.
Thank you, next person.
Yeah, talking again. So David
Brannon and I, I did miss some
of the discussion on this. I'll
just say my only concern is this
is, as it's listed, or as I read
it, it says uh any anything.
And so I would really like to
see more verbiage in there
specific to uh the violence or
some some sort like that, right?
Uh folks will grow up, they'll
become adults, um, there's a big
difference between a violent
felony.
Thank you. Next.
Good evening, Diane McCash. I'm
not sure that I'm opposing it
completely. Um, I appreciate
what they said about not being
compromised as an adult in terms
of education, housing, and all
of that, but I am concerned that
our long held practice of
protecting future adults from
the mistakes they make as
children could be compromised by
provisions of this bill. So I do
urge you to really think long
and hard and um think twice
about supporting the change.
Thank you.
Next. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Kim
Chavez Cook with the Law Offices
of the Public Defender. Um, I
want to comment a little bit on
the substance of the bill. It
was, um, introduced as uh only
addressing the dealer access to
this information so that they
don't sell someone a firearm.
That part we have no problem
with, although I do understand
there are uh practical
challenges to having access to
that information. Um, but it
does not only do that, it also
makes
someone who has a uh delinquency
offense on their history, a
felon for all intents and
purposes by making them
punishable as a felon in
possession later as an adult. So
while we do not have any problem
with the prohibition against
ownership civilly and preventing
dealers from selling them to
them. Um, we do oppose the
provision that makes it a 3rd
degree felony for an adult to
possess if they have such a
delinquency, um, history, and
that is largely
Because
Sorry, switching pages on my
computer, um, because it
conflicts with existing law. In
section 32A218, which is a part
of the delinquency code. It
states that a judgment resulting
in a juvenile disposition shall
not be deemed a conviction of
crime, nor shall it impose any
civil disabilities ordinarily
resulting from conviction of a
crime. So this, um, bill does
unfortunately conflict with
that, and that is an important
provision in the Delinquency
Act. It's what
contains what is a core value of
our juvenile code in treating
children like children. Thank
you.
OK, that's everyone in
opposition. Do we have anyone
online?
One person, OK.
Please mute yourself and you
have to. Madam members of the
committee. My name is Joshua
O'Reilly, and I'm the policy
research associate at Indigenous
Women Rising.
On behalf of my organization, we
oppose HP 39, and it's not
because we don't think the issue
is important. We would like to
ask the committee and the
sponsor if they would be open to
considering adding a study that
gets to the root causes of why
gun-related crimes were
committed during adolescence. We
would like to see more
investment in fully funded and
holistic family support, which
is why we supported HB 58
sponsored by Representative
Herndon.
The bill represents a proactive
approach to enhancing public
safety, however, it raises
important questions regarding
how young individuals acquire
firearms. Additionally, there
are concerns that the
legislation might inadvertently
lead to extreme measures for
those who have been denied legal
access to purchase a firearm due
to this bill, potentially
driving them to buy fire
firearms illegally and
increasing crime rates in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you. Now we'll go to the
audience and those in support.
Raise your hand.
OK, so 2 minutes each and will
not go past 10.
Oh, that's what you were
pointing out, OK, um, we have
one more person in opposition
before we start support.
OK.
All right, we'll start with
those in support. We'll start on
this side. Raise your hands
again if you wanted to speak.
OK.
And don't forget the one in the
back.
Hi, my name is Alicia and I'm
the co-founder for the New
Mexico Crusaders for Justice. We
are the families of victims of
homicide, and um I'm in support
of this bill because
Um, there's consequences for
juveniles in here.
Um, this generation of miners is
unfortunately violent and quick
to kill over anything minor.
Uh, this is my 3rd year, and
every year we seem to blame the
gun and take away
accountability.
Um
With consequences, all we have
is chaos.
And that's why I'm in support of
this bill.
Thank you, next person.
Good afternoon committee and
Ma'am Sherman.
My name is Maurilio Bernard.
And I am Darren Bernal's dad.
And for those of you that don't
know Darren Bernal, he was my
son, and he was brutally
murdered 4 years ago.
Along with his two friends.
The reason they were murdered
was because he did not want to
give a juvenile alcohol.
So he goes out, picks up a gun,
and shoots all three of them.
So he goes to court in Los Lunas
County.
In front of Cindy Mercer.
Cindy Mercer let this juvenile.
Go after 5 months.
Last weekend.
Uh, Anthony.
Anthony was shot and killed by
an officer.
Returning fire
To uh to Anthony Williams.
And the officer killed him.
Well
That could have been prevented
if this officer knew who who he
was dealing with.
And
39
Before approaching a person.
So if this officer would have
known who he was facing, he
would have been a lot more
prepared.
And I don't, I think this would
have turned out a lot better.
Thank you.
Thank you and sorry for your
loss.
Next person
Anyone
On this side, that wants to
speak in support.
OK
I'll get back to you.
Madam Chair, members of
committee. My name is Manu
Guterres. I'm a major with the
New Mexico State Police. Been
doing this job for 20 years
already. Uh, we, uh, New Mexico
State Police does support this
legislation, um, as it will
enhance public safety by
restricting firearm access for
individuals with a history of
juvenile firearm-related
delinquencies. It supports law
enforcement and judicial goals
of crime prevention and ensures
a robust background check
system. That's all.
Thank you.
And we have one more upfront, 2
more. I just.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Terry Cole
and I'm president and CEO for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. I stand today in
support of HB 39. The bill to us
is a very targeted action that
we can take to help keep guns
out of the hands of people.
With a record of violence
involving guns.
While New Mexico generally seals
juvenile records, perhaps to
help people get a fresh start
when they've grown up some.
There need to be exceptions when
the threat to our communities is
so great from guns used by
people with a violent past.
In other words, the greater good
demands that we take this kind
of action.
And we are not talking here
about public disclosures of past
criminal record but rather
disclosure to law enforcement
agencies for the purpose of
background checks prior to the
purchase of a firearm.
Sure.
People with a criminal bent can
obtain a legal illegal firearm,
and this bill won't stop that.
There is other legislation aimed
at this problem, but this bill
will stop some people with a
history of gun violence from
legally purchasing a weapon, and
even if that turns out to be
only one person that is blocked,
then that's one less person who
could inflict injury or death.
Please vote yes for HB 39. Thank
you.
OK.
Madam Chair Representatives, my
name's William Fire Eisen, and
as I said before, I'm a retired
computer scientist here in Santa
Fe.
I stand to support HB 39 so long
as sufficient safeguards are in
place for our use. Right now,
well-known and youthful
offenders slipped through the
background check system and can
purchase long guns at 18 and
handguns at 21 when we already
know that these specific kids
should be stopped.
This law targets juvenile
offenders specifically as
opposed to blanket prohibitions
that we have seen in other
proposed 2025 legislation like
raising the minimum age for
firearms for all purchasers to
21. I applaud you for directly
addressing offenders in this
bill rather than penalizing all
of our young people. Please
continue in this direction.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Anyone else in support.
He will go to um the zoo we have
no one, OK, thank you.
OK, yeah, I do have one person.
Um, OK, person on Zoom, if
you'll unmute yourself and you
have to.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Melissa
Edes, and I am the chapter
president for Las Vegas, New
Mexico
with New Mexicosers for justice,
and I stand in support of this
bill. Unfortunately, times are
getting worse and we're seeing a
lot of juvenile offenders. And
until you're that parent that
has to bury your child.
Um, you just will not sometimes
understand the grief that our
families are going through.
But with Alicia,
we support families that have
lost children to gun violence,
to murder. I have spent my life
as an educator. I believe in
redemption. I believe in cell,
and I believe in helping
students become the best that
they can be. But unfortunately
it takes the village I if a
student is already on the path
which was already on the path
where they need additional
support.
And they're making poor choices,
but it is time for the
government to interfere and to
take this on to ensure that the
greater good is done for all. So
I ask you all of the court, this
bill to ensure that those
juveniles that have committed a
violent crime are not able to
obtain a gun to then reoffend as
adults. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, I think that's everyone. Go
ahead. Would you like to thank,
thank you, ma'am. I'd just like
to address some of the comments,
um, absolutely as the as the
online speaker just said so this
is just addressing uh violent
juvenile crime as you can see in
the bill on page 2, starting
with line 12, it says an adult
subject to a juvenile
disposition for the
delinquencies act involving the
use of a firearm under the
delinquency Act that would be.
felony if committed by an adult
regardless of whether or not the
judgment resulted in the adult
sentence. This would not uh be a
a a a juvenile who was pulled
over, let's say, and a firearm
was in a glove compartment.
There was they were pulled over
because of speeding or a broken
tail light, they would not be
subject to this bill. This is
only if they are using a firearm
to the regious uh level that if
they were an adult, it was.
be a felony. I would also like
to have my expert witness, um,
Mark Lovato address uh the
child's code issue that was
brought up in public comment.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um.
The
Uh, children code
is um convictions as delinquent
acts, and so, um, the
The, let me back up, sorry, um,
the delinquent acts are, are
Sealed by the statute that is
the focus of the amendment and
so the purpose of this bill is
actually the possession of a
firearm by certain persons, not
just convicted felons. And so um
it is really focused the amended
language is really focused on
the adult as opposed to um a
juvenile proceeding under the
delinquency code.
And, and, um,
Uh, Madam Chair,
representatives, there was a
mention of 32A
2-34, um, as being in conflict
with the amendment and um that
was in public comment.
And if you look at paragraph C,
and there's actually an
exception under C6 that law
enforcement officials when the
request is related to the
investigation of a crime, and
that's what, that's an exception
to the confidentiality of
records under the Children's
code. So there's already a
built-in exception for um in the
children's code that covers
delinquency.
That would allow law enforcement
when the request is related to
the investigation of a crime.
Um, so we, we take a little bit
of issue with the fact that it's
in direct conflict because there
is an exception to that
confidentiality statute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee we stand for
questions.
Committee, do we
block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
experts. Appreciate you again.
It's been so long since we saw
you last. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, uh, first
question.
Let me just be clear. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
see on the
Bill, it's involving the use of
a firearm from receiving
transporting or possessing a
firearm or destructive device.
Why are we specifically talking
about firearms in this instance?
Why aren't we utilizing this
provision of access for other
kinds of crimes and not just for
like, like a Nicks background
check, man. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative. This is a, a
bill pertaining to firearms.
OK. Yes, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I understand
that. I guess my, I'm wondering,
uh,
The problem that we're having in
New Mexico regarding crime.
We're, we're utilizing the
vehicle of this provision
regarding firearms, but is there
any kind of data that says that
this is out of hand or
specifically with juveniles
regarding firearms or is there
any other kind of thing that
they're using knives, other
weapons, etc. Madam Chair,
Representative.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, this is a
bill that's regarding firearms,
but my expert witness of Baker
does have some statistics on
juvenile firearm crime. Thank
you so much, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative
Block, um, thank you for the
question. I, I think it, it
highlights we visited the state
during the interim as as you
did, um, and I started tracking
last September the number of
juveniles.
Charged with
Guns related crimes, and it's
the static gave earlier, 343 in
a 500 day period where we are
now still counting and obviously
making some additions last
evening in Albuquerque, for
example, and in fairness, some
additions were made during the
time this committee has met this
evening, um, the problem in a 2
year career.
Uh, in my observation and
experience has expanded to a
rate that I have never seen and
I would consider and and my
colleagues in law enforcement,
including Chief Story, uh, have
agreed that it is unprecedented
and, and I agree and I I think I
know where you're coming with
this. This isn't going to solve.
Uh
In total, juvenile crime, but
much like many of the other
well-intended and appropriate
pieces of legislation that have
come out of this body.
We have to do all of the
subcomponent parts so simply
having a juvenile with a
well-known history of gun
violence.
18 and be able to buy an AK-47
because of the ceiling law seems
like a pretty common sense
solution given the circumstances
we find ourselves in.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives,
experts. Appreciate that, and
I'm glad that we're getting
input from across the state and
I think that's a good thing,
right? We want to hear what's
happening all over the place.
So, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So I'm guessing,
so is this bill in any way
removing civil right for minors.
Uh, for their conduct that is
done.
While a minor
I, I've heard some concerns
about civil rights violations,
and I'm wondering if that
It's something that you have
concerns about also, and then
could you just address that
concern just so we can clear it
up here in the committee, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. I've been
advised by legal counsel that it
is not a civil rights violation,
uh, just as a parole is not a
civil rights violation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. OK, thank
you for clearing that up for me.
I really appreciate that. Next
here, Madam Chair
Representative.
Where's my
Madam Chair Representative, next
question, how does this bill
align with federal firearm
regulations, such as the Gun
Control Act of 1968, that's USC
922. I representative.
I'm Chair Representative, I will
defer to my subject experts, you
want.
Yes ma'am, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Representative block, I think,
uh, precisely is the way I would
describe it and I think about uh
temporary.
restraining orders issued by a
district court.
place through
communication to the federal
government, the federal instant
background check via the points
of sale, the temporary
prohibition for a person buying
a firearm at a point of sale.
Likewise, the extreme risk
protection orders exist. Some of
these things are temporal and
exist for a period of time, some
of these things go on for, for
long periods of time in the case
of convicted felons in the state
of New Mexico that period of
time is 10 years. Um, that
person is prohibited from being
able to pass that federal.
check and purchase that farm.
That is the goal of this
legislation.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative. OK, so 10 years
prohibit prohibition and that
includes
That's, that just adults or is
that including
Juvenile a.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'll defer
to my expert witness. Yes, um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
um, it is 10 years from the um
disposition under the
delinquency.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. That helps a
lot, Mr. Expert, Mr. Lovato.
Appreciate that. So, uh, Madam
Chair Representative.
I guess I just wanna make sure
because from my understanding,
and please correct me if I'm
wrong because I may get this
wrong. So an individual
Goes in to get a check.
And I believe if there's some
kind of
Problem, Madam Chair
Representative.
I believe it's up to 10.
Days that
That is held in limbo until that
is cleared.
And I believe that could
potentially regard your bill
when it comes to minors and
their, their crimes that they're
Under
When they are uh they're
juvenile. I was looking for the
word juvenile,
Madam Chair Representative,
could you, um, clarify.
Yeah, I'm, I'm talking about
like an auto hold when they're
19 years old.
And
When they're trying to get a
firearm, and there's like a
whole, maybe it's something with
their record, for example.
That's kind of what I'm talking
about when it comes to the next
background check.
When you go to buy a gun, for
example.
So Madam Chair represented in
the question, I understand the
where where we're at but what is
the question pertaining to that.
Sure, Madam Chair
representative, I'm, I'm just, I
want to make clear that is it 10
days?
10 days that
The traditional hold period for
that firearm purchase. I'm just
trying to understand how this
works.
So that we can be clear with
your legislation. Of course,
thank you, um, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you
Representative, um, this, uh.
A bill does not have a whole
period in it, um, it is that uh
our licensed gun brokers are
able to access just the smallest
part of the juvenile record to
make sure that they do not
qualify for the gun sale.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
representative. OK, so we're
talking about just the smallest.
Infractions on the juvenile
record.
So Madam, I did not say smallest
infractions. OK, I'm sorry I'm
sorry
I apologize misunderstood what
you said.
Allows a licensed gun dealer to
access the smallest part of the
juvenile record.
That indicates that they do not
qualify for the gun sale.
And only a licensed.
gun dealer, so we're not
unsealing the juvenile record,
we are not allowing uh the even
the gun broker to be able to see
other parts of the juvenile
record, it's just enough of it
so that they know they do not
qualify for the gun sale.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
when, so just enough of it. Are
we talking about specific.
Times, I mean, what, what is it
that we're providing on a
document to an FFL when they
representative on page 2, as I
indicated before, page 2,
of the bill starting line 12
through the paragraph in 16,
this only pertains to juveniles
who committed violent felon
violent crimes that if they had
committed him as an adult would
be considered a felony.
So this does not include.
Uh, misdemeanor gun possession
charges or other charges.
Thank you. So
it's my understanding that the
FFL can't look at those.
Crime records. I'm so sorry,
madam Chair Representative, can
you say it louder? Of course.
Thank you. I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, I don't wanna, I don't
wanna make anyone deaf over
here. Uh, I'm, it's my
understanding that an FFL can't
look at those.
criminal records.
Is that my understanding, Madam
Chair, Representative?
Madam Chair, members of the
Committee, Representative
Blackwell, I'm not an FFL, uh,
the, the goal of and the intent
of the legislation is to create
the binary yes or no, this is
either a person who qualifies
for this background check and
sale or it does not. That's why
I use the example earlier if
someone is under the
restrictions of a temporary
restraining order, the FFL won't
know the details related to
that. They will know that they
can't make a sale, and that is
the goal of the legislation.
It's binary. You qualify or you
are a prohibited person.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and thank you.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, that, that makes
sense. I guess I'm just gonna,
one more question regarding the,
the background check. So, do the
background check, it's federal
background check.
So Madam Chair Representative.
We are now
How, how do we provide this
information to the feds to get
that hit, so that it says, OK,
it's a yes or no, and I'm chair
representative. And is it the
feds that will do it. What do we
have to do a state, new state
check, ma'am, which I hope we
don't.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Representative block,
it's the exact same mechanism
that is used to report to them
on current prohibited people,
including things that can be
temporal in time like temporary
restraining orders or extreme
risk protection orders. So, no,
no new plumbing, no new
infrastructure, same exact
mechanism already exists. It's
to communicate to the point of
sale gun broker, the ability for
that person to pass or not pass
that background check.
OK, got it. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. So it would
just be a regular background
check with this additional
information provided somehow.
That
If I had a criminal record as a
juvenile, I'd go to sportsman's.
It says, nope, you were denied
and then that's that.
I'm sure, I guess that's just
for clarification uh uh
Representative Block it is if
you committed a crime as a
juvenile that was at uh with a
firearm at the offense of uh as
indicated if it was an adult
it'd be a felony, um, and it
was, uh, up to 10 years after
your deposition.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
appreciate that answer. Are
there other states that have
comparable laws regarding this,
that they've implemented, Madam
Chair Representative. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative my
subject expert has a paper right
here.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, Representative Block
and I did have the pleasure of
researching what this looks like
in other parts of the country,
and as I mentioned earlier,
there's over 20 states. They
vary and I think this is
important for the community to
consider on what their
prohibition means relative to a
juvenile disposition prohibiting
one from owning a farm. For
example, in the state of Utah, 7
years.
In the state of California, you
have to have reached your 30th
birthday irrespective of charge
date and in Illinois you are
never eligible to possess a
firearm if you had a juvenile
disposition that was a felony.
So over 20 states including
Florida, Oklahoma, Nebraska,
Tennessee, um, varying degrees
of
Prohibition times associated
with that.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. This might be
another question for your
expert. So, have there been any
challenges that have arisen with
the implementation because I
know Madam Chair Representative,
we said that there's a, there's
a variety of terms that each
state has. Have we seen any, any
issues with that, Madam Chair
Representative, and I don't know
if you might have information.
be some
Madam Chair Representative,
we're not aware of any at this
time.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
That's good to hear. All right.
Madam to your representative,
how do we, how do we define
maybe, maybe I missed it in your
bill. How do we define juvenile
disposition involving the use of
a firearm.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, uh, committee. I'll defer
to um my subject expert Mark
Levada. The definitions
in of uh
Section 1B.
Um, which
Mirrors, uh, the previous
section 4.
Uh, page 2
Starting on line 17
representative my apologies,
chair and Representative block.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
OK, so involving the use,
delinquent act involving the use
of a firearm.
That would be a felony if
committed by. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. OK, that, that
helps a lot.
OK, Madam Chair, let's see.
Are there any uh federal
Uh, legal definitions for
juvenile disposition.
Or is this just mirroring other
state?
Herbage, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
block,
none that we we saw.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you so much.
Representative Mr. Lovato, so
Then your amendment, Madam Chair
Representative, how does this,
cause I, I read the amendment
barely barely, sorry.
Didn't really have much.
time.
Madam Chair Representative, so
I'm trying to
Mirror it here
With
Section 3.
This last chunk of text on D.
And to representative. So my
question is from the actual
original bill that we
For versus the amendment which
we just amended.
Just make sure I have the
correct 11 moment, please.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
think I figured it out, page 1
line 6.
My question
Apologize. OK, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you. OK.
I, I got clarification. Sorry, I
had to had to cross reference
here. Has all the time on the
floor and I'm, I'm, it drives me
crazy when they have a bill in
the jacket finder thing and then
they have a substitute and it's
not in the binder and I'm like,
OK, what am I doing? So,
Appreciate you for bearing with
me here. OK, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, continuing
on here.
Uh, so states that individuals
pardoned for their juvenile
offenses will not be restricted.
I'm, I'm just guessing, Madam
Chair Representative, that this
has been used, which is why
we're using it in the section.
Madam Chair Representative, how
many people historically have
received pardons for such
offenses.
In New Mexico.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I, I would not have a
statistical data, uh, with no
timeline as you asked, but I
will say on page 3, line 14 to
line 18 does clarify the time
period and the restrictions and
uh where you do not qualify for
your point of sale.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative. I guess I'm just
trying to figure out why that,
why does it say a person who has
not been pardoned for juvenile
disposition.
Is there, Madam Chair
Representative, can you tell us
the page and line number you're
talking. I thought we were on
page 3,
16 to 18.
A.
Sure.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, uh, thank you for the
question. Um, that, that
language mirrors um the language
used, um, earlier in the in the
statue that um
Adresses adults
So it was just simply uh
mirrored with the juveniles.
Perfect. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and Representative
Mr. Lovato. So, OK, so it just
mirrors the language, good deal.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
next here, um,
How does the language interact
with existing ceiling laws for
juvenile records?
I'm, I'm referring to page.
9
8 to 16. I'm.
Um, madam chair represented this
bill, uh, does not, uh, increase
penalties.
Um, for juvenile offenses at
all.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I guess I'm not,
I'm not asking about penalties.
I'm just asking about this, the
laws about sealing records.
I'm just wondering how that
Right
ceiling. I mean, I I assume just
not being able to access
juvenile records, right? So, I'm
your representative, I'm just
wondering how it interacts with
the current.
Laws, and is there any kind of
conflicts anywhere or?
What, what's the
What's
the road manager. Thank you,
Madam Chair and representative
I'll defer to Mark.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
block, um.
It is um.
Very narrow the language is very
narrow to allow.
Access
Um
And very limited as as um spoken
to uh uh expertaker talked about
this very narrow circumstances
to access that information and
that that is on page 9 line 8.
Of the, of the seal uh sealed
records actor statue.
Perfect. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative.
That's good to clarify.
All right, Madam Chair
Representative, next I'm going
to talk about
The, maybe not the FIR so to
speak, but the certain agency
analysis which I've looked
through.
Uh, I see there's one from AOC.
Corrections, DAs.
The CYFD, I mean, goodness.
We've got a lot of agency
analysis. So Madam Chair
Representative, I'm, I'm just
wondering, and I don't think I
have an FIR right in front of
me, and I apologize for that.
Are we?
Foreseeing any kind of
Costs, I'm sorry. Oh, I do have
an FIR. What?
Can you address the cost?
to each department, Madam Chair
Representative ICNMCD LOPD.
Those two say that they see a
significant cost.
Increases in their departments,
Madam representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. We don't
agree with the FIR.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
And do, is it just like the
amount that we disagree on, or
is it just that it may
Increase any cost, or is it
because there's already
appropriations in the budget,
Madam Chair. I'm just trying to
figure out.
If we disagree, I want to figure
out how, how we can clarify that
for the next committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, uh, there
is no additional software cost,
uh, there is no additional uh
hard good, um, there is the
inter uh entering of information
in an already existing system.
And so we believe that those
numbers are. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative.
And
So sorry. I'm sorry, can you
please, no worries, I didn't
finish the question. I just
didn't want to, want to make
sure we were all in the same
place.
So Madam Chair Representative,
I'm on page.
Oh gosh, I don't think this,
this agency analysis is.
123.
123, I think we're on page.
2
Of the
Agency analysis for
The AOC.
And they say, experienced
defense attorneys is what they
would need more of, including
salary benefits and operational
costs, and that would be
291,000. So other than whatever
the
The softwares that we mentioned
previously, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, can you just address that
cost for the increase in at the
LOPD.
Regarding attorneys and their
salaries, benefits, etc.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Representative. I
don't have an expert from that
agency regarding their
workforce.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
then I'm just going to take
The agency's word for it, then
I, I don't understand uh.
Or I don't, I don't know one in
the audience right now, and I
think
Their lobbyists in a different
committee right now maybe. So
Madam Chair Representative, I
just will note that 291,000. I
just want to make sure they
don't have another hole in their
budget, especially in rural
areas. I want to make sure that
those rural areas have access to
proper counsel, especially cause
everyone.
Reserves their constitutional
rights and and due process, etc.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you.
For that clarification. My next
question.
is regarding, Madam Chair
Representative how we're tying
we're addressing
The root cause of these kinds of
Of infractions. I know that some
of them are behavioral health. I
know we've talked about behavior
health trust fund and stuff, and
that's not necessarily in the
bill.
But I do want to clarify, Madam
Chair Representative.
I, I'm, I'm one that likes to
look at legislation to try to
prevent things like this. So,
In your legislation when we
implement this, if we do pass
this legislation, will there,
will there be some kind of uh a
rollout in communities to talk
to to young folks about this
kind of new change and how if
this does happen, if you do
indeed.
Have a
juvenile firearm.
Conviction or
Something on your record that
this will indeed follow you. I
just want to make sure that they
know that this could indeed
follow them when it comes to
buying a firearm. So is that, is
that considered and have we,
have we looked into the
what we might need to implement
this, Madam, and I apologize for
the lengthy question, but it was
kind of at the end, pretty much
what we need to implement this
for young folks who need to know
about this newly implemented
legislation if it does pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, committee so as
earlier who who stayed by my uh
the my subject expert Benjamin
Baker, who is the senior public
uh, safety advisor, um, this is
one of the many tools in the
toolbox so that we're asking for
all the time, but especially
this session to be able to give
law enforcement and our
prosecutors, the tools that they
need to be able to address uh
crime, so this is just one of
many tools I know that I will be
supporting.
assessments and behavioral
health and education as well,
um, to go for more of the
systematic um as for if it has
an education element in the bill
itself, no, it does not.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. That
helps a lot. So then continuing
on here with the actual juvenile
records.
Do we, do we specify in the
bill?
And if we don't, what protocols
are used to
secure this data.
Because it is very sensitive
data since it's
Regarding juvenile offenses,
what protocols are in place to
secure the data and if this
change is made, how do we ensure
that agencies are complying with
that privacy. So thank you very
much chair and representatives.
We are not sharing any part of
the juvenile record. What it is
is as um my subject expert
Benjamin Baker explained earlier
it is whether or not they
qualify or not qualify, that is
all that the point of sale will
have information on.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So, I guess, so
if, if this is added,
new provision and statute.
And I'm an FFL.
It doesn't, I don't need to
worry about it, but it, it's the
state talking to the feds. So,
Madam Chair Representative, can
you just tell me how the state
talks to the feds to add this.
Check mark and whatever the
Federal
Guidelines are
to say yes or no when that
Nick's background check comes
back clean or not. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
represent the same way they do
now or other crimes, whether or
not it is a restraining order or
or other disqualifying measures
for your point of sale.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, so it'll be.
On, on the same plane.
Good to hear.
I'm, I'm just glad we're not
changing anything regarding that
continuing here, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, do we, have we
looked at research about
likelihood of individuals with
juvenile firearm offenses
committing future.
Firearm-related crimes and, and
how does that play into this,
especially with the intent of
legislation, which I've heard
before. I want to make sure that
we're clear. Is this a tool that
we can use to prevent that, if
that is indeed a problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'm not
really sure about your question
you're asking me to comment
about a a study about a future
intent.
Of criminals I, I, I don't
believe I can answer that. I, I
will say that we know that when
uh criminals have uh hurdles to
access their fire weapons.
We can affect crime.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Yeah, and I, I just
I guess what I'm trying to
figure out is we're looking for
prevention wise.
Not as opposed to having to be
reactive in statute. And so,
Madam Chair, like my previous
question about that, I do want
to make sure that when we're
putting a new law on the books,
we're creating a new
Provision to bar somebody from
obtaining something.
If that prevent, I mean, I guess
I'm thinking if there was a a
juvenile who previously had
multiple convictions. Let's just
say they had
3 or 4 different infractions on
their record.
Does it show that they've even
learned?
Because while they were a
juvenile madams who represented,
they, they already got access to
firearms.
had these infractions.
So they're going to now legally
be obtaining a firearm.
On the legal market.
And if they previously have 4 or
5 convictions was to say that
that individual, or maybe it's
not a conviction for juvenile,
but they, they have been found
guilty.
Juvenile
For this crime. What's to say
they're not going to just go
back on the street once they're
19 years old.
And then just get an illegal
firearm.
I guess I'm wondering if, if
this is even an effective
approach. Um, I, I guess if you
want to comment or your, your
experts, I'm sure that they have
data on this, Madam Chair.
Representative.
I'm sorry, I didn't understand
the, thank you. I don't need to
comment.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And I
guess I'm just looking at my, my
data here that I've, I've
compiled and I believe.
There's an interesting study.
That was published on Science
Direct regarding that. So I, if
I can get access to that, I
apologize, it's, it's analog
here. It's printed and it's not
on my computer as, as we speak,
but if I find it, I'll send it
along to you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, continuing
here.
Uh, where am I here?
Lost my place.
Madam Chair Representative.
We talked about other states, so
that's good. I already got that
question answered.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
conflicting legislation. Do you
see any issues with other
legislation that's being
proposed this session that could
be conflicting with HP 39.
Representative, um, we have to
stick to the bill. They, they
don't have to have.
Information about other bills.
OK, thank you. I, I apologize. I
am not trying to get you to have
like a gotcha thing with other
legislation. I just, I don't
have the FIR in front of me, but
I'm sure it says if there may be
conflicting parts of your bill,
and I just wanted to make sure
that
That does get indeed fixed
before.
It gets passed, if it does,
Madam Chair Representative,
which was why.
OK. House Bill 135, it says
amending the delinquency Act in
different ways, and that
legislation would
Potentially conflict with yours.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess instead of asking a
question, I would just
Defer to the sponsor of that
that bill and maybe just
coordinate with them to ensure
that there is nothing.
Duplicative or in conflict
that's not the responsibility of
the sponsor of the bill.
Oh, I, OK, Madam Chair
Representative, I just want to
make sure if this does get
passed in 134 gets passed,
there's not a conflict. But if,
if that, if you don't, if that's
not your responsibility, then
Then I will let that
Go. So Madam Chair
Representative, thank you for
continuing this.
Are, are we
Are we, are we worried about
this bill maybe potentially
Disappropriate proportionately,
I apologize, Madam Chair. This
aportionately impacting certain.
Socioeconomic or racial groups,
Madam Chair Representative, and
is that included in that data of
the 300.
18 infractions, I believe we
said in 500 days.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
the.
The groups in which you're
talking about were not um
studied, we're looking at the
criminal activity.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And I'm,
and then next on this line of
questioning.
Could this bill potentially
discourage juveniles from taking
plea plea deals if they know
that they will face long term
firearm restrictions.
With your newly implemented.
Um
Representative, I, I don't know
what individual.
Juveniles will.
be discouraged about.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Well, if,
if I was the juvenile, I, I
certainly would. I would
certainly take that.
I knew that that was the case,
so.
For the
For information's sake, Madam
Chair Representative, uh,
continuing here, uh, do we
I, I guess in the FIRs and the
analysis, I know with DPS did
comment. Did we see if this
might affect recruitment and
retention of law enforcement.
Agencies, that's
totally out of the realm of this
spill.
You, they can't project, they
don't know. So don't ask
questions that I
I'm just I know that we have a
We have an expert, we have
multiple experts here, and I, I
know they have data for us, and
I, I, I won't ask the question
anymore, but I think that's
something to consider, and I'm
sure.
So
On this bill, Madam Chair
Representative.
I went over with the public
defenders had questions about,
and I think that those some of
those were very valid,
especially regarding the
staffing concerns over $200,000.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um
Talked about certain advocacy
groups, Madam Chair.
Representative
I think that is kind of close to
what that in questions wise, but
I did.
want to reiterate
I do not want to.
For me, I don't wanna punish
folks when they're young.
Or something that they, let's
just say it's one time, one time
infraction, you're 16, you do
something stupid. Your brain
isn't fully developed, right?
You're stupid.
Maybe not, maybe the kid's not
stupid, but.
If the person is doing it,
they're probably not doing it
with the best intentions or they
may not necessarily.
Have the proper brain function
to, to know.
What's right and wrong. Maybe if
it's 5 or 6 infractions, maybe
if it's 2 or 3, that's a
different story, but I certainly
do want to be cautious regarding
this, and I'm very, very
cautious regarding this bill,
but I will certainly give it
back to the committee so that we
can hear more debate before I
decide. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you both for being here today
and, and your
testimony. I don't know if you
had anything to add to that,
Madam Chair.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative. I
would just say that this bill is
not designed to punish juvenile
offenders. I've worked with
juvenile offenders, I understand
that I understand the juvenile
brain is still developing until
25, we are not increasing
penalties or parole. This is a
public safety bill and where um
we're not removing as if they
were an adult, they might lose
their right forever. We are not,
um, uh, proposing that nor we're
proposing even removing.
their right forever as other
states are, um, this is a public
safety bill.
We go to uh Representative
Romero. Thank you.
mountain chair, um, thank you,
representative.
Um
Madam Chair, Representative, I
guess I'm, I feel like there's
some missing pieces here that I
just wanna, and I don't know if
we need extra language, um.
But I'm
Trying to figure out a couple of
things. Firstly, who is entering
the data into the um background
checks website and at what point
in time.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, uh, the way it works for
all matters whether it's an
adult adjudicated felony
temporary restraining order, uh,
um, that information comes from
the administrative office of the
court, so courts of record
report.
these adjudications or uh just
uh dispositions, which is the
material part or the filing in
the case of an emergency
restraining order or something
like that, and they fight
through DPS, DPS communicates to
the federal government through
an already established
relationship in portal.
And so Madam Chair, um,
Representative. And if the
person is a juvenile, um, how do
they, how does that information
also get into the system?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Romero
at present does not, and that is
the foundational problem from my
perspective.
So
Where in the bill does it talk
about entering that information.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee and Representative
Romero, um, I, I don't know that
the entrance is specifically
that will come from the same
district court that adjudicates
all the other crimes and
dispositions.
So, Madam Chair, um,
representative, there's, we
don't discuss how that works,
unfortunately, I think it, it's
a, it's a bit of a hole that we
need to talk about how that
information is both entered and
removed, um, from a court
proceeding after that 10 year
period, we need to give someone
that job, right, to, to take it
out when once it's the 10 years
have passed as well, um, and
who's liable for making sure
that that happens. And I don't
know where in a federal system,
it exists that you
can remove the name, um, either,
so do, can you confirm that
that's a possibility or?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Romero, I, I would weigh in this
way that currently there's an
expiration period from a state
conviction for an adult, which
is what we're talking about at
this point, uh, for any felony
crime that prohibits them from a
point of sale purchase for a
period of 10 years post the
finish of their sentence that
already is removed via this
process. That's that situation
already exists and is
contemplated within the current
established protocol.
OK, great. And I think Madam
Chair, we would just need to
make sure that that's really
clear as to who um.
Who is the party that is is.
That we're requiring to do that,
Madam Chair represented, may I
ask a question if we, if I
research and and brought
information on whether or not
the that information is
originally put into the portal
with a deleting date that's
automatic and not a manual
removal, which we know people
can make. Would that be
information that you would be
interested in in the next
committee. I will, I will do my
best to,
yeah, I would love that. Just
the.
c lar ific ation of how the
process works so that way with
the restoration of rights or
that, um, individual that they,
that they know what day perhaps
that they are that that right is
available to them, but also um.
I don't know with that 10 year
period, Madam Chair, for those
that get access to firearms
again after their conviction is
um completed.
Do they get any special
training, any, we don't require
them to do anything other than
now you can just purchase a
firearm.
Having a felony record and then.
They can just go the very next
day and get a firearm. Is that
correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair representative. I,
I'm not aware of any uh firearm
training for felons that are
eligible to buy weapons. I mean,
you and I don't need to buy a
weapon, we don't have to have a
training and so I, I'm not aware
of any of this requirement. OK.
Um, OK.
That was, I was just unaware of
how it is that we can.
Uh, that first of all that these
rights are restored and then how
that works. So, um,
The other question that I have
is regarding the amendment, and
I know we adopted it, um, but
after a closer read when we are
thinking about it mimicking the
section, um, section one.
Uh, a 4.
Um
Here were specifically talking
about delinquent acts involving
the use of a firearm.
We don't do the same thing.
In the release of records. Is
there a reason why we wouldn't
want to be specific about when
we're looking at section 3 on
the amendment.
Um
I would
Recommend language essentially
after line.
Letter D line 3 that says
involve after act.
Involving use of a firearm that
would constitute a felony if
committed, so that way it's not
every felony, it's just firearm
felonies, um.
Would that be a friendly
amendment, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, uh, representative,
thank you, Madam Chair.
We, we consider that a friendly
change.
You want me to refresh that.
Um, I think since they're
talking about doing other
changes before judiciary, do you
want to make sure it's in there
or you want to just it's
friendly, we can do it now or we
can do it.
And representative this bill we,
we did not have another
amendment before judiciary that
was the other bill, but I'm so
sorry, Representative.
I think you were going to.
It's a small judiciary, uh,
restoration of rights after 10
years. Is that?
Madam Chair, it's actually on
the amendment that we received,
um.
It would be after, um,
This app on online 3 after the
word act.
Um, would just be inserting.
The
phrase involving use of a
firearm.
That would constitute a felony
if committed by an adult. So
then it parallels what's going
on in the earlier part of the
bill.
And that's friendly. Madam Chair
Representative, may I have my
expert witness um talk directly
about this proposed change.
Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, that that would be
consistent with the other uh the
amended language and in the
original bill, yes.
a track.
OK, great. Meaning it's
friendly. That's what I'm
hearing. OK.
You're standing between me and
tacos right now, so I'm like I
um I'll try and go quickly, um.
Which means also everybody else
should.
Be able to eat.
Um
I think that's representative, I
think.
Uh, we need to stop and make a
formal vote on your amendment.
OK, and before you go on, that's
OK. So, Madam chair I move the
amendment to the amendment.
OK, and can you state
Um, under, um,
3.
After act.
After act, the phrase would be
involving use of a firearm.
OK.
I'm so sorry, Madam Chair, I
don't believe my expert witness
was clear. Yeah, are you, are
you?
On the
Yeah.
I'm, I apologize, please
continue.
You want me to explain it or
we're good. OK. Thank you. OK.
It's acceptable still. OK. OK.
All right. Um,
So we will um.
Motion was made for an ending of
the amendment.
And um D right after act.
Um, for, um,
Involving uh the use of a
firearm.
And do I have a second?
OK, then seconded.
Go for a vote, please.
Um
Representative Block.
Representative Lord.
Uh, Madam Chair, no, because I
don't know what it does yet.
You, would you like?
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson.
I, I madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chu, yes.
We've amended your amendment.
Um
Oh, I'm sorry. Yes, we have to.
But
I'll just be a no on this for
now.
No.
No, ma'am.
Representative Lord, uh,
Representative Romero, do you
have any more?
Um, I just,
One final question on the use of
data, Madam Chair, um.
Representative, is there?
When we're talking about
providing.
The records, um.
For federal authorities.
What
I guess at a certain point,
We want to know how it's being
used, how those records are
being used, do we?
Have any, um
It seems like Madam Chair,
representative, there's no
constraint, um, as to what data
would be provided for this minor
after being able to open it up
after sealing.
Um, my concern is that
Some federal administrations can
be unfriendly to the use of
data, in which case we're just.
Turning over what information,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative. I'll turn it
over to, uh, Benjamin Baker and
you want to comment, but it, it
is my understanding we're not
um.
The process is not to provide
the records the the processes to
enter whether or not they
qualify or don't qualify, but I
will, um, defer to my subject
expert.
members of the committee, uh,
representative Romero, I think
you raise a good point.
It's an important one. the only
amendments that are made that
Mr. Lovato will be able to speak
to with precision that already
exist in law relative to the
ceiling of juvenile records, um,
is, is, and he can kind of speak
to what that uh looks like, in
fact, the record, I think um
when we're thinking about it,
what we're thinking about is
adjudication. So this is not the
case file, this is not the same
photographs. This is not the
statement made by a juvenile
witness relative to their abuse
or or anything like that.
What was the adjudication.
Of the act in this case we're
talking about something that
would have been considered a
felony punishable by up to a
year involving a gun, very
specific. It's binary yes or no,
and I think Mr. Lovato can talk
about what impacts we're
proposing that have on the.
The Children's school.
Go ahead. Sorry, Madam Chair
Representative Romero, it, it is
the language is narrow and that
it
provides very limited access to
the adjudication information.
Um, and so
Uh, that, that's page 6.
Uh, excuse me.
No, it's a little bit further
in, in the, in the bill. It's.
Page 9, at 8.
At line 8
Yeah.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
I think, I, I think it could be
narrower. Um, when it comes to,
um.
You know, essentially looking at
the.
The actual data. Um, and I think
we should perhaps spell out what
data is being provided to the
federal um system. Um, we, you
know, like a standard, you know,
form for, for what we're
allowing them to look to look
out for these records that are
being released, so.
Um, I don't have any proposed
language right now, but if it's
just.
Name, you know.
previous
The, the delinquent act that
would be a felony and and that's
it. I don't know. I mean how.
I don't know how broad we, how
much information we need to do,
but.
Confine it to only the
essentials for what they would
need for the database if we
could do that.
I 100% agree, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative, there is no
right we we don't need access to
the record. What we need is
qualified or don't qualified,
and, and I would support that
and we'll just see how I can get
that done.
OK that's all right now
representative Romero, and, and
I also
Mentioned earlier under the
Children's code, there's an
exception to the confidentiality
of those records, um, under
32A-2-32, um, and it gives law
enforcement officers access when
the request is related to the
investigation of the crime.
And so um when you're talking
about a person that possessed a
gun and was adjudicated.
Um, and they're being
investigated for crime as an
adult.
Um
That that falls under that
exception.
Um,
Representative Lord, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Representative experts, so.
I want to go over some
technicality issues that I also
have that rips and Romero had.
So, um,
I'm very close with the
gentlemen that were here that
were here earlier. This is in
New Mexico farms Industry
Association, so I've been
talking to them about.
How this works and I've been
there when they go through the
Knicks, I've explained
everything to me.
So part of the problem is, I
don't know if you know this or
not.
But
When you send off in the form.
But purchase again.
It goes off to the ATF.
Usually that job is contracted
out half the time, not even ATF
agent looking at they're looking
for some simple stuff, they're
looking for things like you can
get something simple like they
restraining order from DPS.
My concern is, so how are these
other states doing this, because
now you're taking children's
records.
Somebody has to have that
information.
Get it released, send it back to
Nick's in a timely manner.
How are these other states
handling cause I don't see the
specifics and the technicality
of how you're going to get the
records to these people that are
looking to see.
Because you want them to have,
it's a crime with a firearm.
So does that mean that I mean
who who's getting the records,
who's in hold of that? Who is
sending it and what is it gonna
have on it? That's, that's my
big concern.
Ma'am terms the committee
represented Lord, I think that's
a great question. It's
important, um, I think again
might have conflated a little
bit what record means and what
we're really talking about is an
adjudication that would result
in a prohibition from being
eligible, right? And so I think
that the key kind of component
here is the administrative
office of the courts already has
to do the work to determine what
records disqualify a person for
firearms, uh.
Possession. It's like that
already exists. Now you're right
in that if this were passed,
there is an additional narrowing
component to that, and I, I
accept that that is true, and I
think that is the point of the
legislation is to carve out a
population that has shown.
It's increasingly
needed, um, that work is done on
the front end. That is all in
the reporting from the state
going to the process, what
you're talking about is what is
the, the, the receiving end so
the requester at the point of
sale makes the request based on
the information on the form,
that record, uh, presence or
absence for prohibition needs to
be present when it receives. It
is the state's responsibility to
get out the prohibited person
just like if one were to apply
for a restraining order this
evening that has to get.
Input in there to be able to get
there so that that exists and
that that can be done.
Right, and Madam chair and a
representative because I'm
looking at it from the insider
baseball looking at it. So we
have this NIC system.
That when you feel it, and it's
not on the form, so I'm guessing
we inform the ATF this this is
what we want for the future. Is
that correct?
chair members of the committee
represented for just like we do
with a temporary restraining
order today. Yes, ma'am.
Yeah, also, uh, I also Madam
Chairman Ribson and I spoke to
them about the tenure thing that
is not automatic, you would have
to apply to have that taken off.
It's not going to come off your
record. So if it doesn't get
handled, if you say, hey, my
thing's cleared, you gotta go
through a tremendous amount of
steps, lawyer up, get the
information, get all the
paperwork, you, it's on that
person to prove it.
So Madam Chair, representative,
I guess what I'm thinking is it
probably would have been better
for everyone cause I know a
representative Ramiro had
questions on how the other
states are doing it because DPS,
it's simple, right? You have
these, you have this whole.
Now we're
Relying on the administrative
courts and walk me through this.
To, OK.
They file for to get a gun.
And that ATF has to send
For information. Who are they
sending it to?
How long will it take, and how
do those people know just to
say.
Yes or no. Who is that person
and do they have a lot of
training or is it just a clerk
with a high school education. Is
it somebody who will actually
know.
This is what I'm supposed to
say, this is what I'm supposed
to send, who is making that
decision to send back to the ATF
or more likely the person
they've contracted to do that
work.
Madam Chair, the committee
Representative floor
respectfully, it would be this
legislature creating a new law
that says they shall, um, and so
if, if this law were passed and
it became a prohibition to be a
previously adjudicated
delinquent with a gun-related
crime, and that is the
incumbency.
Of those agencies to report that
in New Mexico, you're right,
it's the Department of Public
Safety is the, the intersection
point for that, just like it is
now for every other felony
adjudication or other
prohibition for firearms
possession. So no, no changes in
the system or how it's an
addition of a new criteria.
Right, and Madam Chair, I think
that would have helped with
decisions on if you had said,
OK, this is what they do in
other states. This is exactly
how I do it, then we could have
had the chance to amend it or
change it with nothing in there,
that means.
I hate when we.
Sometimes do things where we're
reinventing the wheel where it's
rather working properly
somewhere else. So I guess that.
and
So I just go ahead, ma'am
sorry ma'am
so um we don't put operations or
process in our bills, but I do
see that it could build comfort
if I make a one cheater that
explains these as well as the
information that representative
Romero, um, requested.
Right, the other thing I want to
bring up because it all has to
do with background checks.
When you go to do a background
check and there's a hold for 7
days. I don't know if everybody
knows this. Nothing happens.
Honest to God, nothing.
There is no further
investigation. Nobody's looking
for anything extra or
extraneous. So after that 7 day
wait period, either something's
gonna come back where they're
denied, that's a no sale, and
that's the obvious one, same
thing's gonna happen with this,
or it's gonna come back, um,
saying proceed.
So you don't, yeah, they're
ready to go. Oh, there's a thing
called open.
Open means they sent for the
records.
Nobody replied
They can give them the gun in 20
days. I think we passed that
with 20 days. I just want you to
be aware you can still get a
firearm.
But I think
What it comes down to more than
that.
How I look at the bill, yes, if
I know somebody is the worst of
the worst, they've got a ton of
crimes, they've done.
The most egregious crimes
they've committed a murder, blah
blah. Don't want them to fire
him well.
I hate to say kids do dumb
things, but that, that, that
draws a line for me.
However, I'm also looking at, we
have a loophole in the next
system, we do.
has always been there and that's
on the ATS part, not much we can
do about it here.
Um
I have a concern that.
We do this and there's no
automatic tenure. This person
has to go through the whole
system of trying to get the
record clear, and that's not
easy either.
Um
It still doesn't.
So I've just been informed that
um I'm sorry to interrupt, but
Madam Chair, I've just been
informed that there is a
slightly different process
between getting as a juvenile,
getting your records sealed and
getting expunged.
And I think the um the.
Difficult lift that you have
described is when you are
expunging your record. Well,
Madam Chair, because you're
saying after 10 years, isn't
that what it says in here, 10
years at the 10 year mark, they
still have, it's on.
Their part. They have to go get
it cleared with the Nexus and
that's why I'm trying to to make
that.
So if somebody commits a crime,
Madam Chair representative
experts, and they
Uh, kill somebody, commit murder
without a firearm, this is not
applicable, so they could kill
somebody with a knife, run them
over, kill them any other way.
And they still can get a
firearm. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Lord, great question we heard
during the last bill
presentation the DA talked
about, uh, folks, um, prosecuted
as youthful offenders. If a
person did what you just
described, the likelihood of
them being prosecuted as an
adult is extraordinarily high.
Therefore, they would be
ineligible irrespective of their
age at the time of the crime.
So with that, Madam Sheriffs
don't even include if it was
like 2nd degree murder.
Representative Lord, I don't
have memorized the, the, uh,
precise crimes that qualify one
for adult sentences, but I will
tell you there is a distinct
difference between the crime of
first-degree murder and the
crime of voluntary manslaughter
that was recently very
important, uh, both result in
the death of a human being, and
there's a difference between
those two in existing law.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair, I
represent an expert. I'm just
looking at.
This other
thing
But they could do a very
egregious crime and still be.
Um
Oh, I also want to make sure
people understood. I know a lot
of people thought.
Law enforcement does have access
to certain records, but they
don't, they would not have
access to this though, they
would not know where the person
was denied.
Yeah, OK, so they, they would
not know. I think you got to
know.
So law enforcement doesn't know,
so it doesn't um they were
concerned, I, I've never seen so
many.
Uh
Issues that were sent.
I did have one that I wanted to
address.
Um
We had
So, um,
Public defender Kim Chavez Cook
was here earlier and she asked a
question, asked her to send it
to me so I could re-ask it to
get some clarification because I
wasn't sure what she was saying.
So she was saying, um, the bill
also makes them a felon or felon
in possession, so they're guilty
of that 3rd degree felony if
they possess a firearm. This is
inconsistent with the core
provision of the Delinquency Act
32A to 18A, that guarantees that
a judgment resulting in a
juvenile disposition should not
be deemed a conviction or crime,
nor shall it be imposed any
civil disabilities ordinarily
resulting from the convictions
of crime. Can you address that
which she had brought?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, my my
subject expert will.
That we did address it the first
time she asked it but but but
it's alright, it's complex,
we'll do it again.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
can you re-ask the question,
please,
if you don't mind.
Thank you. Um, OK, so what she
said was, but the bill also
makes him a felon for felon in
possession, so they are guilty
of that 3rd degree felony if
that, if they possess one.
This is inconsistent with the
core provision of delinquency
Act that guarantees that a
judgment resulting in a juvenile
disposition should not be deemed
a conviction or crime, nor shall
it impose any civil disability.
Ordinarily resulting for the
conviction of a.
So if if I'm understanding she's
saying it's not a crime, so how
are we now making it?
I think it's well, I, I think
the last amendment is pertinent
that it came in under D.
That's that the men's language
and addresses that.
And then um the second issue is
um you're dealing with a
dangerous subset of the public,
um, so.
So that that sort of addresses
any sort of constitutional
concerns that Kim Travis Cook
would have.
Um, because you can carve out
exceptions when you're dealing
with dangerous subsets of the
public as a view to
prohibition against the general
public.
And Madam Chair represent
experts. Are there any other
situations where we unseal
records like that to make a
decision on.
Person's life or property or
liberties.
I'm, I'm not sure if New Mexico
has another provision, but other
states definitely have
provisions that mirror this that
that allow it because you're
dealing with the dangerous
subset.
so.
What happens when we have.
Somebody's done horrific crimes
in Texas when they were a
juvenile.
So we don't have records of
those here, so this, this is not
applicable to anybody out of
state. Is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Representative, that's
correct we can only control our
own state laws.
OK, so I'm looking in some of
the concerns.
Um
OK.
So this, there's so many. This
is from
That's FR. This is one of the
concerns it said.
Um, currently 32A-226 prevents
AOC from disclosing any sealed
dispositions, uh, pursuant to a
federal instant background
check.
This bill will allow the AOC to
disclose these sealed
dispositions involving the use
of a firearm for delinquent that
would have a felony offense if
convicted by convicted by an
adult.
So I'm gonna pause there first.
So anytime they use a firearm.
That would have been a charge.
Child does something they're not
charged. Walk with me.
They do something.
But now we're gonna say, if I
understand this correctly.
Because they did something.
With a firearm as a child.
We're gonna look at them.
Like they were an adult.
So saying that if if that felony
would have been something they
were charged with as an adult
that's still applicable to them
even though they didn't get the
charge.
Is that what I'm understanding,
Madam Chair?
So they have to have the charge.
Madam Chair Representative, it's
not this bill is not based on
charges, it's based on
convictions, right? And
adjudication.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, so it all
depends on.
The getting something as a
minor.
But it has to. I just wanna make
sure I'm perfectly clear on
this.
Um, manslaughter, assault,
battery, kidnapping, burglary.
Those would all be applicable if
they used a firearm, if they
kidnap somebody and use a
firearm.
They rape somebody and use a
farm.
If they rape somebody with a
knife.
That wouldn't count, is that
correct? That is correct.
Representative uh chair, Madam
Chair Representative Lord, um,
and that goes back to Mr. Baker
said earlier in your
hypothetical that would qualify
as a serious youthful offense
under the Children's code, which
would be part of the record that
law enforcement can access
that's not.
It is outside of a juvenile
record.
Under the Children's code.
OK, Madam Charleston, I, I can
see where the technicalities
could get grainy.
So that's why again, looking at
what other states are doing
because now you're putting
someone in charge of kind of
making these decisions.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
don't believe that it's
subjective.
It's if you uh commit a violent
crime, not using a firearm as uh
uh subject expert Mr. Baker has
stated and also uh Mister
Lovato, you are already going to
be charged.
At that adult level, correct?
Yeah. There's enumerated
offenses that that cover that
under the under the code.
Madam, would a minor that is
just in possession of a firearm.
Fall into this, where they would
be charged and they would not be
allowed to have a firearm, even
if they were holding it for
somebody else with that. So
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative as he stated
when we first started our
presentation that this is uh
I'll I'll, I well, I'll get to
do a hypothetical this time.
So if a group of adolescents are
in a car and there's probable
cause such as speeding or broken
tail light, and they find a
weapon in the car in the glove
compartment. They're not
committing a crime.
their knight possessing the
weapon, they will not follow
underneath the.
The purview of this only if they
are pointing, holding, firing,
or have on their body while
committing a crime will this be?
Uh, well this
under the
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'm gonna ask a question, so.
I guess this would not be
applicable. I was trying to
think if.
A child was home alone and
pointed or used a firearm.
And shot somebody who broke into
the house.
I guess it just comes down
whether they're convicted or
not. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
don't know what the charges are.
I don't know what he was
convicted of, and I don't know
what the defense was.
hypothetical
and yeah, I know Me
representatives, so right now.
It's getting late.
OK.
Once a minor has a firearm in
their possession in their
pocket. Is that a misdemeanor or
is that a felony?
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
defer to um Mr. Lovato.
No, I'm, I'm happy to answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh
Represent members of the
committee, the answer
unfortunately is it depends, and
I will give you a couple really
important things where they are
standing.
Are they standing inside of a
federal building? Are they
standing inside of a school? Are
they standing inside of this
legislature? Are they standing
in an open field of acreage on a
ranch where they have a
relative. It's hard to say
generally speaking, it can be
either.
It can never be both because
it's a singular incident, but it
can be either, so carrying a
firearm into a school is a
felony.
Simply being in possession of a
firearm and it can be a
misdemeanor. So it depends.
It's
It's, it's highly dependent. It
also depends on the weapon and
the age of the person and a
variety of other factors, but I
think I understand the the the
point of the question and I
think the goal here is the
difference between being in
possession and committing.
Uh, a violent offense.
That's enumerated.
Or one that requires a firearm
to uh to proceed with is the
difference here, and that's the
problem we're suffering with in
our communities.
And Madam Chair and
representative as a as a.
find this up, everybody's ready
because I don't talk about their
other bills. Um, how is this
going to play out with CYFD?
What if CYFD has certain
records.
To see where D even said that
there's going to be a
communication issue with them.
Um, but I guess it wouldn't
count because there's no felony,
but if there's a juvenile that
they believe should not have a
firearm. Is anybody taken into
CYFD.
Into consideration with their
opinion is on a child, because
one of the issues they had.
Was that most children that
commit crimes, um, that was what
they had said.
come from very traumatic
background.
And unfortunately,
Here's the hard part. I'm gonna
just wrap this up.
The hardest part for me on this
bill, I get it.
Horrible kids do horrible things
and done some really, really bad
things.
And then there's some kids do
some really stupid things, and
I'm not saying murder stupid.
I'm saying they do some dumb
things, but they have the
firearm.
Or they were there and they get
caught up in this.
Where they had a very traumatic
background.
So I'm still kind of on the
fence. I get what you're trying
to do, but between that and all
the technicality issues of how
things come to play.
And
We still have
See this, we're still not
getting to the.
Root cause.
And we're still not finding
other ways. I know this is
another tool in the toolbox.
But
Go on telegram like I keep
saying, I did not know that you
can buy cocaine, can buy drugs
and you can buy.
Uh, guns, you could buy anything
you want, so it's not stopping
that.
Um
Anyway, so I need to think some
more about this, but I think
that's all the question I have.
The main issues is that I
still in the ATF with the way it
works is if there's an open,
they can, OK, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
When
I'd like to move it too fast.
I am.
The amendment amended, yes.
OK.
Was that a second?
Yes
OK, um, we'll take roll.
Representative Block
No, ma'am.
Representative Lord, you know
what the explanation.
Representative Romero. Yes.
Representative Thompson, Madam
Vice Chair, S.
Adam sure. Yes.
Um,
we have a due pass on a vote of
4 to 2, um, as amended House
Bill 39.
Thank you so much and thank you
for the commit.
didn't ask. Oh, you did? Yeah,
yeah, sorry, sorry.
For an explanation of your,
yeah, it's gonna be quick
mentor. It's not a no, no, I
need to get some more
information on the bill, so
thank you.
OK, thank you. You do have a.
Do pass is amended.
Hey.
Let's, um, House Bill 50. Thank
you, Representative Barrago for
being so patient. We're going to
Go ahead whenever you're ready.
Announce it. Oh, I did.
Yes.
Ready? Yes. Go ahead. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
and members, I know you've had a
long day.
Um, and it's really tough cases
to listen to today.
Um
HP 50.
Is the bill that I'm presenting
to you today. I'm just read the
the title of it relating to
crime, providing that multiple
violations of unlawful taking,
embezzlement of fraudulently
obtaining or receiving or
transporting stolen vehicles or
motor vehicles applied towards
sentencing regardless of which
section of law was violated
previously providing penalties,
and I just wanna, Madam Chair,
introduce some.
of the witnesses that are here
today, um, DA Sam Bregman, who
had to leave, um, and send his
regrets.
Um, New Mexico state police and
I will read their names. Deputy
Chief, uh, Wagner.
Major Emmanuel Gutierrez,
Sergeant Anthony Luna, who is
the um in charge of the auto
theft division.
Um
Sheriff John Allen sends his
regards. He is in Washington DC
right now.
Um, he has sent chief deputy
deputy.
I'm not sure how to say this
boons, I think, is that correct?
Um,
And he is one of our Bernardino
County sheriffs, um.
Also, and I don't know if he's
still in the room or not, but we
have uh.
The chief of the Las Cruces
Police Department, Jeremy Story.
Um
Let's see
He's on his way, OK.
Oh, he's on Zoom, OK, so he was
here, but he will testify on
Zoom.
We have um APD.
Uh, Chief Harold Medina sends
his regards. Commander Jeff
Bernard, Sergeant Nakamura.
Uh, Sergeant Taylor.
So she composed briggs with the
mayor's office, and Josh
Anderson was here earlier, and I
think he also had to leave, um,
we have
Uh, we had, and he's had to
leave and he sends his regards.
Mark Powell with the New Mexico
Automotive Dealers Alliance.
Um
Let's see here, uh, Terry Cole
with the Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce.
Um, and Benjamin Baker was here
earlier and I don't know if he's
returning back.
Um, we have, um, Devon Chapman
with OSI. He is the executive
director.
And I think that is the list.
There's some other officers here
as well and.
I'm not gonna introduce them
right now, but they will
probably be be testifying.
Um
And
Madam Chair, I
I will tell you that, um.
The reason and and if you
remember a couple of years ago
we testified before you on this
similar bill, actually the bill
has been changed some since that
bill was presented 2 years ago.
Um, but New Mexico is in a
crisis when it comes to
automobile theft, we are 5th in
the nation. We were first in the
nation, but we've increased that
to 5 we're still in the top 10.
Am I just sort of going in and
out. It sounds like I am. Oh,
OK. Um,
And automobile theft is a crime
that is committed.
At all ages.
So this is, and then I know
today you've you've all been
listening to a lot of youth
related, um, offenses, but this
is a crime that's committed.
Anywhere from
910 year old kids to ninety-nine
year old people, um, and I think
that that's the important thing
about this particular bill is
that it applies across the
board.
Um
Madam Chair and members.
Give me a second, I want to pull
some information up.
I want to mention.
A name to you.
Which you may remember.
New Mexico state police officer
Justin Hare.
Who is survived.
Who has survived by Diazer.
His wife
Uh, Julian.
Julianne
Cadence
And a newly born child.
And if you remember who you, who
Justin here is, and I, I say
that name because I wanted it to
ring.
Um, for all of us to remember
this gentleman.
Who was one of us.
And I say one of us meaning
state government, um, he was
killed in the line of duty.
And um and and if you recall.
The perpetrator was Jeremy
Smith.
Jeremy Smith, um, stole several
cars actually throughout the
country, not just in New Mexico,
but throughout the country,
um, I'm sorry, could you explain
the bill and stick to the bill,
Horace. Yeah, and I'm getting
there, Madam Chair. I just need
to.
I want to point out these, do
you want me to explain the bill
first because I had the
anecdotal thing and then I, I
can come back to that. OK, thank
you.
OK, so let me tell you what the
bill does.
Madam Chair and um members HP 50
increases penalties for auto
theft.
And essentially what it does is
it applies um.
It aggregates the the uh
penalties for this particular
crime regardless of which
section of the law was broken,
um, embezzlement of fraudulently
obtaining receiving, or
transporting stolen vehicles.
This would mean if you were to
still embezzle or obtain a
vehicle unlawfully, you would
receive a 4th degree felony for
the 1st offense, a 3rd degree
felony for a 2nd offense.
And a 2nd degree felony for a
third or subsequent offense. You
would be guilty of these charges
no matter which offense.
was committed.
And um
That is basically what this bill
does.
So may I go back to my
presentation.
Thank you. Yes.
So the next person that I wanted
to mention, Madam Chair and
members is a gentleman by the
name of Gordon Peter Wilson.
Gordon Peter Wilson was a
gentleman who was murdered at
Best Buy in his automobile was
stolen, and that was here in
Santa Fe, New Mexico, and the
reason that I mentioned these um
brutal murders is because
oftentimes an auto theft related
crime.
Seems like I'm sort of going in
and out here. No? OK.
The reason that I mentioned that
is because.
These auto theft.
Crimes often lead to more severe
crimes, and so that is one of
the key, um,
Uh, points that I had that I
wanted to make in mentioning
those individuals who um were
victims of brutal.
Um, other brutal crimes, and I
think that other my other
witnesses will look kind of
expand on on some of those um.
Comments that I made, um,
And Madame Chair, the other
point that I wanted to make and
members is the uh case of your
insurance and our insurance as
these uh crimes are committed
are auto insurance often rises,
and so, um, and the, and these
are these there are statistics
to back this information up, so,
um, with that, Madam Chair, I,
um, stand for questions.
Thank you.
Um, we'll go to our dwindling
um.
Audience, is there anyone in
opposition to this bill.
OK, is there anyone on Zoom?
And in opposition.
And again
Um, and cash.
So I know vehicle thefts
are very real problem in our
communities. My husband and I
had a little work truck stolen
from our front of our house when
Christmas a couple of years
back, but I also know, not
because of my family story or
because of this.
was already existing penalty
structures doesn't work. My gut
reaction is that more severe is
more effective data and evidence
don't bear that out. We need to
follow the data, even as our
hearts ache.
I believe that it must affect
public safety measures will be
measures that address the
inequity, poverty, and need for
things like housing and
stability in our communities.
When all families and
communities thrive, we will all
do better. We're not gonna get
there by keeping people in
prison longer. Thank you.
Thank you. And is there anyone
in the audience in support?
Besides the expert. Are you
speaking as experts or just as
OK.
We'll start in the back on the.
Good evening.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is David Funis and I'm a
chief deputy with the Bernalio
County Sheriff's Office, um
auto theft is a major issue in
New Mexico in 2023/100, I'm
sorry, over 10,000 motor
vehicles were stolen across the
state, ranking New Mexico 5th in
the nation for auto thefts per
capita.
In November of 2024.
The Albuquerque Police
Department released a list of
their top auto theft offenders.
4 of the 5 had outstanding
warrants and had been previously
arrested.
A theft crimes.
And speaking with our auto theft
sergeant.
Without hesitation, he was able
to list off 7 offenders who had
been repeatedly arrested in
Bernallio County for auto theft.
Um
One specific incident, he
notated was that on the last
operation we had on Tuesday
evening.
They observed a stolen vehicle
which led to a foot pursuit. The
suspect was apprehended and
found to be in possession of a
firearm. This was the 2nd time
where auto theft unit had
arrested this individual, and on
both occasions that suspect was
armed.
Uh, by strengthening sentencing
laws, House Bill 50 will help
law enforcement.
protect victims, reduce repeat
offenses, and improve public
safety. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else on that
side?
They would go to this side.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, I'll be very brief in
my uh comments. I want to stand
in strong support of this bill,
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward. Thank the men and
women of law enforcement, the
men and women of our OSI and one
of the things that the, the
chief deputy just uh raised that
I think it's really important
is.
The ability to steal automobiles
with impunity.
is not confined to just property
criminals or folks who are
suffering from substance use
disorder and other things where
they need our help. It, it
accelerates the ability of
violent offenders to continue
their violent behavior in a way
that they didn't have access to
before. Experiences in my own
career, nearly 30 years ago, the
problem has gotten worse and not
better, and I think an
additional tool that is needed
to deal with that grouping of
folks who has demonstrated to
this legislature in this
community, they're unwillingness
to learn from the previous.
en co un ter s with the
judiciary and the judicial
process, uh, standing in firm
support of this bill and thank
the sponsors and the witnesses
very much and the committee.
Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman and
Representatives, my name is
Rachel Nakamura and I'm a
sergeant with the Albuquerque
Police Department auto theft
unit.
I've been on the department for
9 years and 5 of those years, I
served as a detective with auto
theft until my recent promotion.
Our city saw a 7% decrease in
auto theft from 2023 to 2024.
But our state is still one of
the highest states in the nation
for auto theft.
This crime affects thousands of
citizens each year.
In my experience, auto theft
offenders frequently.
Out of the defenders are
frequently violent armed
individuals who use stolen
vehicles to commit other crimes
and will do whatever they need
to avoid apprehension.
Just this past year, my team and
I were shot at by a repeat auto
theft defender with numerous
auto theft cases spanning over
years.
Fortunately, no officers were
injured.
I share this story with you,
because they're often more
victims besides the car owner.
Please do not view auto theft as
just.
A crime that is a property
crime.
Besides significant monetary
loss and stress to auto theft
victims caused by the offenders?
They endanger the public by
driving recklessly and
committing other misdemeanor and
felony level crimes to include
homicide, human trafficking, and
robberies, while utilizing these
stolen vehicles. Thank you for
your time.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
My name is Anthony Luna. I'm
employed by the Domesco State
Police and I have been for about
12.5 years.
I'm currently supervised the
state police auto theft unit in
Albuquerque.
In brief, I would like to let
you know why the New Mexico
State Police supports HB 50.
Before supervising the unit, I
was an agent with the auto theft
unit for about 5 years, making
my 10 year about 6 1/2.
Since 2018 to present, I have
dealt with and participated in
hundreds of cases involving auto
the offenders, the majority of
them being repute offenders. And
I've seen time and time again
people arrested for stealing
vehicles and released and with
hours driving another stolen
vehicle.
Although some will argue that
stealing vehicles is simply a
property crime. Police officers
across the state of New Mexico.
More often than not, see violent
criminals operating these stolen
vehicles and using them as
vessels.
To commit violent crimes across
our state.
The majority of the time my unit
makes a physical arrest, the
suspect is usually a convicted
felon with a lengthy criminal
history.
These individuals are usually in
possession of firearms and are
under the influence of
narcotics.
I believe House Bill 50 will be
a big leap forward to slowing
down repeat auto theft
offenders.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Good evening. I'm Terry Cole,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm the president CEO
for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. I appear
before you today in support of
HB 50, which seeks to increase
penalties for motor vehicle
theft, especially for repeat
offenders. According to a KOAT
December 2024 news report, car
thefts continue to be an issue
in New Mexico with the state
ranking 5th in the nation for
vehicle theft.
Last year alone on over 10,000
vehicles were stolen across New
Mexico, translating to a
staggering rate of 534 thefts
per 100,000 vehicles. This
figure is 74% higher than the
national average, highlighting a
serious issue for car owners.
This kind of rampant out of
control crime is bad for our
citizens and bad for our
business climate. Undoubtedly
today, you will
your claims that increased
penalties don't deter crime,
whether it's the swiftness of
arrest and certainty of
conviction. We agree that those
two factors are very important.
We don't agree that increased
penalties don't work, especially
for repaid offenders. The word
would get out to the gangs and
car thief rings that if you get
caught, you're going to jail for
quite some time. We think
there's every chance that
tougher penalties coupled.
With swift and sure justice will
work together to put the brakes
on car theft in our state. We
urge you to support the bill.
Thank you so much.
OK. Is there anyone on Zoom?
One person, OK.
You'll please go ahead.
Now it's your name and minutes.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee
chairman for the city.
I apologize.
I'm
driving back to Las Cruces, so
hopefully the connection is
good.
I won't repeat what the other
speakers have said.
Support this bill
we are seeing the same exact
thing that County in Albuquerque
police were seeing
and just some data, especially,
uh, Madam Speaker we've talked
many times about some of the
issues we're seeing in
but
this was not the same issue, um,
5 years ago that we're seeing
now from 2018 we had 17 arrests
for auto related crimes in 2022,
which was our peak we had 124 of
us.
We went from 300 vehicles in
2018 to over 1000 in 2022 which
is our we're still pretty close
to that.
And just to put it in
perspective, especially the
insurance issue, the national
insurance bureau
last report they put out.
We have 3 cities in New Mexico
that are in the top 30 6
unfortunately was uh 18 and was
27 and that's out of 390
metropolitan statistical area in
the United States.
This is become a significant
issue, especially with repeated
vendors and the last thing I'll
say, which is already, already
mentioned.
But it's not just the penalty
itself.
The swiftness and surety and
certainty of uh punishment is
important, but when you're
trying to deal with the events
at some point you have to have a
mechanism where it's not just a
3.
And there is some punishment
that is associated with it.
I stand in strong support of it
and I urge the committee to do
the same. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and members.
Thank you, Chief Story.
Think we got everyone, OK, do
you have anything else you'd
like to close, I mean not close,
but before we go to the.
Me
Madam Chair, members, I was just
uh texted by Alison Riley of the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce
who
also supports the bill, um, with
that, Madam Chair, I will, uh,
close, um, this bill is really
directed at repeat offenders and
well, I understand that you know
people can be rehabilitated. I
think that with the crisis that
we have in New Mexico and the
statistics that have been put
forth.
Uh, by the New Mexico by the
Albuquerque chamber, which are.
The same statistics I was going
to um account for it, it, uh,
basically brings to light the
issue and the severity of
The lack of accountability for
repeat offenders, and basically
what this bill does is it.
It creates a a program or a
system, um, where
Um, let's see, how can I say
this?
There is a uh accountability.
An accountability is something
that, you know, with the current
statute as it is is lacking.
Because people will commit a
crime.
And it's their first offense,
and they will commit another
crime for a stolen vehicle, and
it's their first offense, and so
they keep adding up these first
offenses, and there never really
held to the standard that needs
to be, you know,
Hold them accountable. So um as
you know, I served as a city
councilor in Albuquerque, uh,
for 4 years I saw what our
police officers and that that
was just a couple 2 years ago, I
saw for 4 years what they deal
with on the streets, and it's
not just an Albuquerque issue.
It's Burnleyo County, Rio
Rancho, just, um, night before
last, there was a stolen car and
the gentleman was putting his
groceries into his um taking his
groceries from his car from his
vehicle, and they stole his
truck with his child in the back
seat.
Luckily, the Rio Rancho police
were able to recover the vehicle
which um the perpetrators fled
and luckily the child was OK,
but as you can see,
These situations lead to more
severe crimes, and that is why
I've chosen to bring this bill
forward again, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, all right. Um,
we'll go to the committee, uh,
Representative Lord and then
block and just let me remind
you, we are staying for the next
bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'd
like to say boo to that.
Uh,
I think we should roll it, but
that's just me, Madam chair, uh,
I don't want to thank you for
bringing this bill forward. I'm
gonna be really quick. I wanted
to thank our law enforcement
officers who've been here. It
feels like for days, uh waiting,
thank you for being here, um, I
support the bill. I don't have
any questions, but thank you for
bringing up the hair family.
Their parents are actually good
friends.
Thank you. That's all sport.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you, madam.
I I uh.
Thank you so much,
Representative, uh, for bringing
this forward and
I would grill you on your bill,
but I've read the bill and I.
really like it.
And Madam Chair Representative,
I guess.
I will join Representative Lord
and, and
Giving and singing your praises
for bringing this bill forward.
I know you had another bill in
another year.
That was regarding vehicle
thefts, and I've seen the news
releases. I've seen.
The horrific things that have
happened. I've even seen Madam
Chair when it comes to tourism.
Folks who, I think there was a
couple years ago, someone came
with their RV and their RV was
stolen while they were coming
here to visit for the balloon
fiesta, I believe. And so Mada
to Representative, I, I am
probably like you. I'm sick and
darn tired of our state, always
getting the bad press, and I'm
also sick and darn tired of
having law enforcement have to.
Deal with these folks day in and
day out. And it's like a
revolving door, right? So I
think this is a good approach.
And I also want to thank our law
enforcement for sticking around
and staying awake, you're way
more awake than I am right now.
So thank you all so much for
being here and uh, yeah, I just
want to commend you on this. And
I think that this is probably a
good step in the right direction
when it comes to
Making New Mexico a better place
and a safer place for children,
for everybody, and uh I just
want to thank you and I don't
know if you have any comments on
that, but, and then your expert,
I don't know if he had any
comments on that he hasn't been
able to say anything yet, so if
he does have any comments as
well. I'd love to entertain
those, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, represented
block, uh, I am an attorney,
trial attorney, uh, so giving me
a mic and asking me to talk is
probably not the best idea, so
I'm gonna try and bite my tongue
as long as I can, given the hour
and the duration we've all been
here today.
But thank you for your support.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much.
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Just trying to like understand
the difference between unlawful
tin and embezzlement and all of
the nuance there, I guess. How
is this applied to.
So somebody goes and does one of
these things.
Can you charge them with
multiple offenses that first
time.
And with these different charges
or uh can you just describe how
that, how that ends up working.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Romero, uh, there are the 4
statutes under the New Mexico
Criminal Code that all relate
to.
Being, being in contact and
possession of a stolen vehicle.
Um, they all, they all have the
same penalties regardless of how
many offenses they have, um,
they all are self enhancing,
which is spelled out I think in,
excuse me, well as you can see
in the the the bill as it is
written and in the statutes that
currently on the books. The only
difference among the three or
the 4 statutes is the means by
which a defendant has come into
possession of that vehicle.
Uh, whether they're caught in
possession of it and and knew or
should have known it was stolen
for receiving transferring.
Uh, if they actually took it and
we can prove there in the
individual that that took it
from the rightful owner wherever
the rightful owner left it.
Uh, an embezzlement in terms of
somebody perhaps a mechanic or
somebody else that was entrusted
with the possession of the
vehicle and then refused to
return it.
When, when that possession was
uh basically withdrawn or the
permission was withdrawn by the
uprightful owner or or a a
fraudulent purchase, which we've
seen a great increase in in
recent years of individuals
using stolen identities to go to
dealerships.
Uh, take out a fraudulent
insurance policy and then go in
and and fill out all the
paperwork, the loan paperwork
and everything else just
basically steal a car from an
auto dealership. Um, so in each
of those instances, there is
only one of those charges that's
available per car.
And we've seen multiple
defendants where they involved
with multiple cars and in those
situations we would have
multiple charges related to each
vehicle.
But in, in I think in relation
to your question, it's there's
only one that applies to each
stolen vehicle that they're
found. Thank you for clarifying,
Madam Chair. Um, the, the only
other question I have is when we
see these crimes, um.
Are they, I, I guess like I,
you're gonna do it once.
Wouldn't you do the same crime
again, like in the same way or
we're seeing that they're just
like a diversity of auto theft
from these criminals, they're
just because I'm just trying to
understand the impetus for we
have some days they're
embezzling, the other day
they're unlawfully taking the
other day there. So is, I'm
seeing it's not, but it's.
That's what I'm trying to
understand.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
think, um.
I'm glad I'm not facing the
individuals behind me because
I'm sure a few of them are gonna
smirk when I tell them there's a
difference between what we know
and what we can prove, um, and
yes, in most of these situations
they've heard me say this many
times, we know they took it, but
we can't prove they took it.
But we can prove they were in
possession of it when they were
apprehended. Um, and so whether
an individual is, and yes,
you're right on the street, many
of these individuals, the most
problematic ones.
are doing the same kind of thing
over and over again. It's just a
matter of, of what kind of
evidence is present when law
enforcement catches up with them
and eventually makes it to our
desk as prosecutors, uh,
obviously the easiest one to
prove is their simple possession
of of something they should have
known, knew or should have known
was, was stolen.
Um, but if, if they're depending
on the facts of the case, we may
end up having to charge one of
the other offenses because it's
more appropriate and because
that's what the evidence fits.
Awesome. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thanks for clarifying
that. Um, I will say it doesn't
actually increase penalties, so
it just gives us the opportunity
to coalesce around the diversity
of auto theft that we're seeing,
so, um, thank you for, for your
explanation. Thank you, um,
Madam Chair, Representative.
OK, I'd just like to really
quickly ask um in sections 123
and 4,
Uh
The existing statutory language,
um, isn't as it usually is, um,
following the words motor
vehicle code.
And then having
The reference of the chapter 66,
um.
Uh, articles 1 through 28 NMSA.
Is there a reason you all left
that out?
Or the drafter just Madam Chair,
um.
When, when we reviewed this
particular um.
Um
And I'm still learning all the.
All of the definitions here, the
bill analysis, and we saw that
comment, um, we were fine with
um an amendment if if this
committee would.
Would see fit.
To add that back that the
language motor vehicle code back
in. It's a little more than what
we can do easily, we'd have to
recess and get this all done and
typed up. Is that something you
can do um in the next.
Committee. Yes, madam Chair,
happy to do that.
OK, and chair Chandler just
agreed, so, OK.
Theoretically
yes.
And she said she would help us.
That's all the further
commitment.
Well, there's other
recommendations that you might
take up to.
That I think will help. Um,
OK, so we'll go to the
committee.
It's a pleasure of the
committee.
Madam Chair, I'll move a do
pass.
OK. It's been 1st and 2nd for
due pass, um, Romero and
Uh
Thompson.
OK.
So we'll take real
Representative Block.
Yes. Representative Lord, yes.
Representative Ramiro.
Representative Thompson, Madam
Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
So with recommendations. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members,
but there's a vote.
OK, on a vote of 6 to 0, um,
With recommendations, um, we
passed House Bill 50.
15 minutes.
Thank you. Thank you.
Please clear the room quietly so
we can get started on our last.
And final bill, thank you.
Representative Chandler, Chair
Chandler, I should say.
OK, we're taking up house Bill
60 artificial intelligence Act.
Yes
Oh
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um.
Happy to be here this evening to
present on House Bill 60.
It's called the artificial
intelligence Acts.
House Bill 60s a regulatory
framework for AI systems that
are used to make consequential
decisions.
A consequential decision is
defined as one that has a
material, legal or similar
effect on the provision or
denial to a consumer.
Or the cost or terms relating to
educational opportunity,
employment, financial, or
lending services, healthcare
services, housing, insurance, or
legal services.
The regulatory framework is
designed to mitigate against
algorithmic, sorry, it's late.
Discrimination.
The bill imposes a duty of
reasonable care on developers to
protect consumers from known and
foreseeable risks of algorithmic
discrimination arising from
intended and foreseeable high
risk systems.
And to make certain disclosures
to the, the State Department of
Justice.
It also requires a developer to
provide deployers of the
developer system with certain
information that will allow the
deployer to understand the uses,
benefits, and risks of the
system.
The bill imposes a duty of care
on the deployer to protect
consumers from known or
reasonably foreseeable risk and
includes the requirement that
the deployer develop and
implement a plan to govern the
use of the high risk systems
they're using and to conduct
annual impact assessments.
A deployer, I'm sorry, madam
chair.
OK. OK, sorry. The deployer must
post a description of the high
risk systems on its website. It
also imposes a requirement that
the deployer directly notify a
consumer that a high risk system
will be used in making a
particular consequential
decision.
If an adverse decision is made
affecting a consumer, the
deployer must provide additional
explanatory information and
provide the consumer with the
right to correct any incorrect
information.
The bill imposes a certain
notice and disclosure
requirements that must be made
to the State Department of
Justice by the deployer and the
bill provides enforcement and
rulemaking authority to the
State Department of Justice, um.
And I have two experts with me.
I have uh Doctor Chris Moore of
the Santa Fe Institute, and I
have Steve Wimmer from the
Transparency Coalition.
Uh
Chris has been working at Doctor
Moore's been working in this
field for a while, as has.
Um
Steve, and what I'd like to do
is ask Chris Moore to maybe give
you an example of the kind of
incident that might give our
situation that might give rise
just to give you some context
because I know this all seems
very theoretical, doesn't it?
So, um, thank you very much.
Madam Chair Representatives,
thank you for being here at the
end of a long day, uh, some
years ago, Amazon, the company
was getting a ton of job
applicants, and so they wanted
to build an AI system which
would help, help them figure out
which of these many job
applicants because they didn't
have time for HR to interview
all of them, which one of them,
which ones of them they should
hire.
So they gave it lots of resumes
from people they had hired and
promoted in the past. This is
what in this business we call
the training data, the past
examples, and they asked the AI
to find patterns in those
resumes, and it did, and one of
the patterns it found was that
applicants who were captain of
the women's volleyball team or
of the women's chess club or who
went to women's colleges.
Were given lower ranks, lower a
lower chance of being hired and
promoted.
Now this system could have gone
into effect.
And if it had been a black box
if no one had even known that it
was giving that negative rating
to those applicants.
It would have taken years to
even.
find out that that bias was
there, let alone diagnose and
correct it.
Another example very briefly is
a major health care company was
trying to predict people's
health needs, for instance, if
you come into the ER with
pneumonia, should you stay
overnight or should you go home
and recover?
It turned out that they were
using, among other things, how
much money you spent on health
care last year as one of the
factors in predicting how what
your healthcare needs now are.
This was done with no ill
intent, right? It's just looked
at a pile of data.
But one of the things that, you
know, that clearly would have a
very discriminatory effect,
especially on New Mexicans, many
of whom are low income, and
again, it's only because there
was enough transparency for some
independent researchers to know
about that bias and to diagnose
it and fix it.
Otherwise, if it had gone into
practice and been a black box,
we never would have known.
So this is the kind of
transparency we're looking for
in the kind of black boxes we're
wanting to avoid with that
transparency, we can take
advantage of the best that AI
has to offer. We can make sure
that it's not discriminating,
and we can take advantage of its
fantastic powers for lots of
things include in our society
ranging from healthcare to fair
lending to fair housing, and so
on.
Um, I think the industry will
tell you that they're fine just
regulating themselves, I would
argue that there is abundant
evidence that that is not a
sufficient approach.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Wimmer has been working with me
on the bill. I am not a
technical person. I'm those
individuals on the floor that
sit next to me, um, are very
aware of my limited
capabilities, but Mr. Wimmer
does have, maybe you could just
briefly give you his background.
I'm not gonna ask him to
summarize a lot of stuff because
he'll be here to help us answer
questions, so Madam Sharon
representatives, nice to meet
you. I work for a nonprofit the
transparency coalition.
And what we do is help different
state legislatures come up with
sensible policy and then
sensible bills that then reflect
the values of the state and.
Specific consumer protections in
place around these different
types of technologies and New
Mexico is in really good company
in pursuing this particular
particular kind of bill, there
is a nationwide movement towards
regulation of AI. There are
about 1516 states right now in
the process of trying to
legislate various aspects of the
technologies.
12 of them are different states
that I personally am working
with right now in terms of
crafting that type of
legislation that's going to
ensure the safety, uh,
California, New York, Texas, and
Washington are pursuing
transparency initiatives in the
same way that New Mexico is duty
of care that chair Chandler just
mentioned is being pursued in
Virginia and Washington,
California, Washington, Utah are
pursuing the output labeling
that was, that's taking it a
step further from what passed
last February here.
in New Mexico and finally the
whole consequential decision
making aspect in addition to
California, Connecticut, Texas,
Virginia, and Washington are
also persuing pursuing these
different things, so this is not
something that just New Mexico
is in fact
pursuing. It is in fact
something that is uh gaining
more and more traction,
especially because these there
was an executive order that
President Biden initiated back
in 2023, which was just rolled
back last Monday but
the current administration, uh,
basically rolling back any of
the AI protections that have
been part of that executive
order.
So, uh, we see the time is
right, the, the ground swell is
there and certainly the need to
act quickly on these types of
technologies is here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and with
that, we're happy to entertain
questions when you're ready. OK,
thank you. We'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
in opposition.
OK, you like to speak?
Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association,
uh, the American Council of Life
Insurers and America's Health
Insurance plans. Those are 3
national trade associations that
work in the insurance field and
collectively they opposed to the
bill in its current form, and
the reason for their opposition
is that the members of these
trades associations comply with
the standards that are.
In the insurance code and then
the Mexico insurance code.
And those standards in the
insurance code ensure fair
treatment of policyholders and
so there's an existing robust
regulatory regime for how
insurance companies have to deal
with policyholders. Uh, we've
had discussions with uh the
sponsor and we are talking about
how to address uh the potential
for dual regulation, uh, these
insurers would much prefer to be
regulated by the superintendent
of insurance and not the
superintendent of insurance and
the Department of Justice.
And so we'll be working through
those issues with the sponsor in
the days to come. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. Anyone else in
opposition.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Anne Conway and I
represent the State Farm
insurance companies, so for the
reasons that Mr. Moore um just
addressed, uh, we concur with
those. Um, I would also add, and
we've we've talked to the
sponsor, we have to keep working
with representative Chandler on
our concerns. Um, another
aspect, for instance, with uh
homeowners insurance. We also
use AI for things.
Like modeling wildfire for
working on mitigation plans,
you're gonna see a couple of
mitigation bills this year,
where we're in coalition with
the Forest Service, um, like
wildfire modeling would be an
example of the type of AI that
we also use in addition to what
we've used um with regulation
under the New Mexico Insurance
code on our rating and
underwriting use of AI.
think.
OK, so is there anyone on Zoom?
People in opposition.
OK. Those who are on Zoom, raise
your hand if you are in
opposition and we'll call on
you.
Go ahead, Mr. Martinez and
unmute, and you have 2. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is William
Channis Martinez, and I serve as
counsel to the state privacy and
Security Coalition, a
multi-sector coalition
representing over 30 companies
and 6 trade associations. Now
let me be clear, we appreciate
the intent behind HB 60, and we
do not oppose workable AI
governance legislation. However,
we urge the committee to
reconsider advancing HB 60
without first having a
comprehensive consumer data.
privacy law on the books. As we
have seen throughout the nation,
privacy has served as a
foundation for AI regulation, as
the expert mentioned, AI systems
process vast amounts of data,
including personal and sensitive
consumer information.
Without a comprehensive privacy
law in place, there are no clear
statutory limits on data
collection, use, sharing,
retention, leaving the consumers
vulnerable to unchecked
AI-driven data processing.
states like Colorado,
Connecticut, and Oregon have
recognized this by first
enacting comprehensive privacy
laws before tackling a specific
regulations. Uh, and also no
state has perfected the AI
government's models. Colorado's
AI law remains under revision.
Connecticut last session due to
its complexity, and Oregon is
still the issue.
The evolving nature of air
regulation suggests that a
rushed approach could lead to
unintended consequences.
Finally, New Mexico's HP 60
comprehensive privacy framework.
Excuse me, since New Mexico
lacks a comprehensive privacy
framework, H360 introduces
specific requirements that leave
many questions unanswered, such
as consumer protections, data
processing rules, or enforcement
mechanisms. Without clear
guidance, the bill creates
uncertainty for businesses and.
alike. Therefore, we urge the
legislature to prioritize
comprehensive privacy
legislation before advancing a
specific regulations. Thank you.
OK next.
Unmute yourself, please.
Hello, can you hear me? Yes.
Hi, good evening, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Robert Singleton and I serve as
the senior director of policy
and public affairs for the US
West Regional Chamber of
Progress. A tech industry
association supporting public
policies to build a more
inclusive society which all
people benefit from
technological advances.
Our corporate partners include
many companies working in
artificial intelligence but they
do not have a vote or veto over
our oppositions.
I'm here for a commit today to
oppose HB 60, which is intended
to address discrimination but
would render many online
services unusable without
meaningfully advancing civil
rights.
AI is tremendous attention for
improving education and enabling
creative expression, and
creating new business
opportunities. So it's
critically important that the
public policy promotes the broad
and equitable distribution of
these innovations and economic
efficiencies. The sponsors of HB
60 are justly concerned about
civil rights abuses,
particularly discrimination in
housing employment and lending.
Historically marginalized
communities have faced repeated
discrimination in these areas
and many more, and as such, we
applaud the sponsors for their
attention to these critical
matters of social justice.
However, pinpointing the source
and catalyst of discriminatory
outcomes of intelligence system
is not always possible, nor is
it consistently, nor is it
consistent in determining who or
what is responsible for the act,
discrimination. The roots of
bias maybe in the day used to
train the model, which could be
laden with human creative biases
or the human the human rubber
stamps the outcome and I a
decision tool or someone who
downloaded a.
version of a commercially
available um AI solution and use
to review or piece of synthetic
content or from any other number
of sources up and down software
development from a frontier
model to a fine-tuned chatbot.
Regardless of origins, there
must be avenues to circumstances
discrimination that are
consistent use online or
offline.
Uh, there's also concerns about
privacy. Section 8A1's
requirement that online
platforms notify consumers every
time on high risk AI automated
decision tools used to make a
consequence decision presents a
complex challenge. Well,
addressing harmful algorithmic
discrimination is laudable. Such
notices could divulge sensitive
information about algorithms and
data processing methods,
potentially compromising use of
privacy
OK.
Thank you. Thank you.
Next
Go ahead, Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, public
policy director for the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
While well-intentioned House
Bill 60 is overly broad and
risks cycling innovation in New
Mexico. We've already seen
states like Colorado revising
similar legislation after
realizing that rigid, unworkable
regulations do more harm than
good.
New Mexico cannot afford to make
the same mistake, especially
with our recent designation as a
quantum tech hub.
There still places onerous
compliance burdens on businesses
or deploy AI.
Small businesses and startups,
which are often the key drivers
of innovation will struggle to
comply, limiting their ability
to grow. Instead of fostering
responsible AI development. They
still sends a message that New
Mexico is a hostile environment
for tech innovation, pushing
businesses and jobs to other
states. AI is a rapidly evolving
field and fought for regulation
is necessary, and we'd like to
work with the sponsor on that.
The current bill is not the
right approach, and we urge the
committee to vote no. Thank you.
Go ahead, Ron.
Unmute yourself.
Who's the next speaker? Oh yeah.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Ward Tisdale.
I'm with the National
Association of Mutual Insurance
Companies.
Um, I want to echo what what
Brent and, and Anne said
earlier.
Uh, state insurance codes
already addressed and prohibit
unfair discrimination.
In the procurement and pricing
of
Uh, insurance products and
insurers take significant
measures to prevent such illegal
discrimination. We already are.
Have we fully regulated by the
OSI and if this bill were to
become law.
We would our industry would face
dual and duplicate duplicative
regulation
from the OSI and the State
Department of Justice. I will
add that Colorado was just
mentioned, I was working.
Uh, with that legislature last
year and
We presented the same argument
that unfair discrimination is
something that we're already
regulated for and we were.
Uh, removed from that bill, and
there are 2 other bills going
through the process right now,
Virginia and Nebraska were
insurers that have also been
removed, so just want to uh
Make those points and we do.
For working with a sponsor on as
this thing moves forward.
Thank you.
Go ahead, Lorenzo.
You have 2 minutes.
Madam Chair and representatives,
thank you very much. My name is
Renzo Soto, executive director
for the South, representing
technet, the national bipartisan
network working to advance
innovation economy. We all
respectfully opposed to 16 in
its current iteration for
reasons fully outlined our
submitted materials. We share
the goal of ensuring that AI is
developed and employed
responsibly, enabling innovation
while protecting consumers from
potential discrimination. In
fact, our industry has adopted
several best practices to ensure
this, including working with
researchers to identify and
address.
and making sure there are strict
data hygiene policies and
practice and practices enacted.
However, before moving forward
with comprehensive AI
regulations, we also strongly
recommend that the legislature
first establish a clear
interoperable data privacy
framework to provide consumers
with rights over their data and
potentially harming efforts to
responsibly develop and deploy
AI. This is the approach many
states also pursuing
comprehensive AI regulations
have taken regarding the bill
specifically transmitting
similarities with the Colorado.
AIX, as has been mentioned, we
do appreciate the attempt
interoperability, but the
Colorado law remains untested
and it requires additional work
to avoid stifling innovation.
Similarly, 60 introduces
significant uncertainty that
could discourage AI investment
in use in New Mexico to realize
benefits in several use cases.
There are also significant
divergences in s, notably the
private rights of action, which
will have a chilling effect on
the development and use of AI
technologies. We strongly urge
for interoperability when
regulations to allow for
meaningful and a feasible
compliance. We do appreciate
that the sponsor has been
considering our recommendations
and we look forward to
continuing to work on this bill.
Thank you for the time to
present our concerns.
Thanks.
Good evening, Madam Chair
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks registered lobbyist for
the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber
of Commerce. The chamber stands
in an opposition of the bill as
it's presently drafted a huge
number of beneficial services
from public safety to education,
as well as a vast array of
critical industries from energy
to healthcare, currently utilize
AI in a responsible way on a
daily basis.
The well-intended 60 is not
workable in its current form
because it proposes a unique
framework that if adopted, will
make it harder for New Mexico
businesses to innovate and
compete nationally.
New Mexico is not a closed
market. Many of our companies,
small and large, operate across
multiple states and unique AI
laws in New Mexico like this
will make it even harder to do
business in the state.
Some specific examples are the
bill defines high risk AI system
pretty broadly, um, and we think
so broadly that it could play a
huge number of tools that aren't
actually high risk and many
tools um of those tools are
already being used on a regular
basis today.
Bill also suggests that
consumers should be allowed to
sue AI developers for
discrimination even if there's
no intentional bias that opens
the door to countless lawsuits
and costly government
investigations, which will scare
off investors in New Mexico from
any AI tools or businesses that
utilize AI in their operations.
The bill as mentioned was passed
in Colorado is currently being
worked on.
Um, I think Colorado feels that
it needs significant work in
order for it to be a workable
solution to responsibly regulate
AI.
With that mind chambers this
should not move forward rather
we feel New Mexico should joins
AI working group
with stakeholders from various
sectors who are tasked with
developing a model bill that
states can adopt so that we're
regulating AI in a uniform
manner. Thank you.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
distinguished committee members.
My name is Maurice. I serves
outside counsel to the
receivable management
association International Trade
Association of over 600 members
of the banks lenders.
Debt purchasers in the companies
serve them, but we're opposed to
HB 60 for many of the reasons
you've already heard. I'm not
gonna repeat them, but I will
point out two things to the
committee that I think of
courses that have not been
mentioned.
The first is 60 defines
financial institutions in a way
that's different than the
federal graham Leach Bliley Act.
That is a federal privacy law
that regulates financial
institutions.
The GOPA, those financial
institutions include non-bank
lenders and the companies that
service like loan services debt
collectors.
The GOPA and the FTC, the
Federal Trade Commission, with
the safeguards rule. It is a
stringent data privacy law. If
we're going to move forward with
360 we should fall in line with
existing federal data privacy
standards under the safeguards
rule. The second aspect that
makes.
HB 60 different and as far as I
know, New Mexico would be the
only state to do this is the
private right of action, one of
the prior seekers mentioned.
AI at least is defined here
could include machine learning,
something as simple as a very
smart spreadsheet. A private
right of action creates the risk
the typical business operations
like the spreadsheet exposes
them to lawsuits. New Mexico
should not be the first to allow
such a private right of action
in an emerging technology where
many companies use it to ensure
compliance and accuracy,
integrity of the.
financial products and besides
New Mexico's unfair practices
Act allows people to recover
damages or an injunction when
they suffer such harms and so do
some federal laws. Thank you for
your time and I'm available to
answer any questions.
Thank you.
OK. Um, now we'll go to those in
support of the bill.
OK.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Luca Cecarelli. I'm with uh AI
synergy.net and AI literacy and
leadership and education startup
based here in Santa Fe. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
in support of HB 60.
AI is already shaping decisions
in education from a from
admissions to grading to
discipline and special
education.
While AI offers abundant
benefits in education, of which
I'm a proponent. However, there
are, there are already plenty of
studies speculating that
unchecked systems can reinforce
bias and inequity, as research
from MIT and Brookings
Institutions and numerous others
have already reported. So rather
than stifling innovation, I
believe that HB 60 strives for
transparency, accountability,
and human oversight and an AI AI
driven decisions that impact not
only consumers and job
applicants.
But also my primary concern, uh,
students and their families.
Without these safeguards, we
risk allowing hidden biases in
algorithms to shape educational
opportunities without recourse
or fairness. So New Mexico
actually has an opportunity to
lead in responsible AI
governance and ensuring that
these technologies serve
consumers, job entrants, and
students equitably. Thank you.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Ray
Charay. I use the them pronouns,
and I'm with bold Futures and
advocacy organization by and for
women and people of color in New
Mexico. Thank you to the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward. We support HB 60's
common sense measures that
safeguard the privacy of New
Mexicans and protect our
communities from discrimination.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Lena
Weber, uh, policy director with
the ACLU of New Mexico. Um,
we're in strong support of HB
60, we know that like the rest
of our world, New Mexico is
watching AI transform our
workplaces, our personal lives,
and our communities. And as AI
is growing to influence so much
of our lives, we need to be bold
and confronting that AI has the
power to preserve and exacerbate
systemic racism and other
inequities. Predictive
algorithms.
and hiring and housing,
especially threatened to deepen
biases and inequities. We
especially appreciate that HB 60
doesn't limit the use of AI
rather simply says that it
cannot be used in a
discriminatory way. HB 60 will
play an important role in
mitigating these harmful
prospects to ensure that it is a
tool that contributes to the
building of a better world, and
that the innovation that we're
fostering in our state is not
based on discrimination, but
rather inclusion of all. Thank
you.
Uh
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Nathan
Bush. I represent the University
of New Mexico. Uh, appreciate
your time, especially appreciate
the good work of the sponsor on
this important issue for UNM.
To be clear, we are at this
juncture neither.
In support nor opposed, I'm not
authorized to take that position
right now.
Um, however, we, we do think
this is an incredibly important
issue for UNM. Uh, we've had the
good fortune of working with the
sponsor in the past, an
important legislation with
particularly uh defined scopes
on things such as the use of AI
in elections.
As you all supported last year.
This is, these are important
societal issues that are being
discussed and uh and run through
the legislative process. So
really appreciate your
attention. Um, I will also say
that there was an issue flagged
and the informational hearing
yesterday in House Judiciary
around statewide education and
media literacy on AI issues, uh,
UNM is using its limited
bandwidth with the congressional
delegation right now, we
actually have a really great
project.
With the help of our research
experts and our uh uh racial
bias, uh, oriented researchers
in that community to reach out
statewide and help educate
communities on the appropriate
use and understanding of clear
explainable, ethical AI that is
in the final appropriations
package awaiting uh attention
from Congress this spring. So
thank you so much for your
support.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
in support?
But on Zoom.
No one on Zoom, OK. Are there
just, just a few, um, if I make
comments, um, Madam Chair, and
I'll be brief, um, I find the
suggestion that we should be
waiting on a privacy act and
interesting suggestion. Um, I
think we could probably do both
of those things at once, and as
I understand it, Mister Chair,
uh, Madam Chair, there may be
such a bill being presented this
this session, but I just, I, I,
it just strikes me as yet
another argument to kick this
very important issue.
down the road. We can do both.
We can work on multiple issues
at the same time, Madam Chair
and committee members and.
I think
That is all I would point out in
the bill that it it it certainly
acknowledges that we have to
adhere to federal and other
other laws, so for example, the
issue about the federal banking
law and all those sorts of
things that I haven't had a
chance to delve into, if
anything in this bill were to
conflict with those laws,
obviously the federal law would
be superior and would be
honored, so I'll leave it at
that, given the.
The lateness of the evening.
Madam Chair, I'd just like to
make one final comment.
In particular, what this bill is
really trying to do is promote
responsible use of the
technologies, people using the
technology should know what it
can do and what it can't do.
We are in a position right now
to deploy technologies that have
pretty far reaching
implications.
Because of that, we need to
really double down with our
understanding what these systems
actually can do. What the bill
does is spells out a series of
very specific responsibilities
for those people building the
software for those people who
are deploying the software.
We're not asking for.
Anything other than responsible
use and responsible deployment.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to the
committee then and
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I've
been hearing all the horror
stories about AI and healthcare
insurance. So I just did a quick
Google and this is from the Yale
School of Medicine.
Healthcare algorithms are
mathematical models that support
clinicians as well as
administrators in decision
making about patient care.
But biased AI is already harming
minoritized communities.
Experts have identified numerous
biased algorithms.
That require racial and ethnic
minorities to be considerably
more ill than their white
counterparts to receive the same
diagnosis, treatment, or
resources.
These include models developed
across a wide range of
specialties such as for cardiac
surgery.
Kidney transplantation and more.
Um, that's enough for me, but my
guess is that algorithms also
discriminate against women,
because that has been part of
health care.
I'm immemorial, so, uh, thank
you.
OK, next we'll go to
representative block.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives, uh,
representative and experts. I
think it's a really cool
Interesting topic to talk about
AI. I know it's, it's huge, it's
kind of like a big black hole,
so to speak, and I know that
there's so many moving parts and
things, and for me, I am, I am
not like a rocket scientist,
which I'm sure or maybe some
kind of
Other scientists that you know
exactly how to build.
I'm not a developer, so to
speak, right?
So Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I'm just gonna go through
some of the things in the bill
and just try to figure out what
they mean. Maybe just get some
clarification on them first. So,
Madam Chair Representative.
I'm gonna just start on page 2
here.
Line
7
So to offer license or use of a
high risk.
AI system.
So, Madam Chair Representative.
Maybe I missed it somewhere in
the bill, it's 30 pages. I
apologize if I did. There are
definition of what high risk is
and what can that
Include Madam Chair.
OK, could you give me a page
number, please? I'm sorry.
Yes.
Um, Madam Chair, page 5.
Line 60, perfect. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I, I think I
underlined that one as well. So
I must have skipped right
through it.
So, OK, Madam Chair
Representative, it means any
artificial intelligence system.
That when deployed makes a
substantial factor. OK, I did
have a question about that.
Substantial do we define what
that means.
And if we do, please tell me
which page.
Um, madam
Madam Chair, representative, um,
page 8, line 6.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
I found it. Yay, OK.
OK.
Then I guess I feel I feel like
it's like a, it's going to the
next thing. So I
And this one, I said, what is
the consequential decision, and
I know we had a
A definition on page 2.
Which
Does it means a decision that
As a material of significant
effect. So, like I feel like
this definition is going back to
the other definition, so
significant.
was on page 8.
And then page 8.
Go back to page 2. So I'm just
wondering,
What is, what is that? I mean,
like, significant effect. Could
you just give me some examples?
I mean, I know we talked about
some earlier, like maybe
insurance wise or admissions to
a school.
But would that be included in
that, Madam Chair
Representative, for what a
significant
I'm sorry, what a consequential
decision is, which is
significant in nature, which is
in the definition of
consequential.
I, I guess it's very. Well, I
think what you need to do is
look at page 8, what a
significant factor means is a
factor that assists in making a
consequential decision is
capable of altering, advising,
or influencing the outcome of a
consequential decision and is
generated by an artificial
intelligence system.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, and I
I agree. I read, I read that
portion. I just don't really
understand what that means per
se, cause I, I know that we're
saying it as an outcome of a
consequence of consequential
decision.
But we don't necessarily say
specifically what constitutes
such a like a life altering
decision. Is that kind of what
we're, we're asking on this
because
I just want to be very clear
what that would mean, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Well, I guess I'm not sure I
understand your question,
Representative Madam.
OK, I'm sorry. Uh, maybe, maybe
it was confusing. So.
I confused myself a little bit.
I don't care, so.
OK.
Starting off with what?
Consequential decision means.
So consequential decision is a
decision as material, legal, or
similarly significant effect.
According to page 2 to 3.
On a consumer or the costs.
In terms of, and then it
specifies like education,
employment, healthcare, etc. So
I'm just wondering, Madam Chair
Representative,
Like this, this list of 7, it's
very, I, I hope it's all
inclusive.
But I'm trying to figure out.
Could it be stretched to
anything else, cause I know.
For example, if I was
Let's just say housing.
So Madam Chair Representative,
if I use chat, GPT or some
other.
AI
To find out housing, and let's
just say
It only gave me housing.
Because of my parameters, I give
the AI because it needs to be
trained. I gave it.
specific parameters.
Or whatever and and then it gave
me specific things that may have
been discriminatory.
I'm just wondering how that
works. And would that even
apply,
Madam Chair.
Representative
This bill would not apply to
chat GDP.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. But
it would apply to, to businesses
that use AI and it could include
chat GPT correct
Madam Chair, no, because
It would apply to an algorithm
that is used to screen.
Let's say an applicant for a job
or um an apartment. Chat B GTP
is not used for that.
It's not predictive, it's
generative.
Madam Chair represented.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
so then a
Predictive
AI used by any insurance company
or whoever it is.
If it does, let's just say it
gives
Let's just say this AI is an
insurance company and they
approve people for policies or
they, they declined people for
policies, or it could be a
credit card company, they
approved declined. So Madam
Chair Representative, what if
this is based upon objective
standards, such as like
Household income
You know, if, if you paid on
your credit report, your credit
cards. I'm wondering if the, if
technically one of these groups
that is protected from
discrimination in the bill.
Which I, I'm sure I can find the
page for you.
If it does disproportionately.
Decline or approve a certain
group.
And it's not necessarily because
of that.
Entities, identity or whatever,
but it's just because of
financial reasons, would they be
protected somehow with this
legislation.
Yes, I would say they would
because what the responsibility
upon both the developer and the
deployer is to understand the
inputs and to understand why
certain outcomes are happening.
If you understand what the
inputs are and the factors, then
you can assure yourselves to the
most reasonable extent possible
that the algorithm is not.
Discriminatory and in fact,
Madam Chair and Representative,
the factors that you identified
that are neutral factors, you
know, credit history, you know,
that those kinds of things are
actually the thing that is
screening the person and not
some other like uh uh uh non
appropriate factor. So what
we're saying here is you need to
understand what your, your tool
does, and check it every once.
a while to make sure it's still
doing what it's supposed to do,
relying on appropriate inputs so
that people are not injured in
situations where they're, you
know, significant things in
their lives are, are, um,
affected like whether they get a
job, whether they can get um
housing, whether they can get a
loan, those sorts of things,
Madam chair representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
yeah, Madam Chair and uh
representative. So I, that makes
sense. I'm glad that
I hope that it's it's like a
quality.
Framework instead of an equity
framework.
Because Madam Chair
Representative, I understand.
That
Some people may may feel as
though
Certain things need to be
accounted for, like in a bit in
all of the
Groups that we're trying to
protect or the ones that are in
here. I just want to make sure,
OK, if you have a credit score
of like 200.
Let's just say a black person
and a white person and his back
and Hispanic person, all of a
200 score.
One person pays off their credit
card, the next one doesn't pay
off their credit card and then
the second one pays off the
credit card.
Sometimes, right? There are all
different races, they all have
different factors.
How do those factors then apply?
Is it like an equity basis or is
it just based upon
Specifically
Have you paid your credit card?
And what your score is, and I, I
guess I'm just trying to figure
out.
Is it just an equal playing
field or is it kind of based
upon certain factors,
socioeconomic, etc. Madam Chair
Representative in the bill.
Well, the bill doesn't address
anyone specific algorithm, as I
said, Madam Chair, and
Representative, what it requires
is that the person, the entity
that is using the algorithm, um.
Has safeguards in place that
will assure um it does what you,
I think, Madam Chair and
Representative, which is rely on
something that's neutral like a
credit card rating or and those
kinds of things.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, and
yeah, I, I guess that's kind of
what I'm looking for.
I just want to make sure
everyone's on an equal playing
field, so thank you for that
information. And I hope I've
read this bill correctly in that
regard, so I'm going to continue
to
Look at that. Madam Chair
Representative, I'm gonna
continue on on page.
5
These are exceptions.
So
Madam Chair Representative, I
see some exceptions,
anti-malware.
Antivirus.
AI enabled video games
calculators.
cybersecurity, etc. So I'm just
wondering.
I, I just
Like, calculators? I've I've
never heard of an AI calculator.
I'm chair representative. So is
that
Is that something that's been a
problem nationwide. I mean, I'm
looking, I know we're looking
nationwide to solve a problem.
Is that something that's been
non-issue
Nationwide, Madam Chair and
perhaps the experts can
supplement, but I'm gonna take a
stab at it. You heard a lot of
input this evening about, oh my
God, is this going to apply to
us and how's this gonna work and
my suspicion is this is as has
been noted, it's been modeled on
other legislation and it derives
broad discussion about this
nationwide is people were
bringing about well what about
this and what about this and so.
To assure those people that
these kinds of things, which, as
you point out, Madam Chair and
Representative is not predictive
generally, um, are not somehow
misunderstood to fall within the
um prescriptions of this, this
legislation.
OK. No, we.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representative
and
Sounds like since you're on the
working group, you've got all
the answers. I'm glad. I'm, I
really think I'm glad I don't,
but I try.
Madam Chair Representative good,
at least, you know where the
pages and lines are in your
bills. That's, that's really
helpful for us.
So
Yeah.
So Madam Chair representative.
So I, I'm gonna go on the bottom
of page 6.
And it talks about new
reasonably foreseeable risk.
Of algorithmic discrimination.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Did you just tell me a little
bit about what that means
regarding foreseeable risk.
Um, could you point me to that
again? I was slightly distracted
page 6 lines
24 to 25 starting at a new.
Page 6.
OK.
So Madam Chair and
Representative.
Reasonable foreseeability is
something that's fairly well
established in the law.
And there are all sorts of case
law that instructs courts as to
how to determine what is
reasonably foreseeable, so
that's a, that's a term of art
and law that is well understood
um through the case law
primarily.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
All right, that
Good, I'll try to.
No
OK, next year.
Madam Chair Representative.
So I see on page 7 it says is
offered sold, and I'm sorry,
line 5.
On page 7.
Offered sold license given to
other or otherwise made
available to a employer.
And then
Madam Chair Representative, it
says on,
On the bottom here, recipient.
So can you just tell me the
role.
At least in, in layman's terms.
I know this is like, I feel like
I need AI to read this bill.
Sorry, Madam Chair, but um,
we could
put this in chat GDP and it
could explain it to us, I never
thought about doing that. I
might have to start, Madam
Chair.
This, that's, that's a
generative, not predictive, so
it's a lot, right? So.
Madam Chair Representative, so
I'm just wondering, so offered
sold, I guess that just means
the individual company or entity
that is producing this, that is
the kind of AI that we're
talking about, it can be sold.
Or leased, so that includes
someone who creates a program
and then can sell it for the
purposes of
Of predictive, is that?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think you need to read the whole
paragraph you're pulling out a
few words, so on page 6, it's
that that is an extension of the
definition of intentional and
substantial modification.
And it goes through and says
what that means it means a
deliberative chain deliberate
change made to an artificial
intelligence system that results
in a newly reasonably
foreseeable risk, etc. but does
not include a change made to a
high risk artificial
intelligence system or the
performance of a high-risk
artificial insect.
Intelligence system when.
The high risk artificial
intelligence system continues to
learn after the system is given
to somebody else, basically, so
meaning, um, the originator, the
deploy the developer is not
responsible for the modification
after the system is given to
someone else and they choose to
modify it.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So then if the
developer is not responsible,
like we.
Of
They are responsible for what
they originally.
put out there.
But
What's to say that things will
not change following that, Madam
Chair Representative, and how do
we protect them in the future.
Well, um, the way the bill's
structures it it, Madam Chair is
the original developer is
responsible for what the
original developer did. If it,
if it's then sent to a deployer,
for example, or given to a
deployer or sold to a deployer,
and that deployer modifies it in
a significant way that deployer
becomes a developer, and those
responsibilities that attach to
the are the same as what would
have had hatched to the original
developer.
I think, thank you, Madam Chair,
and that, that's helpful. So if
they make any changes to it,
they're now developer, and
they're now liable for whatever
changes they made. If they're
significant, you know, yeah.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative that
helps. Let me see what else I.
OK, I'm on page.
8. I do, I do like that one
section about trade secrets. I'm
glad you put that in there.
On page 9,
Let me see what I have here.
This is a
You use reasonable can use
reasonable can.
to protect consumers from known
or foreseeable risks of
algorithmic discrimination
rising from intended and
contracted uses of high-risk AI.
So,
Contracted, would that be?
Contracted use would be.
You're selling
Your developed product.
As like a subscription, for
example, or just someone else
around here. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, um, representative,
yes.
OK. And thank you, Madam Chair.
And then on that same page, I'm
online line 18.
A, it's a 2A22A.
Documentation disclosing, and
then it says the purpose
intended uses, so Madam Cha
Representative, I'm wondering
what if your use in changes
halfway through or your
intention changes halfway
through the use of
Of your AI, let's just say your
business model changed, but you
could still use the AI.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Would you have to disclose that
as a new intention for use.
Madam Chair, yes.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative.
So, OK, so
What I'm just wondering cause we
have a lot of people who a lot
of cooks in the kitchen
sometimes in these big companies
that have many developers. One
person says, I want to change
something.
And a lot of the time that these
developers, they
In my experience, they do
testing. They test all the time.
A B testing on things. So what
if there's a test for one thing
that changes it.
Significantly, and then another
one keeps it. But let's just say
it's a lot of different changes.
Do they have to give a daily
report or some kind of, some
kind of um
Report on what the intention is
that's changed since it's been
It's been altered in some way,
and it's rapid Adam chair, Madam
Chair representative, great
question. You're asking the
question about AB testing and
how would you roll that out. I
would argue that AB testing
typically is not going to
foundationally change the way
you're using an AB testing is
typically used to change a
slight feature to make a tweak
to a user experience uh what
we're talking about here is
substantial changes, things that
change the way in which say a
particular data set is weighted
something that substantially
changes the way the model
behaves. That's what we're
really talking about here, not
the
The incremental testing and
potential tweaks you might make
to the system on operational
daily level.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, representative
and expert, appreciate that.
OK.
I will, uh
Mark that as a question
answered.
OK.
Next, Madam Chair, I'm going to
go to the next page, page 10.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
guess, could you just go over
what?
What algorithmic discrimination
is in general. I know it's on
the bottom of page 10, but I
know it's all over the place in
this like algorithmic
discrimination, what specific
factors are we looking to?
end
discrimination of
Well,
in
What we're trying to end is the
use of a tool that um a person
uses without validating its
merit in the or it's
appropriateness, if I may say,
in these enumerated areas of
decision making, that's, that's
what we're talking about here,
Madam Chair, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, and I
did like the, the one.
scenario that I believe this
gentleman talked about regarding
Amazon workers or something and
They put them all, all the
resumes who regardless of
whoever it was, and they said
they were disproportionate.
Effects or something of of
whoever was hired or or
promoted, etc. So Madam Chair
Representative, I mean, these,
I, I guess what I'm thinking is
to train this, you had to have
something that was non AI.
be put into as a training
device. And so,
These received biases of the,
the non-AI.
test group that's been put in to
train the AI.
I mean, are, are we saying that?
I mean, humans are fallible
beings, right? We make mistakes,
and so do robots, I'm sure,
maybe, I don't know if they do.
Maybe they probably do. I mean,
2001 Space Odyssey, I guess they
do. So Madam Chair
representative. I'm just, I'm, I
guess my question is, how do we
ensure that what we're putting
in
I
Isn't already unbiased.
Such as in that scenario, Madam
Chair, because I mean they did
their best as a company to hire
the best people, I would assume.
So
Is that biased just from the
get-go and how, how is the
company, let's just say Amazon
is supposed to use this new
tool.
To be more
Equal, I suppose.
Very long question, but I'm sure
you got the gist.
Not sure I did, but I think what
this bill does is require the
developers and the deployer to
do their best to validate the
quality of the information upon
which they were lying.
To
check
Or inappropriate decision making
in the area of discrimination.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and uh representative.
Yeah, I, I guess I kind of have
some concerns about that,
because like,
And I, I, if I, if this was gone
through and I wanted to use such
AI in a business that I owned, I
would be.
Really hesitant too, because
someone could say, oh, you,
you're being discriminatory with
your AI.
If I wasn't, I just, let's just
say I, I developers, let's just
say I hired.
33 women.
And two men
And the two men said, Well,
you're discriminating against us
because we're men. And because
you have disproportionate amount
of women. I would just be scared
because
I look at all the factors is you
can't really predict through an
AI resumes when someone went to
Harvard, someone went to
Princeton went, someone went to
Yale. They're all very good
schools.
One's a woman, one's a man, 11
is a woman.
Two of them are better than one.
I mean, how do you put all those
factors in in a very objective
way without kind of
Being biased because I, I feel
like this could technically
bring forth a lot of lawsuits
regarding bias.
Because someone said, I had a
4.0 at Princeton or something.
You only had a 3.9 at Harvard,
but you got the job.
It's, it's like kind of a
holistic approach,
Madam Chair.
Yeah, I'm, I'm sorry, part of
the bill. Yeah, well, to the
whole thing. I mean, the whole
thing is new language. So
obviously, so, Madam Chairs
representative, I'm just trying
to figure out how do we protect
that person from any fri
frivolity in lawsuits, Madam
Chair, Representative.
That first of all, this law
doesn't create a cause of action
for discrimination personal
cause of action for
discrimination. So let's, let's
be clear about that, Madam
Chair. It simply requires that
these, the companies that are
using these tools and validated
to the reasonable extent
possible that they have checked
to ensure that it's a fair.
Tool
Um, in terms of the rest of your
question, I'm not sure how I can
tie it to this bill, Madam Chair
Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
guess.
tied to the bill would be on
page 3.
And it would be all these
different
Places that would be used,
education, employment, or
employment opportunity. That
would be it right there.
Employment opportunity.
No.
Financi or lending service. What
if my business is a financial
lending service that's hiring.
But if we also have healthcare.
Uh, businesses within large
corporations. So I would say it
is tied to the bill, but I'm
gonna continue here anyway.
The Madam Chair Representative,
page 12.
top of it says within 90 days of
a risk incident.
Can you tell me a little bit
about what risk incident means.
I'm sure.
Yes, Madam Chair Representative,
it is a defined term.
High risk
What page?
Page 8
And
High-risk incident means an
incident when a developer
discovers or receives credible
report from a deployer that a
high risk uh artificial
intelligence system offered or
made available by the developer
has caused or is reasonably
likely to have caused.
algorithmic discrimination and
I'm gonna have to learn to get
that word right, but.
Going forward, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
probably will too. I'm sure on
the floor, we'll have a lot of
discussion on this. So, OK,
credible report.
Um
From a deployer. Does, does that
have a specificity specificity.
See, there you go. There's my
word today, specificity of how
many reports are needed to be,
to be credible or does it, is it
just one report that's
That's really damning in some
way, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Um, Madam Chair represented the
word damning is not used.
Um, and it doesn't have to be
any specific number of reports.
It has to provide sufficient
information to give the
recipient of the report to, to
say, OK, that's, that's good
solid information.
Which we should therefore um
Report
OK
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So, OK, I'm I'm
just trying to figure it out.
Good solid information. I don't
know if the word solid is in
this bill either. I just want to
understand what, like what that
means. Like, if I might have a
different perception of what a
valid report is versus another
developer.
So, do we have more, more
frameworks, guidelines on that,
or they're in the bill, Madam
Chair representative. Well, um,
there will also be a regulatory
framework that the attorney, the
attorney general will be working
as well, so things like those
kinds of terms will certainly be
considered in terms of giving
guidance, Madam Chair, and
Representative to developers and
deployers.
OK. Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. I did see
that we were giving them the AG
some rulemaking authority, and I
mean.
Wouldn't
This passes, I would hate to
work in the ZOJ because this is
such a long and very complicated
bill. But I know there are
people who are very capable of
doing that job. So I applaud
them in advance, but Madam Chair
Representative, I'm gonna just
keep going on this, uh, another,
another 90 day.
group
The requirement is on B on page
12.
Uh, request by the State
Department of Justice.
To submit a copy of the
summarized documentation to
Madam Chair Representative, is
that, does that kind of tie on a
With the credible report.
And then is be kind of like a
subset? Well, it's not really,
it's not a subset, but
What is that one pertaining to
on page 12.
Line 9 on B.
Within 90 days
I'm sorry.
Oh, I'm sorry, go on. Adam
chair, uh, Madam Chairs
representative, well, it starts
on page 11.
Risk incidents required
disclosure and submission, so
the provision that you were
referring to relates to when
there has been a risk incident.
And what is required and what
the Justice Department.
Um, may request and what the
developer then must respond to
so.
Maner represented.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So,
so from my understanding, it's a
multi-pronged.
Report or risk incident report
process process, OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
All right. Continuing here, uh,
reasonable care on page 13. Do
we have a definition of
reasonable care on line 4.
A section 5.
Um, just like many things in the
law that's a well established.
on principle, reasonable care,
well developed in case law.
Common commonly used in many
statutes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. You
know, yeah, when I was in
business school, we learned like
the reasonable man standard. I
don't know if we maybe a
reasonable person standard now.
I
So that's probably it. OK. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
Um, continuing here.
Another question, OK, this is
the one that I had a big
question about. Page 18.
Line 9 on 1.
So Madam Chair, representative,
and I think someone in public
comment had a concern about
this. Notice that the system
will be used to make or be.
A substantial factor in making a
decision.
And so I believe they said that
they would have to file a
notice. Would that go with the,
the DOJ, Madam Chair,
Representative.
I'm sorry, this would be the to
the to probably the person who
buys the product.
Madam Chair,
so.
So this is like
You're applying online on online
applications, say, in something
pops up and says
This process is being aided by
artificial intelligence.
Some of you, madam chair, see
that now.
Um, so that's the kind of thing
we're talking about, it's not
hard to do, and it's easily um
implementable, Madam Chair,
representative.
OK. OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. So that
notice, would it have to be
before?
Or during the process of, of the
application, for example, if it
was an employment document.
Excuse me, sorry, um, I would, I
would say before, so the person
has the ability to choose
whether they wish to participate
in a process where they may be
evaluated through an artificial
intelligence system, Madam
Chair, Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So,
And
In the employment situation, if
I owned a company that
Like, I don't know, uh, there's
an indeed and.
job application platforms and
then they go to sub.
Sub pages where let's just say a
company such as
Any company. Let's just call it
ABC Company. ABC Company is, is
hiring, but they use a software.
To iron individuals, and it's,
it's AI driven.
Would, if, if someone or if if
there was an infraction seen by
the district or the DOJ now.
On such an employment practice.
Who would be liable? Would it be
the employer?
Or the
program that they, that they
utilize through a third party.
to sip through the the resumes,
Madam Chair Representative.
Does that make sense? So if I
use a subcontractor,
To do this for me is the
subcontractor.
Liable
In this case, or is it the
actual company that gets
whatever the data is from that
subcontracting AI program.
to see what resumes are the best
or the worst,
Madam Chair, um, represented,
when you say libel, what do you
mean?
So Madam Chair Representative, I
guess whichever one would have
consequences pursuant to this
legislation, if not in
compliance, OK.
So what this legislation would
require of, I think it would be
the contractor that's deployed.
is to ensure that
on.
Risk assessments.
reported to the Attorney
General, all of the things that
in here.
They don't do that
the Attorney general could seek
enforcement.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative that.
a lot with that.
I have some questions that I had
from the FIRs that I will get to
you now.
Sure.
Representative, OK.
So, OK, this is one concern that
I, that I heard about.
and I think
It's probably in the fur.
4 somewhere, but it's regarding
just impact on AI startups and
technology companies in New
Mexico and how this could affect
AI startups, and I, I think that
Concerned that we heard tonight
in testimony was that it could
discourage.
v ation
Wandering, Madam Representative.
That is something that
Guys have considered
folks have considered within
the.
The framework of your drafting
of this legislation.
New businesses in New Mexico to
come here. Is this?
This be seen as anti-business
friendly to those AI companies.
No.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
And I appreciate your answer.
And I'm sorry, I
this FIR
late last night and I need to
remember which page I'm on, I
believe it's for.
It says
representative.
Well, I can't find it right now,
and I apologize for that.
But it did say.
That
One moment. I'm sorry.
It's my place here.
OK, got it. I see it here. It's
on the bottom of page 4, talks
about EDD states that
requirements of the Act could
result in new increased costs
and administrative burdens for
business developing and or
deploying AI systems, says that
the bill could have a negative
impact on innovation by creating
additional obstacles for
development and deployment of
new AI technologies.
Madam Chair Representative, I
have not had an opportunity to
speak with the secretary or
anyone at EDD, but I'm just
wondering if
If this is a concern that you
that you've considered while
drafting this legislation.
Potential to keep innovation out
of the state.
Yes, it's been considered in all
of this information is vague and
hypothetical,
Madam Chair Representative.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I don't know
actually, I have the EDD FIR
right here.
Let me see what
They said, to make it a little
less hypothetical manager, one
moment.
Well, I'm looking for that,
Madam Chair. I did have one
other question. I know on the
AOC report.
It was, or the, the agency
analysis, it did indeed specify,
and I, I guess I kind of am
inclined to agree with the.
With the AOC, it said that the,
the bill was really hard for
laymen or individuals who are
not attorneys to understand the
bill.
And I think that that might be
something to consider maybe
cutting down the bill to a few
less pages.
Regarding that, and I think that
that was on the AOC report,
which I, which I could always
provide to you here. It says,
This could lead to confusion
regarding
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
sorry. It says, uh, the bill is
written in a difficult, is
difficult for a layperson to
understand and apply. This poses
a barrier to the accurate
adoption of the requirements
outlined in the bill. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I'm just
wondering, have you considered
making this a little shorter
bill just for business and
innovation to be able to uh
To digest, I suppose the word
would be, Madam Chair.
I think that Bill's length needs
to be determined by what is
necessary to explain.
Provisions
And shouldn't be judged
necessarily, Madam Chair, on its
length.
Of course, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I, I
don't think I'm
I'm saying that or the AOC is
saying that I think it's just,
you know, written in a way
that's difficult. So I think it
might just be the verbiage, not
necessarily the, the length,
like 30 pages, 27 pages,
whatever the, I think it's 20.
Almost 30 pages. So I just think
that's something to consider and
Madam Chair Representative, let
me look at my other
other questions that I had here
for you. I had a lot regarding
the furs and the agency
analysis.
So
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't know if you might not know
offhand, but I know we talked
about in your open about other,
other states that are utilizing
this type of law.
How did these uh
Compared to states such as
California and New York, and I
believe Texas it was that we
spoke about. Are they pretty
much, I don't want to say copy,
copy paste or cookie cutter, but
I want to say, are they, are
they structurally similar in
ways that may
uniform on a nationwide approach
and is ours any different than
theirs? Does it have anything
specific to New Mexico, and I'm
sure.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
This law is similar but not
identical to other laws that are
being pursued in the states that
you have referenced. It was
based on the Colorado law that
was enacted and signed in
Colorado.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and it's good to
hear, neighboring state to our
north which has
Less delicious chili than ours.
Madam Chan Madam Chair, just had
to put that out there. Sorry,
Colorado, but.
That green chili is the best,
but anyway, so, uh, HB 60.
Uh, I'm wondering how this
How this will affect
development. Like let's just say
in an educational setting,
you're trying to develop
something.
And at UNM or NMSU for example.
How will this affect
Just that kind of development in
an educational setting.
We're not asking about
application. We're just asking
about development, Madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't think would apply to the
development phase of the.
process.
It this all has to do with a
system that is um considered a
tool.
The screen, not one that's being
developed and that's what we're
talking about here, not.
testing and developing new
algorithms or new tools once the
tools settled on, you know.
There has to be a mechanism to
ensure.
To look for potential bias and
the like, Madam Chair.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
appreciate that answer as well.
Uh, I'm glad it doesn't apply
to.
Innovation when it comes to
The uh
Higher education department I
read. So continuing here, Madam
Chair.
I guess
I'm wondering how does this
ensure that consumers are aware
of AI decision making is, and I
know you said it would be in
rule with the AG's office. Are
we gonna also have a portal or
something from the AG's office
through rulemaking for
complaints or or any kind of uh
Troubleshooting when it comes to
such.
Entities is the ones described
in your bill, Madam Chair. Well,
Madam Chair, I'm not sure I
totally understand the question,
but the bill provides that if a
person is um receives an adverse
decision as a result of the use
of the tool, the um deployer
must provide that person with
notice.
Um, of that fact and enough
information to determine whether
they would like the information
corrected and uh and there's a
right of appeal.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So at least
there's a right of appeal. I
like that idea, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm continuing
here. Are there
OK. Uh, so, nationwide.
back to nationwide federal. Are
there any federal regulations
now currently regarding AI?
And the uses as set in this
bill, madam chair representative
statute-wise, maybe not
executive order wise.
Several bills have been written
by bipartisan sponsors, but none
of them have moved in
Washington.
Mm
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, that's
Interesting. Well, nothing
usually moves quickly in
Washington anymore, um, or ever
maybe Madam Chair
representative. So continuing
here,
Um
What about the cost to the DOJ,
the state DOJ rather, Madam
Chair Representative. Do you
know how many new folks they
would need to oversee a
department such as or an agency
to oversee the
Enactment of your legislation,
Madam Chairman Madam Chair, I
don't have that.
Certainly I have been consulting
with the Attorney general's
staff and the Attorney General
himself and the um.
They would not need to have a
budget allocation for a couple
of years, I believe that's one
of the.
statements that were made in the
FIR, Madam Chair,
Representative, so we'll have
time to assess and staff this
appropriately.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
And I appreciate those answers,
and I continue to look at.
Bill here. I, I only got to page
like 30 something or I'm sorry,
age 10 or something.
Maybe I was on 15, who knows?
OK. Representative, is there a
way you could consolidate some
of your questions because it's a
60 page and we don't have that
kind of time. I understand,
Madam Chair, and I, I, I wish
this bill may may have been
first heard in this committee
first on the agenda, and I'm
sorry, I just, this is a very
long bill, and I've read the
bill. I just want to make sure
that I understand the bill from
my constituents because I can't
vote on something that I don't
fully understand, and I, I would
not be doing a service to my
constituents if I didn't. So.
Sorry.
Representative
OK, so I'm gonna continue here.
On the information protected by
law and the notice to the
consumer. This is page 21.
It says nothing in the act to
require a deployer or developer
to disclose a trade secret to
Madam Chair Representative, do
we, do we have a
Really concrete definition of
what that trade secret is other
than on page.
13, I believe it was.
Maybe it was page 9.
That referenced trades, trade
secret means information
including formula pattern,
compliance program device method
that do we, do we think this is
very inclusive.
Of trade secrets because I know
we're we're always developing,
we're always enacting news.
New kinds of technologies had,
how do we ensure that this
indeed is
It's all inclusive, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair Representative, it's
on line 19. I see the definition
here. I have it circle, yeah,
page 8 and it goes all the way
to section 3 on the next page.
I'm just wondering, Madam Chair
Representative.
Is this all inclusive? Have we
had issues with this in
Colorado, for example, if this
is just been duplicated. What is
it? Trade secret and how indeed
can we make sure that those
businesses are protected.
of trade secret.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representatives. And
so I
I don't have any questions about
the insurance.
And then we talked a little bit
about State Department of
Justice, the civil action. So,
OK, Madam Chair, we're getting,
we're getting there, Madam
Chair. We're almost there.
So
Next, Madam Chair
representative, I know we talked
about it's going to be January
1st, 2027.
For the rulemaking, I believe.
I know rulemaking takes a really
long time, especially for a very
complicated bill such as this or
statue if it's past, Madam Chi
Representative, um,
Has there, has there been any
such rulemaking that was this
significant regarding
Regarding AI in our state before
or any kind of
Large project that the DOJ has
done and I don't even know how
the rulemaking works at the DOJ.
So could you just quickly run me
through that.
Um, I can't answer your question
about how the AAG chooses to
implement rulemaking. There are
protocols for that in law, um, I
doubt there has been any
rulemaking by the AG on IAI.
Since this would be probably the
first significant bill of its
kind in the state.
And was there another part to
your question, Madam Chair
Representative? Yeah, my next
question actually was regarding
the, we talked about federal law
when it comes to the feds,
they're trying to pass
something. We also talked about
executive order or something was
rescinded. I'm wondering, Madam
Chair Representative.
The governor of an executive
order in the state.
I know you
You could technically be the
governor and make an executive
order as long as it's not in
law.
So could she technically put
some of these protocols in
place, such as she's done with
the early child or the.
It just, what is it?
She did something special
education department for special
education office. She created
that through executive order. Is
there a way that she could
potentially do some of these
provisions while we're waiting
till 2027, Madam Chair,
Representative Madam Chair
Representative, I don't know, I
imagine so.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
guess that's kind of all my
questions.
a lot more and there were a lot
more lengthy, but I appreciate
the time and the attention, and
I will continue to read this
bill and follow it during its
next committee. Is it, is it
going to your committee, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, yes. OK, good.
Well,
I hope they want to get on your
good side in the past it. So
thank you.
Thank you, Representative. I
appreciate the time today.
I move it too fast.
OK.
We have um uh
Motion for a due pass in a
second will take roll.
Representative Bloch.
No, ma'am.
Representative Lord.
Representative Romero, yes.
Representative Thompson, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, madam.
Madam Chair, yes.
On a vote of 4 to 1, you have a
Du pass um on House Bill 60.
Thank you very much for your
patience, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your Easter.
I
Oh,
