Representative.
The.
Representative hembry
here.
Representative montoya.
Representative rubia.
Representative scott
representative small.
Representative townsend.
A bit based hair suddenly
amazing.
And message him and macqueen
here.
Yeah.
The.
We have a quote
thank you.
So a couple hours keeping items
for stuff
we had a very nice committee
there last night I think
thinking in our sponsors.
Which was basically that the
industry when I list with me but
they were that well and thank
you for that
I want to talk about the last
meeting or thirty meeting.
So it was a long meeting and I
think everyone for sort of
slogging through it
there was some concern after the
meeting about how the meeting
was.
And um.
It started with the clean fuels
bill represent towns and outside
today
told the sponsor that she didn't
understand her bill
and I thought that was
disrespected
reserve
scott
mispronounced the sponsor's name
several times was corrected
several times
I think that was an intentional
and.
Her name's a little tricky
because it's not what we expect
it to be.
And then
we're so matoria be the job
about.
In illas.
I I thought it was late hurted
but I think.
Partly because a long day it was
stressful and we sort of got off
on the wrong foot there was some
sensitive.
I would just
increase the committee uh to be
more cautious more respectful.
Um.
I am thinking about this I keep
thinking about an interim
committee meeting.
One of our centers are their
senators
so as a pleasure to see one of
the advocates because she was
attractive.
Uh fully believed he intended
that it's compliment but it
also.
I mean she's part of panel out
that probably wasn't a property
either so these are just things
to keep in mind as we move
forward uh just ask me to be.
Mine for that.
Yeah.
Policy so
we
um
I substantial amendments we want
to get to the twenty four hours
in advance.
Uh i'm i'm not going to start a
stop with.
You know twenty four hours of
beginning the meeting with the
ideal course are leaving
similar.
Uh we we rolled over and
amendment on saturday because.
We've been the minute today that
was a late.
It's it's also not posted on the
website as far as I can tell you
I think that's a communication
issue our new policy posting
things ahead of time um I i'm
not sure we've really got it
into the spring of how that
works so we
can the committee will need to
make sure
they would get legislative
service to process.
And we also served more and then
then we also in this committee
not every community does this we
will do more minor amendments on
the fly.
Like if there's you know uh
small additional or correction
or something like that that
doesn't have to be prepared
amendment that circulated twenty
four hours in advance.
Uh today is going to be a little
bit challenging because I think
there's gonna be a lot of in the
now
I have a commitment to build up
in a few minutes uh so i'll
leave uh I speakers of your car
has a bill today now matoria
ticks and and then one of our
presenters um
uh
cheer hooking view hill her
committee is meeting and going
over the transportation portion
of the budget.
But she needs to find a way to
come over here and present her
bill so.
There's gonna be a lot of store
back and forth and just sort of
fair with.
In case you're wondering uh what
you have five bills on the
agenda today they're all
either a fund or a tax bill.
Umm I think they're pretty
straight forward I hope they
don't take a long time we are
excuse from the floor.
So.
Uh any questions on any of that
or any.
Announcements or anything from
their members of the committee
representative
thank you mister care I just
wanted to mention for the public
you know this morning that I
was.
Putting it in my head the bills
that were hearing today and just
kind of.
Going over on I went to the
website and for the public arm
thursday attenders published and
I was like here is my tuesday
agenda I mean I know where to
look for us but through the
public I thought that was
you know.
Sort of confusing because I was
like what tea is it because you
know we're all rushing right and
I was like if he's not thursday
right
so you know I think that.
We need to be
very careful and you know I I
know that.
Yeah.
You know it's kind of misleading
a little bit misleading to me
because I had questions what is.
So resident brigo thank you for
that I didn't realize that.
The other on the website
actually at the thursday and
then not the two the general.
Um we don't control the website.
Uh I will alert the house to
third
had.
People just aren't on the same
way yet and I don't know it's if
it's because we have new tack
we're dealing with or because
we've changed policies or were
just you know rusty but that
that's a good point or agenda
should be on our.
On the list they were saying
the house energy page.
Anything else when the
committee.
The.
Okay are first bill today is
house bill on the way local
solar access with
representatives and mobile
cover.
The.
Good morning mr chairman and
every.
The.
So for allowing me to present
the spell to you today hospital
when o eight I know you have a
very packed agenda so amguna
keep the overview of this bill
fairly brief and hospital one oh
eight established as a local
solar access find at the new
mexico finance authority that
would issue great to four edge
types of entities municipalities
currently public school
districts and tribes for solar
energy systems that would
include storage
this is really for buildings and
infrastructure located within
new mexico that are owned by one
of those operated by one of
those four kinds of entities and
belongs to requires to know
where couriering reverting
appropriation of a hundred and
ten million into the pound and
the reason for bringing this
bill and was actually an idea
i'm constituents of my
it is an investment in our
communities financial while
being energy and emergency
resiliency and the development
of seller energy work force and
I want to let the committee know
that we did consult with
communities various sizes across
the state and in there are
variety of communities that are
ready to solar eyes certain
public buildings and
infrastructure
the things that are positive for
these local communities and I
think you'll hear that as well
as energy bill costs
a desire from residents to
diverse by power sources a big
driver of this bill is with the
addition of storage to allow for
emergency resilience in
communities so the vision of
having a resilient center in
every community that could serve
for heating cooling emergency
shelter
health care services in an
emergency we've seen a number of
emergencies over the last.
Few years
and and I think communities are
realizing that great resiliency
is really important for those
emergency situations
this point would also like allow
us to dry down some federal
funds including the federal
direct pay program that's just
recently launched for
unicipalities local governments
to achieve this purpose.
And
then the the fund also would
allow for greats for technical
assistance to apply for federal
or other funding and finally I
will say the finders
prioritizing applications to
from rural communities
communities that wouldn't
otherwise be able to find a
solar storage project projects
that support work force
development with local work
force and and projects that
would solarize buildings and
infrastructure i'm here with one
of my co sponsors representative
or other sponsor senator polban.
This morning
i'd like to ask my cosponsor to
make a statement I just want to
let you know
that we have four experts here
that are available to answer
questions alicia share with
public power new mexico right in
decker policy and capital
strategies to the animal mexico
finance authority john brown is
a senior design engineer from
positive energy solar and mainly
bruden are of savary.
Good morning chair members of
the committee and the audience
and those viewing uh i'm happy
to be here today to.
Um support this important bill
in my commitment toward its
energy democracy.
And in my commitment to
community solar and taking
almost five years to pass
community solar this is the
access part of what we intend
that with community solar.
The opportunity was opened
without app and this is the
access and so I appreciate and
thank the leap sponsor
representative strange ski
senator poltan and the other
responses for
introducing this bill and i'm
here to offer whatever kind of
support that I can in this
the uh discussion today thank
you very much.
Great thank you for your
presentation we are going to
start we're going to go to the
audience so first let's do a
quick check how many of your
opposed to this bill reason.
Okay
well so do we have let's go to
verte the virtual group please
raise your hand if you are
opposed to that.
Opposed to the bill.
The.
So we're going to go ahead and
go to james stewart.
Would you like.
The.
The.
All right mister stewart last
year.
The.
Alright let's go ahead and go to
the audience for a support we'll
start with this um I thought we
started the back of the limit
start thank you madame chairman
is the committee
all intent and I represent
public enough cities and a fait
and the gallop killing category
school tester this legislation
this legislation benefits all of
those entities that are in the
bill including the county so I
checked with superintendent my
kind of check with governor
jailer sigh up law and I checked
out with me or alan weber of the
city of santa fe and all all
three of these energies strongly
support this legislation and it
will benefit not only those
energies that I mentioned but
all school districts all
municipalities and all travel
governments thank you.
Yeah
members of the community money
is when I start and this mexico
change him
I think this will some forty
nine just recently mexican
communities within the state
is kind of like energy democracy
right but we need more of all
the place and this is in
fantastic store voicemail
perfect.
Good morning committee to be
here my name is muriel carpenter
and i'm here on behalf of the
environmental justice cautious
of the democratic party to
mexico not to say we can't work
with we were from that is
certainly we can on the state
level
to strongly support this bill
because we have a list of
shortcome to report the other
day and tell us about this bill
in forty
is about where percent behind it
because i've been following the
community solar issues
and I know they're a block after
block after block and it just
isn't happening fast enough and
one of those walkages is the
cities and sounds telling us we
want to do it but we don't have
the money.
This bill goes along away and
solving that problem and it's
still our cities and towns to
give us the services that we so
depend on
thank you very much so that I
can get a breakfast for under
two dollars
so I I thank you for
supporting this bill those of
you because this is a bill
really for the people to help us
to count through this climate
crisis thank you.
Good morning.
Okay good morning
with a new mexico
on behalf of our member support
as others have mentioned a lot
of cities are interested in an
expanding energy options and
funding source were also glad to
spell wood direct majority
funding to brought communities
that are least likely to have
other funding options possible
or so thanks so much
so you can still stand up
alright.
Good morning that share thank
you sponsors for work money
I jumped in
with basic call interbig power
like we work with the state with
the community people and your
stories all the time from our
rural people living there
but they don't have to passed
you to take advantage of certain
things like solar or funding
that might get a matching grant
project in their community and
this particular deal would be a
great talk to our communities
with the passive tea and also
for reserve and see in
applicants what so thank you.
Morning madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
steve johnson i'm the chief of
dickson volunteer fire
department in new mexico two
days ago we flip the switch on
our solar system
seven point five kilo watch
system that has large storage
capacity that was in response to
a year long community wildfire
protection plan that we
completed that prioritized are
being able to service an
emergency response center and
how the reliable source
so we and really county life.
What is tops all of them
organizations
turning back to climate crisis
this bill goes far to implement
one of the cheapest forms of
clear local energy solar and all
throughout new mexico especially
in public energies the climate
prices is real is here last year
was the warmest year and record
we have to do something this is
an important part of that so
thank you very much.
The officer renewed energy
office and I have like
commissioners definitely good
director in the state land
office we stand strong support
was filled we're a bus
participate in the community so
our program and we can partner
with communities this all these
school districts for forty years
about having to go so we see
this is a good thing for the
state of the specifically thank
you is there anyone else on this
test.
Thanks.
Sustainable communities which is
the price of towns
county
counting screens
centers in every neighborhood in
the students are great would
start thank you.
The.
The body credit card was
a bus I feel I stand strong
beats out of this bill on behalf
of the grief lost
the smallest drive you mexico
and straw commitment to make
sure the decision and can
survive the disasters like the
recent buyers we have so
dispensed go along with
supporting that thank you thank
you
thank you.
Good morning so much for having
us my name is
I just want to show my support
for this bill and also represent
my constituents we are so
excited to be able to really
move away from depends on yours
and be a little more independent
thank you very much.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes
thank you
chair members maybe my name is
martin
chair
we very strongly support this as
we do anything that promotes
solar wind or anything other
than
to reiterate has been said but
it's not in the major athletes
that this money unlocks a lot.
So this major federal funding
for
stolen and other renewable
development
with this money
to get that.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chair
representatives might be in this
rest of santa fe county and
architect i'm also the president
of the new mexico chapter
very strongly supported is
legislation
our organization represents over
five hundred architect members
in the state.
And we were strongly support
addressing climate change
improving resiliency reducing
green gas missions increasing
renewable energy and promoting
resource efficient buildings
as well as equipment
and
the designing built environment
and
so
again we strongly support this
legislation
your health.
It's okay to stay here
good morning madame share the
committee my name is
zero excuse me very first time
before you and
go
to support of local access to
solar providing planning and
implementation grants
and reduce data
and as far as
communities over
to build this.
What many members
representatives and citizens
press my name
is district
public renewal
is the legislature of two
thousand and five or power
disagreement
five thousand one
two thousand thirteen diving us
four million dollars
also in two thousand eleven or
visitors center parking in my
life offering setting entirely
the needs of our officers which
are community
corporation in two thousand
nineteen useful library
with financial support from our
library foundation we don't
think there is that all
additional
twenty twenty
for the work or nonprofit
western mexico university
recently installation of three
hundred and seventeen party
political rate in the watch
saving thirty thousand dollars
this is
a water
is local musical solar projects
and not only especially
with that increasing consumption
rates
downturn lower the marginal
costs interstructure
as we saw with store flooding
the communications to
communicate how do you options
should that meet arise
electricity.
Already a community experience
multi hours
the opportunities for
recognizing.
Have improvement
projects with somewhere
successfully to cost for awful
access
to school district council I
want to thank considering this
after continuation documents
successful products.
Yeah.
Chairman was the committee you
might just
decide to renoval energy
industries association mexico
with about sixty plus diverse
members two thousand four our
mission is support promoted
advance transition removal
energy new mexico this bill
creates a state on that will
help pine and sold sort of
projects of public buildings and
tribal governments who also help
to drive the local story in the
street from providing jobs and
economic development.
As we realize the windfall of
our oil gas
that we think about the future
this help us to make it just
transition to renewable energy
in the mexico we strongly urge
that you have to be passed thank
you
anyone else.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is choice of
cardinals to my lobbyist for
public power new mexico strong
still.
But i'd also like to mention
that during the summer.
I worked with score which is an
organization based out you and
we did a lot of engagement
around.
And as a result of that.
Number of participants that
actually created recommendations
about building the energy into
the.
So i'd like to
support this bill.
As well as just mention that you
know it was a state why
to be able to bring a lot of
people together.
Two support energy and this
still just gets some of the
recommendations that are.
The.
And how you climb it and
director of.
All the reasons.
This.
Right going to go on
Yeah.
Yeah.
Hello can you hear me.
Yeah.
The.
Oops.
Can you hear me.
Yeah.
Hello.
Bye
my name is sophia
and the environmental justice or
need here for it organization
called birth care.
Um where community development
economic environmental and
social justice or based
organization or based here in
santa fe we have thousands of
members across the state as well
i'm here to echo everything that
everyone has said it still
strongly I want to think the
sponsor is very much for ringing
it um and please pass the local
solar access but thank you.
Better
if I might a joke while we're
waiting
for that
I you know some people say that
albert einstein was at the
theoretical person would I be
theoretical isn't us but I
believe
in them.
My apologies.
So
can you hear me.
Okay how can how right now can
you hear me.
Should.
Yeah.
That.
Thanks.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Did you have to give the joint.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You know you can get the audio.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
About that yet.
Can you hear me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
So feel when you're ready.
All right hello everyone thank
you members of the committee
my name is of the adjunctions
yet though i'm the environmental
justice program corner for
organization called earth care
where based on the south side of
the band we have hundreds of
members and supporters across
the state on them ask you to
please support this bill
we are very grateful and were
hopeful that this this bill
pushes forward the vision for
just transition away from parcel
fuels we need important.
Renewable energy sources like
solar now more than ever in our
communities need that support so
I ask you to please pass it
I also want to think this once
there is very much for
for supporting this belong for
supporting our communities thank
you very much.
Think is that the nexus.
Hello.
Yeah.
Good morning madam chairs
representatives my name is and I
am the policy campaign manager
you've united for criminal
crisis actions as a youth lied
climate and environmental
justice organization but
thousands of members across the
state of new mexico we strongly
support house bill when we the
local solid access bone is a
bill that begins to act on the
principles of a just transition
and an energy democracy this
bill are properly developed
looks that access and winning to
communities or want to solidar
infrastructure who otherwise may
not currently have the proper
support plans or technical
expertise to begin these
projects in a statewide surrey
commission by the public power
coalition it's on that thousand
fifty seven registered voters
thoroughly percent of them
support their use of wind and
solar energy as we have less
than six years to act on a
climate prices it is group that
was support local entities and
their transition away from also
especially these communities
themselves are making the
initiative to transition away
from bus or feels yup we go
grateful I mean hopeful by the
vision this bill pushes forward
and helps manage this thing to
represent as good pansky
representative way about that
yeah this bill when shirt
regional costs saving and
support a reducing greenhouse
gas emissions and protecting the
health of our communities across
the state so I opening up access
to such an apparent whole
important renewable energy
resources like solar thinking
once again and I hope that you
will yes on this
other steep.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Good morning madam chair can you
guys hear me.
Good morning that and chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for allowing me to
speak stamp for other members of
the public to speak I would like
to just kind of give my words a
support coming directly from the
fiscal impact report for this
piece of legislation from ever
that notes that minutes policies
and other eligible entities
identified in this bill may have
difficulty excessive sign of us
excuse me sufficient capital to
supporting installing energy
systems and as somebody from a
role community I myself can
speak for
the fact that many of our rural
communities need help leveraging
funds in an accessing funds to
make these projects possible
according to house bill on a
approximately fifteen hundred to
two thousand individual projects
could be funded at fifty one
thousand seventy one thousand
dollars or twenty seven projects
at three ninety five million
dollars each and I really think
that the provisions of the bill
on both pages two three and four
really outlined how critical
this is to addressing issues and
rural communities and so I would
really urge the committee
support I appreciate the
sponsors representative sapansky
and representatives are
representative robot cabinet
when the others as well so I
would urge the committee support
thank you so much.
Thank you sir
good morning then the adam chair
members of the committee my name
is shelly man live and I am the
director of new mexico health
professionals for climate action
I am here to strongly support
express support for this bill on
behalf of public health and
health care professionals
throughout our beautiful state
with our mission to mobilise
professionals to
ensure that there are climate
solutions that protect health
and promote equity I think this
bill really takes that in a very
strong direction thank you so
much sponsors and I urge you to
vote yes.
Thank you next is.
The.
Good morning can you hear me
my name is barbara calif and
represent the league of women
voters of new mexico the league
supports this bill.
Because it will make the
benefits of solar energy systems
accessible to communities that
might not might otherwise not be
able to afford them please
support thank you very much.
Good morning committee members
i'm glad gripping him silver
city.
My grandcounty democratic party
member and environmental justice
carcus member this past summer a
while fire nearly destroyed the
town of teenas alternatives in
the fire nine homes were
directly threatened and those
residents could have been house
pa fire station while they
evacuated that to this emergency
response center for towns like
service cities struggling to
build a recreational center for
remodel in new city home that
don't have money for renewal
energy.
Much longer long term energy
bills could help three up funds
for such things a sidewalks
installed once with numerous
tower outages from pn having
these buildings as the emergency
response centers could really
help in time to in wildfire in
southwest the mexico thank you
for supporting public solar
cells.
The.
Thank you very much madame care
member with the committee my
name is asker's simpson on the
public land's chair
small organization real random
to visible which is one of
several state cha- at stake
chapters in the mexico but also
we long to the national chapter.
Please support house bill one or
weight the local solar excess
fund to get needed resources and
expertise to develop and reduce
solar energy and to minimize the
effects of climate change at
minimize the effects.
Of hydrocarbon fuels that are
magnifying big problems from
drought wildfire and so forth
thank you much.
Madimension which.
Thank you very much madame chair
harry brown and great county
commissioner from just at five
and that first while I want to
wish everybody a happy grant
county day
very sold here
thank you for the opportunity to
briefly support HB one oh eight
good friend counselor next
principles overseas listed many
of the projects that have taken
place here the county commission
has a numerous occasions
expressed interest in the
similar projects our detention
center and our county on
hospital are both a large users
of electricity and both have
apple space in which to install
solar power generating
facilities but every time we
discuss this we run into the
problem that our sheriffs are
detention center officials need
raises we need to investigate
the roads in the cost of sports
going through the roots
there's just a competition for
resources that has prevented us
from moving forward.
This bill of course would
eliminate that competition and I
want to think representative
so into pope for sponsoring it
because it would be a huge boom
to rock communities such as ours
are the the don't have the
resources to
address climate change into make
long term investments in saving
on utility bills I just would
save us tens of thousands of
dollars a year easily in utility
bill so thank you again and good
luck with with the bill
representatives.
Sh.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is no call my
estimates a lot of it in the
president of the new mexico
solar energy association the
oldest for an energy renewable
non profit in the state fifty
one you're strong we've had the
pleasure of being able to
participate for almost a year in
the creation of this built long
side other stake holders from
all across the state not only
but this assist are underfunded
institutions with infrastructure
in development the bills like
this are exactly what mother
earth needs to ensure habitable
future in addition the cost
savings of this bill will yield
high returns on investment for
the tax payers of new mexico for
decades to come is important to
note that the earlier that you
have access to technology the
more likely they are to enter
into those trades I think of the
need our nation will have for
renewable trade skills and I
pair that with the power of this
bill for example on untrue on
until central here in
albuquerque there's a public
library that's powered by solar
as you walk into this library
there's a post that explains
this this pics the interest of
those who internet building now
imagine if all schools have this
take it to step further imagine
if our emergency services had
this this one power our society
to feel more comfortable around
a technology that seems to be
intimidating to us as we find
herself struggling to step back
from her foster field addiction
change can be scary but house
bill one await has power for
these reasons and many more than
your mexico solar energy
association humbly requests you
join us and support this bill
thank you
are good.
Good morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is joseph
hernandez and I am
from the community of ship rock
and i'm speaking out as as an
individual I I first want to
take the sponsors for bringing
house bill when a weight forward
there
there is a vast untip untap.
Renewable energy potential
resources on tribal lands here
in in new mexico and in sam on
county.
That largest.
Construction project is also a
solar project
we have a lot of government
buildings in salon county in
house bill one away will help
many of our local governments
move forward
to two reach.
That to have access to.
Two solar support for the
reasons I I want to ask the
committee to support house bill
one away thank you very much.
We've been on this for thirty
minutes we're gonna stop here
and then go back to the sponsor
pretty possible have any
comments
or
additional
thinking manager to still
professionally.
Okay.
Alright under the committee.
Thank you adam chair and thank
you representatives and
representative royal ball got
the.
I I appreciate
what many people have said I
understand that access
our is a big issue
I I just have a few questions.
The the.
Um sorry can you find finance
authority in its analysis
mentioned that this fund is
unsustainable which means
they're going to have to keep
coming back or
appropriations so so my question
on on that is why it wises a
grant program and not alone.
Thank you madame chair and then
representative hungry members
that's a great question.
Heart of the concept of the
grant program is to allow for
the smallest of our local
governments to be able to access
this finding they may not have
the ability to they may not have
a tax base to repay that loan
for example with me not the
ability to necessarily
participate in projects like
that are involved in like the
public project revolving fund
for example the other piece is
that there are some sources for
example the the new federal
program is a rebate program but
it requires the local
government.
This is structured as a grant
program specifically because we
prioritized rural at understood
communities
and they can also use that in
terms of whether they want to
stack it with the potential
matching find availability etc
to get to.
The.
Okay thank you madame chair
representatives
so.
What is what.
Is the average life span of one
of these projects.
Thank you madame chair and
representative I would like to
ask mr brown to the answer that
he is a senior design engineer
at positive.
There
the warranty lifetime is twenty
five years the expected lifetime
exceeds that because nobody's
gonna make an insurance provider
have it less than that so
functionally the majority
equipment is twenty five.
Thank you missed brown
thank you mister chair.
Representatives
in
the heaven just in that vain of
on page two um.
I think when you see
line twenty one we have uh
provided branch to eligible
entities to plan design
constructive purchase install.
And and then again on page three
lines well beginning there where
we say the criteria and there's
all these plans you know what
they have to showed to apply for
the ring at but there's nothing
in there about the commission
the commissioning
why is there not anything about
the.
If there are span is about
twenty.
Mr chairman representative are
you.
Suggesting that we were required
to decommission and clean and
initial application
I don't need to ask you a
question
but
clarify that mr chair
representatives yes yes why
isn't it the commission a
consideration in the original
application yes
representative hungry that is a
great way and certainly
something we could look at I
think we have to look at some.
Standards for.
Decommissioning
building a small solar project
so I think I I wouldn't be
prepared to necessarily include
that this morning
something happened at to look at
screw the point.
Thank you
representatives thank you I I
really would appreciate if you
considered adding some language
about the commission on the
front
thank you
very much
Uh reps.
Thank you mister.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thirty four street.
Appropriation
to travel.
If you represent
this
into that.
Given current industry rates
this is just if we turn the
hundred and ten billion from
state this is zero funding from
others will be at least forty to
fifty megawaters starting out
now that's national the iter
inflation reduction act do it
substantially more.
And.
Mr.
Well choose to uh
stop and say that
does the problem with you
Can you clarify what that means
capacity of their total of
existing
purpose.
Current installed capacity
will not do so of this point I
can tell you that in terms of
just a single city that's one
city in new mexico most alamos
so there's plenty of opportunity
for greater.
Adoption of summary community
put it at the actual source of
power then it means that it's
almost medicated in terms of
distribution
that facility.
Yeah.
So.
You wise.
Actually.
Commercial.
Chairman
does
our options
solar installation generated
more to charge the battery
storage facilities so that I can
use it or not
it could also be used
for the says so there are a
number of options however there
is that either way in place
I can ask one of my experts
provide further information
if you would like.
So.
Yeah.
This is an improvement
and
Which would say
that something will have to be
offline.
Well these.
The.
What is called
the way.
Chairman and representative I
appreciate you so far to the
future I think it's going to
take time for these facilities
to be proud of my constructive
constructive and
the internet is legislation
take something specific off
will both capacity within
communities emergency.
Okay.
All
utilities
communities.
So.
Your information.
Yeah representatives all stick
complete what i'm gonna say but
I think the scale that we're
talking about is
I think the l
yeah sorry I think the scale
were talking about is
considerably small work than
utility a lot of the the
projects that we're aware of
that communities have
our small roof top projects are
shade structure projects that
are just a matter of kill the
watson easily connected to the
grand that are not taking
existing forms online offline
this is savings and resiliency
for a communities and a lot of
these projects are ready on the
ground throughout her state this
is really about capacity or
communities that are interested
in accessing this but haven't
had the resources to do so
to be able to have that
resiliency i'm not sure
what's talking about
Long
stock.
The.
Sure decline.
So.
One could nice case.
That
installation fifteen hundred
somewhere power
I would call
you.
The.
This
representative I think one of
the best examples we have
seen a color.
That has a hundred percent data
somewhere power into house
carrier surrounding areas.
Yeah.
However they've been able to
integrate that with your danger
updates
yet you know
potential capability for
individual projects needs local
government can right size their
sport facility our one
emergency brazilians he said.
Thank you.
The.
The.
The bill specifies
local entity being the municipal
cover so I think it would depend
on how that utility for
structure
given the size of the like I
don't know that it could support
any initially until it is size
project besides projects
and as well as the priorities
the number of projects so we are
asking in the build that the
provider you need priorities to
allow for the maximum never
projects
I don't think that utility scale
project necessarily followed to
that high priority
because we maximizing us across
the state.
So
I can make a case
Install
requirement
very much spirit with courageous
representatives that it's well
as in why the energy natural
resources department is also
consulting as well as new
maximum ideas
I particularly admitted priced
with the mexican budget support
is ability to offer technologies
to local governments that you're
right this will be if you could
envision rooftop solar enough
community center library yet
perfectly structural
the battery storage
allowing
I would just pass there I don't
know of our expert for a few
mexican financial even what to
add anything to that
thank you
mr charlie
bill provides for technical
assistance funding so I would
including planning to decide so
I would expect that that would.
Support
capacity
manage projects.
Expert.
I presume that in the same
nineteen
corporate work.
This would be.
Mr chair my name is right
from the policy capital
strategies my policy
they know we don't have a a
correct engineers
programs like this strong
successful full notation is is a
collaborating partner agencies
in the case of those problems
with the energy office
partners before in the past
could be a potential technical
part on the assessment projects.
Yes.
This is this.
Anyone else on the question.
They seem they won't also really
go.
Um
bill I had a question regarding
the eligible
looked for um
local subdivision
uh
different bills looking for
division
you don't use the channel uh for
for subdivision.
Interest in this design.
I don't I just say
that some way that's reportable
substitutions and someone.
So if that is something
if you're accommodating in the
ultimate.
Mr chairman
we're happy to look at it I will
say we started the draft of this
bill with a very expensive less
eligible
political september however in
working
and in ms which is
high specific existing statutory
restrictions and consultation
with council service and I don't
need to replies
this less because this wise we
thought the most
constitutionally justified world
list
eligible entities for
established president within the
five I also do agree that they
are grants
can it for this so i'm happy to
look at that
and see if we can't figure out.
Okay
at least the ones that are
political divisions
that the struggle is house there
um
yeah they're republican
couple out.
The following and say where is
that.
This.
Okay um.
It's of that does it happen
again.
Okay.
Langrans have struggled to be
recognized as public entity.
By while they are
in the certain so they certainly
would fit.
Honestly and I think they would
fit.
The other goals of the program
rural underserved you know.
I mean this at least something
in a language you know could do
um
cheaply the.
Center james him type structure
you know they have land you know
they could power their.
Really feeling so
I want to offer any amount makes
that I don't know what the
language should be but if
there is a experience give you
look at that I would appreciate
it.
Yes mister termino.
Thank you
mister chair on that point.
Reserve garcia.
Mr chair representative if you
were to be fine language aspect
of such a measures that would be
the idea of language.
Because we have what is a twenty
eight day grants that are.
Or.
Declining language as political.
That you know the government.
It could to me you could see.
Elsewhere to meet eligible
entity means a political
subject.
So division of the state
including.
This list or.
In indian nation tr.
Okay resident brigade.
Thank you chair
and you know I wasn't going to
speak earlier but I after I
thought about it some war I
thought
in twenty twenty the city the
other city council a bill that I
sponsored it was a memorial and
I don't have the number and
that's why I didn't wasn't going
to speak but I think it's
important the city council
passed a memorial that
encouraged government buildings
to utilise
you know new technology that
related to clima.
So it is support your bill
because as I was thinking about
it it really the really started
with the premise of supporting
government buildings before we
go out to tell the public here's
what you.
So I wanted to mention that
memorial because I think it's
important in its it really is
supportive of this sort of
legislat.
The reps that brigo.
Um.
I think we're not the committee
do you have any closing
thoughts.
Resistance I just what I think
you offer the one walk on for
all the community support he.
Important.
Thank you.
Raking member scott.
Do you know where reps.
The.
The.
Yeah.
So.
As repeated onto the accident he
said he did one of both on this.
Um.
I respect that.
The.
Will.
Five I would like to.
So so hold this in advance and
tick a vote later in the meeting
with.
No for the question.
Ski would that be acceptable.
To end our discussion this bill
and bringing up for emotion
leader in the meeting without
your p.
At the pleasure of the chairman.
Okay so any questions from
members of the committee on that
issue.
Okay so we're gonna conclude are
considerations of the spill we
will entertain the motion um.
Later in the individual.
Thank you representatives.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay so members of the public
you could hold your
conversations and exit the room
if you're not here for the next
bill.
So I need people either sitting
down early
thank you our next bill as full
seventy three
energy storage system income tax
credit with the store any other
whenever you're right
thank you mr chairman the
members of the committee like
you said I represent a sony i'm
here to present house bill
seventy three energy storage and
contact credit
I have to expert witnesses
mister jim desert in and.
And.
Mr chairman members of the
committee i'm margitatro I am an
engineer and work for a company
called actually nonprofit called
grid works dot org i'm a native
of mexico and a resident of more
accounting.
The.
Miss chairman members committee
gem decided i'm executive
director of the renewal under.
The.
All right.
Mr chairman this will create the
energy store system in
compatibility for taxpayers who
purchase and install it energy
storage system on the taxpayers
residential commercial
industrial industrial or
agricultural property new mexico
the credit is forty percent of
the purchase and installation
cast of the certified system to
a maximum amount of five
thousand for a system installed
on residential property and a
hundred and fifty thousand
installed on commercial
industrial or agriculture per
property no more than one system
per property show eligible for
the tax credit
taxpayer will apply for a
certification of eligibility
from the energy minimals and
actual resources departments.
There's an agricult amount of
credit.
That may be certified for
account year is more no more
than i'm four million.
Why do you need this bill well
husband seventy three would
promote wider doctor of
distributive energy stored
systems in the state of new
mexico these distribution
systems can provide localized
energy storage for property
owners and if grid tight feed
excess energy to the local grid
wider option of a distributive
energy stored systems in the
state of new mexico could make
rural urban and in suburban
communities more energy
efficient and as do mexico faces
these aggressive weather events.
And they cannot knock out
electric tristing distribution
extreme cold extreme heat like
last summer
in larger more aggressive storm
systems it is critical new
mexicans continue to have access
to reliable electricity and
energy stores can also be used
as a short term back of power in
an emergency like we sign texas
a couple years ago.
The.
In each b seven three
you have to applicable for the
text years beginning on march
first of twenty twenty four due
january first of twenty twenty
nine and last year
representative smile told us
that the entire bucket for the
environment conservation and
renewable energy is less than
five percent hobby less than two
percent of a tax expenditure
year of a year for the state of
new mexico so we don't spend a
whole lot on tax for any mexico
when breaking happening in
mexico the next error energy
resources that it's a hundred
twenty mb when a vista energy
center solar plant near separate
new mexico it has four hundred
and sixty eight thousand solar
panels and fifty megawhat's a
battery storage on twelve
hundred acres of mexico and land
so interstorage is out there
it's only getting better and
sheeper and um.
New mexico we have wind we have
solar and the third prone to
that seat is energy storage
in me to defer to my experts for
any additional comments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think the
representative sarnya has done a
great job explaining the purpose
of the bill I stand ready to
support any questions that you
may need assistance with.
One moment please
I believe we have people in the
all do you want me to run them.
We're not about to take a vote.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
We have seven
forget the voice here
never mind please proceed this
group mr chairman we do have any
amendments I forget
so we haven't a member that's
been passed out I would like to
pull comment before we do the
amendment because I think there
could be debate on the moment
it's okay okay so in the
audience.
They show hands uh
sports.
There are these reason your hand
if you.
So no opposition
okay we will do.
Uh twenty minutes you'd sign a
message we'll have opposition.
Um.
If you would like to speak and
support this bill
please stand up will do we'll
raise your hand i'll recognize
you
this every morning is chairman
of the committee my name is
always
chapter thirty five thousand
support and if you storage any
storage would enable the onset
capture of energy from silver
other sources of energy top sold
helpful
emergency but also
energy when they did it.
We have credit so top so where
to build through the program.
Thank you for that
mister chairman members thank
you for allowed me to score it
up out very good spots out of
this build because this actually
allows us to attend that goes
set out by the energy drives the
chimac because in earty storage
is being installed by a
utilities and high level of the
great what is from the bottom we
need to energy story so that can
this great can be supported from
what sites this is probably the
most effective use of energy
storage and I strongly support
this bill and
suggest that you support the
what yes what the spirit thank
you.
You know some
morning chair thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
richard martinez or raise your
professor here and
other than ten thousand two
hundred forty three percent
engineer stated in mexico thank
you mister
service and full disclosure
my wife is the first cousin of
representative for a couple
messages
so i'm president elect
it mexico society professional
engineers and open light offer
since you're support for this
bill and especially offer
appreciation for the sponsors of
this bill thank you very much
thank you for that.
Good morning mr chairman members
meeting my name is market
we are supported of this bill
energy storage rise valuable
services also
customers price means you know
security through a policy clean
back up our future.
Additionally people's more
effective universation of
outside and allows customers
more effectively managed to earn
due cars to refuse things like
that
and demand activities the
ability to do storage provides
customers to engage with the
great op it's a huge
opportunities to leverage
distributed energy resources to
enhance the overall efficiency
and resolution better than all
customers who face the response
for it with very much
step forward for the exploit at
you mr members.
Thank you
mister
support of the bell believe that
it will enable people
businesses rather state to adopt
a storage more easily which is
an important part of our
basilians and transitions thank
you for your consideration she
identifies place because i'm
sorry at least.
Thank you.
Um
this.
Yeah.
Mr chair.
Committee members witnesses my
name is jim mckenzie coordinator
of through fifteen new mexico
i'm here this morning with a
down my corporate tom solomon
i'm a retired commercial
industrial electrician i've been
a principle in two distributor
to energy a businesses in new
mexico i'm inemitly familiar
with issues of storage and
distributed energy on our grid
and I stand in strong supporters
bill thank you.
Yeah.
He spoke.
That's right is there anyone in
opposition to speak out there
and if you would like to speak
in support as this films these
breeze are here.
Yeah.
Okay so we've
second time with the virtual
comment
so we had to plug into a
different court so I think we
have the she fixed uh
purpose.
Mr
herper with this
yes can you hear me.
Good morning.
So I can hear you coming through
the computer but that's what the
last period.
It.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Okay.
Mr
yes sir I can hear you.
The.
The.
The.
Are you ready for me to begin.
Yes ma'am I can't see
it.
The.
The.
The.
Mr herber can you hear us.
Yes sir.
Okay that's an echo but.
Well but it's I think it's
coming through my speaker.
Like now if you talk to.
Can you hear me now
mr go ahead
thank you mr chair and committee
members were allowing me to
speak and support house bill
seventy three I am my name is
adam harper i'm the ceo and
founder of solar which is a
local
solar and energy installed
company that was founded in two
thousand nine and I want to urge
this committee to vote yes on
this bill for multiple different
reasons one is to the point that
was made earlier about this is
going to help for great
resiliency in times of
emergencies as well as this
would benefit job creation not
just for my company but also
many members many different
companies inside the state so
I would again just boat this
committee to approve this bill
to increase our resiliency as
well as promote jobs in the
renewable energy sector thank
you.
Yeah.
Thank you for that next operator
arbor caller.
Good morning chairman queen and
committee members and barbara
kayla speaking for the league of
women voters of new mexico.
The league supports incentives
to develop renewable resource
renewable energy sources and ask
for your boat in favor of this
bill thank you very much.
Thank you and accept we have
lurious.
Yeah.
The.
Or are you there.
Hi can you hear me ok
yeah i'm just a citizens then of
new mexico I was born here and I
really think there's a lot of
potential for renewable energy
and I know.
One of the pieces we need is
energy storage so i'd like to
state my strong support at this
bill.
Thank you.
Is there anyone online that
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill.
If so please research.
Okay I see military treatment
with her henries the streaming
are you in support or opposition
of this bill.
The.
Okay we lost.
I think that's in the coming.
Before we go to the committee
there is an amendment with
someone like to move the
amendment for discussion.
So.
The second.
Um
yeah that would you like to
explain the amendment.
Yes thank you mister chairman
the amendment would allow tax
payers who are stephen energy
storage system income tax credit
after the annual tax credit card
has been exceeded to claim the
tax credit in next year's
taxable year we also strike a
picture five we.
Strike the curse first of course
of and insert in lewit via
america fifteen sixteen strike
existing and with the service
provider.
Um.
I'm page fifteen line eighteen
after the semi.
Um strike out the lines to
anyone i.
Um.
Is installed for use w.
Okay discussion on the
amendment specific
resistance thank you
misdetermined just just one
quick question.
The.
In everything is carry overs
continued to carry over this
would not impact the maximum.
Why build.
The.
Thank you
for the discussion the moment.
Someone like to move the amount
out option.
Is there any objection to a
data.
This.
Okay so seeing then the
amendment is adopted.
Um
never onto the bill
a discussion from the committee
on the.
Yeah.
Reserve a.
Thank you mr chairman
representatives.
Thank you I just have it a few
questions about this or on I
think.
Primarily on the residential
side but also
and I know because on the
commercial side this could very
widely but on the residential
side what is the.
Estimated cost to a home owner
for instance of these systems.
Mr chairman of him brain
I would know obviously it's
very and.
Separate all of the system
itself tend to twelve thousand
million fifteen thousand on the
higher end.
Thank you mister chair
representative saranian.
It would there be a significant
difference for say a
newer bill home versus
an historic home.
Yeah chairman
and representative hungry
yes what I would think in a lot
of things you know when you have
a clean slate I can do
construction it's easier you can
think it out okay we're gonna be
putting the energy store system
here it's going to be tied in
over here so that would
certainly be advantageous and
that's one of the reasons why
there can be a variance and
causes on existing buildings you
know.
There's a lot there might be
other variables there.
Thank you mister chairman
representative saranian
and i'm sorry sir I I missed
your name earlier jim days.
Okay thank you mister charge
so
what part of the new mexico
population given these costs do
you expect to be able to install
these storage systems.
Um mister chairman and
representative
I would think you would have a
variety of people interested
depending on
their interest so I think some
people might be very attractive
to the resilience back
especially if you have a family
member who is has a medical
device that requires electricity
if you're in a area where the
great is not a stable you have a
business that.
On the other side because of the
way that until these charges for
a business call customers and
they have something called the
community chart by using an
energy storage system you can
minimize the impact of that
demand chat it's offering
singapore when I remember
looking at the city velbert
energy bills and sixty percent
of their costs were demand
charges so this could help
minimize.
And then there's all the future
that are industry is looking at
terms.
And high.
The.
That thank you mr chairman
reference representative
saranian mister dessert as our
dan sorry.
So I guess my my real question
there is what percentage of new
mexicans has fifteen thousand
dollars of disposable income or
funds said aside.
That even with the the tax
credit would allowed him to do
this.
Mr chairman representative right
thank you for that question so
the intent of the legislation is
to make that amount of
population much reader.
And you raise a good point and
so we do need to address that I
don't have you know actual
numbers on that but we want it
to be more
thank you mr
mister chairman representative
saranon mr day shared and if say
the the and the amount of the
tax credit is forty percent up
to five thousand dollars so if
it were
at fifteen thousand dollar
project
one third of that is five
thousand dollars capped it there
so the home owner would still be
out of pocket ten thousand
dollars I I appreciate that you
have expanded that percentage.
But that is what still what
percentage of the max is new
mexicans have the ability
to expand ten thousand dollars
on that system.
And thank you mister chairman
and and representative number so
man of three retired teacher and
and when I was a teacher you
know we made we made a decent
salary but I could see using
this and I believe I could
afford it
because I could use I would like
a standalone system
that I could charge at night use
when the kids are during peak
times I think eventually it
would pay for itself but
more people believe in claim and
change and believe we have to
use everything we can and this
would just be one and it is
again only pilot to try to bring
more people on
thank you representative I I and
I do understand that and and
and mister chairman
representatives sounding on a
mister deschardian
um
my concern is that even if.
And and I understand that over
the long term it could pay for
itself.
But again my concern is there is
a significant amount of our
population they can't wait that
long.
And and to recoup that
investment and so.
My question is.
That this is really
to me.
A way to give those.
Who can afford this system.
A tax credit
that will be born by those who
cannot
afford to install it
the commission chairman of
mrperiod at representative
of other things start out that
way right phones only the only
people who could afford and we
had him but then everybody had
em i'm last year was below crow
and hit you know that it comes
of age and people start seeing
what it can do and trying it out
um I believe that's where we're
out with this it is a pilot it
is to introduce it it is to get
people excited about it and
understand what it can do so but
yes not everyone will be able to
forward it but there will be
some are paying ears with
anything that happens and that's
what we're looking at first
thank you thank you
representative serious mister
chairman representative serious
mister days hard and want one
final question in and or
and I I appreciate that many
many things started out that way
phones.
Televisions microwave over right
those those all started out.
Where only the barry wealthy had
them.
But then supply in demand.
Drove the prices down.
And.
And then more and more people
were able to afford it.
I don't think in any of those
instances
were you giving tax breaks to
someone who bought a tv or a
phone.
Or
a microwave of it.
So again this seems to me.
A a tax credit
to those who need at the least
on the backs of.
The other tax payers of new
mexico who cannot afford to
install one of these thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you.
I think you mister chair
thank you representative for
bringing this forward I I
appreciate.
You p.
I I am concerned a lot of
questioning.
The portion of the folks who can
who can.
Do this already now we're
talking about businesses.
My my concern mr chair is just a
number of.
A number.
Last week uh or on the weekend.
My preparation for it I was just
trying to figure out what was
what was.
And in new mexico w.
And so
mister chair and and
representative.
Uh two hundred p.
Twenty seven thousand five
hundred
three hundred percent of poverty
and and by the way that's that's
thirty eight percent of the new
mexican pockets.
You get to three hundred percent
of poverty.
And that's right at forty
thousand dollars.
The.
I would I would suggest mister
chair.
That person.
With all of the expenses and
that person is paying taxes.
It's not going to be able to
afford the system they don't
have they're not.
Even if there is a hope of pay
off.
Pay off as literally.
Investment even if they.
Go out and get a loan so we can
get this the reality is because
it's on alone
the investment for them will
likely never pay off.
So in reality looking at these
systems mister mister chairman.
There's not that many systems
that are even in the fifteen
thousand dollars.
That is a very expensive system
and that is the one that.
Mister chairman representative
works for a co.
The.
Tremendous systems risk top
doesn't look like a solar system
looks just like.
Battery pack that installs in
the wall it's a tremendous
system I want this myself.
But the reality is.
I make more than the three
hundred percent of poverty I
can't justify the cost.
So mr chairman and
representative my concern is
really we're giving a tax break.
To the wealthy
and there are too many folks in
new mexico that can afford
these.
And so.
I understand you have this
tremendous passion for this.
The average person right now the
average constituent I have.
Mister chair they're concerned
about th.
Expenditures.
And we do this out of the
budget.
I'm just worried about the
escalating costs of the folks
who really can't.
Could you.
Where you are.
Represent montoe so I guess I
look at it from a different side
I look at it as as parcel people
is surging in an mexico we're
getting hotter climate changes
real we're getting hot and water
hotter and it is affecting these
poor people also so if the ones
who have can support this and
push energy storage and it's
happening all over the world
then maybe that's more their
duty than there you know what
they can do for everybody else
because.
What's hurting us is climate
change
this will help is as we start to
bring it out more people use
anything we can do for climate
change because of the
possibility industry serging in
the mexico polluting making a
hotter this will help and that's
we have to look at it as one
more step helping us fight claim
it change and the heat and
extreme wildfires the floods
that are happy because of an
industry we believe hurting so
this is more of a rich helping
the poor in especially with
energy costs.
Thank you mister chairman
representative I I actually see
this as the opposite is the poor
helping the rich.
Purchase their system.
And the reality is.
The.
There are number of things
besides escalating heat that are
worse on poor.
And what's where some poor
frankly is not being purchased
food I was looking and I didn't
bring this up on saturday but
the numbers that we've been
presented in on other bills
about food and security in new
mexico one and six people in new
mexico
are claiming some level of food
and security.
Uh one and four children are
claiming food and security.
I would submit mister chair a
bigger concern for the poor.
Is the rising c.
Would love to do something.
As you do they'd like to do
something.
Representative I would submit
that they're more worried.
And the food that they're trying
to get to their children and I
would submit that in much bigger
concern.
Fix a problem.
I think I I think you said it's
kind of maybe a responsibility
for climate change I I don't
know that the poor feel like.
It's their responsibility.
I think they feel like we.
Continue to do things that cause
their causing negative effects
on inflation.
And they're more right about
their.
For that mister chair.
If you represent material.
The.
With a representative of what.
The.
Representative to this committee
that.
Representation.
The.
Quantity.
The.
How much.
Thank you mister chairman
representative
of course not but it is one of
the things that will help with
climate change it we need
everything to fight against
payment change and to represent
my toyota's point you know claim
it changes causing drought
that's gonna hurt us i'm growing
our food that's going to cause
more insecurity than anything
food and security
but no it's not going to have a
big change but it's it's part of
what we need to do as a country
as a world we have to start
pushing these things that will
help um
fight against climate change.
Okay mister chairman
representative i'd like to
export
their statement just a little
bit
and ask if these rebates would
be available to utilities.
Your mike sorry mister chairman
represents god I believe the
bill does not allow it it's just
residential industry agriculture
and commerc.
Battery storage.
At utility scale
which is oaks would be
very well qualified
into their sister
benefit.
And i'm in a reference.
Members of the committee i'm
marching senior fellow at grid
works i'd like to address this
question about the the benefits
of storage in particularly your
question about it's ability to
support the grid right inter.
I've recently completed a nine
month process with a hundred and
thirty stake holders in new
mexico providing input into the
twenty year plans for pn and sps
two of the largest investor on.
The number one thing we heard
from stake holders into these
twenty year planning
conversations was reliability
and resiliency is the most
important thing to them from
their electric providers.
Of course affordability is
second but resiliency and
reliability in agreed that is
transitioning significantly to
one that is more carbon free and
it's generation sources and an
infrastructure that is aging and
having to be replaced and
rebuilt as we speak it's clear
that storage at every level is
going to be an important element
of our grid of the future
whether be behind the meter.
In the residential or other
commercial settings or in a
large industrial utility scale
these are all going to be
required in orde.
Liability and resiliency.
So I don't know if I
specifically answered your
question representative scott I
think you were clearly asking
about how is this going to
impact the big picture of
greenhouse gas emissions and I
am a suggesting that we also
consider the reliability and
resiliency.
The.
Mister chairman.
Representative.
One of the questions
is using identical technology.
With identical subsidization
doing this utility scale doesn't
just benefit the wealthy.
It would be.
Everyone that is connected to
the courier.
That's the that that is the
consideration that I think needs
to be at the fortunate because
we doesn't appear as though.
This piece of legislation would.
Would would benefit everyone.
So mister chairman
representative members of the
committee.
Clearly the technologies that
are going to be used by
irresidential home.
To be used by the utility at
large scale um
storage so they may be they may
be different right and you might
have a bank of batteries that
gets installed as utility scale
which you might use thermal
storage you might use other c.
Really in technologies that
technology is not very
accessible at the smaller scale
for residences and small rural
applications so I think they are
going to be different currently
the utilities don't have
communications and controls
system to see the functionality
of every storage device behind
the meter and they cannot use
those devices to support the
grid in terms of its service but
that is changing.
We believe that the technologies
for communication and control of
energy storage at a system level
can be integrated to support the
resiliency of the grey.
But you are correct the
technologies.
We'll be different.
In those two applications.
Expert it would appear.
That communication and control.
The utilities had within their
control these resources what.
What I see this.
And to follow up on.
Representative hampers line of
questioning what I see this
benefiting is a relatively small
group of wealthy individuals.
And the folks that.
In installing these if you will
small scale battery storage
systems in these.
Limited.
The.
Here's the yard sticks that I
use for electric power
generation needs to be available
it needs to be reliable it needs
to be affordable and it needs to
be environmentally sense.
Now we this party has made
our utilities provide all of
those services
minimal cost and it appears to
me that with the efficiencies
of.
Large scale deployment.
Of these technologies I folks
that know how to do that.
We would be accomplishing that
in the most.
Getting.
Refundable tax rebates to very
wealthy people.
That can put these systems then.
The.
Does not appear.
In my opinion to be the best way
to solve.
Thank you very much mister chair
thank you representative briefly
mister chair represents going
sorted to the source that tax
credits we serve on
appropriations and we we know
and if it would ridely know that
a much of our current strong
financial situation is generated
through oil and gas.
Thank you mister chair thank you
representative signing out of
and
it seems like your suggesting to
us that a good use of those some
of those dollars.
Or it's that this is a way to
diversify both our energy system
and storage would that the
european.
Great air reps inside any honest
I think it's that's good to know
understanding that we're taking
these record energy revenues and
using them to strengthen and
diversify our energy system and
mister character of setting you
on it's my understanding that
course most mostly the oil we
produce in particular goals is
shipped out of state for for
either refinement or and or
further transport it both
nationally and internet.
And yes mister chairman and
representative okay mister
that makes me more comfortable
that the source of the revenues
that you're using here were you
proposing to use come from uh
energy generation in the rate
increase in energy.
The.
Secondly mister chairman of
setting on it I want to go to I
saw a recent report that
suggested the at renewal.
Work force in new mexico is
growing and perhaps it in all
time is that your sense of
center in your mischairman
representative yes that is
correct great mister chair
repsison and his we grow that
work force would that suggest
that the costs for the their
products that they're working on
providing can we assume that at
least that labor cost which is
one of the biggest challenges we
face that those costs actually
come down the more folks we have
working in an industry
the more ab.
Yeah.
And mister chairman
representative I I think that's
a good assumption mr chair of
simpson I item to agree and I
that brings me sort of the fact
that we're you're proposing we
invest in this area using
revenues that have been
generated through the energy
industry.
Continuing to grow our workforce
in a key area energy storage
which is particularly important
for our state given it's rural
nature in.
The.
You're building the work force
we have already sources.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you mr chair
representative thank you for
bringing this built forward
one of the things that I think
about when I you know i'm
staying with my mother up north
which is really a a joy way
because I get to spend time with
her
in a lot of her friends are you
know elderly women that have
lived in their homes through
many many years and I think
about them as we move forward
into and I particularly think
about what happened in towers
I think it was about five or six
years ago when the you know the
they lost all their heat and all
the during the winter months
and you know I happened to be.
At the time serving to help with
you know emergency.
And
you know I think about things
like that and I think about what
a natural resource we have.
And how we need to use.
And I think that you know.
In times like that when the grid
went down and in touch
you know people who had this
kind of technology on their home
could probably have released
gotten through that a little bit
easier
um so that's one point the
second point mr chair is.
Yeah
I guess yes i'm hoping that this
does go through
the.
We also think about
there's little via heat those up
in northern new mexico and
around the state that don't
understand what all this means
that the state invests the money
and language barriers and
so they people can make this
transition a lot easier
so I just want to kind of throw
that out mister chair is put
that in our back park it is we
need to create programs out
create and and create
opportunities for those language
barriers because.
You know some of those pop
people might do it
and you know with their little
savings account or whatever
but you know they may transition
to this if they understood it
and so I just want to throw that
out as something to think about
for the future.
Very further.
Questions.
Yeah.
The uh past as amendment is that
correct.
I don't think just for the
record we didn't read the two
two number at the outset it to
seventy four nine seven point
one.
Yes.
To either review a motion
as
particular.
The.
Yes mr chair.
The.
Representative where I go yes.
Representative dixin.
Representative first yeah.
Representative hambury.
This.
No.
The.
Representative rubio yes.
Representative scott.
Representative.
Representative town sends.
Madam vice chair yes.
The.
Yes.
Yeah.
The vote is yes.
The.
Okay so the last will be heard
we help the vote.
So how still one of eight local
solar excess fund I think.
We have enough people in the
room.
Would some like to make emotion
house.
So we have a department in the
second I believe that was not
amended preparation.
Um.
Victoria could you take the
yes mr chair
representative yes.
Representative dicks in.
Represented aggressive yes.
Representative himbury.
No and i'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative monte no and i'd
like to explain
representative rubio yes.
Representative scott.
Representative small yes
representative town sent.
Madame vice chair yes.
Mr chairman yes.
Six years three.
So by both of six to three
household one away received a
two passed from this committee
ever since embry to explain.
Thank you mr chair.
I I just have some some serious
issues with the bill in that it
doesn't plan for the
decommissioning of these
projects I think there are
serious environmental concerns
with the with the the
commissioning of the projects
and I would really like to see
that that be at the front end of
the grant process and that grant
applicants are required to set
aside some of their grant for
the decommission thank you
mister chair
thank you
montoya to explain
thank you mister chair.
Yes.
The concern mister chair that I
have.
And in subscript bills that were
seeing where there is going to
be other smaller.
Utilities that are created.
Essentially uh uh that
as we
on eta we put requirements on
our
big utilities.
And what I see happening is mr
mister chair is a people who are
the.
Local governments that can
afford to do this and have are
able to get into this even
though they're a part of that
red mister chair
they're going to be
more and more and more exiting
uh the rate payer class
so there be fewer fewer rate
pairs
that will be contributing to the
requirements that we placed.
On the utilities the major
utilities in new mexico.
So there will be a shrinking
number of mister chair of.
Uh.
Rate pairs.
But the requirements not going
down on those utilities I see
the rates going up.
As long as we were doing this
all as a.
Within those
major utilities the cost was
spread out but as we see people
starting to to to take advantage
or organizations community solar
kind of does this but now we're
doing this with what I saw and
there were a number of of folks
mister chair that spoke up that
kind of represent local
communities I see as we see
those local communities entering
into this.
I see once again the cost going
up on the remaining great pairs
these utilities that we put the
mandates on so I haven't had a
real concern once again my
arguments will always be the
consumer.
And my concern is the consumer
of these utilities that are not
able to take advantage of this
are going to see their rates go
up to m.
Thank you so and that's I helped
the vote for representative
which are clear to return the
room
I would know it would not have
affected outcome therefore I
won't always do that
that worked out in that case
but.
The.
So our next bill is incurring
test rate cheer hoping the hill
is still um.
In her committee or can the
budget the transportation budget
so we're gonna go to um
robot caba
center or cheesy pino was here I
think he loved.
Uh we have hospital your service
hospital may be wine.
Hospital ninety two um.
Uh.
Mind my reflection is we passed
these last year with by person
sport
and they went up to the governor
and they got the
and they came back
with some changes the message
from the governor
in our pack before us
so um
we never hear it hospital ninety
one.
The.
Think of mr chair and and thank
you for reminding us.
Are successful
thank this was well.
Well received on both side so
thank you very much mister chair
members of the committee
there are some changes and but I
will introduce as I always have
a
sticker for formality so i'm
here to introduce hospital
ninety one which immense the
deductions of the energy
conservation and management
division of the energy minerals
and that's a resources
development I creating the
geostermal.
Projects development fun which
will authorize grants and create
the jealous on a project
revolving now and specifically
providing appropriate six
hundred thousand to the
department to add uh for
starting operating cars and to
administer and carry out the
beauties of the app.
It also appropriates ten million
dollars to establish the deal
certainly resources development
fund and fifteen million for the
geoceral resources revolving
long fund to study the cost and
benefits of fields are more
resourced development projects.
And provide rams and mountains
to help finance them which is
very exciting uh because they
think as we've heard in all the
previous presentations madame
chair members of the committee
uh were attempting to open an
opportunity and access and as
much as we can in the renewable
energy world.
I have with me today madame
chair expert witness
thomas solomon and I will
ask that we give a very brief
introduction.
Representative.
Thank you representative and
madame chair yes my name is tom
solomon i'm a retired electrical
engineer
and die bin of facilitator at of
the new mexico thermal working
group for the last couple of
years at the perhaps of sender t
p you know happy to develop this
program and the legislation
before you today
what we are looking at just very
briefly is to develop the sixth
best geothermore resource in the
united states which is right
here in mexico
and take advantage of our unique
geology which due to the real
grand rift which runs of course
nor itself through the state has
been
you know the earth crushes when
pulling a part along the real
grand riff of the last thirty
five million years allowing some
of the subservance to come up
closer to the surface meaning
that the drilling costs to
access this those geothermore
resources is
lower here in new mexico because
you just don't have to drill his
deep and that's what makes you a
thermal
research potential in the state
so attractive and
the bill here today is intended
along with the next bill that
hopefully we'll get to present
to provide a small package of
incentives to
businesses and private industry
that want to develop that you
have there more resource.
Madam chair I will say that
senator decent been out will
we've advised him that we are on
he's on the floor of the senate
and he may be joining us
hopefully soon and we have the
other sponsor center I mean
representative terrible plan
here I don't know.
Thank you madame chair i'm just
here to to support this bill
we've been working on this for a
couple years now I think the
opportunity for us in invest
investments in other energy.
Where we're coming back this
year with it I think a little
bit more improvement of the
bill.
Manager with.
Can you raise your hand if
you're in opposition.
Right regional in support.
Since we have an opposite.
Yeah.
The.
Okay so I understand we're doing
our position online if you would
like to speak in our position
please raise your hand.
Okay so seeing then I will go
back to the room to
support if you'd like to be
consportant to read your hand.
Okay
apparently they might
call
me chair committee my name is a
theme increase
already mental and energy
engineer tired commander and
christian supporting life
we need to move as quickly as
possible to reduce all your
possibility
because not only for our health
but for our planet's future.
We
can do this by going all schools
speed and transitioning our
energy sources
dirty polluting faster fuels
that have lied to us and brought
us to the break.
To clean.
Constitute your thermal sources
that we have now at our access
it will also allow transition
are local industry who are
involved in oil and gas two
another clean industry and for
this reason I support both
ninety one and ninety.
Thank you there's no support
from my left.
The morning chairman
was still recommending this year
across a chapter or thirty five
thousand
twenty four seventeen
thirty
four solar power this building
created you the whole project
all these political subdivisions
of the c the development do you
have the whole energy
representative transition
opportunity for workers in the
oil industry.
The
sport on
the right
mr
committee members
sponsors and witnesses
i'm called
in west coast we
support of the whole galaxy
bills
technology this is not your
grandmother's
this is neutral server and I
think a lot of business of us in
this room are familiar with the
explosion in.
Fracking technology that the one
gas in this reason developed
in the last fifteen years it's
very nice on this technology is
being brought
to your mouth and this is a huge
potential for the states
thank you for your support.
Okay.
Thank you
carpenter representative
of the democratic party of new
mexico
yesterday I was stepped out into
the lawn and I saw this
wonderful
display which i've never seen
before
we got get himself bigger and
i'm so well for displaying for
me
it wasn't for me shortly there
after a female when running
so
they just wasn't for me but my
commitment is to hear what I
think of the billions of alaskan
snow crabs that have died
because of the increase in ocean
temperature I have to support
these creatures I know you do
too
you lose the crabs we write it
in industry.
So that way at the environmental
justice corpus were crushed last
year when she has terminal
didn't work make it on.
So i'm so thankful that you are
considering bills again we are
whole part of the supported
thank you for your work for us.
Yeah.
Thank you others in support in
the room.
Anyone okay we'll go online if
you're online there would like
to speak and support please
raise your hand.
The.
Okay so we're we're trying this
again that dent or class time.
Can you hear me now.
Hello
so so we're hearing you through
the computer and not through
the.
K.
The.
That's the same problem we have.
River either.
Yeah.
Okay all them we're moving the.
Yeah.
More money into art it systems.
The.
Can you hear me now.
Yes you're here.
Okay thank you.
I'm barbicaler speaking for the
legal women voters of new mexico
the league supports the
development of clean renewable
energy sources and this one is
especially exciting because it
would be a baseload twenty four
seven so we hope we ask for the
support for this bill thank you
thank you anyone else in sport
online please your hand.
Okay so seeing them in the
public portion.
Cool.
Reserve a room for me before we
get to the common mister card
happy to question members of the
committee.
Your z.
Mischairman represents their
pierce to be.
The.
Specifications in the bill.
If I look on page two line
twenty.
The.
She has no developed project
using here the earth above one
hundred
and if we go down to page three
or one seven.
Uh natural heating excess of two
hundred and fifty degrees could
you.
Elaborate on scrapes.
Mr cheer representative will as
mister solomon.
Yeah.
Mr chair representative scott
yes it turns out that during the
drafting of this bill
we
found a need to add a specific
category that you're
highlighting here of for a
geosemal resource project
development project of I believe
it's above a hundred greens fare
night the reason that we wanted
to do that is specifically to.
Make a provision for
businesses for example
hot springs and spires and other
there's the mass and farms geo
thoroughly heated uh green house
in redium springs that use lower
temperature resources in current
legislation prior to this bill
passing in current statue
geothemal resources are defined
as above two hundred and fifty
degrees fair height
but some of those other hot
springs and spires use
geothermal
waters that are lower than two
fifty so in order for those
businesses those existing
businesses to
a be able to apply for the funds
in the gfirm of grant program we
define this additional category
of your thermal project
development of above a one
hundred degrees parent high in
that allows
those businesses my hotspring
that may want to explore
expanding a two have access to.
Uh thank you mister.
So there are.
Two tranches here one for two
million dollars.
That would
be expenditure on development.
Fifteen million dollars.
The would deal with.
Operational.
I get some clarification.
How is.
The.
Might be eligible.
Thank you mister.
Representative
mister solomon can quality
clarifying that for you.
Thank you mister share
representative scott so finders
stand
you want to explore how
operational expenses might be
might be used.
So the grant fund well I guess
there's there's two places I
think we're operational
reference first is in the first
appropriate.
We wanted to
emerge is the deal from a
permitting and oversight
authority for you through more
resources in the state and
the current time when we wrote
this bill
the head count allocated to
overseeing and uh.
Monitoring geotheral resources
in the state amounted to one
quarter
in within c m d and so
we hoped there will be lots of
water development do you there
will be business coming their
way and they will need
additional head counts and so
the purpose of the this first
appropriation
excuse me of the six hundred
thousand dollars to eminer is so
that they can hire
water more full time equivalent
heads to argument that
department to have more
resources to do the job that we
want them to do for further
developing to your thermal in
new mexico
so that's that's the fundamental
purpose of we're also chartering
um
to interact with the federal
government and explore the
opportunities to apply for
federal level feel there more
moneys specifically in the
inflation reduction act and we
have identify potentially up to
five hundred million dollars
nationally and federal funds for
geotherman that we could apply
for some portion of and so that
w.
Is that what you were getting in
the chairman of the fifteen
million.
So the fifteen million dollars
mister chair representatives got
the fifteen million dollars in
the revolving loan fund
is intended to give businesses
that want to come into the state
to develop a new geothermal
project
some moneys to apply to.
To to help them to free the
initial costs of developing it
to your thorough project for
example if they wanted to build
a new geothermal electricity.
Power plant that's going to cost
them you know many many millions
of dollars a fifteen million
dollars is a small am.
Help you getting a leg up on
that project you'd probably want
to fray a large percentage of
their told capital cars but it's
something and it represents the
signal to private.
The.
And you know potentially in the
future if you therefore
businesses take off and we want
to add to that funding in the
future that would be an opportu.
And the last question mr
be available to the folks
sparse.
Mrperiod chairman representative
scott I believe so.
Yes.
Mrperiod cheer and
representative cut I think the
beauty and this
reviving loan fund is as we
stated in in the previous
presentations is that it
promotes.
Ah providing additional access
and resources.
So the the and it does so in a
way in which are the fence are
are not only available but they
also
as a revolving loan in the
nature of the group
is they they continue to accrue
interest and that interest is.
What makes the value of the
fund.
And so I just wanted to add that
that it is the whole ideas to
promote that access.
Through this manner thank you in
mr representatives gathered
the answers yes.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative boy bob
copyroll mr solomon and my
solomon I thank you.
And
so one of the one of the
members of the audience who
stood up in support of this bill
actually told me something I did
not know about geo terrible and
i'm not an expert on it so that
would have been very hard to do
but
that that.
With
technology which I wouldn't say
is it's new
it's new it's only been used in
for about fifteen twenty years
in new mexico but it's been
around for about seventy years.
Fracking is is used in these new
and for geo thermal.
Development is that correct.
Representative.
Mr chair representative
himberry.
Fundamentally yes so.
Um there is a you know a new
virginian style of a gear
thermal energy development that
we hope will take off.
It is advancing with very
extreme repeatedly
am yes the existing drilling
technology from the oil
industries essentially what's
allowing this to develop so
quickly so they're they're
taking the bounces
and drilling technology
vertical drilling and hers on
drilling and I draw it factoring
of the subsurface and applying
those
coil drilling and development
techniques to drilling for hot
rock and finding developed as
resources so yes okay thank you
mister salmon urges mister chair
representative this was all
among follow up.
So
in using that technology and I I
don't want to.
Miss quote you were saying
something you didn't say but you
said there are some differences
between what is used in the oil
and gas industry and and what
would be used for geothermal is
that correct.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you representative I think that
one of the fundamental
differences is that we in this
process from what I understand
i'm not an expert that i'm
learning as we go along with
your questions actually.
And that is that one of the
fundamental differences is that
we're not using any type of
chemicals
to break down anything in the
process we're actually having to
go into the ground but you would
into the natural resource of the
ground of the natural that
you're terminal presents to us
that my understanding and that's
what makes this indifferent
change this from the couldn't
quote fracking that's associated
with oil and gas industries and
makes this a clean and renewable
way of
digging in so to speak and just
using the natural resource which
is clean and so that that's my
take if mister soleman would
like to clarify any further that
it that is great down and and I
think you
thank you representative and I
think you you hit gonna have the
heart of my question about sort
of environmental concerns over
rocking with g or thermal and so
so I would
mister chair representative
mister solomon I I would say
um but there is similarity in
that you you need to use
province of some sort to keep
the fractures open is that
correct.
Representative.
I different.
Up mister chair representative
henry we may be getting too far
into the technical details of
how.
There are limit let me focus on
advance to your comma which is
one of the things that I think
were most excited about there is
a style of it developing
advanced your thermal energy
that uses no fracking at all
what you do is drill a deep into
the earth surface as was done in
a test well
in the.
November of twenty twenty two by
a company called ever ever said
geotherman company and they they
drilled down the eighteen
thousand feet and then used
their you know.
We're using a drill rig borrowed
from texas actually.
And then it used horse I don't
drilling at that depth.
Um
and they're technology
essentially creates a series of
underground radiators
with a series of horizontal
drilling.
Pipes and they connect them at
their tips and you end up with
this you can figure them as a
series of fingers deep
underground and it's essentially
just extracting the heat of the
earth so you recirculate a fluid
from the surface down into that
depth she was series of
regulators not fracked and then
absorbs the heat that fluid gets
very hot comes back up to the
surface you run it through heat
exchanger at the surface power
plant transfer that heat to the
to the power turban and generate
electricity and it is a closed
loop system there is no release
of any fluid at the surface and
it is that's one reason why it's
considered a very clean
and.
That particular style of advance
to your thermal uses no
fracking.
And and just to add instruction
and I think that mister solomon
just said it were not a minute
in any chemical
into the into the atmosphere so
again that's what makes it clean
thank you thank you
representative mr
representative mister soleman
for for someone like me that is
an excellent explanation of that
system I know we are
look but it is essentially a a
heat generating source that
creates steam and then the the
transfer mechanism some sort of
condenser on the surface the
transfers so that the water
returns right thank you very
much mister
and and representative and
mister chair thank you.
Thank you
thank you mister chair.
I like parts of this bill quite
a bit probably.
But I do have a couple of
questions about the two funds
this is this bill is different.
Real quick.
For administrative
administration the six hundred
thousand dollars.
Influx into that fund non
recurring how long do you
believe that.
I'm concerned that it's that it
only remains in that.
The.
Mr chairman representative
before it were to mister soleman
for detail I just like to call
your attention that the fund
amount sort of are basically the
same as previously so I just
wanted to clarify that mister
solan.
Representative montoya so
i'm looking at page ten of the
bill under the section six
appropriat.
So let's start with section a
which is six hundred thousand
dollars to the energy minerals
afte.
First question
yes that is not recurring funds
up my understanding is that
emerge in through the course of
working with the lfc did request
one additional head to start off
with which I believe would be
maybe about a third of the
summer so I am guessing that the
six hundred thousand dollars
might cover three years of that
per.
Need to consider coming back and
it is non it's not transferable
and it would not go into the
that's my understanding okay
mister chair and.
The.
A lot of this.
Yeah.
Try to identify.
I do have.
The.
And that is
a concern that we might.
Two hundred degrees.
Um is there any thought or has
there been any thoughts.
Close especially in offer this
to be potential.
Cross the state.
For this
to take place across the state
is any thoughts to if we get a
warm source but not hard enough
not the two hundred and fifty
degrees.
Something less than that.
Still tapped out and maybe to
get to that extra temperature we
use another source.
Get it beyond.
I'm suggesting.
I think there's gonna be a lot
of exploration and if it took to
get to where we were to that
temperature.
It's going to be very very deep
very deep.
The.
Not.
Might be able to.
Yeah.
I'm suggesting.
That
if if we spend all this money
trying to develop the source
which would be mister chair and
reason I supported the bill last
year is it is something.
Could be something that could
be.
Close to thirty degrees.
Suggestion and that's really
all.
Potentially consider.
The.
Think about.
An additive to th.
Mr chair and there's not a
question associated but I will
tell you as we've said before
part of the research and the
development processes will help
us make certain determinations
and as we mention the last time
whatever findings the scientists
are fine during this research
and development process i'm sure
that will be applied to what new
mexico
results in that process and I
think that's the best that we
can do and we welcome and think.
The.
They here was a month near the
question from the committee.
The.
If it depends on how the second.
Can we give the surprise there
any opposition.
The.
To have seen that
you have a unionist you pass we
have um everyone here except
there's him townson who is it's
here.
Oh but represent my toya
testing the next two build
through that
okay so let's let's just roll
right into house build ninety
two.
Thank you everyone for your
support and hospital ninety one
I will go hidden proceed with
husband ninety two
which has related to
your several electricity
generation income tax credit so
what it does as it creates the
deals or electricity generation
corporate income credit.
And the gross receipts tax
incumbents they the introduction
for geosermal electricity and it
is.
Distribute the loss of local
option gross receipts tax
revenue attributable to the
deductions which is really an
important component and the apps
provide the this particular tax
credit at provides fight million
dollars a year agriculture for
electricity income text credits
and so it's important again as
they mentioned in the previous
bill to open up opportunity and
access and at the same time be
able to promote the expenditures
on me in geocermal so at this
point the same expert witness
with me time mr thompson
at a couple of clarifying
details.
Thank you representative mister
chairman members of the
committee
this bill is intended to pay
with the previous bill and to
look forward to the faces where
we are hopefully
looking to build the kind of
your them all electricity
generation plants that we talked
about earlier and
this would provide a relatively
small production tax credit at
one and a half and per kilo what
our
for the generation electricity
up to what it'd be saying
five million dollars ago good I
think it did the math and that
would potentially promote up to
about forty two meg lots of
power
being built in the state if you
look at a ninety percent
capacity factor for geotheral so
he had some it again is a
is a significant but not huge
amount of money to offer to
private industry to get them
started
and it helps to
free the cost of the initial tax
impact of their electricity
generation the capital equipment
grocery tax deduction
would also help them to free
some of the costs of building a
plan up front as with all
renewal will energy generation
of the operational costs are low
because the fuel is free and the
cost of building the project
come front is really w.
Thank you mister care.
Okay let's do the show hands uh
I show hands and audience if
you're so inclined
if you're in support of this
bill.
Thank you please reverse your
and if you're you're in
opposition.
In the opposition.
So
we will do public commitment I
would ask you
we still have another bill after
this if anyone feels the need to
speak in sport of this bill
please raise your hand.
Okay that was effective
let's go online.
Is there anyone online he would
like to speak and support this
bill and I would also note that
we have technical challenges.
So I don't see any hands in the
opposition online okay.
Members of the committee.
The.
The.
Oh.
So.
So either we would you pass
second I will hold those we'll
still have discussion if
warranted or some material
discussion represent monetary
thank you mister chair.
Representative could you explain
the gross receipts provision in
their it looks to me as if we're
going to be holding that we're
going to be
giving an unlimited grocery
streets tax.
Then that we're holding local
musicalities and counties
parmless suit.
Local governments.
For their loss of rush receipts
as.
Mr chair and representative
that's correct
so on that mr chair that's.
That really is kind of.
Quite a bit different than than
last year's.
That's that is concerning that.
When making it perpetual
unlimited mr chair in and I i'm
sorry for the failure to clarify
it is not unlimited and mister
solomon.
Offer some more clarity on it
that it's not unlimited.
Yes so mister chair represented
my toy the five million dollars
per year aggregate cap applies
to all of the uh tax credits in
this bill so the capital
equipment tax deduction combined
with the energy production tax
credit.
For both of them together
there's a five m.
So there is a cap as to but
there is
chair and and representative as
as is my understanding is one
company.
Currently in the mexico
potentially.
The.
And
if no one else gets involved in
for them and.
The.
Mr care and representative again
mister solomon can offer some
clarity.
Mister chair representative I am
looking through the language of
the bill.
Texas
but my understanding is that
there is somewhere in the in
this bill that basically says it
is for.
So the existing businesses
you're referring to circ
energy's lightning doctor.
I believe that they would have
to make a new investment
to potentially expand that plant
or do something new you know
what they qualify for the d.
And i.
Representative that is
absolutely correct and it will
actually promote.
Um the incentive more so that we
will expand beyond the one.
And that one will have to be a
plot or have to apply so I just
wanted to offer that in our text
experts
senator jesse pena who's been
through this i'm sorry he's not
here today but he could have
offered a lot more clarity but
that's the best that we can do
right now I can't find the
section in the bill
right now at this point that
that's answer your question
thank you mister chair I I do
have some tax concerns I see
that that community.
I I do have questions.
Think he represent my toyota
scott.
The.
Taking per chairman repeated
someone.
So.
The total commitment from the
state of number.
Over this year time period.
Forty million dollars.
The.
Yeah that would be combined.
The.
Prtcrt and g r.
Which includes.
One.
Representatives.
Chairman representatives is
there already.
Mr chair mister solana
mister share representatives
card so there is an one existing
geothermal power.
The.
Fifteen mb facility.
It supported p and m's grid so
yes but that is it would qualify
yes another facility of that
nature would qualify and think
what we're looking for years
developing what I think los
alamos called hot dry rock kinds
of geotherman resources that
would not require finding uh an
existing hot water awkward for
like the one that lot lightning
dockers currently tapping into
so.
Brand new kind of resource that
doesn't require a
doesn't require an existing
pot across her to tap into.
The existing facility would not
qualify
for anything.
Mister chair representatives got
my understanding is yes unless
they were to expand unless they
were to happen to it.
And that do
you know that new project that
new face of whatever does they
were doing.
Last question
or.
How many companies.
Might there be actively pursuing
this benefit we talk one out fit
or.
The.
Fifteen.
Mister gere representative scott
that I think there are two lead
companies that we have both
worked with and have spoken to
and have in fact
sent members of their company to
help us testify it previous
interim committees and those two
companies are ever.
Eavor
in ferbo.
Uh they are probably the two
leading advance and enhanced
their more companies in the
united states there are some
others looking at it but those
of the two that i'm aware of
that are the far this along in
our currently in
building
tangible physical projects that
that nature just not here in new
mexico ever has a project in
support of a google.
Data center in the matter and
for is building.
Power pl.
Hoping to be operational
starting in twenty twenty six so
those would be the two ever.
Mr chairman.
Representative missile you tell
me what to project cost to power
on the great.
Any of these.
The.
Mr chair representative scott
what I think I tell you a couple
of things about that and that
going to advertise exactly what
the cost will be how the current
cost of existing.
Get them all
energy developed in the united
states and around the world
iceland zealand elsewhere
northern california the better
there's in the united states I
think there's about three point
six gigawats of operational
geothermal online right now have
been since the nineteen
seventies had increasing levels
that cost of energy is somewhere
in the range of I think
according to lazard about
seventy five cents a
seven a half cents to kill what
our.
That is the
level ice cost level ice costs
of energy and it's.
A little bit more expensive than
a combined cycle natural gas
plant it is cheaper than call
much cheaper than no clear a bit
more expensive than solar and
wind so it's kind in the middle
of the stack but of course it
has the advantage of being a
fully dispatchable
ninety percent capacity factor
that's current style you are
there more the department of
energies getting all division
has set a earth shot goal of
four and a half said the kill
what our for the cost of it.
In the in the coming years as
that resource
down the
costco.
Thank you mister charles thank
you
thank you.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative loyal
boy ball cobby and thank you
again solemn.
So it's my understanding that
there are essentially three
different tax credits in this
bill is that correct.
There's a there's a personal
income tax corporating contact
in his gross receipts tax
correct that mister charin and
representative we are correct
thank you and mr chair
representative and mister
soleman
a few moments ago you you said
that all three were subject to
the aggregate five million
dollar cap is that correct.
Mr representative that's correct
okay thank you mr chair
representative mister solomon I
see so the the personal income
tax credit begans on page four
at line three but then down
starting and in
I believe on line twenty one it
says the aggregate amount of
credits five million dollars I
see that.
Then over in section three on
the corporate income tax
beginning and page nine
one line in the aggregate amount
of credits
subject to the five million
dollar cap.
However when I looked at a
completely separate section
which is gross receipts tax
beginning on page twelve line
eighteen and through the rest of
that section would you please
show me where it says it is
subject to the aggregate.
The.
This.
Mr chair and representative
we're not finding it if you can
get mister.
Yeah.
You were not hearing
representative
we're not able to find
what you're referring to
although in the new language in
the sections that you did point
out.
Um you are absolutely correct
that it isn't there.
That i'm not quite sure that in
the um.
That.
I am against senator he said you
know is was the expert in
creating this particular tax
bill and working with the staff
so we're a little bit of a dish
it should heap the year you
would find it out to you
right now looking through it mr
chair and representative we're
unable to find that thank you
representative thank you mister
solomon mister chair.
Representative mister solomon
i've read through it.
A number of times and I would
submit it's not in there and
therefore the gross receipts tax
the doction is not subject to
the five million dollars
thank you that is all.
Thank you reserve a
very
further discussion from.
Okay we do have a motion.
Yeah.
Although the second.
The.
The.
The.
Okay
let's take the versus go we have
a two percent motion
this is hospital ninety two.
Representative bureaucrat
I love them always first
yes
a presentative dixon
representative yeah yeah
representative hambury
no and i'd like to explain my
representative montoya
no.
At presentative rubio yes.
Representative star.
Representative small.
Representative townsend
madam vice chair yes
mr chairman
yes
seven yes three now over the
seventy three of the two pass
and read to explain
thank you mister chair
representative and mister
saltman I do appreciate your
time and and thank you
I I have a concern about the the
lack of a cap on the grocery
seats tax and that we're holding
harmless the union's appalling
for that amount
and so that that comes.
We have to compensate them for
that loss of grocery seats tax I
have a concern about that and I
would be much more likely to
support this bill if there was a
cap on the g r t thank you
thank you reserve thank you
members of mr care vice of the
committee and we hope to clarify
all these of their next
committee thank you very much.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay her last day is hospital
one forty
clean car it contacts credit.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Whenever you're ready
good morning mister terra
members of the committee I guess
I am up here all alone so
easy
and tell somebody gets here send
one text but.
Okay thank you mr chair members
of the committee we're here to
talk about each b one forty
which is the clean car tax
credits.
HB one forty is a government's
bill that creates new personal
income tax and corporate income
tax credits for the purchase and
lease of clean cars as well as
the necessary charging units for
this part this bill builds on
years and legislative debate in
dialogue but also includes the
new features intended to make
the credit credits successful to
all the mexicans and to
incentivise the lowest emission
vehicles credits are proposed
for both new and used vehicles
with the use of the holes being
eligible for half the credit
amount as a new vehicle as time
goes by more electric will be
available on the market and
cleaning her credit for use
vehicles and shows lower income
to mexicans can make use of
these credits electric vehicles
would receive the most generous
credit with plug in hybrids and
fuel some vehicles receiving a
reduced credit the credits are
also proposed to be both
refundable and transfer these
peoples will allow the vehicle
purchaser to transfer their
credit to a dealership
immediately to receive a cash on
the head on the day of purchase
refundable credits you sure
lower income consumers can
benefit fully even if they have
limited income tax liability.
All of the credits proposed in
this bill that face out
gradually until some setting
completely on january first
twenty thirty the credit
available for a traditional
electric vehicle charging and
then will be up to four hundred
dollars but it enhanced credit
above the twenty five thousand
dollars will be available for
direct current fast charges and
feel sat fuel cell chargers fast
charges and fuel cell charges
are much more costly obviously
and are expected to be feasible
only in all time family
presidential complexes and
commercial facilities let's see
here my expert has joined me and
allowed to introduce themselves
the commitment
representative and mister
chairman members of the
committee good morning still
just good morning my name is
mark shaken and the tax policy
director of the taxation and
revenue department tender i'm
here to support representative.
And with that mister termina
committee we will be ready for
questions
okay thank you
good audience first we'll do
short of hand
please read your hand if you're
in sport of the spill.
Please raise your thank you and
if you're in opposition to this.
So we will do i'll become it and
support will do
the more than twenty minutes.
Uh ninety seconds for person if
it's less than that all the
better pleasure is your hand if
you like to speak and support
this bill.
Hi i'm analysis of the energy
models
and that the
network is department certifies
the credits and we are really
able to do that because there
is.
Your
and think that it's perfectly
with our expense
alternative fuels program.
Yeah.
Hi sydney
mexico environmental
from our perspective
provide tax credits for use
electric vehicles which all the
benefits
will get
thank you so much to respond so
hard to really grateful.
Thank you mister german members
because you're down with.
We're very supported for this
bill look forward to having the
still help for the adoption of
electric vehicles and the
maximum which we think before
important what specially excited
about a couple things what is
that is to use to be a cold
which we think will be very
important drive that market and
also for the director of that's
charged
credit twenty five.
Mister james
speaking
new mexico this is because I
think the earlier doctors have
already punches their initiative
make this what this bill will do
is open up the next structure
users who can you applies to
screading required so yeah
strong support and that you are
sp.
Part of this fill for all the
reasons figured we mentioned
want to exercise these
cars and it's.
You're you're not
listening to strong support of
the bill former oregon
legislator in the by the
national conference of
environmental legislators which
is a non pricing but that is not
taking positions on bills but
provides a lot of great
information on these kinds of
subjects i'm actually here
speaking on behalf of the new
mexico health professionals for
climate action
masters in public health care
very much about the fact that
clean cards provide much better
health outcomes and I think the
affordability piece is really
important number one the clean
cars and and greater health is
really important particularly
for it like that suffer creator.
Greater adverse effects from air
pollution because of less air
venolation in their homes their
work environments they live
often close to industry or to
roads the affordability peace
maximum is fifty five thousand
dollars for a car so it's not
much requires the used car and
then the fact that the
maintenance is so much lower for
these I appreciated the
discussion earlier about
affordability and this is a
perfect bill that really be told
that's concerned thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Committee everything I send
because.
This is a priority for us in
november of last year we passed
the advanced clean cars to truck
standards so with the influx of
all the year he been coming into
mexico market really near these
tax credits to ensure that you
leaves are except.
Economic.
Yeah.
What are you used car.
The.
Thank you sir thank you can
remember something so obvious
for the mexican other dealers
association we use support of
this legislation
we we hope to continue to work
with sponsored on some language
relative to how the credits
function but ever because it
cost a bit more than
we do think that promoting
credit like this will help
average consumers access those
we understand all the benefits
of he's right now they're pretty
small percentage of you use car
sales this will hopefully be
that percentage to go up so we
can stay compliance with other
environment criteria but as it's
currently drafted we have some
concerns we just want from an
industry and industry
perspective to talk to the
sponsor and we will continue to
do that about how the best
crashed the credit so that is
utilized to the force degree by
consumers we think the other
dealers the obviously position
to do that so we stand support
thank you yes
well this my name is
coordinator of the
new mexico focused on the way to
claim to change i've also
like your car.
With less eleven years it is
a great experience they are
clean there is no poison coming
out of the exast if you want to
commit some side in your horizon
like your vehicle they don't
look elsewhere
they are fast places
so many benefits only
offer the last eleven years I
really look over to passing this
bill
provides some help to lower
members that.
The.
Chairman of efforts class
new mexico interviewed power and
late and we are in strong
support of this bill for reasons
particularly
used to be a holes and how that
makes it more.
Just maybe you're real car
video returning environmental
justice corpus of the democratic
mexico we are a political
student and politically active
membership that with members
across the state many of us
can't afford electric course yet
for we're waiting for that day
and i'm so happy that this bill
includes you the purchase of use
for your calls thank you for
considering this.
The.
Mr chairman was the committee
i'm ten people corn with
restaurant restaurants at the
kids thank you for allowing us
to talk to day quickly we are
strong support of this bill I
know you've all seen me here for
the ten times now
the express
is the year
this perfection this year now
includes
used vehicles which is very very
important I think you've heard
the story but also time I bought
my electric vehicle used like
most new mexicans i've never
purchased a new vehicle and it's
really important that the
benefits and ship gets the can
I bought my car used it has very
low insurance i've spent almost
nothing on maintenance for the
last seven years and I charge at
home and my use has averaged
about six to eight dollars a
month to charge at home I want
to make sure that those benefits
every single low income you
message my friendly every
mexican so for all those reasons
and all the things you've heard
today police support this
yes
I am energy
prosperity works and our work is
all about positive wealth in new
mexico and fighting poverty and
the population that we serve is
very interesting in electric
vehicles and the tax credits
that are available are going to
make that possible
thank you we support the bill.
Okay we'll go align
what should we have to figure
out.
This.
All once again.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Okay.
Chair committee my name is at
the increase to do i'm here
again an engineer that and
christian again protecting lives
I would like to ask you a few
questions how many more are
compocus were hurricane with
from tropical storm to category
five unless then twenty four
hours with no warning it would
even go past category too how
many wildfires choking our lungs
how many dry wells from droughts
how many before we act and I put
to you that is probably n- not
the time to be passionate about
grabbity when you've already
fallen off the cliff.
Please pass this bill i'm on my
fourth eve I want everybody to
experience the joy of driving on
thank you
thank you next week carry robin
render.
And my unneeded now
wonderful good morning mr
chairman of members of the
committee my name is carry robin
brunder and i'm the registered
lobbyist for advanced energy
united I very much appreciate
the opportunity to speak
virtually to you as i'm at home
taking care of my five weekly
daughter advanced energy united
does support this legislation in
particular we are very excited
about the twenty five thousand
dollar tax credit for a direct
current fast chargers or fuel
cell charging units we believe
this is really important for
multi housing units and also for
retail opportunity to make sure
that we can have vast charging
charging stations throughout the
state so we urge your support
and thank you so much.
Yeah.
Thank you and
good morning again chair mcqueen
and committee members the league
supports hb one forty because
sorry i'm a recaller speaking
for the league of women voters
of new mexico the league
supports hb one forty because
that it is an incentive to
reduce greenhouse gas
submissions further more than
credit promotes equity and will
make even available to all
presidents of new mexico thank
you.
Thank you for that is there
anyone in the audience who would
like to speak in opposition to
this bill
is there anyone online who would
like to speak in the opposition
to this bill please reassurance.
Okay so seeing name will in the
other comment portion.
Mr chair occurred that I believe
secretary sharon clark from tax
and reverse and hoping the speak
online.
Then secretary can you raise
your hand there you are.
The.
Yeah.
Edit morning members of the
committee yes I am here if you
have technical questions but i'm
really left our support in favor
of this bill in charge of the
capable hands of mark taken
who's there with the sponsor but
we support this fully stand
ready to administer this
combined with the energy
minerals and natural resources
department and stand for any
questions.
Thank you
so with that well in the public
comment.
Memories many
of them scott.
Thank you.
Representative taken what is the
annual.
And automatically.
State liability crew if these uh
credit cards
at mr mister share
representative scott really we
have up to an eighty five
million dollars liability and
tonnel but i'm going to look to
my expert.
Thank you matt mister chairman
representative of scott we have
put in a fiscal impact report
our estimates or somewhat
different from seas are we're
estimating in tax and rep
maximum fiscal impact and fiscal
year twenty twenty eight which
is as far as our projections go
a forty five million dollars I
do understand that lfc's fiscal
impact estimate is higher we are
going to have our chief
economists work together to come
to a consensus on the cost and
they are working on that now and
mister chairman representative
what is the lfc estimate again
and represent the sky
i'm sorry that was the eighty
five million dollar figure that
I gave you from eleven c.
Okay and or these credits
transferable refundable.
Mr chairman president of scott
yes to all of those things they
are transferable
they can be
reused they resold
the fear call which their
attached
maybe just push that back just
to talk.
Yes mr chairman representative
scott they are transferable in
their transparable at full value
meaning that when someone
purchases the vehicle they can
immediately transfer the credit
the full amount of the credit to
the dealer and that will result
in lower price again in the full
amount of the credit it was
important to include that in the
bill that you can't buy it for
less than face value you can
transfer for less than face
value of the credit.
And mr chairman representatives.
In mr check.
What happens in the circumstance
were a core
rolls over.
Ret.
Mr chairman representative sky I
believe that the credit lessons
with each time that it rolls
over.
So you may have that figure
memorized but it's
got here I have the.
So for a twenty four twenty four
twenty twenty sixth occurred
through the full amount three
thousand dollars for a new
electric vehicle two thousand
dollars for a new plug in hybrid
and feel so vehicle and half of
those amounts for each type of
used vehicle for tax year twenty
twenty seven the credits are
seventy four percent of the full
amount test you're twenty twenty
eight percent forty nine percent
of the full amount and for tax
year twenty twenty nine the cuts
were thirty two percent at the
f.
Chairman representative.
The same vehicle.
In one year.
Gets button sold.
Three times.
Or.
Or each of those transactions
eligible for the credit.
Mr chairman representative of
scott yes I believe they are.
Yeah.
And at expert once the ad one
one clarification on that thank
you mister chairman
representative scott the
for previously on vehicle that
qualifies the vehicle must be a
model year that is least two
years prior to the counter year
the vehicle is purchased or
least.
Thank you mister chairman
representative hockman be hill
mister shaken thank you
just a couple real quick
questions so what is the market
share of vehicles that would
qualify.
I'm building right now
mister chairman representative
himbury electric vehicles are
represent about two percent of
the sales that we have right now
new mexico.
Mr chairman represented him
that's correct and the first
again this is the tax and
reference for the soon set with
an annual growth rate projected
to be fifty seven percent which
is based on data by the end of
the credit seven percent of
total registered vehicles i'd be
vehicles offered under this
credit.
Thank you mr chair
representative of hockman be
held mister shaken I appreciate
that but I think what what my
question was of that two percent
market share what is the market
share of vehicles that qualify.
Under the fifty five thousand
dollars or twenty five thousand
doll.
Mr chair and representative
heavy that's it's a very
interesting question I think it
depends on the light of factors
so you have your new electric
vehicles which would obviously
qualify for the credit right
away he is vehicles have to be
at least two years old so you
have whatever percentage added
and then any vehicle in between
it's also important to remember
that these credits either have
to go through a dealership so as
to avoid
misuse of the credit or again
you have to have two years it
has to be a two year old used to
be a call so you you can't
continue to resell the same
vehicle more than once within
one one month.
Thank you thank you
representative mister chair
representative hugment behild
mister shaken III understand
what you're saying but I what
i'm saying is if there are two
two hundred.
Electric vehicles sold.
In the state of new mexico.
How many of those.
Are actually new ones so it's a
two hundred new vehicles sold in
a state of new mexico.
How many of those are under
fifty five thousand dollars and
would actually qualify for this
tax credit.
I think you mister chairman
representative so that two
percent is of the total electric
vehicle sold the number I can't
give you immediately is those
vehicles that would be under the
fifty five thousand dollar price
mark so that those the metrics
we would need to get for you.
Mr chairman represented hembry
do someone else as these data
hard to come by and it's hard to
predict your which market share
is going
in terms of price point but we
do not approximately forty
percent of the vehicles sold in
twenty twenty three were tezzled
which tend to exceed the price
cap so I think we can say
probably about sixty percent
currently even market or sorry
the clean car market I should
say would be subject to overhad
this credit available and but
those figures it's very hard to
project how that will run
through the rest of the credit
as we are incentivising now the
lower cost vehicles thank you I
appreciate that mr chairman
representative hockey be held
mister shaken say last spring I
visited the ford f one fifty
manufacturing plant up for the
lightning and it was fascinating
to watch them and amazing
experience so but those start at
ninety seven thousand dollars
before you even start.
Adding options so that is why I
question you how much of this is
actually going to be applicable
if if that makes sense to
chairman representative him
right it's a great question
actually and it's one of the
issues that we are looking at
quite closely we want to make
sure there are price points or
realistic and that we can put
something in the bill that most
new mexico's can take advantage
of especially in the light to
medium duty track market it's
hard to come by electric
vehicles that are going to meet
that fifty five thousand dollar
price point affordable on fifty
lightning starts around a
hundred thousand dollars so and
there's definitely some
additional work that needs to be
done on that point but we had to
start somewhere and so that's
where we are thank you
mr chairman and and
representative hockman be hill
mister shaken
I did not see
and here I I believe there is a
sunset provision but I did not
see any sort of aggregate cap on
these tax credits is there not
one at mr chairman and
representative him break there
is no cap thank you thank you m.
Thank you very much.
Thank you mister chair.
Just in the spirit of
transparency I am registered to
buy and sell vehicles in new
mexico and
I have two brothers in the
automobile business that are
used car dealers so I think for
transparency purposes i'm just
saying that but I do have some
questions with regard to the
bill and I want to see this
restart by saying that I think
this is a great move
but they do want to see a good
bill
so having said that mister
chair.
I would like to know if the
motor vehicle code has been
amended to
reflect or deset come after this
is a doc.
Act mr chairman clean and
representative rigor I do
believe that any changes to the
motor vehicle code we need to
come after we are successful in
getting the spell through we
don't want to put the card
before the horse thank you
so as I was reading the bill and
understanding sort of uh the um
measure I guess or
certification if I have a used
vehicle for example and I decide
to sell it there's a standard
that the house to be met in
terms of the electric what
what's I guess I mean I don't
know how i'm not this is not my
you know technical bailey work
but I think I get get the point
there's a standard and somebody
house to certify that so there
is an enforcement mechanism
mister chair so who actually
does that who goes and says yeah
my vehicle meets a certain
standard of electrical watch or
whatever that's sufficient
to be certified thank you mister
chairman and representative of
rego I can appreciate what you
say we are all learning quite
quickly
how all of this works is quite
complicated but the first stage
is going to be what you're told
by the dealership and what the
water is requirements are for
the vehicle that you're
interested in purchasing then
it's incumbent upon you a lot of
new mexicans you know have have
live at houses that are not
built to a stand that say the
two hundred and forty kilo wat
for our requirement that
overnight charge requirements
rate so it would be incumbent
upon those new mexicans are
interested in buying these near
calls to figure out what the
water is requirement is for what
they're interested in and then
go back to their house and make
sure that their house is capable
of delivering that type of
watted otherwise there are
programs that are available
through program through
companies like p and m.
Who can come out and
help you make that conversion
and in some instance instances
and even help you with the price
of the thank you mister care but
representative I don't think
that's my questions my question
is when I decide to sell a
vehicle who certifies that I
have that my vehicle is meeting
the standard it is in this bill
that says I have to meet a
certain standard in order to to
apply for
the rebate thank you very much
mister chairs and that
representative regularly
understand now that would be
imminent.
It would be emergency in new
mexico environment natural
resources department okay so do
they have a team of code of
enforcement persons people that
go out in certify with the
automobile dealers
travel around the state to do
mister chairman representative
to meet her
so i'm i'm linden well the
policy director for the energy
middle.
Thank you mister chair
my apologies so we are the
agency responsible in the spell
for certifying the tax credits
in the process of certifying the
taxed credits we were we are
prepared to build a program to
do the kinds of things that
you're asking about
representative of mister chair
we would probably start with
compiling a list of available
models on the market every year.
Because that provides a pretty
easy checklist because the model
will tell me what kind of watch
it needs what kind of other
requirements that would meet the
requirements in the bill.
And we do have electrical
engineers we also have electric
vehicle and clean car policy
experts who we currently employ
who are ready to build this
program
in terms of.
Going to a dealer we find that
that would be extremely unlikely
to be necessary
probably if a dealer says that
they sold.
I don't know
ten key and yours.
And they got the tax credits
transferred to them here is
going to appear on our list of
eligible cars
if they can give us the serial
numbers and the vin numbers of
those parts there's no reason we
have to go out to a dealer why
wouldn't we trust that the vin
numbers are actually so you
would have some sort of
certification from the dealer
coming to you we would if the
dealer was the person who
submitted the credit
representative
mister chair
oh it's all
if the dealer was the interview
that applied for the credit then
it would be the dealer who would
submit it if it was an
individual new mexican they
would submit their bill of sale
which would tell what the bin
was where they registered it has
to be registered in new mexico
and we would look at that and we
would build our system to
basically very quickly identify
if those matched if they didn't
match we would have the
capability of checking to see if
there was an interesting new
exception we didn't know that or
if it wasn't all thank you okay
so i'm in a little bit better
than
so chair and
secretary I guess so
no you have i'm sorry directors
director
so it's not incumbent upon the
it's a comp encumbered upon the
purchaser and to go in certify
it before they before they get a
rebate back yes I don't have
that certified by your agency
yes okay alright that that's
very helpful as I was trying to
figure out how the dealers were
going to do this
so then my last question
is with regard to
representative and mister chair
with regard to you
could it does talk about you
know and we know that most of
the electric car.
Dealers are on reservations
which is a totally different
government in us do we have when
there is a a point of transfer
and especially and I don't want
to complicate this but when your
filing on your income tax you
get a certification you you know
from a reservation I guess
because they are the people who
have these dealers on their
property and it's not something
that either the state of new
mexico or the federal government
regulates
is there some sort of an
agreement between governments.
Mister chairman represented rego
i'm going to deferred it by
expert.
Mr chair representative
what will happen is that the
endeard will still startify the
the tax credit and it can be
given the certification will
then be given to the taxation
revenue department and we will
apply the credit so there is a
provision in the bill that make
sure that sales that occur on
tribal and with companies are
people who are authorized as
dealers under where global
whichever sovereign and st is
granting the license to be a
dealer
and those will be included in
the bill so the certification
process will be the same even if
the sale takes place on tribal.
Okay so there is some sort of
certification that that we have.
To show that there is an
agreement in exchange between
you know.
A US
agency or new mexico agency and
the.
Yes that's correct and this
return representatives other
will be the same exact type of
certification and again any sale
that takes place must take place
with a dealer whether that
dealer is licensed by
the state or some other
sovereignty
all right thank you so much yeah
mr chair having served on a
having actually served on board
a directors of a credit union so
this is really interesting for
me and it I mean i'm i'm
interested also and how the
banking and the the banking
industries are going to be
dealing with these uh
certifications as part of their
processes as well so thank you
for that and
that really doesn't have you
mister chair.
Thank you said brigo
for the questions in the
committee before i.
For a second time.
I I thank you mister chair
representative hoping to be hill
mister shaken how would the
process work if they you went
down to well passo and purchase
the behavior and then brought it
back to you regist.
The.
At mrperiod chairman aren't
chairman mcqueen that
representative
I imagine you would still have
the same certifiable paperwork
for the credit that you would
receive like whenever you have a
bill to say a bill of sale from
another state for the same car
but when I make sure i'm.
I'm actually mister
I believe the sale has to take
place in new mexico for the
credit to be available.
Okay thank you
thank you mister chair for that
indulgence think you reps in him
so
can deal.
Can you explain the.
The more expensive best charging
units
Thank you very much chairman
mcclean and so those the fast
type charging units I think the
cost up to a hundred fifty
thousand i'm sorry three hundred
thousand dollars or up so and
that's exactly why you see such
a large number of credit being
available for those types of
chargers.
Okay so when it says twenty five
thousand or the cost of the unit
whichever is less.
Represent the chairman between
you are not going to find one
for less now.
Okay that was my question
was pleasure.
So
in the second from.
There's
sort of the other.
Um.
I think everyone who's here is
here
victoria could you take the
place yes mr chair.
Representative
mr terrible yes and i'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative dickson
representative gracia.
Representative henry
nope
representative montoya
representative rubia.
The.
Representative scott.
The.
Representative small yes
their president of town sends.
Madam bice chair yes.
Mr chairman yes.
Sixty three
by the sixty three you have a
department errors and brigo to
explain her mister chairman even
though I mentioned the in the in
the
in the line of transparency I am
registered to buy vehicles in
new mexico
I do this is not my primary
business so and I haven't telled
him
thank you for that reason for
ago
and experts we are journed I
will see you at the thirty one
thirty
