The Senate to pass respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Move adoption we are adoptions
favorable commuter for in house
bill one all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was named Canadian point
adopted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to miss
been referred house bill two has
had it under consideration point
same as recommendation that it
to pass and insert for to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair move adoption
we are adoption favorable
committee report on house bill
to all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was a
the report is adopted the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections so we're
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr speaker honourable members it
is a great day of celebration
and I really want to thank the
staff from the clerk's office in
the speaker's office for
facilitating the visit of the
volcano Vista hawks boys and
girls state championship.
HOLX.
Mr speaker members of in the
first in the it.
For the first time in a
generation maybe the first time
in state history both
championship teams went
undefeated in winning the state
title concern is the leaders of
the boys took over to fellow
westerners Representative bash
Representative Daymon Ely and of
course Representative.
Join Garrett who introduced the
girls team but the boys Mr
speaker order by head coach Greg
brown it's a second state
championship one twenty nine no.
In Los crucis Bulldogs for the
state championship.
So we just want to welcome the
team that just worked incredibly
hard through COVID come through
this past year but sitting on
the rostrum Mr speaker is a
Jaden alone.
Austin according.
Gatorade Mexico boys yes the Gen
con welcome team captains.
Please.
Fox.
At this time Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
thank you Representative.
Many of you went through title
nine before there were girls
team so I am thrilled to
introduce the girls teams today.
We have.
Our three captains sitting over
on the other side R. J. Lynn
Bates Kennedy brown and the
Thalia Chavez for the girls
team.
And we have one of the most
winningest coaches in the state
she could stand up please so
very out.
Head coach.
Ross via Rio is here.
Okay Chantelle lose Cerro.
Personal Salazar and Lisa
Madrid.
And for those reps from northern
New Mexico all five girls
coaches are from northern New
Mexico.
And I think it's very
significant that both girls and
boys teams one twenty nine zero
at volcano Vista high school is
in district twenty nine.
Yes so thank you very much and I
turned it back Mr speaker to the
representative.
Thank you
thank you Mr speaker thank you
no words for the time.
In addition to being the all
boys girls tend to going to
finance it is the same here the
only basketball team to ever
come to the state legislature to
the the legislature convenes
during the basketball season but
just lastly just want to think
of the activities director
towards words system coaches for
the boys a rebates says call us
Josh Miller and Eli Smith can
last tour the generators of on
the state championship team
Natalie Travis and David Bates
playing next year division one
basketball for the New Mexico
levels.
Thank you so much for your
patience the Mr speaker the
governor had invited you all to
the to the governor's mansion
she's working at home today that
we couldn't pull that off
because I was this morning but
we just keep that in mind that
you welcome you here to the
wrong house as well they met
with the chairman governor and
folks in the Senate and just a
we should guys a very very best
take your disappointed
chairmanship to the west side
and to the state and we sure are
very very happy junior seniors
thank you all.
Thank you John and I believe
there is a certificate floating
around somewhere for the team
and I mean just the chief clerk
if we can have some extra copies
made it all signed today so that
we can get a copy for each of
the members of both the teams to
take home as a as a souvenir
from there a time your capital
so we should have time to do
that before they go I hope if
not we'll get the certificates
mills of the coaches and
distributed students and will
submit echo with you but welcome
it is that you onerous by being
here congratulations is really
remarkable both teams boys and
girls to run a state
championship in the same year
never happened may never happen
again that if it does happen
again hopefully it happens in
Santa Fe.
The gentle lady from Los Alamos
is not in the chamber.
the analysis the taxation and
revenue committee will meet at
twelve forty five in room three
seventeen.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move the house
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair we are
recessed subject to call the
chair tax committees meeting at
twelve forty five
we will probably be back here
around two thirty somewhat that.
So don't go far.
Adrenaline ge.
The local.
