In the John to explain the bill.
thank you so much Mr speaker and
and body I am really pleased to
be here this evening Mr speaker
and body this morning rather
we've now officially gone into
the morning.
Representative Senate bill
fourteen so the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen as amended.
I think and body well I just
take a couple of quick minutes
to the explain this bill
and why this is a good bill Mr
speaker body why this bill
Is fits New Mexico can Mr
speaker body that I look forward
to a good discussion Mr speaker
and and body.
Very simply the clean fuel
standard requires fuel providers
to reduce the carbon.
Footprint of transportation
fuels Mr speaker body why should
we reduce the carbon intensity
of few of transportation fuels
very simply Mr speaker and body.
Because transportation is now
the second largest source of
greenhouse gas emissions here in
the state of New Mexico Mr
speaker and body and greenhouse
gas emissions as we all know
our the.
The driver of catastrophic
climate change and then Mr
speaker C..
Madam speaker and and body.
Catastrophic climate change is
not something that is in the
future it's not something that
we have the that we should be
worried about in ten or twenty
or even thirty years.
Madam speaker and body
catastrophic climate change
we're already seeing its
effects.
Madam speaker body this
legislature just passed over
thirty million dollars in short
term drought relief.
That money madam speaker and
body is meant to counter what is
extremely likely.
To be one of the worst summer
seasons we hope not madam
speaker body I certainly hope to
be able to go fishing on the Rio
Grande
you know past some of the run
off in April or may in places
where we used to go catfishing
late into the summer Madam
speaker body.
We are facing this.
We will be facing wildfires will
be facing extreme temperatures
because of climate change and so
madam speaker body I say that
all to just simply set the stage
a little bit.
For the kinds of challenges The
New Mexico faces Madam speaker
body in fact perhaps one of the
if not the most rapidly warming
state in the United States.
And madam speaker body again as
we know.
What's causing that catastrophic
climate change it's the
greenhouse gas emissions and so
if we have the second largest
secretary of greenhouse gas
emissions which is
transportation that the clips to
bow extricity generation behind
robust energy and oil and gas
industry if we have something
Madam speaker and body that can
ride away go to work not only
reducing the intensity of those
emissions in the overall
emissions Madam speaker and body
go about reducing that infants
and those overall emissions in
ways that grow our economy that
creates jobs that actually help
diversifying new Mexico's
economy then we should
absolutely do that and that's
madam speaker embody that is
what the Senate bill fourteen SB
fourteen the clean fuel standard
does by retired again recoup
requiring fuel providers Madam
speaker body.
Might be thinking well maybe
this is the gas station that I
go to no it's not the gas
station it's the fuel provider
whether they're refining
Blanding
it or otherwise that fuel
provider Madam speaker body what
are the numbers we say we're
going to reduce the carbon
intensity by how much a very
fair question to ask madam
speaker and body so those
numbers are as follows.
We're going to reduce the carbon
intensity of the transportation
fuels by twenty percent by
twenty thirty those are the
standards that this bill sets
out Madam speaker body and
thirty percent
by the year twenty forty from
one Madam speaker body these are
from twenty eighteen levels
Madam speaker body we have
excellent data.
Madam speaker body at that
twenty eighteen level and so
it's twenty percent by twenty
thirty.
And and thirty percent by twenty
forty Madam speaker body.
I know we'll get into this in
the bill but I just want to
briefly explain it this process
is going to roll out basically
as such in this is a great place
for me to refer to my experts we
have secretary James County this
Sandra Ely director Center
easily fall from New Mexico's
environment Environment
Department you may know them for
a lot of the other issues
whether it's P. foster other
things today and tonight we're
only here to talk about clean
fuels.
But they're going to petition
the environmental improvement
board within two years of the
enactment of the bill.
We we hope we think sooner Madam
speaker gentle lady but just so
that we're on the same page as
we start this debate.
It doesn't go into effect right
away it will likely take at
least twelve months for that
that petition to go forward
although obviously that's not an
argument in our control rather
but it's within two years so if
we think about mid twenty two
when this law goes into effect
year or year and a half where we
kind of go forward that
rulemaking state starts
somewhere the the mid to the
second half of next year
concludes in the following year
for looking madam speaker body
just ride around that twenty
twenty four time frame where
then the V. I. B. and and NMED
which'll administer this program
is going to set an annual target
to reduce emissions intensity
from our transportation fuels.
And that's just by a little bit
each year again getting us to
that cumulative twenty percent
by twenty thirty and thirty
percent by twenty forty.
Madam speaker and body.
Briefly I talked about the
economic.
Angle to this so we know that
protecting our environment
safeguarding our air our water
fighting back in mitigating the
worst effects of climate change
which is caused by these
greenhouse gas emissions driving
catastrophic wildfire crushing
drought that we're seeing uh in
and and unfortunately expecting
to likely see much more
frequently in the future.
We have to do this in an
economically smart and and
diversified sort of a way and so
madam speaker body.
The conservative estimate is
that this will bring sixteen
hundred and one thousand six
hundred permanent jobs twenty
three hundred construction jobs
to New Mexico by twenty thirty
so this is that twenty thirty
twenty percent infants time
frame with an estimated value I
guess in today's dollars madam
speaker and body
of four hundred and seventy fill
out four hundred and seventy
million dollars and economic
benefits this is estimated to be
a two hundred forty million
dollar investment in the
facilities and infrastructure
the go into meeting this
standard share in New Mexico and
that's why the department myself
other than this body we've heard
from over twenty eight
businesses that support Senate
bill fourteen the could the
clean fuels
standard that are committed to
cleaner energy fewer emissions
and will bring with them more
jobs.
Madam speaker and gentle and and
body so we've talked about our
standard we talked about the
what's facing us.
And again frankly madam speaker
the body as I think about
leaving when we conclude the
session soon the I think about
Turkey hunting.
Madam speaker embody that's
right around the corner tax day
for some started Turkey hunting
day for others.
And.
There are moments I remember as
a child growing up we go up on
mount Taylor.
And we can I'm grandpa only had
a two wheel drive pickup truck
but you could've had an eight
wheel vehicle and you can get
over the snow drifts that would
have been in these places I
remember very distinctly cousins
that come down
we we would want to go hunting.
Madam speaker body I mention
that because the what the
catastrophic climate change it's
melting that sell more quickly
is making more that so come in
the form of rain during the
summer monsoons longer periods
of drought hotter temperatures
longer stretches a hotter
temperatures so we have
catastrophic wildfire we have
crushing droughts we have the
sort of extreme weather events.
That very you know with no
hyperbole threaten life property
and some basic parts of who we
are as New Mexicans we have the
what madam speaker and body we
know that the transportation
missions of the second largest
secretary for New Mexico and so
we're going to go after that
with the clean fuel standard
setting these strong yet
reachable targets twenty percent
reduction in intensity by twenty
thirty.
Thirty percent by twenty forty.
We're gonna start this
rulemaking within two years
likely within a year or so Madam
speaker and gentleman and and
body.
We know this only applies to.
the.
Will providers this is not at
the retail and this is that the
fuel providers and madam speaker
and body.
This is opening up new markets
for for bio fuels for
rectification for other ways to
reduce the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels meeting
these standards creating jobs
now madam speaker body.
again this is over let's say a
five maybe a six year period
depending upon when the
rulemaking is complete.
For those transportation fuels
that can't meet that twenty
percent standard Madam speaker
body although so many can and
we're gonna talk about this
evening madam speaker embody the
ways in which if I was buying
diesel regular diesel and be
twenty these so that is the so
with a blend of twenty percent
biodiesel are likely be paying
fifteen cents less per gallon
for biodiesel
and and madam speaker and body
actually seeing lower
maintenance costs but for those
fuels madam speaker and body
that class that can't quite me
this standard.
we want to make sure that there
are credits available Madam
speaker embody that there are
credits available.
Administered by the New Mexico
environment department to ensure
that the reduction in carbon
emissions that we seek.
Are there for New Mexicans those
benefits accrue to New Mexicans
and these credits can be
generated generated excuse me
from all across the state from
agriculture to oil and natural
gas to power generation.
Madam speaker body.
If you can reduce carbon
emissions in the transportation
sector again price starting in
twenty five twenty six somewhere
in there twenty twenty five
twenty twenty six
you can generate these credits
madam speaker and body and these
credits are are you something
that will help reduce emissions
find new markets and new
revenue sources for folks who
are interested in them of course
totally voluntary but folks are
interested in them from the
agriculture to the forestry to
the other other sectors.
Madam speaker about and body.
That reduction in emissions
which even includes things one
it's verifiable quantifiable
when you can measure it as a
gentleman by the New Mexico
environment department includes
things like carbon capture and
sequestration that reduce these
transportation related emissions
this is going to clean up the
air along our interstates and
busy highways and we know madam
speaker and body.
That these.
Hi intensity emissions pathways
these areas lead to worse health
outcomes for folks who live
there the often times madam
speaker body courses body refers
to some of these areas were it's
persistently kind of right in
the middle of of a lot of that
emissions intensity is
disproportionately impacted
communities
It will help them significantly
and in fact madam speaker body
within our legislation we want
to make sure that the budget
particularly from the credits
accrued to disproportionately
impacted communities the most in
fact we put in law Madam speaker
and body the requirement that
helping disproportionately
impacted communities this can be
rural communities all across our
state it can be urban
communities that are
disproportionately impacted
receive the most benefits from
these credits.
Madam speaker and body so we we
have this
process we have many different
pathways for sectors in New
Mexico to grow economically to
diversify economically all
within a very clear focus on
reducing the carbon intensity
reducing the carbon emissions
that are the prime driver of
catastrophic climate change
which is impacting New Mexico
New Mexico New Mexicans some of
the most extreme ways in the
country and really that's it you
know we we get started here at
that twenty percent target go up
to thirty percent by twenty
forty and madam speaker and
body.
I'm really excited for this
legislation to move forward I do
also want to briefly.
no and I I imagine we'll get
into some discussion madam
speaker and body.
an amendment that was put on to
this legislation friendly
amendment that address is
something that's not exactly the
that is very connected here the
power generation side.
Madam speaker gentle lady or
gent of body excuse me I
apologize.
The energy transition is quite
difficult when PNM said that
they were leaving San Juan
generating station at the end of
two thousand and twenty two
course they came to this body
back in twenty seventeen as I
recall madam speaker and body
they said we are leaving San
Juan generating station at the
end of twenty twenty two this
body got to work in our earnest
over an eighteen month period
and said.
If they're leaving which they
had every right to do and and to
say that they were going to do
it invests in different cleaner
cheaper sources of energy than
what was offered there.
Instead of just letting that
happen we wanted to act we
wanted to set aside three
different funds which the body
did to support the workers in
the area diversification other
things long story short after
court challenges that have been
resolved in favor of the energy
transition act
we ran into the pandemic.
Madam speaker body and why
that's important is because the
long Labor delays the supply
chain constrictions and in some
cases disruptions in some cases
breaking have all led madam
speaker body to a delay in
getting online the replacement
resources for San Juan
generating station and so madam
speaker body course we only meet
once a year unless there's a
special session and
We knowing in and reading as
everybody in this body does see
in the news understanding that
there could be a shortage of
reserve power this year
specifically for public service
company in New Mexico the
possibility.
And again something that
actually is exacerbated by
catastrophic climate change if
we have those spiking
temperatures session free of
forest fires maybe madam speaker
body that threaten power lines
and power distribution if you
don't have a lot of reserve
power then the potential for not
having enough power it's in
critical moments is there we
have to acknowledge that Madam
speaker body in this transition
and this is the an issue madam
speaker body faced by states all
around us.
States that are red states that
are blue states that are purple
Madam speaker body this is the
the some of the challenges of
the energy transition and so we
have the chance madam speaker
and body to really do a kind of
an insurance policy in an
amendment that was put on in the
house state government committee
madam speaker body and what's
really important about this
amendment is that it follows the
law that we've already set Madam
speaker and body it follows the
law in one key way which is that
with the energy transition act.
That date that PNM first set out
when they came yeah and twenty
seventeen so they're leaving San
Juan generating station ten to
twenty twenty two that was put
into law this ammendment follow
the law Madam speaker body and
so it allows for an extension of
the.
Voluntary abandonment that goes
into effect the middle of this
year roughly ten just extends
that till the end of the year
per the ETA Madam speaker body
not outside of existing law but
the inside of existing law and
further madam speaker embody.
Just gives a little extra
insurance that you know we all
hope for the supply chains are
are straight now
that that were no longer in mass
soon enough that were working to
creating new normal that does
not involve so many of the
destruction of that we've seen
but if that is not the case then
speaker in body if not all the
replacement powers bill this
also allows for a temporary
essentially acquisition and use
of resources madam speaker body
this amendment in twenty twenty
three Madam speaker body again
another one more important thing
and I'll I'll wrap up there on
the amendment very important
thing is that the PRC retains
their full rate making authority
Madam speaker body this is an
insurance policy to make sure
that the ETA as follows that
that the the rest of this year
San Juan generating station
can be online as it is needed as
is under the ACA and madam
speaker body that we have this
temporary acquisition of
resources in the twenty twenty
three but the rate making
authority for the public
regulation commission is
Is is is reserves within this
ammendment that's something
that's very important so fast
figure body I did want to.
Take a little bit of extra time
to explain the clean fuels tax
to go through some of the
elements within the bill some of
the mechanisms to explain
gleefully the amendment that
that was put on in house state
government.
And I I would just before we go
to debate madam speaker body
again I want to emphasize.
Like it or not and frankly I
don't like it.
We are facing catastrophic
climate change that threatens so
many different parts of what we
do and who we are as New
Mexicans whether it's the places
we went Turkey hunting.
Whether it's our our our
livelihoods whether it's our
recreational pastimes all of
these different things.
Catastrophic fire.
Crushing drought those sorts of
things present clear and
pressing challenges fans figure
body.
The way that we work forward
their that we react is going to
say a whole lot about us and so
the claim future act again
tackles the second largest
source of the missions
transportation secretary does it
in a way that grows our economy
creates over sixteen hundred
jobs brings nearly half a
billion and in economic impact
estimated by twenty thirty a
quarter billion dollars nearly
in direct investment well while
setting aggressive targets that
reduce the carbon intensity in
the transportation sector
allows other sectors of New
Mexico to be part of this
decarbonisation and economic
growth takes out an insurance
policy with the amendment that
we've discussed and so I think
is really something that is the
right thing for at a an
important time and again I'm
just so pleased to be able to
present to you tonight madam
speaker embody.
There is debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman from on the I'm not.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Thank.
Just.
There are warnings about the
consequences of climate change.
Hello this.
Piece of legislation.
Would positively impact.
If you were consultant through
experts there was.
This legislation does pass it is
completely successful by the
year twenty four.
Twelve returns to first.
Which.
How much.
Direction we're aiming for.
Generating.
Speaker and gentleman for
proximal fifteen Newman metric
tons of CO two a year with our
transportation motor fuels.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen that fifteen.
Maybe slightly more
but that I think madam speaker
German and give me a good point
to again introduce and and refer
to my experts course have
secretary Jim Kenney from the
New Mexico environment
department this Sandra Ely
director uli also from the New
Mexico Environment Department
That that that fifteen million
metric tons roughly in the
transportation sector I think is
is close Mr speaker we.
Of take that for twenty eighteen
okay so are baseline their.
Put ten percent reduction.
I am terms here.
In terms of twenty percent for
half million tones.
Thirty percent or those numbers
all thank.
Madam speaker and gentleman
annually yes and then cumulative
we just we Adam up.
So.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
This program is completely
successful with those
reductions.
What is the quantitative impact
on the to the tour of the
planet.
As a consequence.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen you pose one of
the interesting and challenging
questions as I would expect you
to do gentleman from Lee Madam
speaker gentleman I want to
briefly set out
first I'd like to go to the
experts madam speaker
gentleman's hold on just one sec
I want to quantify it in another
way in terms of of vehicles
they're on the road.
Thank they then figured thank
you German one way to think
about it is that in twenty
thirty one year.
Sorry I am drinking drink this
Red Bull yet Mr speaker
gentleman for men's figure down
five hundred and seventy
thousand cars off the road in
one year in twenty thirty now
those cars though they're not
coming off the roads madam
speaker and gentleman the
emissions that that are
associated with those that would
be the amount of reduction for
us to think about and madam
speaker gentleman's.
That's important because that's
a cleaner air that's less
particulate matter especially in
these disproportionately
impacted communities that's
frankly less respiratory
challenges madam speaker
gentleman for folks who live
there Madam speaker gentleman.
To your global question the the
temperature question because of
course we're within this global
system madam speaker
gentleman's.
This puts us in line with where
we need to be to reduce
emissions and avoid the worst
impacts of climate change so
madam speaker gentleman that's
to keep the warming I think it's
to one point five degrees
Celsius.
My sense madam speaker
gentleman's is that the US doing
this in the transportation
sector is a part it's a key part
of us staying within that
temperature threshold not going
over that one point five degrees
Celsius warming not going into
worse and worse impacts from
climate change.
Madam speaker and gentleman let
me ask the question thank you.
Well this legislation was passed
in is completely successful what
is the quantitative temperature
affect all New Mexico has
a consequence.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen unfortunately my
and my answer is going to be the
same again we have to act as a
state in the in that ways that
we can within the the broadly
acknowledge parameters of water
set out there madam speaker
gentleman's and so this is a key
part of us not warming madam
speaker gentleman over that
additional one point five
degrees Celsius this is a part
of it taken alone does this
accomplish that no madam speaker
gentleman's but this is an
important part of reducing these
emissions madam speaker
gentleman's bringing health
benefits to New Mexicans and
madam speaker gentleman's
seizing economic opportunity.
From a country or region and the
world that is rapidly going
towards decarbonisation as
frankly a tool for for survival.
And seeing that as a pathway for
economic growth Madam speaker
gentleman and I'm sure we'll go
through this conversation be
able to talk about.
The rapid flow of capital.
At all levels towards
decarbonisation strategies.
Transportation emissions second
largest part of emissions here
in the state.
You can kind of get where I'm
going.
Gentleman
you're going.
I have a.
More quantitative answer so I'm
going to try to answer for you.
And then would like to the
console with your experts to
soon.
One answer is a proximate Li
correct let's go for just points
to the rate of growth.
What effectively rounded that
number two zero.
And let me posit that that will
be the impact on the planet's
temperature as a consequence of
this legislation
experts agree with that.
Figure Germany confer with my
experts.
Thank you madam figured thank
you gentlemen so the answer I
got back from my experts is that
The New Mexico is is part of the
the US climate alliance part of
twenty six states that
two that's over half of the
emissions madam speaker
gentleman's and that is two
thirds of the economy of the
United States madam speaker
German wire those numbers
important because madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you for helping set
attainable standards that
rapidly decarbonize while
growing our economy the madam
speaker gentleman's for part of
this in this case the US climate
alliance part of a much larger
Brock over half of the United
States emissions two thirds of
the United States Akon economy.
That are helping set a path
forward on decarbonisation so as
we said a clean fuel standard
that brings jobs to New Mexico
brings investment to New Mexico
sets a clear when it's just New
Mexico no in fact madam speaker
and gentleman in this case were
operating.
Perhaps not exactly in concert
with but definitely along side
over half of the emissions in
the state are in the country two
thirds of the economy the impact
that you outline as a state is
actually magnified I would argue
madam speaker gentleman's not
only in this twenty six state
alliance within the United
States but actually madam
speaker gentleman's.
On a national and international
level why they say that Madam
speaker and gentleman and
briefly I say that because some
of these
nearly thirty businesses they're
going to have operations
nationally and internationally
madam speaker gentleman's.
Capital around not only the
country but around the world is
looking to locate in areas that
are winning the clean energy the
decarbonisation the economy and
so madam speaker gentleman's.
We're not only reducing these
emissions and showing the other
states are in the climate
Alliance how to do it helping
set a standard for the for the
nation for attracting investment
we're attracting interest from
capital and business in state
and across the globe those are
all.
Quantifiable benefits that are
part of how we act madam speaker
and gentleman to confront the
vexing challenge the the global
the catastrophic global climate
change so by acting locally
being part of some of these
regional approach is being part
of the building
a place for capital investment
business and jobs to come to
because of this work then
We're we're we're magnifying our
emissions reductions for maybe
madam speaker gentleman setting
this twenty percent standard in
reductions for the other twenty
five states and transportation
emissions are generally either
number one or number two now in
the United States in the mission
secretary so we we have to
magnify that out across these
other states check globally to
be in concert with where we are
with the folks that are working
hard to decarbonise madam
speaker gentleman's and on the
other hand and perhaps the hand
that's it it's really frankly
equally important bringing more
investment in almost half a
billion dollars by twenty thirty
and economic impact forty
billion dollars in direct
economic investment
infrastructure investment
sixteen hundred jobs madam
speaker gentleman permanent
twenty three hundred
construction jobs that all come
in that twenty thirty time
frame.
I haven't heard an answer to my
questions so I'm going.
I'm gonna go was room for now.
What if I could.
The
knowledge.
About.
This piece of legislation will
mark.
In my analogy.
Is putting in the hard drive
for.
Of course
drops of green water.
At the top of the line before
school.
Falls.
And measuring how much grander.
The water is at the bottom.
Thanks.
Will's editorial.
Change so much.
To
and gentleman.
Yes.
Would burn.
To create.
Soon to.
Thank you madam figured thank
you gentlemen while we're
getting those answers madam
speaker gentleman's I have to
keep returning to the math that
says a half a billion dollars in
economic impact a quarter
billion dollars nearly in direct
economic investment sixteen
hundred permanent jobs twenty
three hundred construction jobs.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
If we don't adopt this standard
if we don't adopt this
legislation then that capital
that investment those jobs that
economic impact goes somewhere
else madam speaker gentleman's
not to mention madam speaker
gentleman's that we are not
acting alone Madam speaker
gentleman as we went through
briefly part of the climate
alliance over half of the
country's emissions two thirds
of the country's economy this is
acting in concert with and
setting a strong standard that
brings investment jobs in gross
to New Mexico Madam speaker Jim
and I own.
While we're waiting on the
gasoline answer just for the
bodies edification I want to
really stress madam speaker
gentleman's that this is
transportation fuels is not just
gasoline madam speaker gentleman
it's the so it's other sorts of
things but Madam speaker
gentleman I been talking.
I've got a number here it says a
hundred and thirteen madam
speaker gentleman hundred
thirteen gallons of gas for that
metric ton of CO two.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
number is the first graph number
we've had tonight and that
number is that correct and.
In spite of all of those great
things that we're going to do
with respect to jobs and and.
Whatever economic activity one
thing we're gonna do.
We've made the clear one thing
we're going to do is alter the
course of.
It's not going to happen with
this piece of legislation so.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Yes Sir.
The issue.
Of transportation motor fuels
both castle and castle.
Questions has been ongoing for
something over a hundred years
now and.
Perspective those tools for
would be little.
For improvement Representative
actor.
Madam speaker gentleman's
the the first part of your
question these processes have
been ongoing and been
continually tinkered with for
that time frame over a hundred
years madam speaker gentleman's
to the issue can they be
improved madam speaker
gentleman's I would have to
unfortunately disagree there
madam speaker gentleman's
forcing innovation all the time
that gets better efficiency
Madam speaker gentleman that
review that can reduce carbon
intensity take waste streams
turn those into fuel sources
madam speaker gentleman and
there by at.
Greatly improve the efficiency
madam speaker John and brief and
I I know what will kind of
return to this as well you know
good numbers madam speaker
gentleman sixteen hundred
permanent jobs two hundred and
thirty million dollars of direct
investment of you know here in
less than ten years almost half
a million to a half a billion
dollars excuse me madam speaker
gentleman in economic impact
those are good numbers those are
great numbers madam speaker
gentleman's those are numbers
that are borne out by where
capital is going at the state.
Regional national and
international level Madam
speaker gentleman this is as
much about cleaning up New
Mexico there reducing emissions
from transportation says much
more about that as it is growing
New Mexico's economy I just want
to emphasize madam speaker John
respectfully that those are good
numbers you know we feel.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman.
In spite of all the economic
activity.
Alter the course of climate
change we don't change the
temperature and I heard in your
opening remarks that that was
one of the primary objectives.
Four could.
Could you describe technological
advances that will reduce.
Global footprint of a gallon of
gasoline or gallons of diesel
the low the one hundred and
fourteen.
Gallons.
Currently generating the metric
ton is there something like
that.
On the horizon.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman let me confirm briefly
with my experts.
Then figure gentleman I miss the
job but I'm sure we'll we'll get
to it mass figure gentleman I
so.
Let's go back first to the time
frame madam speaker gentleman's
is this tomorrow no Madam
speaker gentleman this is by
twenty thirty that is Madam
speaker gentleman the rule
making that will commence within
two years of when this bill is
passed so for looking out in the
twenty three or twenty four
Madam speaker Jim I just say
that because this time frame
that we're looking at is really
that.
Twenty twenty four perhaps at
the earliest madam speaker
gentleman but for sure that
twenty five to thirty twenty
twenty five to twenty thirty
time frame to make these
reductions madam speaker
gentleman's
that I know of you and I'm
certain many perhaps all the
members in this body or familiar
with API the American petroleum
institute they are a I am a not
only a membership but a
technical and safety group that
is integrated in so many parts
of the petroleum industry madam
speaker gentleman's.
Day and I just got this from my
experts
Have set forth I'm told a five
pronged plan to meet exactly
these this is the petroleum
industry working in petroleum
fuels madam speaker gentleman
that by this twenty twenty
twenty thirty time frame I'm
told is in this twenty percent
carbon intensity reduction and
so here there I I wrong goals of
course I don't know madam
speaker Jim if they've been
around for the four hundred
years but they've been around
for awhile number one madam
speaker gentleman's accelerate
technology number two Matt Madam
speaker gentleman further
mitigate emissions those are
some of the credit reductions
that we'll talk about madam
speaker gentleman look at some
of these market based solutions
also madam speaker gentleman
that's part of our our framework
at least for the possibility
madam speaker gentleman's
gentleman
Advance cleaner fuels which.
Are very.
Of course is kind of the clean
fuels part of what we're
discussing today and three
finally madam speaker gentleman
to drive climate reporting.
So madam speaker gentleman in
answer to your question.
Within the time frame that we
set out the time frame is twenty
thirty the American petroleum
institute I'm being told said
the same general framework that
we're doing here so how is that
going to happen in in those
different ways mitigating
emissions accelerating
technology market solutions
advancing cleaner fuels climate
reporting that's how we get
there that's not how we get
there so the American petroleum
institute gets there madam
speaker gentleman's.
that is one of the things that
gives me confidence that this is
eminently reachable
we'll get into some of the
biofuel blends madam speaker
gentleman B. twenty reduces
emissions is lower cost fifteen
cents lower per gallon on
average than diesel in states
where clean if you were clean
fuel standards are in place so
That's how we get there
administrative for gentleman.
Madam.
John Marshall's eligible for any
business for.
I think maybe fifty years.
I'm sure he'll want to weigh in
on whether or not there or any
technical breakthroughs
horizon that would modify the
CEO to help with some of a
hundred fourteen gallons of gas
in the time frame that we're
discussing here and I'm going to
deposit.
Will.
Tell you that there are no
such breakthroughs.
Currently contemplated.
So.
We're going to be burning
gasoline ten years from now.
In order to
use carbon reduction goals.
The economic credit system.
Right required and could you
describe the Corbin credit
system would function.
This is a created commodity.
We'll get to the cost of the
gallon of gasoline.
To score.
Speaker and gentleman.
The process will work.
What a corporate credit.
When B. is.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen.
First while while a carbon
market is part of this
legislation will go through that
madam speaker gentleman's I
really want to emphasize that
through diversified strategies
the emissions reductions that
are sought in this bill are
Madam speaker gentleman and body
these are these are not pie in
the sky madam speaker
gentleman's.
These are carbon reduction in
carbon emission intensity
reductions that are within
industry trade associations
targets these are our carbon
emission intensity reduction.
I've been infants reduction
targets madam speaker gentleman
that are accessible through both
cleaner fuels through
electrification other for to
strategies but Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Even as we have the Big Five
auto makers that are saying
they're going to go all electric
within that twenty thirty to
twenty thirty five time frame
madam speaker gentleman's I know
you hope you know you watch the
Super Bowl like so many of us
that in here so many of those
car commercials about electric
vehicles madam speaker
gentleman's even though the
source of the vast majority of
not our cars in New Mexico not
the country's cars but the
world's cars are pledging to go
all electric and that twenty
thirty to twenty thirty five
time frame reducing emissions
madam speaker gentleman's the
technological improvements in
the cleaner fuels.
Your.
You are correct within this bill
there is an ability to generate
carbon credits madam speaker
gentleman's
That allow those
Rural providers who are are
unable for one reason or another
to reduce their carbon footprint
it still allows these emission
reductions to happen so madam
speaker and gentleman this
market madam speaker gentleman's
this is not just in New Mexico
market men's figure gentleman
this market in fact will be able
to participate with other
regional and national markets
many of which are up and running
many of which I deposit madam
speaker gentleman will come
online between now in twenty
thirty.
And madam speaker gentleman's.
This there there will be a
credit the credit will be equal
to one metric ton of carbon
dioxide equivalent in in this
bill it has to be reduced from
the transportation sector so
madam speaker gentleman's one of
the examples in this comes from
and and oil and gas producer
that's out in the the the part
of the state that produces the
second most of oil in the
country
they switched over they're
processing station from natural
gas driven our compressor
exhortation excuse me from
natural gas to solar Madam
speaker gentleman and that is
moving along transportation
fuels so madam speaker
gentleman's they're able to get
these credits because that
reductions in carbon intensity
going from that natural gas
generator to the solar power
panels that that power that
Compressor stations so madam
speaker gentleman within the
bill there are a number of of
different industries different
ways to get that credit
reduction of of one metric ton
of carbon dioxide
And those.
Working with the New Mexico
environment department with
these other markets in the state
regional perhaps national in
nature perhaps larger than that
at some point madam speaker
gentleman's.
those
this will establish a mechanism
for the generation of these
credits goes through all the
different areas that can be
waste water that can be
landfills are turning the
methane gas and the fuel fix
etcetera etcetera madam speaker
gentleman's
projects that expand
transportation electrification
etcetera.
Madam speaker gentleman's even
carbon capture direct air
capture are eligible for this
man the speaker gentleman for
them to generate credits
they shall result in additional
quantifiable verifiable
permanent and enforceable
greenhouse gas reductions one
credit for one metric ton of
carbon and this is then requires
the fuel providers not the gas
stations but the fuel providers
madam speaker gentleman's to
demonstrate compliance with the
clean fuel standard by balancing
those carbon those credits as
they are needed with the
deficits on an annual basis if
that transportation field
doesn't quite reach the the
target set forth in the bill.
So.
Speaker and gentleman carbon
credit.
Will be generated by.
Really function characters in
sequesters carbon or has a lower
energy intensity than that of
the combustion of a gallon of
gasoline that commodity is
created by the state for those
activities will lower carbon
intensity from the burning of
gasoline is that pretty much
the.
I'm getting a slight head shake
from acts for hold on one second
Mr Madam speaker gentle.
so then figure gentleman it's
not just a it's not a gallon of
gasoline per se madam speaker
gentleman's it's for a
transportation fuel it's that
reduction of twenty percent
intensity by twenty thirty four
that transportation fuel that
transportation fuel madam
speaker gentleman's includes
gasoline but also includes other
fuel sources as well.
Mr.
Speaker pardon and.
In general.
I think.
One
of the consumers in New Mexico
right.
This debate at this late hour
would be interested in what most
of us buys gasoline.
We can apply the same principles
to a gallon for diesel or gallon
of.
I have final or gallon of
whatever.
To the same calculations is
that.
Madam speaker gentleman yes.
Well madam speaker to I
apologize madam speaker
gentleman's I just want to again
emphasize that this these
requirements these standards
this annual reporting it's on
the fuel provider Madam speaker
gentleman that's not the gas
station.
That certainly not any of us
driving that vehicle madam
speaker gentleman's this this
standard this system this is
with the fuel provider why
should that be madam speaker
gentleman's because they're the
ones that already deal with so
many of the other rules of the
road if you will within the
system madam speaker gentleman's
so.
The the standards the accounting
the annual reporting those all
applied to that fuel provider
that business madam speaker
gentleman's that is in an
excellent place madam speaker
gentleman to become more
efficient to make smart
investments that reduce costs to
bring greater value that compete
in the capitalistic system that
we have bringing value to
individual to all of us as New
Mexicans while lowering costs.
So.
Madam speaker and gentleman up
to the refining companies if you
will the folks to turn those
barrels of oil into gasoline and
diesel it will be up to them to
acquire these carbon credits.
Representative.
Passed on to the consumer
as an additional cost.
Madam speaker gentleman again if
they if they can't meet the
standards which madam speaker
gentleman given electrification
given technology advancement
giving American petroleum is so
API's commitment to meeting
these standards I have maybe
perhaps slightly higher
confidence that you that they'll
be able to meet the standards if
they are unable to meet the
standards madam speaker
gentleman's then they they will
be required to get these credits
madam speaker gentleman's and
madam speaker gentleman's
then they're going to be
competing against all the other
fuel providers against folks who
want to break into this market
with perhaps new fuels new
technologies new ways of doing
things that they're able to sell
their product for in for for
better value to the customer the
whole system Madam speaker
gentleman.
The reason I go through that is
because madam speaker
gentleman's the system is set up
to drive lower cost to drive
more competition
and to bring better value madam
speaker gentleman to New
Mexicans and so this I think the
the the doom and gloom outlook
perhaps madam speaker
gentleman's or one of the a and
this in outlook that
That says we just can't meet the
standards the only way to do it
is to go to all just through the
credits no technology advances
no electrification.
that outlook could generate
higher costs the outlook that
we've seen and that were we're
really aiming for in this bill
does not have these higher costs
for consumers.
Speaker and gentleman her chin
chin.
There's more conventional in
operation and I believe that is
correct in the states of
California Oregon Washington in
the province of British Columbia
is that.
Understanding the Madam speaker
gentleman in North America that
is my understanding madam
speaker gentleman there are
other states that are looking at
this same approach madam speaker
gentleman and other countries as
I was doing a little bit of
research into this I came across
at least Brazil in addition
other countries it was engaging
in the madam speaker gentleman's
here in North America the list
you just read out now is the
listed that is accurate as of
now.
And Mr Madam speaker.
Channeling those carbon credits
your bachelors in Trenton today.
Home those more controlling on.
Madam speaker these legacy
markets do have that system in
place madam speaker gentleman's.
those are I I called a legacy
Market maggot madam speaker
gentleman not a term of are just
a term that refers to these have
been in place for a while now
madam speaker gentleman what
we're looking at really kind of
comes in that twenty five to
twelve to twenty thirty time
frame the markets are becoming
more efficient we we want them
to become more efficient as
market should
Madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker.
And gentleman.
Usual commissions for these
markets are active there has
been for a number of years a
strong incentive.
To increase the brother Chris
the carbon intensity of those
motor fuels the fact that those
input costs with.
To purchase carbon credits or
already in place is that your
understanding.
Then figure gentleman turned to
my experts briefed.
I apologize can you repeat the
question madam speaker
gentleman's.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
just the point I was trying to
make it is California Washington
Oregon British Columbia already
have strong incentives to reduce
the carbon intensity of those
transportation professionals
calls or having to purchase the
refiners and sellers of motor
fuels out there are already
having to purchase these credits
would that be true state.
And then figure gentleman thank
you for the question the the
standards exist the markets
exist I did for varying amounts
of time Madam speaker gentleman
I don't have those in front of
me so I don't know the duration
in each one of those those
jurisdictions but but the the
standards and the markets are in
place yes.
Thank you for that answer Madam
speaker and gentleman can you
tell me what those credits so
for today.
And then figure gentleman thank
you to the.
The credits very depending upon
market conditions madam speaker
gentleman's they they very I
don't know the entirety of the
rangeman speaker gentleman but
in in California yeah I guess I
would just heard madam speaker
gentleman that it's in that a
hundred and fifty dollar range
madam speaker gentleman's.
Those.
Very Madam speaker gentleman and
I'm not sure and some of the
other localities madam speaker
gentleman's in this bill we give
ourselves the opportunity if
it's advantageous for New Mexico
to collaborate with regional
markets madam speaker
gentleman's on the other hand if
it's a better not idea not to do
that to have just our own system
that is outlined in this piece
of legislation as well.
You madam speaker and gentleman
I would submit that the larger
the market.
The closer we would give to
actual market conditions.
Or is correct a hundred and
fifty dollars is on the low end
of
those credential for up to four
hundred dollars and this is per
metric ton of CO two is that.
Is that the.
The.
Chair if you will.
madam speaker gentleman the the
the one credit per metric ton of
CO two I believe that is a
standard unit of measurement
madam speaker gentleman's but
you just outlined the wide
variation that can exist in Jeff
and excuse me in different
jurisdictions madam speaker
gentleman's
the the.
So.
What I'd like to do.
District on the low end of that
four hundred fifty four dollars
to two hundred dollars for
trying to enhancing math to work
with during this.
I'm not very good at math I have
to be able to do it my head.
Madam speaker gentleman that we
on the you are good at math I I
I do not so one thing I do not
accept in this debate madam
speaker gentle and master
gentleman whether it's a hundred
fifty or two hundred whether
it's a hundred maybe we could
use a hundred whichever number
that you want to use I'm happy
to go through madam speaker
gentleman's.
But the regional variation
within the markets
I think is a point that can be
discounted when it comes to
thinking about where will be
also then figure gentleman just
briefly.
The reason it's important that
we consider what looking to you
know kind of behind us a real
time and then when we look out
twenty five to twenty twenty
five to twenty twenty twenty
thirty.
The efficiency the technology
gains the electrification by
itself it's going to be
different between the you know a
year ago much less five or ten
years ago in five years from now
the just the electrification
within the transportation sector
Madam speaker and gentleman much
less the cleaner fuels will in
my opinion
substantial give us room to see
substantially reduced
costs market costs for for the
that credit.
In spite of the.
Actually experience in those
west coast market so.
Two hundred dollars because of
last week in the auction market
the.
The actual number was a hundred
and ninety three dollars per
metric tons CO two so.
So the more.
Could not be any simpler.
We've got two hundred dollars
metric ton of additional input
costs going to vet gasoline.
And a hundred and fourteen
gallons of gas generates a
metric ton if we reduce those
carbon emissions to zero.
The dollar and eighty cents per
gallon.
Did you follow.
As for your gentleman I I follow
the mathematics speaker
gentleman we have to stay within
the standards set in this bill
it's a twenty percent reduction
in intensity by twenty thirty
thirty percent by twenty forty
madam speaker gentleman's I
believe you just outlined a one
hundred percent reduction in
infants Madam speaker gentleman
and so you know that's five
times madam speaker gentleman's
so so the follow the math thank
you madam speaker gentleman on
the other hand.
In doing the math madam speaker
gentleman you left the bounds of
the bill.
Madam speaker gentleman and so
but I yeah I think that that's
important for us to to know
madam speaker gentleman's again.
Just to.
Just a little bit ahead of me.
Twelve hundred.
Four dollars is a hundred
percent reduction what would a
ten percent reduction B. one
thousand one maybe eighteen to
twenty cents a gallon.
Figure gentleman in your example
yes Madam speaker gentleman in
real world experience now even
in madam speaker gentlemen
legacy markets that have been in
a time when electrification was
on the horizon if only just for
spat on the horizon madam
speaker gentleman's when there
were fewer technological options
for cleaner fuels madam speaker
gentleman that most madam
speaker gentleman's there's seen
I believe it's a.
Madam speaker gentleman on one
the three cent impact per gallon
of gasoline so madam speaker
gentleman significantly lower
than what you outline madam
speaker gentleman's.
And that is all before in in
this is this is history this is
a this is the the number that
I'm being told madam speaker
gentleman in isolated markets.
Where the markets are expanding
Madam speaker gentleman without
electrification certainly
without the deeper penetration
of electrification that we're
seeing in the country and across
the world without madam speaker
gentleman's gentleman the
technological innovation that's
going on.
With cleaner fuel stocks we
talked about API and their
commitment to this carbon
intensity target those are all
before one to three cents with
put it this way madam speaker
gentleman's worst case scenario
very few others participating no
to very little electrification
option very little on the clean
fuel side it was a one to three
cents not an eighteen to twenty
cents as you outlined madam
speaker gentleman's.
We're going into a much better
case scenario for the Big Five
auto makers madam speaker
gentleman are committing to all
electric vehicle fleets
production twenty thirty to
twenty thirty five time frame.
On down the line API commitments
and twenty thirty X. cetera.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
does not comport with the
physics.
Comport with the mass health and
it doesn't comport with the
actual experience that is that
is happening on the west coast
of Canada and the United States
with gasoline prices in the four
dollar and fifty cents to a
dollar each.
How would.
The other public policies in
those western states make a
contribution to those high
gasoline prices but if a carbon
credit.
Cost two hundred Bucks.
The price of a gallon of
gasoline has to be going up by
twenty cents.
For ten percent reduction.
For twenty percent reduction and
sixty cents a gallon for a
thirty percent reduction.
Madam speaker.
Is.
Maybe the air cleaner.
Discuss what we're doing is
shuffling papers
or we are enacting an
environmental channel tax.
Between twenty and sixty cents a
gallon.
One of the people of this
Mavericks echo that can least
afford to pay.
Election.
Sure this lady.
That's where we work.
B. anything else in the
spiritual people that are doing
this bears that to be true.
Madam speaker.
To
very simple algebra.
Yes taxes in vernal Gasol Tax.
Virtually nothing to improve the
environment.
We'll make our state for thank
you madam speaker function
gentleman for the answers to the
questions I appreciate that.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Eddy and
Otero.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman yield madam speaker I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from Chavez Eddy and Otero.
Gentleman.
I am.
I have listened I have listened
with much interest.
To your presentation.
And.
I don't really know where to
start.
I'll start like this gentleman.
In the last.
Here has your price of gasoline
gone up or down.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
the price of gasoline has gone
up madam speaker gentleman's
because of the price of oil has
rebounded from historic lows
madam speaker gentleman that we
experienced below zero value for
a short period of time to now
extend not historic but
abnormally high prices madam
speaker gentleman's those prices
are above ninety dollars for the
West Texas intermediate.
That is why madam speaker
gentleman's the price of gas has
gone up the price of oil a
worldwide commodity on a
worldwide market has gone up
commensurate with the price of
gasoline and madam speaker and
gentleman you're exactly right.
But I heard you say that this
bill was going to lower the
price of of diesel fuel
specifically with your statement
and gasoline in.
And Sir.
With all due respect.
I find that just.
Almost unbelievable.
The price of gasoline.
In the price of diesel.
Is based upon.
The price of crude tool.
Now.
Gentleman are you familiar with
how gasoline gets into New
Mexico and how do so gets in the
New Mexico.
Madam speaker gentleman I.
Before I answer that you cited I
appreciate to the siding and and
I always listen closely the
vases you do madam speaker
gentleman's
the the lower price per gallon
for a bio diesel madam speaker
gentleman that I cited a number
that I saw was fifteen cents
lower per gallon
Then.
That a gallon of regular diesel
so gallon of all petroleum based
diesel madam speaker gentleman
in a state that had a clean fuel
standard will get that if we
want to was fifteen cents lower.
That gallon of biodiesel than a
gallon of diesel.
Mr that's what I said and madam
speaker and gentleman I've been
in this business a long time.
And I have
many of barrel of gasoline and
diesel across New Mexico West
Texas Oklahoma Arizona.
And I tell you Sir.
When I drive down the street and
every one of these other people
drive down the street you're
going to see the price of
regular.
And the price of diesel and the
price of diesel is going to be
almost the price of premium.
Sometimes that exceeds that the
reason for that the gentleman is
several years ago the government
went from JP for to J. P. eight
which is the diesel based fuel
they pull more diesel out of the
market more care seeing out of
the market and that's what drove
the price of the phone.
If you go look in the every
market like California today.
California is run and about but
a gallon over New Mexico in the
LA basin today.
Right now.
California has had stricter
gasoline standards for the last
twenty years their gasoline
prices have been higher than our
gasoline and diesel prices ever
day.
This process.
That you're proposing is going
to harm the families in New
Mexico.
This process will rot will
raise.
Fuel prices.
To those that are.
I mean our state is already one
of the poorest states in the
nation.
You're proposing a bill.
That is going to raise fuel
prices the only thing that I
know that it's going to to
demonstrably changes the
standard of living of families
in New Mexico.
I know you believe in this and
I'm not arguing that point.
But that.
That statement that do so will
be cheaper.
To my knowledge.
Is not.
Based on in the market that I
have ever seen.
Now gentleman.
You talked a little bit about
catastrophic effects.
Let's do that amendment.
The gentleman from Lee.
Been made an argument.
That.
The.
Limiting amount.
Of the missions.
That are being calculated in
your bill.
Could not be.
Calculated more.
Closely than four decimal
points.
And had no effect.
What is going to have an
effective immediately is when
the mothers and fathers of New
Mexico drive up to the gasoline
pump and and stick their knobs
all in their car and look at the
price of fuel.
Now gentleman.
Can you tell me.
Can you show me.
One time in history.
That increased government
regulations lowered the price of
of fuel in New Mexico.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank the gentleman madam
speaker gentleman's.
The price at the palm is related
to the worldwide price of oil I
thought we just agreed on that
madam speaker and gentleman
madam speaker gentleman's that
price of oil is in Santa Fe New
Mexico not set at the you know
it is said it it's a worldwide
commodity price Madam speaker
gentleman when that price goes
up.
When record profits accrue to
those within that industry price
at the pump goes up.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is this this relationship madam
speaker gentleman's again with
with with the perspective.
What I cited was a gallon of
biodiesel being fifteen cents
cheaper than a gallon of regular
diesel Madam speaker and
gentleman
that's what I cited so so just
so we're we're clear on on on
going back to the clear in that
part of.
Well
Madam speaker and gentleman let
me tell you the truth those
sites the today in New Mexico.
If you if you put together.
A barrel of B. twenty.
You have to.
Constructs.
The process to bring in biofuels
where the year use on corn
whatever your use of.
And.
And that the only way.
I mean it doesn't work it I know
market right now I can show you
in New Mexico that that's just
factually does not work.
The price of fuel is going to
rise.
Gentleman do you know how many
grades of gasoline or diesel or
sell to the state of New Mexico.
The figure gentleman I don't
have that number in front of me
fast figure gentleman I did a
and I apologize the madam
speaker gentleman's I'm looking
at a chart here that follows.
I just got away from it the
price B. twenty that's twenty
percent biodiesel madam speaker
gentleman's regular diesel it
follows that madam speaker
gentleman from January monthly
or bi monthly I guess quarterly
madam speaker gentleman's
January fourteenth October
twenty twenty one Madam speaker
gentleman in all cases the price
of regular diesel is above the
price of the twenty of twenty
percent biodiesel madam speaker
gentleman's that concluded here
at the and in October of twenty
one or.
July twenty one it was roughly I
guess two ninety for regular
diesel two seventy four for B.
twenty diesel that that's.
Those are the the the national
numbers of.
I'm checking with my ex for
those of the national prices the
B. twenty is cheaper than the
gallon of diesel and madam
speaker gentleman.
That infrastructure investment
that you just outlined which is
being funded by capital that
wants to go to decarbonization
strategies that's part of the
the quarter billion dollars that
can flow into New Mexico part of
the sixteen hundred permanent
jobs part of the nearly half
billion dollars estimated by
twenty thirty that are the
positive economic impact from
adopting this policy and madam
speaker gentleman's.
With the perspective I would I
would dispute that there's no
benefit madam speaker
gentleman's we we have to talk
about catastrophic climate
change absolutely and how acting
in concert we help keep these
temperatures within a survivable
threat within a safe threshold
the madam speaker gentleman well
taking five hundred and seventy
thousand cars off the road the
equivalent emissions in twenty
thirty.
Now that I am happy to go tell a
family whether it's back home in
Los crucis whether it's
somewhere in Albuquerque
somewhere over on the side the
west side what have you madam
speaker gentleman's their air is
going to be cleaner because
there are fewer emissions that
have been released that part.
Outside of the impacts on the on
the global climate or the New
Mexico Climent that cleaning up
of the air madam speaker
gentleman's is absolutely in
play within this legislation.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I I.
There are so many.
Statements.
That have been made that I I
they are.
I just believe there actually.
Not at.
Do you know what the cetane
value of B. twenty as verses of
regular diesel is.
I don't have them from the
administrative regions well.
Gentleman cetane is the is the
power point the power
measurement of a.
A unit of the soul.
Like.
Premium and regular.
The cetane value of virgin the
self.
Is about fifteen percent higher
than the twenty.
It ought to be cheaper because
it doesn't take you as far.
It ought to be cheaper because
it doesn't how are your vehicle
the sign.
It ought to be cheaper because
it's not the same quality.
And madam speaker and gentleman.
If you have to buy more of
something.
To get the same distance you're
not saving a dime.
And that's the that's the trick.
Of this in New Mexico today we
have one refiner left.
Process is about a hundred
thousand barrels a day approval.
Brings about twenty four
thousand barrels a day north
into the Albuquerque market the
balance of the fuel.
that comes from Albuquerque is
is today comes from to Texas
refineries.
One in the panhandle in the
other one in el Paso.
Is your bill going to cause out
of state refiners to pay.
The to sell their fuel in New
Mexico.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman the the fuel
providers are are the the
participants in this legislation
madam speaker gentleman's I
believe the refiner that you're
referring to and we probably
will definitely agree on this
because there's that one this is
Holly Madam speaker gentleman as
I understand it just told by my
my experts they made a three
hundred fifty million dollar
investment madam speaker
gentleman's what did they make
that investment to do Madam
speaker tell your real quickly
why they did it but because four
years ago they were separate
spending three hundred million
dollars a year to buy these
credits that were required in
order to sell the fuel that came
out of their plant.
They did the cover and every
investment every dollar of
investment goes on to the backs
of the people in New Mexico.
They would not have made this
had they not.
With the chair again
they would not have made this
investment if they could not
madam chair yes ma'am.
Please.
Your mask.
Thank you.
They would not have made this
investment if it wasn't a
regulatory burden on top of
them.
They didn't do this out of the I
mean nobody goes out and built
this.
For the fun of it.
The price of fuel increases
because of the regulatory
burden.
I ask you are you going to.
Burden out of state fuel.
Refiners markets coming into New
Mexico.
The thank you madam speaker
thank you gentleman
The.
So so the in state fuel provider
madam speaker gentleman's that
is the the participants Madam
speaker gentleman in
in the clean future bill madam
speaker gentleman's.
What we just talked about
briefly with the the refinery
New Mexico madam speaker
gentleman's they invested
hundreds of millions of dollars
I'm sure there are many
permanent jobs connected to that
refinery to that new investment
that they may madam speaker
gentleman's.
The end of the land of the so
that they're selling I believe
if it that that's helping to
meet that be twenty standard
madam speaker gentleman's.
That's part of the innovation in
the investment that is needed to
lower carbon intensity while
bringing economic opportunity
madam speaker gentleman's
and madam speaker gentleman's.
Sticking with that simple which
I I appreciate.
The worldwide price of oil when
where why the price of oil
plummeted Madam speaker
gentleman when that plummeted
then the price at the pump
plummeted when the worldwide.
Price of oil rose Madam speaker
gentleman that price went up.
That price madam speaker
gentleman's again all the
numbers that I'm seeing the the
the real world.
Examples and and again it's my
words to be firm Madam speaker
and gentleman.
In.
In all other markets in places
where they had fewer advantages
and what we're looking towards
in the future.
The it was the worldwide price
of oil that drove the changes in
price madam speaker gentleman's
not the policy the policy madam
speaker gentleman will reduce
emissions that's part of how we
combat climate change it is
absolutely how we have a
healthier air for for New
Mexicans all across the state.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I'll try one more time are your
regulations going to burden out
of state refiners bringing the
old and New Mexico.
Madam speaker gentleman's these
rules of the road applied to in
state fuel providers madam
speaker gentleman's how they do
how they do all all the
associated how they bring
investment in the real world
example that we're talking about
with the refinery madam speaker
gentleman that you noted that is
their business and madam speaker
gentleman's status part the that
is a great thing that more
competition more participation
in markets should drive
investment should drive value
should drive keep costs lower
drive more value.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
That this is on the way the
world works.
I know you have said that.
But let me briefly tell you have
gasoline and diesel gets in New
Mexico there's a refiner over
the panhandle this got a six and
a ten inch pipeline they come in
the Albuquerque that's called
the west emerald system.
There's a six in ten inch
pipeline that's that's
telescoped.
That comes from el Paso through
Alamogordo the Albuquerque.
And Holly the one that you
talked about has an eight inch
pipeline that comes up and has a
terminal in Moriarity New Mexico
and has a native pipeline that
goes on Farmington.
That's the only way you'll get
sent in New Mexico other than
someone trucking a barrel in.
In the truck.
Trying to compete with the
pipeline care which is
absolutely an economical that's
why the state needs a plant
that's over it Marathon by
Gallup is shut down today.
Because it couldn't compete.
This bill.
Will raise the price of fuel to
every family in New Mexico Madam
speaker.
There's no way around it.
You're not going to cause any
more competition.
There's no one that can come in
and compete there have you have
almost every major in America
selling gasoline and diesel in
New Mexico today either by
production.
Or by exchange.
Those those that's how those
barrels get here.
If you go to one of the
terminals down here on Broadway
in Albuquerque.
You're gonna be able to buy
Kanako chevron.
All the I go down the list it's
the same gasoline.
Comes out of the same bank.
Comes from the same refinery.
The differences it's got a
little bit of additive in that
that you need to that.
Manufacture.
What you're doing.
Is not adding a single
competitor madam speaker.
It's only adding a regulatory
burden.
You're creating a credit.
That comes marketable.
That has value that is going to
be passed to the consumer.
That's why gasoline is about
higher in California.
Dumond.
This system.
Will not make.
Eight.
I don't know how else to say
that I'm a tell you what my mom
always said it's not a make a
Tinker's damn bit of difference
to the air quality anywhere
outside in New Mexico probably
not even in New Mexico.
It's not gonna do anything.
When we talk about fuel costs.
Being.
Higher.
This kind of regulatory burden
that's being put on the backs of
the people in New Mexico that
can afford it.
If you live in rural New Mexico.
For my friend that's looking at
me in the northwest.
His family uses more fuel.
Every day.
Than someone that lives in
Albuquerque because he travels
farther.
Just like my family does.
Rural New Mexico will be burden
Madam speaker.
With this.
And it's not going to make a
darn bit of difference.
It is a environmental
initiative.
This administration.
State at.
Did you say we have to meet.
But it raises the cost on on our
people.
And it doesn't do anything Madam
speaker and gentleman I wished
if it said that it made a
difference the in the body.
Any where.
That lives in New Mexico I'd
say.
It might be worth.
To your point I ask you a
question while ago do you have
you know I am the grades of
gasoline diesel or sell in New
Mexico.
Do you know Sir madam speaker.
Then we have figure I don't have
the number from me.
There are probably.
More than a dozen grades of
gasoline.
You have vapor pressure you have
opting requirements years ago we
had.
We had three grades of gasoline
will really coming with we had
regular knefel.
Fifty years ago.
And then California started
chart gasoline's Arizona started
as Bob's and all of the rest of
that that goes with the.
Now in New Mexico.
You change vapor pressure
several times a year.
The James Bay vapor pressures.
Several times a year.
The change oxygen oxygen that's.
Of twice a year.
All of that causes
infrastructure to be built.
Either have landing systems you
have more tame chair railing
ethanol in.
It's not.
Is it cannot you cannot talk
about this and not talk about
the burden on the backs of New
Mexicans.
Is your witness has something to
say
I'm more than happy to listen
then figure gentleman that.
There wasn't a question so I'll
wait until there's a question
but I was conferring with my
experts to to get a little bit
of feedback.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
You talked about the suffering
of the catastrophic of the X. in
New Mexico.
If you go back and look in the
nineteen thirties and forties
there was a time called the dust
bowl.
Was it because the madam speaker
and gentleman by.
Of.
The.
Simon changes that you're
talking about today.
Madam speaker gentleman's the as
I recall it Madam speaker
gentleman and what I've learned
specific to that the practices
of the day madam speaker
gentleman's including some of
the land use practices Madam
speaker gentleman depended upon
extraordinary amounts of
moisture they didn't have any of
the soil conservation practices
that we see today in fact madam
speaker gentleman's
the many of the soil
conservation practices we take
for granted today across New
Mexico especially in rural
communities came out of that era
madam speaker gentleman's when
these practices kept going the
rain fall did not and they had
an extended drought and and he
when the other the that thing
madam speaker gentleman's that
is what caused in large part as
I understand the decibel it's
what led madam speaker gentleman
to many of the soil conservation
practices that are house and so
conservation districts and New
Mexico State University all
across the state across the
country came out of that and
madam speaker and gentleman.
We're getting more efficient in
agriculture every day as we
should madam speaker John one
for working efficiency and
innovation across the spectrum
madam speaker gentleman's we're
in the midst of an epic drought
Madam speaker gentleman in fact
this is what I just read.
Is the we're in the worst period
of drought madam speaker
gentleman in twelve hundred
years Madam speaker and
gentleman.
With the forecast for it to get
worse madam speaker gentleman's
we don't feel those effects in
the way that they would have in
the nineteen thirties madam
speaker gentleman's because of
the investments because of the
efficiencies because of the.
The different practices that we
now just kind of take for
granted every day if we had some
of the state I would posit madam
speaker and gentleman that if we
did the same the things the same
way as we did back then for
madam speaker gentleman's
perhaps rolled back and just
went back to fully leaded
gasoline very efficient engines
very very bad for development
madam speaker gentleman's in in
children
madam speaker gentleman's.
We we shouldn't do what we did
back then.
We can do what we did back then
madam speaker gentleman's
especially as we go further into
what we're being told is the
worst twelve a drought in twelve
hundred years.
And into a period of extended
drawing into a period madam
speaker gentleman where if we
don't.
Work to reduce emissions as a
state as a country as a as a
glow that this these these years
now that we say are very dry.
In fifty years madam speaker and
gentleman the forecast tell us
that these are going to be
considered what years.
Imagine that the worst drought
in twelve hundred years.
In our live many of the
lifetimes of folks in here
certainly the lifetime of kids
and grandkids of folks in here
this will be considered the good
old days.
It's going to be drier it's
going to be hotter it's going to
be harder to to do what we as
new Mexicans treasure doing so
madam speaker and gentleman
I got a little off on a tangent
there but specifically you know
the guy I got started I guess
because of the question around
the decibel and what that I
think can really tell us about
going forward.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Yes exactly what will this bill
do to to make a difference in
that in New Mexico today thank
you madam speaker thank you John
for the question Madam speaker
gentleman this will by twenty
thirty have an equivalence of
five hundred and seventy
thousand vehicles the emissions
from five hundred seventy
thousand vehicles in New Mexico
not going into the atmosphere of
those vehicles off the road
madam speaker gentleman's that
means there's going to be
less exposure to things that
cause respiratory illness for
kids for seniors for for New
Mexicans all across the state
madam speaker gentleman's it's
going to be in cleaner air in
New Mexico and madam speaker
gentleman's it is a part of how
we
Reduce the impacts of climate
change that we guard against the
worst effects of that but it
absolutely madam speaker
gentleman it'll make the air
cleaner in the state of New
Mexico for New Mexicans.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
What this bill will do.
Is it will reduce the standard
of living in many New Mexicans
twenty percent of our seniors
now live at or near the poverty
level.
Forty percent of our seniors are
raising children in their homes.
Their grandchildren.
This bill is going to cause
them.
It this bill will reduce their
ability to take care of those
grand children.
This bill is not going to make a
bit of difference to the
Climent.
The anywhere but maybe in a
specific area and almost.
calculable in those areas.
This bill is going to cause
rural New Mexico.
The specifically allies because
they drive more than someplace
else.
Rural New Mexico doesn't have a
real runner that they can jump
on and go to town to get
groceries they got to get in the
pick up and go up to ten to do
it.
Madam speaker.
I'm convinced in the body should
be convinced.
That.
When we.
As a state.
And that regulations.
Thanking the people.
In Paris.
Care.
Is unrealistic.
What we're doing unfortunately.
And I know this from.
Many years of experience in the
business.
And I know many others in this
body have seen it time and time
again.
The burden of these types of
regulations.
Have no affect anywhere except
the pocketbooks of moms and dads
trend a raise families in New
Mexico.
The.
Ellen Farmington or the fella
and jail New Mexico.
Don't have.
More problems today that you're
talking about.
Gentleman there trying to make a
living.
They're trying to provide for
their families.
I have watched all of this
happen around me.
I have watched the.
I have watched all of these.
These.
Prophetic statements about it's
going to get a lot better and
it's gonna be a lot cheaper.
In every one of our lecturers
the built in this building.
Has gone up the last several
years.
Every one of our gasoline and
diesel fuel prices have gone up.
This comes on the back of New
Mexicans.
Gentleman.
Madam speaker.
Does your bill find for an
additional runtime of the San
Juan generating station.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman Madam speaker
gentleman thank or we we agree
to disagree on madam speaker
gentleman's the budget the clean
air converted New Mexicans the
benefits that are accrued
through this Madam speaker and
gentleman and madam speaker
gentleman's I think.
Perhaps we agree to disagree
that the investment of three
hundred fifty million dollars at
a refinery in New Mexico to
produce renewable diesel is a
good thing seems to me like it's
a good thing madam speaker
gentleman's it brought
investment it brought jobs six
cetera Madam speaker gentleman
to your question the amendment
put on in house state
government.
Of bills what the ETA sets out
and madam speaker gentleman's
what the public service company
of New Mexico came and told this
body told the state in twenty
seventeen.
That at the by the end of twenty
twenty two they were gonna leave
San Juan generating station
madam speaker gentleman's the
amendment.
Specifies that that that and
point the end of twenty twenty
two is the that that that time
applies.
Previously madam speaker
gentleman's there is been a
voluntary agreement leave that
to for public service company of
New Mexico to abandon that plan
earlier this amendment provides
the entirety of the time allowed
under the energy transition act
in line with what the public
service company of New Mexico
told this body told the state
back in twenty seventeen.
Madam speaker and gentleman I.
My memories right to carry debt
bill called the ETA is that
correct.
Madam speaker gentleman I did
carry that piece of legislation
I know it's very familiar madam
speaker gentleman's prior to the
legislation again public service
company of New Mexico said that
they were leaving San Juan
generating station at the end of
twenty twenty two back at
believe first time I heard it
was in twenty seventeen.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
There's a thousand people up
there that have jobs that have
been told that they're going to
be laid off for the last couple
years.
Even today.
I've been told that they started
laying off miners at that
facility.
I find it almost.
Heartbreaking I guess is the
best way to say it.
And today we're asking them to
continue to work for four more
months.
So that the people in
Albuquerque that bore.
Three hundred million dollars
worth of that.
We're gonna ask him to work
three more mmhm for more months
so the people in New Mexico in
Albuquerque might stay cool this
summer.
So they'll be unemployed next
winter.
That doesn't sound like
prosperity to those families.
It doesn't sound fair.
I don't think it's in their best
interest.
And I bet you those moms and
dads are more worried about
what's going to be on the supper
table than what the air quality
might be.
Someplace else.
Madam speaker gentleman.
It's been a long time personally
in this business.
I think I know the market.
The infrastructure.
The capacity I can tell you what
the diameter and most places I
can tell you about the wall
thicknesses of many of those
pieces of pie.
Those types.
In many cases are fungible.
Their common carriers not all of
them some of them are are
private.
But the idea that this bill is
going to.
Because.
And excitement in the industry
is absolutely.
Laughable to me.
In order to ship in the any of
those pipelines you have to they
have the capacity to ship.
Thirty you know how much B.
twenty is shipped in the
pipeline across New Mexico.
I don't have the number of men's
figure gentleman I don't have
that number from not one gallon.
You can ship it.
So you have to try to get.
And it's about ten times more
expensive than pipeline in the.
That cost.
Is borne on the backs of the
people of New Mexico.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman.
These energy companies.
The one that I work for.
For many years and everyone that
I did business with.
Care about the environment.
You have a small select group of
special interests.
That that are in the mix because
in a lot of dating problems.
The diesel.
Spent over the years for
example.
The software spec has been
driven down and driven down.
And it needed to to be real
honest with the higher self
respect was problematic.
Gasoline was the same thing.
If you'll think about eight
years ago when you were driving
down the streets in the
Albuquerque you saw these
muffler shops on every corner.
You can they had these outdoor
left you could pull up in the
changer muffler out in about ten
minutes.
That was because of the software
level and gasoline.
When gasoline went down to ten
PPM.
First off one way.
One less because they started
making members better it was
because there wasn't as
corrosive environment.
The technology that has advanced
in the industry has driven the
mission's straight down.
The industry.
Is the bread and butter.
Of this state.
It's what indicates our kids.
It provides the majority of good
paying jobs.
It is going to make.
The difference in the state.
I have seen bills come out of
this place this year that does
have because my head this the.
And.
They do nothing but harm the
families of New Mexico.
I don't.
Thank you for the world global
warming issue thank harm our
families.
They put thousands of jobs in
Farmington out of business.
They have nowhere else to go.
We have one of our.
Legislators that went on to
Washington this at all or they
can sell their art in there
will.
I'll never forget it.
We can not keep putting these
burdens on Mexicans.
And saying it's for the greater
good.
It's harming our children.
This.
Madam speaker.
We're doing the reduction goes
to thirty percent by two
thousand and forty correct.
Men's figure German yep.
Madam speaker and gentleman what
benefit will that bring a family
living in Farmington New Mexico.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
The twenty thirty so there is in
twenty thirty madam speaker
gentleman's sixteen hundred
permanent jobs twenty three
hundred construction jobs two
hundred fifty million almost to
slightly less two hundred forty
some million estimated
infrastructure investment nearly
half a billion dollars in
economic impact madam speaker
gentleman's those are the
numbers that are associated with
this piece of legislation madam
speaker gentleman's those are
the investments that you just
outlined down at a refinery in
the southeast part of the state
three hundred fifty million
dollars in that case madam
speaker gentleman's.
Those are jobs that's investment
that's opportunity Madam speaker
gentleman.
I'll see I'll ask my experts for
the number of cars that would be
off the road equivalent in
twenty forty madam speaker
gentleman's.
It deeply surprises me that the
air quality benefits of taking
five hundred seventy thousand
cars off the road the reduction
in as much the reduction and
other respiratory illnesses that
face New Mexicans within high
emission intensity where the
where the air quality is is
hurting those New Mexicans.
It surprises me to no end.
That isn't considered beneficial
madam speaker gentleman's.
You know the numbers the
economic impact again.
Sixteen hundred permanent jobs
by twenty thirty twenty three
hundred construction jobs.
The the investment the economic
impact that we've discussed.
Now I don't I can't say I don't
have in front of me madam
speaker gentleman's exactly
where that would go in the state
madam speaker gentleman's that
will be of huge benefit in the
state as I'm sure the jobs
connected with.
Building renewable diesel
production at that refinery in
the southeast part of the state
the benefit that accrued to that
community which is wonderful.
We should have those benefits
those jobs that opportunity that
investment accrued other parts
of the state and madam speaker
gentleman's.
The real time air quality
benefits and madam speaker
gentleman confronting.
You know I'm not the one asking
the questions here but madam
speaker gentleman's.
Some of the line of questioning
and statements lead me to wonder
whether.
The census went whether twelve
hundred year drought weather
catastrophic wildfires are
considered concerns.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
All of those are concerns.
But so are the so are the
thousand families in the four
corners area that are going to
have no place to go.
You talked about this this bill
that in Artesia.
Was something that the board of
directors dreamed up and said
this is a heck of a deal we
ought to go bill one of the
things I can make a lot of
money.
They did it to save money
because of the impact of the
regulations that were costing
them hundreds of millions of
dollars a year.
They didn't build it because it
was a good deal.
They built the because these
regulations that have been
forced upon them.
They couldn't survive.
I.
You.
It's amazing to me.
That that we would tell this
body that these regulations
don't cost families in New
Mexico tremendously.
They do.
In rural New Mexico.
Is targeted and harmed more.
These fuel prices.
That.
Moms and dads buying groceries.
And certainly fell in the car.
It's a big deal.
You talk about.
Quarter of a billion dollars.
In infrastructure.
That's two hundred and fifty
million dollars.
Do you know how much crude oil
refinery right to check for
every day when their process of
a hundred thousand barrels
approval at ninety dollars a
barrel.
Madam speaker gentleman's the.
The.
It is that is a very large
numbers slightly below a billion
men's figure gentleman madam
speaker gentleman's it also
illustrates again as we've
discussed today that the
worldwide price of oil.
That commodity price is what.
Dr.
madam speaker gentleman's.
The fluctuations
the that we we've also discussed
but that's a very large number.
And madam speaker and gentleman
in the US.
And all of these industries.
Our capital intensive.
In.
I have not seen a single
process.
That creates.
Biodiesel.
Economically compared to a
refining operations.
I have what.
People tried creating.
The so from algae and all sorts
of other.
Process and you can do.
You just can't do it making the
money and you can't do it and
survive.
We have to start working about.
Processes and regulations and
the regulatory burdens that
cause families to flourish.
We have to start looking at the
impacts.
Of the regulations.
And start considering those
thousand native American
families in the four corners
areas.
That are really stranded.
It's not fair to.
It's not fair to the
municipalities across New Mexico
to be burdened by this.
Gentleman.
Early on you described and madam
speaker you described twenty
eight businesses that we're
going to come into New Mexico
can you give me any detail for
that the how many employees they
would have and that kind of
stuff.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
speaker thank you gentlemen
Madam speaker gentleman I'm sure
some of those businesses will be
part of the sixteen hundred
permanent jobs twenty three
hundred construction jobs that
are the conservative estimate
madam speaker gentleman's
with in that twenty thirty time
frame which is really twenty
twenty five to twenty thirty
madam speaker gentleman's I
don't know how many of those
jobs or questions specifically
to the different companies Madam
speaker and gentleman but again
in sixteen hundred permanent
jobs conservative estimates
twenty three hundred
construction jobs conservative
estimates of get to know me.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen Madam speaker
gentleman what I'm being told is
that with these companies for
looking anywhere from from low
and say the business are in the
the innovation side say ten
employees all the way up to very
large companies with five
hundred plus employees so madam
speaker gentleman's I think the
the the conservative but but
fair numbers are this sixteen
hundred permanent jobs twenty
three hundred construction jobs.
Russian
Again among some of these but
but that these twenty eight
companies.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Can you tell me where these
companies would be located and
what they would be doing I mean
we talk about sixteen hundred
and twenty three hundred and
that sounds good but I mean I'm
I know where thousand people are
Lee and jobs can you tell me are
they going to get any of those
jobs and what will they be
doing.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I know that the
the focus will be on within the
legislation disproportionately
impacted communities also Madam
speaker gentleman in rural
communities that's where
reinvestment of the credits goes
back into that's in our
legislation is here madam
speaker gentleman's.
Because these are industrial
many in many cases very heavy
industrial processes I think
it's very fair.
We side go down madam speaker
gentleman down there in the R.
teacher yeah I think it's
absolutely fair to
deposit that it's going to be
going into other parts of our
state including in the northwest
part of our state where there is
that extensive experience with
industry folks who know how to
work with their hands Madam
speaker gentleman folks to take
showers after work that's what
we
that's what we want to make
happen I think.
you madam speaker gentleman.
there's suburban prudent give a
few examples suburban prove
propane northwest New Mexico
Madam speaker gentleman that's
one of them madam speaker
gentleman's over on which would
be in the dairy producing areas
southeast part of the state
little bit the south central.
madam speaker gentleman's carbon
and engineering Permian in the
northwest
renewable energy group in Clovis
madam speaker gentleman these
are all areas.
Including in the northwest part
of the state that have extensive
experience with industry that
are well suited to that madam
speaker gentleman's that if we
adopt this policy that that
investment those jobs those
expansions will absolutely.
The of the.
Targeted towards those areas
with that experience so madam
speaker and gentleman is it your
testimony today.
This regulation that you're
proposing is going to create a
job.
That we don't need to date and
is not.
And economically driven job at a
regulatory burden job driven.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman no Madam speaker
gentleman in this approach madam
speaker gentleman that responds
to where investment is flowing
at a at a state and national and
international level Madam
speaker gentleman that is
towards decarbonising while at
the same time growing our
economy Madam speaker gentleman
that is what I am not positing
but that is what is happening
around the world that these are
the growth industry the growth
areas madam speaker gentleman.
Briefly you know staying in the
four corners area.
Public service company of New
Mexico said that they were
leaving San Juan generating
station in twenty seventeen they
they told that.
To to the state to the to the
region Madam speaker gentleman
that followed and continues to
follow similar private sector
departures from carbon
intensive.
Energy areas and towards lower
carbon areas madam speaker
gentleman's and that's why madam
speaker gentleman's.
This policy that reduces the
carbon intensity of
transportation fuel will attract
additional investment we just
we've talked a lot about the
simple down in the southeast
part of the state Madam speaker
and gentleman.
This will attract investment it
will lower carbon intensity it
will lower emissions because
that is what is happening from
the private sector perspective
and madam speaker gentleman's it
is absolutely part of a public
approach that acknowledges madam
speaker gentleman's.
The.
Incredibly damaging effects of
climate change madam speaker
gentleman's this body has
appropriated thirty million
dollars this year to deal with
catastrophic drought in with
dire water shortages that are in
part linked to and more quickly
changing climate.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
In the your money is going to
have to go to a just to to
address these problems frankly
madam speaker gentleman whatever
happens the madam speaker
gentleman's more investment more
jobs more economic growth is
going to go towards solving this
problem.
That we need more energy but we
need that energy madam speaker
and gentleman with less carbon
intensity more energy less
carbon emissions Madam speaker
and gentleman that is the puzzle
that is the that we have to
solve the challenge we have to
face.
The private sector is pledging
trillions to that effect madam
speaker gentleman's
And that is again why we have
these conservative numbers that
I've given repeatedly today
about what that investment will
bring to New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I would tell you that the
American.
Entrepreneur is alive and well.
And if there was a driving
force.
In the.
Business circle.
For someone.
To invest money.
To create a widget that brought
value to the company they would
have already done.
I I would tell you that.
And I I think about the
technology that has been
developed in the last several
years in the industry that I'm
most familiar with the.
Course on drilling and hydraulic
fracturing.
Was come from a regulatory.
Secretary that said all I I know
how to do this I'm gonna teach
the industry how to do it.
The the engine.
Of desire.
In the ability to design and
develop.
Is what drives that.
These companies that.
These twenty eight businesses in
the six hundred permanent jobs
in the twenty three hundred.
Construction jobs.
You have to you have to
consider.
Thousand jobs the to kill in the
four corners area.
You have to consider.
The cost of living to the moms
and dads all over New Mexico.
You have to consider the impacts
of.
The grandparents who are raising
children.
All of those things madam chair
I can reach out and touch.
In your the impacts of your
bill.
You can't calculate to four
decimal points.
That's what I'm saying is
problematic.
Is the immediate impact.
This bill.
People's standard of living.
Deteriorates.
And these.
Assumed.
This.
Do not matter to them when they
can afford to fill up their
vehicle for the two kids.
Madam speaker and gentleman you
talked about catastrophic fires.
Do you believe that catastrophic
fires in New Mexico.
Are more caused by our inability
to manage our forests.
Four global warming.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen fans figure
gentleman across the west in
states that have different
policies Madam speaker
gentleman.
Drier conditions hotter
conditions left snow pack snow
packed that stays for shorter
periods of time Madam speaker
gentleman and not just in the
United States madam speaker
gentleman's in forests around
the globe if it's hotter for
longer if there's less moisture
the the in and more sure that's
there for shorter amount of time
madam speaker gentleman's it is
going to burn more quickly and
and and hotter madam speaker
gentleman's so.
Of all of the conditions madam
speaker gentleman's the hotter
drier conditions are a bigger
factor madam speaker gentleman's
for the risk and the reality of
catastrophic wildfire Madam
speaker gentleman.
I think we can all be proud as a
body as we did again this year
where we're making upstream
investments in watershed health
that will reduce those impacts
that'll make it
for instance madam speaker and
gentleman harder for about a
fire to thank you to have less
dense tree stands and what have
you madam speaker gentleman's.
But we can innovate we can.
Techno you were racing right now
I would say this madam speaker
gentleman's.
The hotter and drier that it is
the more quickly that that for
us catches on fire the hotter
and drier it is the more quickly
the Rio Grande goes dry not in
the summer but in the late
spring madam speaker
gentleman's.
Those are real world effects
happening in New Mexico that are
absolutely resolve of climate
change.
Madam speaker.
Until then.
I have watched carefully and
southern New Mexico.
The success of the of the
Mescalero Apache in maintaining
their forced it is.
Ideal.
Unbelievable.
Manicured.
And doesn't have I.
Across the street.
Where.
The state in in some.
Areas the US for service has
failed to.
Manage the for us they have a
problem.
It is because we did not
manage as well as the Mescalero
Apache in southern New Mexico we
ought to take notes from those
guys they do an amazing job.
Gentleman.
Representative Scott.
Representative from Lee County.
Add some estimates of the cost.
This bill.
But raised the price of gasoline
and diesel.
Do you agree with that and if so
why or why not.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen Madam speaker
gentleman I I disagree with the
costs of that that the gentleman
from the side and then speaker
gentleman the gentleman from Lee
cited I believe in eighteen to
twenty cents cost I believe
madam speaker gentleman's in
fact in with less technology
less electrification Madam
speaker gentleman it's been at
most one to three or four cent
cost so madam speaker
gentleman's three I I disagree
and the reason I disagree is
because of that experience in
different markets with inferior
technology
madam speaker gentleman's I
think we're we're gonna have a
better market madam speaker
gentleman's with better
technology madam speaker
gentleman's more electrification
which will help reduce emissions
more quickly and help offset the
intensity of emissions madam
speaker gentleman's.
The American petroleum.
In order to commitment to reduce
the carbon intensity of
petroleum based fuels in the
same time frame and that twenty
thirty time frame by that twenty
percent intensity that we side
madam speaker gentleman's we're
gonna have that so I would
conclude by saying I disagree
with that estimate based upon
historical precedent madam
speaker gentleman's the fact
that we're going to have a
better market with better
technology
Of those of the my reasons madam
speaker gentleman's Madam
speaker and gentleman if that be
correct fire the prices of
gasoline and diesel a dollar a
dollar and a half higher in
California than they are here.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker gentleman that can
be based on and multitude of
factors but I have here and the
breakdown of the cost of
gasoline madam speaker
gentleman.
We have roughly forty two
percent Madam speaker gentleman
of this this is updated twenty
twenty one.
Forty two percent of the cost of
gasoline based on the barrel of
oil madam speaker gentleman's so
we can all agree that the the
lion's share of the cost of
gasoline is absolutely related
to the worldwide price of oil
we've seen worldwide price of
oil madam speaker gentleman's
rise precipitously therefore
reducing the cost of gasoline go
up.
Madam speaker gentleman on my
chart that I have in front of me
here.
it says the next largest share
is twenty seven percent Madam
speaker gentleman that's related
to transportation refining
retailing and profit Madam
speaker and gentleman going down
from there the next largest
share at thirteen percent is the
state excise tax madam speaker
gentleman I'm unfamiliar with
the state excise tax in
California I would bet you
dollars to donuts madam speaker
gentleman's that it's a higher.
Tax rates in the state of New
Mexico Madam speaker gentleman
in descending order.
Federal taxes six percent.
Four percent the other state and
local taxes for forty eight
percent Madam speaker gentleman
at the very bottom of this chart
that I have here
this is sourced to
Dr Severin Borenstein says
triple a and the American
petroleum institute says Dr
Severin Borenstein one percent
of the cost Madam speaker and
gentleman is related to a low
carbon fuel source.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
do you know.
How many.
What percentage of.
Role of crucial.
Is converted to gasoline.
In a refinery today.
Madam speaker Jim and I do not
but I would if you do I would
love to know.
Well it depends on the Nelson
refining index the complexity of
the refinement.
But.
It's going to be.
On West Texas sour probably
sixty five to seventy percent if
they have.
Of the capacity to have
downstream.
Refining and and reformer
capacity and.
Tax records and all that kind of
stuff.
I would tell you.
That.
I I just can't.
Find the word.
Apparently.
To explain to you.
How.
In full.
Regulations like this are to an
industry that is so great.
And our nation.
I hope everyone in these
chambers.
Considers
the immediate impact.
To the families and their
district.
I hope.
Every person in this chamber.
Remembers those thousand people.
That regulations.
Have foster families in the four
corners area.
Madam speaker.
Is climate change.
It's so.
Imminent.
Are we waiting two years to and
to start the process.
The men's figure thank you
gentlemen this is the the the
environmental improvement board
process is a collaborative
stakeholder driven process madam
speaker gentleman's it's a
process that requires
the HSD
in this case the New Mexico
environment department to invest
a great deal of time a great
deal of money a great deal of
collaborative effort in bringing
stakeholders together in order
to
bring together a rule to
implement the delirious does
Madam speaker gentleman and
these pieces are extensive Madam
speaker gentleman these pieces
go out to twenty forty Madam
speaker gentleman these pieces
involved
Giving pathways for
participation from a number of
wide over a I can witness.
Madam speaker of.
Diamond figure gentleman as a
the in addition to.
A collaborative stakeholder
driven process Madam speaker
gentleman there's an extensive
economic analysis the New Mexico
environment department has to
undergo so madam speaker
gentleman's we don't even expect
we we've given that two year
time frame for them to develop
this madam speaker gentleman's
we do expect that that it with
the petitioning for the
environmental improvement board
would
Begin before that two years and
so madam speaker gentleman's
I'm positing.
Starting within a year to say
eighteen months where they go
petitioned the environmental
improvement board
you know save anywhere from
fifty percent to twenty five
percent ahead of schedule madam
speaker gentleman in the worst
case scenario.
Just figure gentleman it brings
us back to the time frames the
time frames are twenty thirty
and twenty forty.
So madam speaker gentleman's.
In order for us to reach that
twenty thirty time frame which
is the twenty percent intensity
reduction which equals five
hundred and seventy thousand
vehicles today's vehicles often
New Mexico's roads cleaner air
madam speaker gentleman's.
I I feel that giving that front
in time to do that collaborative
stakeholder outreach the
economic analysis that front end
work will get to you know have
us in place of state in twenty
twenty five.
Madam speaker gentleman's so
then there's five years madam
speaker gentleman's.
Right as we're seeing a huge
drive pun intended the figure
gentleman towards
electrification.
As we're seeing the Big Five
auto makers begin to go almost
exclusively towards electric
vehicles for instance madam
speaker German so so that twenty
thirty time frame if they we
have those five years we better
for us to put in the work on the
front end to get this right and
to get these reductions madam
speaker gentleman's.
And I deeply appreciate the
question because.
We are seeing the impacts of
catastrophic climate change
madam speaker gentleman's we
have to work against those.
The twenty thirty decade of the
twenty thirty time frame that
this legislation kind of sets
out.
Is a pretty decisive decade
madam speaker gentleman's but we
have these targets to go out the
twenty forty and even twenty
fifty because this is
You know it's a bit of a
marathon I guess in that sense
also madam speaker gentleman's
so we for starting quickly but
but putting in the front and
work madam speaker gentleman's
the economic economic analysis
of the collaborative stakeholder
outreach to get us to the most
efficient system that brings the
most benefits the most
investments the most jobs the
most infrastructure to New
Mexico Madam speaker gentle mun
provides the greatest
environmental Beth budget and
also help to buffer us through a
challenging energy transition
that that man's figure gentlemen
I think we all acknowledge it is
a is a challenging transition.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I'm always tickled about.
Phrases that we use
stakeholder collaborative
effort.
Is that when you call on
together and Telemeds you want
to do.
They don't come.
If if if they needed to do this
on their own they would I mean
the truth of the matter is.
This process is going to be like
the methane process.
Where.
Those industries.
Had no choice but to to come
together.
And we're forced to do
something.
That raise their cost of
operation.
Raise the cost of the end
product to the consumer.
And that's really what happened
that's what we mean when we say
a stakeholder collaborative
effort.
It was an effort where they were
this.
You know Karen the doors down
trying to get in the have a
methane rule.
Would you agree.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen then figure
gentleman I agree that Madam
speaker gentleman.
The the regulatory system that
we have in the state of New
Mexico and throughout the
country in other states as well
madam speaker gentleman's it
You know for a rulemaking it is
absolutely that that the
stakeholders participate for the
I. B. madam speaker gentleman's
I do think it's worth noting for
the body than anybody can
petition the IV in these
rulemakings madam speaker
gentleman's madam speaker
gentleman's I think.
As we look at what's transpired
over these last few years Madam
speaker gentleman we've seen
The return for instance in a
bill that Madam speaker
gentleman I know we unanimously
supported on this house floor
the produced water act then
figure gentleman we saw the
return of penalties in that same
bill.
The authority for the state of
New Mexico to levy penalties on
that actors within
specifically Madam speaker and
gentleman within the oil and gas
industry.
Madam speaker gentleman that
hasn't harmed production.
Madam speaker gentleman in fact
in fact we've seen production
set records for at least the
last three months that I'm aware
of matter speaker and gentleman
we've also seen our New Mexico
regulators do their job madam
speaker gentleman's they've
level you'd well over a million
dollars in fines.
That have brought money back to
the New Mexico treasury helped
clean up.
environmental hazards help
correct actions that were not in
the best interests of New
Mexicans at the same time madam
speaker and gentleman that.
Economic activity.
Oil and natural gas production.
Have increased madam speaker
gentleman's certainly I think we
can agree significantly that's
been driven by price but madam
speaker gentleman's.
In this area I think it's
particularly notable.
In the same time period madam
speaker gentleman's.
That we have gone through gotten
the methane rule madam speaker
gentleman's that we are nearing
the end of the ozone precursor
rule rules madam speaker
gentleman that are setting a
standard to reduce waste reduce
flaring.
Going ahead of the state of
Texas for instance madam speaker
and gentleman the industry Madam
speaker and gentleman has
returned more quickly to New
Mexico.
Following.
The negative zero oil prices the
oil and gas industry returned
more quickly and more
substantially in the state of
New Mexico in fact madam speaker
and gentleman and I know you
know all this I think it's.
It's illustrative for the body
in the same period that the
state of New Mexico said we're
gonna have a bit cleaner a bit
safer environment madam speaker
gentleman's we're going to
support our regulatory agencies
to do their job madam speaker
gentleman's we're going to
restore their ability to levy
fines for bad actors Madam
speaker and gentleman.
During that entire period New
Mexico is the only state where
oil production is not only
return to pre pandemic levels
but now beginning to outstrip
any clips pre pandemic levels
Madam speaker gentleman I think
that speaks.
Entirely madam speaker
gentleman's to something that is
should be
The you know I don't know
inspiring is the right word
although madam speaker Joan and
I think it's pretty close to the
right word that we can say we
need a cleaner healthier safer
environment to empower
regulators health and safety and
madam speaker gentleman's that
the private sector can respond
in innovative ways to raise
economic activity I think it
illustrates perfectly madam
speaker and gentleman in a
period where we've added
increased health and safety
regulations through a multi year
stakeholder process that
included thousands of hours of
input madam speaker gentleman
for we've in.
Then figure gentleman a and I'm
told it was fifteen thousand
hours of collaborative
engagement over that same period
madam speaker and gentleman.
That output has increased
exponentially and in fact
outstripped madam speaker and
gentleman areas of the country
including our neighbors just to
the east it is far surpassed it
is come back to pre pandemic
levels and now equips those so
madam speaker gentleman's.
When we set.
Reachable standards let's take
the methane rule for example
madam speaker gentleman's a
ninety eight percent cap for
rural that's not saying
everything that is saying madam
speaker gentle and we can set a
higher standard that now the
nation is looking to follow we
do it right if we put in that
time if we spend a couple of
years working to get a ride
Madam speaker gentleman it can
also.
and we're both having trouble
with our agency here I've I'm
doing the same thing madam
speaker gentleman's they can
coincide with that increased
economic output.
And madam speaker gentleman's I
think it's it really illustrates
well.
That right sort of balance madam
speaker gentleman's this piece
of legislation relies heavily on
those regulators and that
approach that.
On I would say entrepreneurial
approach to working with
stakeholders setting strong
standards no doubt that are tied
to clear environmental benefits
the madam speaker gentleman's
those are health benefits that's
less has not less respiratory
disease X. cetera.
It's also critically important
madam speaker gentleman that
more investment is flowing.
Towards lower carbon intensity.
Better yes C. environmental
social governance sorts of
businesses that's where capital
is flowing that's where jobs are
being created madam speaker
gentleman we need more energy
Madam speaker gentleman for
being told with consensus across
the board madam speaker
gentleman's the leading
scientists with energy companies
whether those energy companies
are oil and gas producer's wind
and solar geo thermal all three
at once.
The the leading scientists in
those companies much less madam
speaker and gentleman folks in
our own state.
Are saying that we have to
reduce this car these carbon
emissions we have to reduce its
carbon intensity or the extreme
weather events that we're seeing
the.
You know the longer periods of
drought of of and madam speaker
gentleman to be to illustrate it
a Rio Grande river that dries up
sooner madam speaker gentleman's
where you can go fishing in
Santa casa for catfish like I
also grew up doing madam speaker
and gentleman when that stretch
of the river started drying up
because there's less snow packed
that snowpack melted sooner not
to mention madam speaker
gentleman's the Rio Grande river
that flows for maybe two or
three months out of the entire
year in some areas madam speaker
gentleman's below elephant Butte
pass the community that I
represent because there's just
not enough water.
So madam speaker gentleman's I
think we've shown in New Mexico
over this period that we can be
cleaner we can be safer and we
can see economic opportunity
grow during that same time the
low carbon fuel that this clean
fuel standard.
takes that simple and and pushes
it forward in the area of
transportation.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
You do a good job.
Telling the story that I don't
believe.
And I don't mean that
disrespectfully.
I appreciate the the debate.
I think you.
Have.
I think that bill I shouldn't
say you know I think that bill
misses the point of the impact
on families of New Mexico.
You talk about.
Things.
And jobs.
And processes.
As if they're going to be an
immediate.
The.
But I in no.
I know.
It's gonna drive the prices.
I know without a doubt in my
mind.
That people on fixed incomes in
New Mexico will have less for
anything else they wanted to
because of their energy prices.
I know.
That since we started some of
these other activities.
I haven't seen.
Electrical prices go down I have
seen them continue to go up.
And they're going to continue to
go up.
As long as we pass the
regulatory burdens like this.
People in New Mexico.
Will have a lower standard of
living.
To support.
This type of initiative.
I recently.
Ran a poll in the in the greater
Albuquerque area.
And one of the questions well
us.
Equal amounts of Republicans
Democrats and independents.
Across across the spectrum.
One of the questions was.
Do you believe.
You should pay a higher cost the
public interest city Iowa a lot
higher cost of energy.
To meet the governor's mandates.
Eighty five point one percent of
the people that responded said
no.
When I looked at that in detail
and said the movie isn't.
More Republicans Democrats are
aiming how how did that work.
They were almost equal.
The independence were higher
than the Republicans and the
Democrats in saying no.
You know as well as I do.
That this type of legislation.
Will raise the price of energy.
It has no what I mean you can't.
It has to go to the end consumer
R. A. and they have no choice.
We see what happened in
California.
There's a reason.
Their gasoline costs a Buck and
a half more than it does in
Arizona.
There was some folks out there
that thought they had it all
figured out and they came up
with the carb filled formula.
Cost more infrastructure.
Harder byrd  harder to produce.
More expensive to produce.
And gentleman.
It hurts the people that we try
to surf.
I think our job is legislators.
Is to listen to the people that
we serve.
And when we do this.
And we lay off people.
We because people in remote
rural areas.
To spend more of their.
Income.
On fuel taking away.
From the many other issues that
they Stanley's today.
I don't think we're doing our
job.
Especially when we can't even
calculate the benefit other than
saying well I know it's got to
be better because of.
Paris accord  said it had to be
better or somebody else from a
far away place.
We have to do better than that.
Madam speaker.
I'm pretty passionate about
these kind of things.
Because I know.
That hurts our families I see it
all the time.
I represent a very rural
districts.
In fuel prices are darn
important to.
The pulling cornucopia mountains
don't.
Think about anything other than
the price of fuel.
The people and we New Mexico.
Do the same thing.
They don't care about California
says.
They don't care what New York
says they worry about what's in
their bank account and had
effects are families.
That's what we ought to do.
I asked the body to think
seriously.
About this legislation and what
effect it will have on the
families that you
representative.
Don't believe for a minute this
will raise the price of their
fuel.
Don't believe for a minute.
It won't lower their standard of
living.
It will.
Madam speaker.
This call on the house and have
everybody in.
Thank you.
I'm receiving telepathic
information from seven members
of the house.
That they want to call I'm not
seeing any hands seven people
okay there we go.
Started our arms.
Please call the house.
Spoken with the leader Townsend
we are waiting to members we're
awaiting Representative
Strickler Representative Chasey
Representative Townsend has
Withdrawn his call of the house
and he'll take a couple minutes
to finish is debate and then we
will go to the gentleman from
Dona Ana to close is that
correct John.
Yes.
Yes okay.
Gentleman from Chavis enteric.
Thank you madam.
Madam speaker Mr speaker I
apologize.
Ladies and gentleman.
The bill for us tonight.
Raises the price of gasoline and
diesel.
In your community.
Estimated.
Based on.
California credits today.
Of about twenty five to fifty
cents a gallon.
I suspect you will hear.
The environmental impacts.
Are worse.
And I think you should think
about the people in your
community.
And wonder.
How the expect you to vote
tonight.
Do they want you to raise the
price of gasoline.
Twenty five to fifty cents a
gallon.
I know what mine the.
They say no.
And they say no because this
measure.
The night.
Does not do one thing for global
warming.
Does not do one thing for the
vast majority of families thanks
that will lower their standard
of living.
We have twenty percent.
Of our seniors that live at
poverty levels.
And almost forty percent of our
seniors are raising grandkids.
On fixed incomes.
Too many of our.
Rural.
New Mexicans.
Will be disproportionately.
Will be disproportionately
harmed.
By this legislation.
But because people in rural New
Mexico burn more fuel.
They have to go farther to go to
the store to go to the doctor
tended to go to work.
I believe ladies and gentleman
that.
I'm gonna vote for my
constituents.
I'm not gonna vote for a.
California standard or.
Some environmental.
Activists that.
Proposes things that he can't
even calculate and tell you
about the impacts are.
I appreciate the debate Sir.
I'd appreciate I appreciate.
The consideration.
And I believe that the people in
New Mexico deserve for us to do
the right thing.
And to do but affects them
today.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentleman the gentleman from
Dona Ana to close.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker body what we have
before us is a jobs and economy
bill Mr speaker and gentleman
this is estimated to bring
nearly half a billion dollars by
twenty thirty sixteen hundred a
permanent jobs madam speaker
gentleman's twenty three hundred
construction jobs two hundred
and fifty million dollars Mr
speaker and body in
infrastructure investment Mr
speaker body this fall by twenty
thirty take the equivalent of
five hundred seventy thousand
cars often New Mexico's roads
creating cleaner air a safer
environment for New Mexicans
helping us deal with the reality
of climate change Mr speaker and
body.
If we would go back to the
gentleman from Travis Lee and at
ease.
Point remove all environmental
rules go back to leaded gasoline
and other approaches.
Mr speaker and by both sides
have no displays like that
during debate and force it
earlier on this side of the
aisle I would appreciate the
same respect for the body from
the side thank you very much Jim
if you thank you Mr speaker and
thank you body and so I think
we've proven and we know that
cleaner and safer call in size
with a stronger growing economy
with more jobs more investment
it's not how New Mexico has to
go it is what the investment in
infrastructure is happening all
over the country mastered Mr
speaker and body this bill
positions New Mexico for
economic benefits for
environmental benefits and so
with that Mr speaker body I
would move that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
taxed business committee
substitute for Senate bill
fourteen has twice amended do
now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate taxation
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen as amended the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes no
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash foods
yes Representative Buka.
Yes Representative will go both
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Chasey.
Yes Representative Chasey both
yes Representative Cook.
Representative Cook foods No
Representative Fajardo.
No Representative Fajardo votes
no Representative Harry Garcia.
Who Representative Harry Garcia
votes no Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
those less yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente both no
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Lundstrom both no
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes no
Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya
votes no Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative
Strickler.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo both
yes.
Those close by one of thirty
three in the affirmative thirty
three in the negative Senate
finance committees sub two
percent taxation and revenue
revenue committee substitute for
Senate bill fourteen as amended
has failed to pass the house.
Yes.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I will go
to the next order of business
messages.
No objection it is so ordered.
It is ordered to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed house bill thirty nine
house bill sixty two as amended
by the house house bill one oh
two as amended by the house
house bill one of four as
amended by the house house bill
one forty four as amended by the
house House Energy Environment
natural resources committee says
to the house bill one sixty
four.
Holly's me yourself if you're in
zoom we hear something.
Every turn same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Mr chair.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed house bill seventy three
as amended by the house and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
Mrs will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed house bill forty three as
amended by the house House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one thirty four
as amended by the house house
bill one forty eight House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to nineteen house
joint memorial one and returned
same here with respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk message we
entered.
The Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed house bill
fifteen as amended by the house
and further amended by the
Senate house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bills sixty
A. as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty three of the
minute by the house of further
amended by the Senate house bill
one seventy one as amended by
the house and for the amended by
the Senate and requests the
concurrence of the house to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk message will
be entered General formerly of
thank you Mr speaker and we'll
go to the next order of business
concurrence no objections order
members of direct your attention
to item number three.
This is the concurrence vote on
the Senate amendments house
taxation and revenue committee
says to for us to one sixty
three is amended gentlelady from
Los Alamos to make a motion.
Mr speaker thank you Mr speaker
I move that house concur with
the Senate amendments to.
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty three.
Gentlelady to explain the Senate
amendments.
Senate amendments do three
things one they create though
what we might call a hold
harmless for certain communities
who did not implement the tax
increments that we're allowed
pursuant to the last told
harmless activity prior to my
arrival in the house here it
changes the child income tax
credit.
By delaying its implementation
for one year but it extends the
by nine years it creates a sense
of that is nine years and it
imposes a.
G. R. T. right decrease.
But it does so and and stuff in
increments of one eighth one
year this coming year and the
one I the next coming here and
there also is a trigger Mr
speaker.
It looks like there's debate the
gentleman percent of all.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield Mister speaker gentleman
from Santa Fe yield thank you Mr
and thank you gentle lady.
I'm familiar with the amendments
that were made in the Senate
Judiciary our Senator finance
committee Mr daily I I hear a
couple differences here were
some amendments made on the
floor.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
From Santa this bill yes I
believe it's somewhat different
Mr speaker Tallman then what
what was what occurred and
Senate finance.
Mr gradually thank you and I'm
noticing just the two
differences here there were not
mentioned as one make sure that.
These changes are.
He either in or out the the
first one was we had included a
freebie for nurses that work in
a hospital in New Mexico for
thirty years or more we can in
the in the last year Mr really
that was not that was stripped
out and Senate finance to the
add that back in on the floor.
Mr speaker gentleman from Santa
yes they read we put in the
nurse's and I want to add
something for the body if I may
Mr speaker and gentleman and
that is they also provided I
can't believe I forgot this
rebates
that have a means test and that
occurred in the Senate finance
as well as on the floor.
the speaker and gently thank you
yes
That's my recollection as well
and I'm glad you brought that up
thank you and then the other the
other change that I noticed
speaker gentle lady I believe
the Senate finance committee
stripped the acceleration of the
new sustainable building
but I didn't hear you mention
them spiritually said is that
mean that again on the floor
they put that back in one year
celebration.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa yes they put it back in.
Okay so madam speaker and for Mr
speaker and gentle lady I
believe that covers everything
here that I've seen and so the
big difference
just kind of the the top little
difference between what we
passed to hear out of the house
and what was in the Senate.
The point two five percent
reduction in the gross receipts
tax right now occurs over two
years and aids and aids and
still maintains the trigger and
I see you nodding your.
had
the speaker internally and then
the the second the end.
Is a child tax credit that we
had passed out here.
Doesn't take effect this year
but next year the speakers only
and this of a five year sunset
the extended that out nine years
speaker and gentle lady is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa yes all right and then the
last is the Mr speaker gentle
lady they included a.
A personal income tax rebate.
that only occurs once and
there's a means test to that can
speaker and gently can you just
describe exactly how
how that works.
I think we've I think that we've
covered what what actually
happened.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe I believe you got it
and I would point out it is
essentially our bill would with
the addition of the rebate and
the hold harmless and with the
kind of push out of the child
income tax credit so it's
essentially are built with a few
things that I am spiritually
thank you and can you just
describe how this rebate works.
Yes Mr speaker gentleman it
provides a one year non
recurring personal income tax
rebate.
in the amount of two hundred and
fifty dollars for single and
married filing separate returns
filers with an adjusted gross
income of seventy five thousand
dollars or less and five hundred
dollars for married filing joint
returns within AGI
less than a hundred fifty
thousand.
Madam speaker and Mr speaker and
gentle lady thank you for that.
And then I guess the last thing
I'll just mention at the fifty
thousand foot view.
the bill as it passed out of the
house had a.
Nonrecurring costs this FY of
about sixteen and a half
million.
And a reoccurring about three or
twenty three hundred seventy two
million for a total of three
hundred Turner and eighty four
but that is very different now
based on these changes in the
Senate.
The reoccurring a nonrecurring
from the Senate instead of the
sixteen million is now three
hundred thirty eight million
spiritually that's because of
the personal.
income tax credit and it's
actually probably a little bit
more because of the nurses
credit we pointed at about nine
million to that number but it's
a it's a big change going from
about sixteen million to roughly
three hundred and.
Fifty million non recurring.
but in looking at FY twenty two.
it looks more similar to our
bill we had a a nonrecurring
about nine million and then a
for recurring about three
percent to six million.
the Senate version it's a.
FY twenty four zero dollar
nonrecurring and just three
hundred eighty million dollar
recurring speaker Joe is that is
that a doctor right of those
numbers maybe slightly different
but these are the big changes
Mr speaker gentleman from Santa
roughly that's right the we we
were talking small differences
okay speaker gently thank you I
just want to make sure.
I had I had all that correct and
I appreciate
again your efforts representing
the house.
And and
And standing for for those
things that we have passed out
of here.
I understand of course the
Senate you know it's their
prerogative to make some changes
Madam speaker internally but I
just want to thank you for your
efforts on this thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman we
had next to the gentleman from
curry thank you Mr Spiegel
gentlelady please you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry I yield to the gentle
gentle lady can go a little bit
deeper into the
hold harmless phase out or
revenue impact by municipality
can you talk a little bit more I
don't fully understand exactly
what they did or on the Senate
side.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from curry I'll do my best
so what it does is it.
Basically the percentage of hold
harmless based on the.
Poverty level that is been
determined by someone and I'm
sure it's in the bill
as to what percentage of.
Distribution they will get so if
if a community is a hundred
percent has a hundred is that a
hundred percent of the poverty
level state would get.
A hundred percent of what they
would have been entitled to and
hold harmless payments and it
ratchets down based on the
poverty level of the particular
community.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
jealousy there's ten communities
listed on the table that they've
provided.
And it it it appears on this
list that of these two and none
of them have implemented any of
their one eight increments the
state of all just tried to make
their way without raising the
that one eight.
It also appears I don't see any
of a hundred percent but there
are.
For Las Vegas for tell us
Gallup.
That are at an eighty percent
poverty level.
And then they have a chart that
goes on so it gentle lady
for that are the freezing it
where it is and now.
And I think we're seven or eight
years into the phase out it was
a fifteen year phase out sort of
the freezing at where they are
now are they go back to square
one eight point zero into the
freezing it there were exactly
are the freezing the hold
harmless phase out Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker.
As I interpret the state are
freezing it at where they are
now at now and then phasing out
from there.
Okay so from this point forward
they would continue to receive
the same amount of reimbursement
back from the state on their G.
R. T. as if they had
tax on food or medical supplies.
at the rate they are as of right
now the effective date of this
which is probably.
July first I would assume is
a fair statement of Mister
speaker July.
Actually Mr speaker gentleman if
you look at the chart the the
numbers.
Change.
In an upward way but stopped at
FY twenty twenty six.
Thank you Mr speaker Dilek it
may have just a moment to
consult with my analyst Phillip
excellent.
Thank you gently.
Gentleman from curry would like
us to come back.
Pardon Mr speaker.
Gentleman here it's it's
somewhat unusual for member to
take a long time preparing to
ask questions would you like us
to come back to you Sir.
Mr speaker the come okay I
appreciate the time I I did it's
a difficult chart to understand
I think even the gentle lady
presenting is having a difficult
time understanding is so but I
think we're there and I think it
is a good thing so
but they come okay thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
very good John thank you very
much the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
A couple of questions.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee
yes.
Speaker gentle lady.
So the whole the whole this is a
percentage of the current
percentage.
The current percentage is fixed.
from here forward.
Mr speaker gentleman looking at
page six on of the bill.
what it says is for this year
it's at forty nine percent.
For next year it's at forty two
percent and it ratchets down to
fourteen it's cetera in zero by
July one twenty twenty nine.
Thank you for that what is the
total.
Reduction in this bill as
compared to the house version
please.
Mr speaker don't I'm not sure I
understand the question I don't
believe we had of a house
version of this whole the hold
harmless provision.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sorry
I have changed courses on user.
Without without any advance
notice the total value of the
tax package in the house version
forces the total value of the
tax package in the Senate
version please.
Mr speaker gentleman very good
question my recollection is that
for this year.
At the recurring amount was
approximately three hundred and
eighty million for recurring and
that's a rough number and for
this package Mr speaker
gentleman firmly it's five
hundred and thirty eight million
roughly.
for the nonrecurring my
recollection is it was
approximately maybe sixteen
million non recurring and that's
for us and for this version it's
five hundred almost six million.
So Mister speaker July.
Substantial increases pretty
much across the board with the.
Yes in a sense that if I may
make offer this modification of
what I said.
Three hundred and thirty seven
six hundred dollars.
Is a nonrecurring.
Of the five hundred and thirty
eight so there's five hundred
and thirty plus dollars Mr
speaker gentleman three hundred
thirty seven of those
approximately are nonrecurring
that is the rebate Mr speaker
and gentleman so that obviously
raises the number for this year
but then it drops substantially
the following year.
So in terms of and this is
perhaps Miner and reading the
chart there's three hundred and
thirty seven six hundred
nonrecurring.
For this year FY twenty three.
And the total is five hundred
thirty eight million eight
hundred fifteen.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
lord for that answer.
The child tax credit.
From left to pay for all of your
credit has now been extended out
to ten years Representative
Ecker.
Mr speaker Jim I believe it's
nine years but.
Yes and I would point out it
starts next year Mr speaker
gentleman not this year.
This time shift.
Thank you Jen Leasure
freelancers there's further
debate the gentle lady from
grant had all go and Sierra
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady old.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
granted they'll go yes I will
you thank you thank you very
much
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
lady one of the things that I
noticed was the change in the G.
R. T. rate reduction and I just
wanted to make sure that I'm
understanding this correctly
correctly the G. R. T.
reduction is it it's twelve it
is now twelve point five cents
on a hundred dollars is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady the G. R.
T. reduction is one ace so if
you've done the math I'll accept
whatever you said Mr speaker Jim
thank thank you Mr speaker so
the the and and and that's
twelve and a half cents on a
hundred dollars in year one and
then in here too moving forward.
It's then twice that so twenty
five cents on a hundred dollars
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
there any is there any other
present provision besides the
five percent change in the G. R.
T..
That that would stop this.
G. R. T. of reduction.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
If you're referring to the
trigger if there's anything else
other than the trigger now
unless the legislature chooses
to do something else next year
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentle lady so could
you explain what the trigger is
just to make sure that you seem
to question that so please
clarify for me I thought I had
it right
the trigger is ma'am Mr speaker
gentle lady if G. R. T. tax
revenues dropped by more than
five percent it will go back to
the original.
tax rate thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady do you
know what percentage of our
budget of the G. R. T. comes
from oil and gas.
Madam speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady that's okay
I mean yes
on the nurses credits of it is
that stuff still a thousand
dollars I'm sorry I don't I
don't have the documents you for
me so I'm just trying to
understand yes I was just
speaker gentle lady is that the
tax credit is a thousand dollars
and can you describe to me what
nurses are eligible.
Mr speaker gentle lady I will
but I'll point out it's not
different from what we already
passed but I'm happy to thank
comedies to questions yes and
that is it's a thousand dollars
just one time this year for
nurses who work in hospitals in
the past year.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
the military pension in there
and if so could you explain the
provisions Madam speaker you Mr
speaker generally it's the same
as what we passed and truthfully
for on concurrent so thank you
thank you Mr speaker and
thanking the gentle lady and how
about the whether any changes to
our suggests our compromise on
the exemptions of security tax
or changes in eligibility Mr
speaker gentle lady now.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and
So there was no change to the
nurses tax credit and who is
eligible.
Mr speaker gentle lady not to my
knowledge so if if you have
something you wish to share
happy to listen no no Mr speaker
No gentle lady I don't I don't I
I just I I I would just want to
make sure that they were we.
Not that I agree but it had
limited to certain types of
nurses who had worked during the
pandemic or had done certain
things and and not all nurses
would be eligible that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady correct
it's what we had in our regional
bill thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady.
So on the do we make any changes
on the the.
The solar market credit other
than the extension.
Mr speaker gentle lady now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
whether any changes made to the
US sustainable building credit
Mr speaker gentle lady now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
that those dollars are still
there after the concurrence
we're still giving you credit
for the sustainable building.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Yes they did not change that.
Mr speaker Julie who qualifies
for the rebate and how did they
qualify.
Mr speaker gentle lady
it right rebate is based on
income for
those filing separately or
married filing separately the
means test is seventy five
thousand and the amount is two
hundred and fifty dollars.
And for those with an AGI of a
hundred and fifty thousand the
rebate is five hundred dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and nothing prohibits them
from also receiving the
children's tax credit or.
Is that.
Actually Mr speaker gentle lady
they don't overlap as I noted Mr
speaker gentle lady the child
tax credit is pushed out one
year so this year we're
providing families with rebates.
Next year the child income tax
credit
we've got begins to be
implemented thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gently.
Thanks to the Johnson you grant
and Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady please yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
grant yes.
Thank you madam speaker Mr
speaker gentle lady
so one of my concerns because of
military Veterans Affairs
Committee is is because it's
going to affect our our veterans
and and so I remember that
there's or I.
Correct me if I'm wrong was
there a.
Are there any changes to the
military retirement income
exemption from Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman on.
Yes I think I've said no that
would they maintain what we had
in our original bill Mr speaker
gentleman I'm sorry more of Mr
speaker gentle lady I didn't
hear you say that I apologize so
thank you very much as late in
and so I didn't I didn't get
that militarily Mr speaker
gentleman for us.
Of the them but I know.
A little but we got a quick
everybody's tired so thank you
and I apologize for the thank
you Mr speaker the motion before
the body is to concur in the
Senate amendments to house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty three as amended the
gentle lady has urged the body
to vote yes all those in favor
of concurring in the Senate and
managements to house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill one sixty three
is amended please signify by
saying I.
Is nay.
Really.
The eyes have it the house has
concurred.
To the Senate amendments to
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty three as amended.
Next we will go to.
Item two gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
To make a motion.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with the Senate
amendments.
To.
House bill sixty oak effect
that's.
Just a second we need to change
this up on the board.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with the Senate
amendments to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill Sixtyeight as three times
amended related to explain the
minutes.
Mr speaker.
The Senate has provided us with
a number of amendments to
consider
that I.
Respectfully request the body of
a concur with so in order to
provide everyone with a full
assessment of the changes.
I'll go through them section by
section.
And this so.
Mr speaker and members.
what the Senate has done with
their amendments is they have
made this into a very robust and
comprehensive crime bill an
omnibus package that really
addresses some of the prevention
measures that we have talked
about
Measures that will help ensure
swift and certain justice by
supporting the recruitment and
retention of our law enforcement
officers
They have also included some of
the grant funds and violence
intervention programs the that
we deliberated about on this
for.
And they have
Added some additional penalties
that we also discussed about on
this floor including increasing
the state or eliminating.
The statute of limitations for
second degree murder.
They have added that.
They have also
Insure that we are now creating
a new crime for threatening
judges so they have made sure
that that is part of this
package as well.
Mr speaker and members
beginning with section one they
have modified and added the
distribution of law enforcement
recruitment and retention funds.
Section two is an addition and
it is New Mexico law enforcement
standards and training council.
That attach is a newly formed
New Mexico law enforcement
standards and training council
to the executive.
In section three.
They have increased supplemental
death benefits from two hundred
and fifty thousand to one
million dollars for our law
enforcement officers who.
Are killed in the line of duty
and I do recall that that was
something debated here on the
floor as well four of interest
to our body.
section four is the New Mexico
Law Enforcement the creation of
that standards and training
council.
Mr speaker and members section
five sets forth the powers and
duties of that council.
Section six.
And members there's a little bit
of activity here in about eight
and a half minutes we're gonna
take a four minute pause because
our webcast the server reboots
every day at the same time we
will not do any business during
that period will stand third
reading will just stand in place
while the server reboots and
then we will resume wherever we
were we paused for the server.
Reboot.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
please proceed.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
are to continue along with the
summary of the changes of the
amendments from the Senate
section.
in.
Section seven
Was deleted so I apologize so
section eight is the New Mexico
law enforcement officer training
discussion of that.
Section eight is the removal of
the director
the provisions on how the
director might be removed by the
secretary.
Section nine Mr speaker Madam
speaker and members is the
definition of the New Mexico law
enforcement officer training.
Section two ten is New Mexico
law enforcement officer training
reporting.
If section eleven Madam speaker
and members is the
certification by waiver
provision.
Section twelve madam speaker and
members is how the fund is
created for the New Mexico law
enforcement officer training.
Section thirteen madam speaker
members is the certification
board duties followed by section
fourteen it's providing the
definitions and section fifteen
the law enforcement officer
training for basic tell us.
I don't think it's telecommuters
training.
Pardon me while I check that
word.
Madam speaker and members I
apologize it's tele communicator
not telecommuters.
That that makes a lot of sense
right now.
you madam speaker and members
are pardon me we have quite a
few changes yet to go so please
bear with me.
Madam speaker and members
section sixteen deals with the
minimum training required for
certification.
Seventeen section seventeen and
eighteen also deal with some
additional reporting and
certifications.
Then it madam speaker and
members section nineteen
continues with the public safety
telecommuters tele communicator
training.
And our here we go a different
section.
Members and madam speaker
section twenty talks about the
law enforcement protection fund
now this is actually not a new
concept in is actually a an
issue that a number of folks in
this house did try to address
with some of the bills that had
been introduced.
So folks should actually be
quite familiar with the law
enforcement protection fund and
so section twenty.
To set forth some of the
language.
How about the creation of it and
section twenty one is the
definition of needs and rates of
distributions now Madam speaker
and members what has happened is
the Senate has amended the bill
to increase not only the death
benefit should a law enforcement
officer be killed in the line of
duty but they are also
increasing the disbursements for
our law enforcement training and
equipment.
Moving along to section twenty
three here's another new section
folks not previously in house
bill sixty eight but madam
speaker and members you probably
will recall this.
The.
Language has it is eliminating
these
Sorry I forgot the word that
statute of limitations for
second degree murder.
Moving on to section twenty four
this is a new language for folks
here in the house that are not
on Senate are on House Judiciary
madam speaker and members this
section section twenty four that
sets up a shooting threat.
A similar to what we did discuss
here in the house but slightly
different.
Madam speaker and members moving
on to twenty section twenty five
this is actually part of the
original bill.
now the Senate.
Did in fact make a couple of
changes to some of the
provisions that one over in
house bill sixty eight and so
I'll tell you what those are.
With this first section twenty
five madam speaker and members
that actually is original the
language that we sent over but
then in section twenty six for
the possession and
transportation of firearm by
felon the Senate did make a
modification here and madam
speaker and members what they
did was they actually have
slightly reduced to the penalty
gentlelady from Bernalillo I'm
sorry have we have to pause for
a moment the rounds of several.
