to read.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 1 has
had it under consideration and
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Movements, move
approval, Mr. Speaker. We're in
motion we're in adoption of
final committee report for House
Bill 1. All those in favor I
say.
wasn't he? The eyes have it can
report an update lady from
Bernallio. Mr. Speaker, it now
being 11:59 a.m. I move we
adjourn until 12:01 p.m. How
will come to order?
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and the journal show
that all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon's session. It is
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revisions and
approval of the rules and order
of business committee. It is so
ordered.
General leader from Berliu.
Mr. Speaker, I move to go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation. The
objection is ordered.
The direct reflect that election
is necessary for replacing House
Bill 1 on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
The general to explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
will introduce the bill, and I
am going to uh ask my co-sponsor
to address one of the sections
of House Bill 1.
The um
As you know, this is called the
feed bill generally that this is
an executive agency. Excuse me,
it's a general appropriations
Act because it appropriates to
all three branches of
government.
In
Uh, the first section we fund
the um legis special legislative
session, all of the, um,
The what is needed for the um
operation, the staff, and so
forth, and we use the
legislative cash balances for
that.
And in the section 2 is the
executive agency appropriation,
and this one contains several
items, and the first one is $100
million to the Indian Affairs
department for the Mescalero
Apache Tribe. This money reverts
at the end of fiscal year 25, so
it's for about 1 year. The quick
timeline ensures that the
funding is used for immediate
urgent and quickly deployable
relief for the.
community. I want to give uh
yield to my co-sponsor
Representative, the gentleman
from Lincoln County to explain
that particular item.
Thank you gentle lady. The
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Vincent, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. This is gentle
lady Yie.
Oh, Mr. Speaker, I do.
Thank you, gentle lady. So on
the 10 million for Mescalero, so
that is going to be a grant and
what I wanted to explain to the
body is that that particular
grant means that we've got an
agreement with them that they
are not going to apply for the
70 million, so they're just
gonna take the, the, uh, 10
million, and they're going to uh
utilize that money and draw down
on that. The 70 million will be
Before, uh, Ridoso Ridoso Downs.
And Lincoln County.
The gentleman, do you yield
back?
Yes, sir.
lady from Berlio. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentlemen
from Lincoln. Uh, section B.
Um, section 2 is $10,000 for the
Department of Energy, Minerals
and natural resources for the
fiscal year 2025 for wildfire
mitigation, watershed
restoration, slope
stabilization, erosion control,
and post fire management. We
learned from both the Hermit's
Peak and Calf Canyon fires that
starting these services as soon
as possible is critical. So and
I want to make note of the fact
that this portion of the funding
is available statewide.
Section C, appropriates $100
million for the Homeland
Security Emergency Management
department in consultation with
the superintendent of insurance
for fiscal years 25 and 26 to
provide on the ground support to
individuals and businesses in
filing for both private and
public assistance.
The department already has a
strong footprint in these
communities, and this will allow
them to increase these services.
Um,
As with um.
Section B.
This, um,
Funding is statewide.
In section D, $70 million is
appropriated to the board of
Finance for zero interest
reimbursable loans to political
subdivisions for fire and
flooding damage attributable to
the salt and South Fork fires.
This the board of Finance has
the flexibility to distribute
emergency funding to local
governments and to determine
flexible repayment options,
including potential forgiveness
of loans. So the board has done
creative loan solutions in the
past.
And much is determined by rule.
The legislature could come back
in the 60 day 2025 session.
And permit loan forgiveness for
the 25% local match if needed.
In section 3, there is the
appropriation to the judiciary.
$30.
The administrative office of the
courts for assisted outpatient.
Treatment and competency
diversion programs.
The administrative office of the
courts has outlined a plan that
would provide support to the
areas with the most capacity and
ability to support those
programs, including the first,
the 2nd, the 3rd, the 5th, and
12th judicial districts.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I'm
available for questions.
All right, there is a beat. The
gentleman from Otero represented
the block.
Thank you so much Mr. Speaker,
with the gentle lady from Berna
Leo, please yield. I yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady, and I appreciate
the uh the information about
your bill, and I think it's
important that some of these
hinge on crime, and I think
crime is why we're all here
today, Mr. Speaker. You know, we
as a body, uh, at least me
myself as a legislator and many
of my colleagues, we came here
looking to help fix the crime
issue.
We came with solutions, a crime
package, and we're looking, Mr.
Speaker, for results for New
Mexicans and.
It's, it's fortunate to see on
the governor's proclamation, Mr.
Speaker, she did put fentanyl on
there and we, we're happy to see
that because that's a huge
problem in our state.
Through the southern border,
Chinese fentanyl is coming to to
kill children.
Kill people all across our
state.
In the thousands and this is an
epidemic, Mr. Speaker.
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have a
amendment.
To the legislation.
And I'm ready to give you the
202 whenever, but I would like a
roll anything
including us.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I
apologize. I will have our uh
colleague do that. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
And I would like to request a
roll call vote on that.
You got the roll call.
Has the amendment been passed
out on the floor? Everybody have
it.
Gentlemen, would you like to
read the 228 number?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, happy
to. The 228 number is 228-727.1,
Mr. Speaker. That's what we
have, um.
And would you like to explain
the amendment?
Of course, Mr. Speaker, I'll be
brief. So Mr. Speaker, this
amendment essentially does one
thing. And so in the legislation
on page 1 line 16, it, it
changes essentially the title of
the legislation.
And then it also on page 4 adds
some language, putting $10,000
appropriated from the general
fund, Mr. Speaker, in the FY
2025 for border security along
the New Mexico, Mexico border,
including the purchase,
installation and maintenance of
electronic surveillance
equipment necessary to expand
and improve state and local
government, law enforcement
interdiction efforts to stop the
trafficking of fentanyl. So Mr.
Speaker, this amendment is very
straight.
It's what places like the state
of California, the state of
Arizona are doing to apprehend
the deadly flow of Chinese
fentanyl into their states. And
so what we would be doing here
is to be helping New Mexico
apprehend these bad actors who
are hurting and killing New
Mexicans. This would give more
security to that area to help
stop the deadly flow of
fentanyl, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, point of order.
your point. Um, Article 4,
Section 6, regarding special
sessions, extraordinary
sessions, reads that special
sessions are of the legislature,
maybe called by the governor,
but no business shall be
transacted except such as
relates to the objects specified
in this proclamation. Mr.
Speaker, this goes outside the
confines of the proclamation,
um, and is not germane. Mr.
Speaker, point of order.
Stand by
General lady, um, so it is your,
is it your interpretation that
these that this amendment is not
germane? Correct, Mr. Speaker,
I'm happy to provide more detail
if needed.
And Mr. Speaker, this is
debatable.
Well, hold on a second, uh,
gentleman from Botero.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to
Put the attention to the gentle
lady, to the actual proclamation
that we're speaking of, and I
agree with the statute that she
did indeed cite, but if you read
the proclamation, which is on
everyone's desk, on the 7th
paragraph in the where paragraph
in the whereas it says whereas
hundreds of New Mexicans die of
drug overdoses every year, many
of which are the result of the
widespread availability of
fentanyl.
A powerful synthetic opioid to
the 50 times stronger than
heroin. So therefore, Mr.
Speaker, I would contend that
this is literally what is in the
proclamation.
Gentleman from San Juan.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is, that
is exactly the point of the
proclamation that I was going to
point you to as well. Uh, the
governor did put uh fentanyl and
trying to make fentanyl a of
larger concern and something
that we needed to deal with. She
did put that on the um on the
call, but since we are not
hearing those bills and likely
only going to hear this one bill
today, um, we believe that since
it is in the govern.
call and and since the feed bill
which you.
No, my objection to putting
anything in the feed bill that
is other than paying for the
legislative session.
Um, I believe this is the only
opportunity we have to address
this one item that is on the
governor's call and so Mr.
Speaker, once again I would
point to the proclamation and uh
I believe that this is very
germane and Mr. Speaker, more
than that, I think this is the
one thing that we could do here
today that would actually
address one of the major
concerns that we have in New
Mexico right now, which is the
free flow of fentanyl on our
streets. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Um, I've
been very clear members.
About the fact that we are cou
branches of government, the
executive and the legislative
and the judiciary, of course,
uh, and I'm not going to try and
interpret um what is not in
front of me on paper in this
mission, so my ruling is that it
is not germane.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. You know,
it's, it's unfortunate.
That this has occurred when Mr.
Speaker, the entire reason we're
here is to address the crime
issue, to address the deadly
fentanyl that's killing our
kids.
To help alleviate some of the
hurt and some of the pain, Mr.
Speaker, that people are
suffering today because of the
loss of loved ones.
The lack of resources.
The continued
Ability to walk outside and
maybe not come home that night.
And so Mr. Speaker, it's it's
unfortunate that
It's not Jermaine.
That we would address this
issue.
And I'll leave it at that.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to
appeal the ruling of the chair
and I'd like to have a voice
vote.
I mean, roll call vote, Mr.
Speaker, I believe that we have,
we can call in question the
ruling of the chair, and we are
going to ask for that, and I
asked for a roll call vote. OK.
Uh, give us a minute to make
sure that the board operators
get the
Uh, proper motion on the board.
All members the question.
Before us,
Is whether or not the ruling of
the chair will be sustained. A
vote of yes and my ruling will
be upheld, a vote of no, and it
will be overturned.
Everybody got it, Mr. Speaker,
point of order really quick if
possible, please. Go ahead,
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um,
actually, I just wanted to bring
to your attention that amending,
uh, certain procedures and
requirements relating
Uh, to criminal competency laws
amending the definitions of harm
to self and harm to others in
mental health and development
disabilities code and the
assisted opioid Treatment Act.
No.
The $3 million dollar
appropriation to AOC.
That doesn't authorize that.
Either, just wanted to bring
that to your attention, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, lady.
A vote yes and my ruling would
be sustained. It a vote of no
and the ruling will be
overturned.
The vote
Is now open.
Well,
Well, it's about to close.
It was not closed by vote of 43
in the affirmative, 21 in the
negative. My ruling has been
sustained. So for the debate
generally to close.
Close
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 1 do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 1.
The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative, 7 in
the negative. House Bill 1 has
duly passed this house from
Blio,
Mr. Speaker, I move the House
postpone in action indefinitely
on all bills remaining on the
Speaker's table on the calendar
or in the enrolling and
engrossing committee, Mr.
Speaker, I second the motion.
You lead from Brio.
Mr. Speaker, I move the House
adjourn ADA.
Mr. Speaker, I second the
motion. The House has adjourned.
