Representative Lord.
Representative Thompson here.
I to Rubio.
Here.
Chair Ferrary yes.
Madam chair we have.
Committees.
Just to announce in case you're
here and in here
House Bill.
Forty the liquor control
container size limit will not be
for today's been asked to be
role and also house bill eighty
six the voter education election
task force.
Has been asked to be rolled out.
Okay
so we'll go ahead and start with
house bill three oh nine
Representative Hernandez would
you like to explain to them
thank you madam chair H. B.
three nine million sixty dash to
a dash twenty eight to allow for
not for profit gaming operators
to offer their members passed
over four thousand dollars this
is the current payout limit for
American legions VFW and other
non profits simply put.
H. B. three nine removes what
many considered antiquated
prohibition and provides for an
increase in charitable activity
required of these nonprofits by
statute I would also like to
introduce my whole entourage but
experts.
I go to rich again.
Madam chair members of the
subcommittee possible to medical
those
one two your committee assistant
chair I'd like to apologize for
make your life miserable the
last couple days I apologize add
to the folks that that I
couldn't get to I tried to reach
as many as possible but three oh
nine was an interesting though
when I was approached brought to
me by the distributors who
represented by Rhonda south
county from Garcia gaming New
Mexico to join your for New
Mexico gaming and we're asking
to up the amount that's prohibit
currently prohibited and statute
four thousand dollars for
nonprofit pay out to ten
thousand dollars so the first
thing we did
under due diligence was go to
the gaming control board to make
sure this wasn't a violation
compacts that we were expanding
gaming
they said we were not in
violation of either one of those
to the next was to go to the
other gaming operators were seen
as in casinos I doubt any of
them this stand up and say they
love it and that but I
understand that they also don't
feel like it's infringement on
their entertainment dollar what
I like about this bills and
amendments that's probably part
of the best part of legislation
sometimes this three oh nine.
Will actually pace statute with
technology and experts are more
myself we have questions can
answer that question the also
the other reason I like this
bill madam chair is that it's a
shower I'm sorry it's a may bill
rather than a shout the.
And with that I would stand for.
Absolutely.
Seven did you want to be I just
want to answer questions about
district.
Thank you madam chair that would
stand for questions okay you.
We'll go to the audience first
those who are in opposition
please thank you.
Okay is there anyone on to okay
those in support.
Okay.
A no poaching.
Okay so we have three people
see your hands again okay.
And okay we'll go ahead and
if you'd like to speak you're
welcome to
use the money those were
webcasting.
yeah.
We're trying to do a lot of
bills in three hours not I.
again it just keep it to one if
you are.
And madam chair bill Jennings
vice commander American Legion
Department New Mexico president
of the veterans paternal
nonprofits of New Mexico I
represent about eighty five
hundred seventy five nonprofits
around the state and we're
supporting this bill.
Next person.
Like to speak you don't have to
speak.
No no you're in support.
All right is there anyone on
soon okay.
All right we'll go to the
committee are there any
questions about House Bill three
oh nine this is the one on at.
At.
And raising your now for four of
ten thousand fund for nonprofit.
Yes.
But.
What the madam chair
Representative Hernandez and
experts thank you for bringing
this forward efforts both thank
you for doing this I think it's
important for nonprofits
specially to not have this
burden especially with times
changing technology.
Growing we definitely need to.
Further push innovation so I
appreciate this bill and it's
from ten thousand to four
thousand to.
Yeah the wait for that.
Okay just to be clear okay thank
you madam chair thank
representative dent creativo.
Thank you madam chair
representative and
representative thank you for
taking time to explain this bill
to me because as being a member
of the American Legion auxiliary
I know that that's important
they do have gaming in their it
was interesting I didn't know
what had only so many this
spaces in there and had to add
that extra space for the winning
so very very smart idea
completely and fully supported
I'd I can't see any reason to
object this bill whatsoever so
thank you madam chair and
representative thank you.
Okay
We still of course because
Representative Rubio is on okay
good
when many.
The past second the tax.
They have no.
The
used to converse with everybody.
We have a motion to do pass in a
sector
is there any objection.
Okay hearing.
You have in the past
one of the for.
Four zero thank you madam chair
thank you.
You madam chair members thank
you.
yeah we have House Bill three
forty I don't.
Senator
That's right sorry three forty
three.
This is.
Right.
Okay I don't see any of the bill
Sanchez here so we'll go on to
house bill six housing and rent
changes Representative Rubio you
be presenting that by zoom.
Madam chair yes I'll be doing
that and I also have a couple of
folks on
I have Maria Griego and Tom
pretty men if they can be
brought in as panelists if
they're not if they haven't
already been brought in.
Okay.
Okay is Maria Griego here.
Chart on soon I'm sorry yes
there.
Will be on them.
All right
if you'd like to go ahead and
present your bills.
Great thank you all and I
appreciate the the patients sign
I officially have the codes so
thank you
so Madam chair representative
hospital six is.
The three point no of this bill
we've introduced it twice
already in previous years this
is the third time that we
presented it's been passed
through the house previously
twice and the last two years is
been stuck in Senate Judiciary
backlog and so we're hoping that
three times a charm so
essentially house bill six
updates a lot of the outdated
landlord tenant laws
as as many of you all know we
currently have a housing crisis
here in the state of New Mexico
and so house bill six much like
in previous years were just
working to modernize
a few things so first we're
wanting to expand time frames
any vacations to allow tenants
eleven days instead of three to
get current on rent before any
fiction case can be filed
fourteen to twenty one days
before hearing to allow the
parties to participate in in an
innovation prevention and
diversion program or to seek
other types of financial
assistance
the third is as to extend
fifteen days instead of seven
days to secure new housing and
moving out of they did.
and and this is additional time
to move at the court's
discretion
the second biggest thing outside
of the time time frames is that
it gives renters the opportunity
to pay in state what that means
is just to avoid eviction if
they can pay what is owed at any
point prior to revision and then
lastly requiring the court
summons for eviction cases to
explain the renter's rights and
responsibilities right now a lot
of folks who are
in in in this position don't
necessarily have all of the
information that's related to
the kind of availability of
financial resources that might
be out there so this is
something that we've added as
part of the modernization there
is strong support for this bill
as you all have heard in the
governor has prioritized
of housing during for this year
recognizing that we have to take
some really important steps for
housings in security and then
as I mentioned we've we've
passed this legislation out of
the house and twenty twenty one
and twenty twenty two so there's
a number of advocates for in
support of this legislation two
of whom are represented here
with money activity adults with
the center for long poverty who
all
provide an opportunity for her
to introduce herself and and
with that we'll we'll open it up
for questions.
Thank you would you like this be
a good to go ahead and speak now
as your expert for sure you can
go now.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and and thank you
Representative Rubio for the
great introduction of this bill
I think Representative Rubio did
a great job providing an
overview of this bill
it's really time at that we take
steps in our state to bring our
landlord tenant laws in step
with the rest of the states I'm
currently New Mexico has some of
the shortest eviction time
frames in the country there are
only ten other states with
addiction time frames as short
as or shorter that New Mexico's.
and as Representative Rubio
already noted and we are in a
housing crisis we've been in one
for years and it's only getting
worse with record growing
inflation rising rents and
stagnant wages more and more New
Mexico renters are at risk for
housing stability or
homelessness
approximately one third of New
Mexicans rents the home they
live in
and in New Mexico currently the
the minimum wage is twelve
dollars an hour well the wages
needed to rent just a basic two
bedroom apartment in our state
are seventeen dollars and fifty
six cents
so many of the renters you know
are going to struggle to pay
their rent from time to time
given our current economic
crisis and we need to take steps
to make sure that these
hardworking families can stay in
their home when they're able to
pay even if it's sometimes a
couple days or couple weeks
behind so thank you for allowing
me to speak today.
Thank you and
with that with that madam chair
will open it up for questions
okay thank you.
is there anyone in opposition to
this bill and the audience.
Okay you can have one minute.
Thank you like to come up to the
my.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is on the second
I'm the executive director of
the apartment association in New
Mexico we represent about sixty
seven thousand.
No units in the states and the
you know I think that all of us
recognize that you know we all
want fair and equitable laws for
not only property owners but for
the residents and you know I
think that's something common
here and unfortunately we
believe that this bill swings
that pendulum too far in one
direction
You know the region in this bill
was drafted we were in a
different situation and we
talked about the rental
assistance programs you know the
allowing of fiction timelines to
you more more time thrill
assistance program is no longer
funded as of January first and
so we're we're in a sense we're
kind of prolonging the
inevitable and you know we
really recognize that there is a
housing shortage in New Mexico
the good news is there's forty
three hundred units and under
development in Albuquerque
there's twenty one hundred units
under development in New Mexico
in Santa Fe and those are the
solutions to our housing issues
this bill unfortunately does not
build any housing this bill does
not create any housing and so
for that we propose thank you
very much.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Randi
Valverde and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors but we
stand in opposition to this bill
we are concerned that the
proposed changes to the uniform
owner resident relations act
will present risks to landlords
that they can't afford to incur
leading to less affordable
housing in the state at a time
when it is critical that people
be able to access that
specifically the increases to
all of the deadlines throughout
the bills are significant and on
page seven of of the FIR they
AOC notes that they're confusing
also there are at least two
opportunities for judgment to be
entered and then vacated further
the retaliation section on page
fourteen at subsection H. makes
very common communication
between a landlord and a tenant
protected activity such that
those communications will be
litigated as retaliation claims
finally the eviction moratorium
in section eleven.
Does not require tenants to
prove that they cannot pay their
rent so for all these reasons we
stand in opposition thank you.
Madam chair.
Councilman.
My name is Chuck Sheldon I'm a
property owner and also property
manager Representative a hundred
fifty five owners you know and
they're all small owners average
about eleven units per per
person.
We oppose this bill.
The length of time we've we've
gone through to try to I think
people are neglect is extended
increase and economic hardship
the people have difficulty
making their own mortgage
payments so that you know that's
putting people out of business
we've already seen a five
percent decrease in owners it's
a twenty twenty unit level and
below so we're losing the owners
that no longer want to face this
so for those reasons and we're
going to lose more housing we
propose.
Thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee members of the
committee my name is Steve grant
the current president of the
apartment so she should for New
Mexico and also an independent
owner operator in this great
state one echo the comments that
Alan are executive director in
check I mentioned and you know
this is a very challenging
situation for the small
independent operator for example
the current three day notice for
nonpayment of rent is is of
course like I said three days
that's going to be proposed to
go to eleven days which makes
the process for doing in an
addiction if you need to that
much harder I really believe
that this was a knee jerk
reaction in my opinion back two
years ago we had the service
stating the limit with COVID and
you for that I believe that into
the reasons that were up here
today
and but the proposed it just
doesn't make a lot of sense as
maybe it did a couple years ago
when it was proposed and so for
that we are posed and I speak on
behalf of many small independent
owner operators throughout this
great state that we live in
thank you.
You.
Madam chair members of the
committee Martha shows
registered lobbyist Rinat New
Mexico commercial real estate
development Association we stand
in opposition an opposition for
many of the reasons stated we do
have just to emphasize a lot of
concerns about the possible
little litigation that revolves
around any action that an owner
or manager takes related to
their residents that might be
deemed to retaliation and the
effects that that could have on
lease arrangements and various
options thank you.
Madam chair members thank you
for having a state can't Cravens
a registered lobbyist and CEO of
the greater Albuquerque
association of realtors and for
many other reasons already
stated I won't belabor just for
time's sake just like to express
our opposition to legislation
of for me those reasons and
mostly because of the what I
feel would be a detrimental
effect overall in the long run
to what we're trying to do in
creating housing of of
opportunities for people it's
just a not not the right time to
do to do something like this and
take this bold and I will bowl
up the in the in the in the
negative direction of a of a.
Legislation would be would be
good for.
Up for constituents and I just
want to add that you know any
are the national association of
realtors along with our state
association and local
associations statewide really
stand at the ready to be
involved in creating
opportunities for homeownership
development of properties and
and the things that would really
drive more more inventory for
the rental pool so thank you
madam chair.
Is there anyone on the okay have
any.
okay one minute each.
Madam chair where property
owners and you know the time
frame that you're talking about
three days to to eleven days
sounds very reasonable but in
reality we attended that we've
been working to get out since
March.
we don't want to be unfair to
our tenants but.
These extra time periods what
would they do to us after the
COVID in in not having the
protection as a property owner
where the tenants have a lot of
protection we feel like we're
not being represented at all.
So with that and I agree with
the what what other people it
said were in opposition thank
you.
Amy.
Hi this is Amy and I am a
property manager slash realtor
and we manage about a hundred
and sixty properties and right
now if we do find a tenant with
the three day notice they do
have three days to pay their
rent however by the time the
file at magistrate court it can
take up to two weeks before we
even get a hearing so that right
there is seventeen days that the
tenant who in most cases I can
show pictures if I need to send
somebody they completely trusted
property a lot of times they're
turning into drug houses because
people aren't moving in so we
strongly oppose this bill thank
you.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Carlos Fund tech
with the New Mexico business
coalition and we are in
opposition to this bill I think
this is going to actually
stifle.
The market.
That we need to enhance to have
new buildings built and
construction for new housing and
people are going to want to be
here and do that this creates a
hardship for the owner who may
have a mortgage or paying
utilities that they can't
collect rent and you're talking
with this bill of extending that
non payment of rent to about
sixty three days according to
the analysis before you can
actually get someone out of the
property that hasn't been
paying.
That is a long time and it just
does not work for property
owners.
So I hope that you will give due
consideration to the people in
business but they can stay in
business and continue to provide
the housing that we need thank
you.
And our current.
Thank you.
Go ahead dina.
No thank you I don't have any
comment.
Connect.
The.
Hi gene thanks I'm a lawyer
whose practice this area for
forty two years and I'm also
general counsel for the purpose
of ciation I just want to say
that.
In my experience people of good
will have plenty of time to work
this out as as it now is
I've worked many cases out with
one of your panel members of my
respect very much
I think what we're doing by just
drawing this out the way it's
setting up is having the it just
take long longer and cost more
money of when people are not of
good will and are not working it
out so I we I oppose six tension
at this point time.
Thank you next.
At okay.
We'll go to those in support in
the audience.
Please.
Thank you madam chair this is
top those office.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Alyssa Kenny Dyer resident of
Santa Fe I was in Oregon state
Representative and I chaired the
consumer protection committee so
I feel very at home here I also
chair the Human Services and
housing committee and we dealt
with these kinds of issues for
years certainly the lack of
housing affordable housing
started before COVID long before
COVID but it really got
accentuated last year so I've
seen similar struggles and how
absolutely devastating it is
when families are evicted
extending the timeline from
three days to pay too I think
it's eleven as well as the other
extensions gives families an
opportunity to work with the
the eviction prevention and
diversion program so that
landlords actually can get paid
and families don't have an STD
record which makes it much
harder for them to find any
other housing so this is an
incredibly important and
actually a very very modest step
if you talk about the pendulum
on trying to help stabilize
families New Mexico I urge your
support.
You.
Madam chair my name is winter
Torres and I am the director of
the New Mexico eviction
prevention and diversion program
we sit in between the the courts
and the department of finance
and administration and I'm an
attorney and I just want to
speak to the legal aspect of
where New Mexico sits with
regard to the rest of the nation
our turnaround is very very
quick compared to other states
and and for instance there is a
court in northwestern New Mexico
where you can be served on one
day and then you are in court
six days calendar days later for
eviction the way it operates on
the ground is not what is in the
current statute the way that it
operates on the ground is really
because magistrate courts are
not currently courts of record.
They interpret what a date is
differently so the different
magistrate courts will
interpretation interpret a day
is either calendar day or as a
business day and that can be
different between judges sit you
sitting in the same magistrate
court so with the it's what
really I think the expansion of
the timelines does is allow for
some consistency throughout the
state and
Yes yes I'm into the matter with
regard to the two weeks that is
seventy percent of addictions
are in but only on the top
metropolitan court and that
that's just because so many land
there.
Anyone else in the audience and
support.
Is there anyone on to.
Okay.
It is what.
I don't.
Go ahead miles.
Hello a chairwoman members of
the committee smiles to vote out
deputy director of a lie and we
stand in full support of HB six
we represent the girlfriends
naturalized citizens really
educators
here in
at teachers and and workers all
throughout the state you all are
renters and we stand in full
support of this very important
and much needed legislation
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
Thank you Representative did you
have any closing remarks before
we go to the committee.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to let you all know that
Tom pretty equipment now on with
us so for any questions that we
might be able to answer later I
did want to just remind folks
because I know it's been brought
up several times about how this
is going to discourage
development there are forty
other states that have longer
time frames than we do so that
means we are one of the last
remaining states that does not
provide the type of time frame
that folks need and so
I think that's just important to
the state because I think people
have been speaking about this
issue kind of an alarmist way
when in fact the rest of the
country is well ahead of us in
this manner so what that madam
chair I'll leave it up for
questions.
Okay thank you Representative
blocked.
Okay I'm sorry.
Thank you madam chair and
representative in the sky
It's weird.
okay so we have a lot of
questions because chair
representative is a huge fiscal
impact and there's a big
analysis on the desk and lots of
questions I have on this so I
guess.
The question I have first madam
chair representative on page
fourteen.
Online H..
So if there's a complaint to the
owner about the function or
safety of them mechanical device
or service of the gas electric
water utility company.
So that then allows the renter
to say.
You can't remove me because I
complained in the last six
months madam chair and
representative.
Thank you Representative and yes
I I like being a legislator in
the sky so I appreciate that
so I'll I'll hand it over to my
my experts on that but what I
would say
Is that.
The I mean there's there's a
number of reasons why we did
that and so I'll go ahead and
hand it off to be their money
are.
This is comforting and I can I
can answer that question if you
can hear me yes I can hear you
from okay so the current version
of the law has a retaliation
provision
but it has led to some confusion
the basic concept of a
retaliation is if you engage in
some kind of protected out
activity like us that you're
what hot water heater be
repaired because it's leaking
carbon monoxide.
That reason should not be used
as a reason to a victory.
And so
This this of change will just
clarify what's already in the
existing law but at the request
of the representatives for the
apartment association last year
we added a provision that
shows how judge would analyze
such a claim where the tenant is
being evicted for no reason but
in fact they're really being
affected for complaining about
about a repair that needs to be
done and that is the second
section it talks about the
initial burden that they engage
in some kind of protective
activity like requesting repair
the burden shifts the landlord
to show that the reason for the
eviction is something else the
landlord can say no I'm not a
victim for the repair evicting
them because I've sold the
building removing them because
they haven't paid rent on the
fifteen them because they
have an unauthorized occupant
who won't leave and that's what
that's meant to do and it's
supposed to clarify how courts
are to to analyze these
retaliation claims which are
already existing in the current
bill it does not prevent
landlords from evicting any
tenant who has bridge the least
by not paying requests for or
what have you but it is meant to
clarify how it tennis protected
from a no cause eviction
When in fact that eviction is
because attending a sort of
their rights by requesting
repair or something like that.
Okay Madam chair representative
both you're gonna have to speak
up will look so very hard of
hearing it's really hard to hear
you but I'm pretty sure because
I've rented and been a landlord
that they're very very clear
contracts in their loss in place
that if I say my sink isn't
working you already have to fix
that so I don't understand what
the purpose of this is because
normally you would call send
email to something of some of
the contract that may state if
it's below a certain right you
have to fix it yourself or
whatever so I'm not
understanding this at putting
the the tenet it doesn't make
sense we're putting the tenant
in this position where they
could be a bad actor just say I
called about their fridge making
noise and now I can't be removed
so I understand those already
contracts in place when you rent
a very clear contracts and
there's already lost that place
those things have to be repaired
so have explained that to me how
I don't understand how this
plays out Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative as we
mentioned as Tom mentioned we're
just clarifying what's already
in statute.
So madam chair representative so
what we're doing is we're
putting landlords in a position
to be scared to death is that
what I'm understanding that they
have to be scared to death if
somebody decides I don't and
their bad actor they're taking
drugs whatever did their that
they cannot be removed now
because this is in there in
writing that says if that person
said and it's their word against
the landlords that the microwave
stopped working at the sink was
plugged up or whatever and now
fears they can't remove them for
fear they're going to be re
talent that's gonna be
retaliation things out when I'm
understanding chair and and
Representative.
Madam chair representative we're
just providing an extension and
opportunities for renters who
generally on behalf of less than
ten percent actually have
attorneys with them so this is
just providing them an extra
effort to stay in their homes
this isn't about giving
landlords an opportunity to be
fearful about something.
Madam chair representative I'm
reading this right in the bill
rate fourteen number eight and
I'm not gonna let this go what
I'm trying to say is there is
very very clear contracts and
there you cannot lady tenet live
there without utilities that
just isn't allowed to happen so
that's really something and it's
ready contracting you can't do
that what I'm seeing here though
is that this is a way for a
tenant to say out House loophole
I don't have to move because I'm
saying they didn't fix something
and they're retaliating against
me so can explain to me how
that's gonna play out in the
courts madam chair
representative.
Madam chair I Madam chair
representative I can't find with
I can't provide you any
hypotheticals at this point all
I can say is that we're just
clarifying within the language
to make it more clear.
What madam chair representative
I can tell you as being a renter
in my lifetime I know that
there's very very specific rules
everything is written out in
detail if this happens to let us
know you send this email and
send us a note there's there's
all these weeds can to
communicate what I'm seeing now
is also being a member was on
the longer because that are
inherited a house and that was
amazing I will never do ever
again for these exact reasons
when I've seen is now this
person I I don't understand the
section all I don't understand
that they could not retaliate
and say well I told you I don't
see anything here what is it has
to be right I don't see anything
so I'm gonna move on from this
but this is I'm not gonna
support this bill a lot of it
has to do with this because I do
not believe in punishing our
plan course
Like myself I tried to do the
best I can and I'll go back to
somebody made a statement but
did will.
I don't see anything in here
either Madam chair
representative for anything like
good will like the person says
okay I can't make these payments
I'm gonna send you an email
letting you know I can pay you
in a couple days I just see
we're sending it to this eleven
days and then X. amount of days
to get to court and then it
seemed like sixty three days for
this whole thing so is someone
like me to seize myself simple
can you explain to me how that
would be beneficial to me FY I
shared it houses barely make the
mortgage payment and I could now
make the mortgage payment
because I have to somebody
affected my take up sixty three
days how does that benefit the
landlords
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative this
legislation is helpful to
landlords because by providing
the extra time lines on for for
eviction prevention it allows
landlords also save money in the
long run I mean at the end of
the day nobody wants to actually
see their tenants evicted
because they're also losing out
on on their funding on their
revenues.
Madam chair representative I see
it very differently I would be a
complete panic if I had to wait
all that time frame which is
something I had to do before
it's not fun thank you that you
can't make the payments on stuff
because you have a bad actor and
that that is not going to move
has absolutely no intention of
paying you and it's just trying
to stall so I'm looking at now
sixty three days of some people
who are not gonna have any
income I don't see how that's
beneficial at all to where
landlords and I just see that as
as another punishment for the
sixty three days so I have a
question chair representative so
let's say for example I do have
a bad actor in there it does
take sixty three days or how
long it takes them and let's say
the person says you can't kick
me out because retaliation on
fourteen eight so I I assume
that would have to go to court
how much would that cost that
landlord import fees and lawyer
fees Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative I
don't have that amount with me
in terms of what that cost is
going to be but what I will say
is that I I think there's a
calculation that that's
different than what you're
saying I folks have been saying
the number sixty three for us
it's a cumulative maximum time
line is fifty two and so we're
saying that if rent is due on
the first then on the second the
landlord gives the eleven day
notice on the fourteen the
landlord can then file free
fiction on the seventh of the
following month the hearing
takes place and then on the
twenty second the tenet has to
be out so for us the calculation
is is fifty two days and so I
think it's important that when
we're talking about the issues
that again
this bill doesn't discourage the
the mitigation what it what it
allows for more of that between
the renter and the landlord.
Madam chair representative so
thank you for correcting that
one day that the landlord
doesn't have to worry about that
what what I'm trying to get
across is
That's sixty two days.
And of somebody who may madam
chair representative sorry I I
think fifty two days not sixty
two what sort of I did hear you
when I said I I said fifty two
days not sixty five two not six
two okay well it's very hard to
hear and hear okay so madam
chair representative of my point
being I see this portion here
where somebody could say I'm
going to retaliate and not be
able to kick them out and I
can't imagine would be like to
be a landlord have some
maintenance could be math in
your house you want to get them
out as quickly as possible and
now they do this entire issue up
in the courts fifty to sixty
three whatever days it is I just
see this is all a longer process
a test to what people that
housing but my question is Madam
chair representative so.
Let's see there's a house and
it's locked Department whatever
it's locked up for six fifty to
sixty three however many days
and it's legitimately the person
needs to be removed because they
have no tests are painted how
does that help people that are
looking to rent that apartment
or house if it's not available
how does that help the housing
market.
Madam chair all all eight Madam
chair representative I'll let my
my
my experts miscreant wants to
that.
Thank you Representative again
and I apologize Representative
Lord I didn't fully hear your
last question but I didn't want
to provide a sort of an overall
statement to address some of the
concerns you've just raised
so madam chair representative
lord the first thing that I
would like to state is this some
of these issues are being
conflated what we're talking
about is expanding time frames
for non payment of rent so.
It's a non payment of rent K.
instead of the three day notice
you get eleven day notice this
is different than.
An example of as a tenant who
has violated the lease in some
way.
That doesn't change you still
have you can still given the
seven day notice that's required
under the law so those are two
separate issues.
Second it excuse me second
I want to address the
retaliation concerns at Madam
chair representative.
And just to provide you some
overall background and context.
Currently the way the law is
written
retaliation is almost impossible
for residents to prove because
of the summary nature of the
fiction proceedings and the fact
there are no discovery right.
In these types of hearings.
So what this provision does is
it simply sends out a message
for the court to analyze whether
or not.
Valuation has taken place it
does not only give the tenant a
magic.
The letter till if you will the
state the landlord tenant
removed because I'm claiming
retaliation.
Rather.
There has to be a court hearing
if the tenant is asserting
retaliation.
They simply have to say they
have to tell the judge.
The activity they engage in that
they think is protected.
I alerted you know for example I
alerted my landlord that the
water heater was leaking carbon
monoxide.
To go to your example perhaps
they did go through the notice
perhaps they did tell the
landlord through a notice please
fix this within seven days and
the landlord comes back and says
it's fixed but the tenant still
knows is a problem and then they
get an eviction notice.
So when they get to court the
tenant simply say look I alleged
that.
My water heater is not
functioning.
rather than fixing it my
landlord instead is effecting
me.
To the lender the lender has to
simply say I'm not affecting
them because they complained
about the.
Hot water heater I'm addicting
them because you know they have
a dog on the premises and they
weren't allowed to have jobs
whatever the case might be.
And then again the burden shifts
back to the tenant so it two
times the burden shifts to the
tenant to find at a reasonable
explanation.
So it's it's not a magic bullet
loophole for the tenant.
Chair representative an expert I
think you missed my point my
point is that the person can say
that and then this person who is
the landlord has to go to court
this to consult with an attorney
and has to take time off and
then it's the burden of proof to
show that this thing was handled
a particular way so I would say
it's not complaining of a
completely disagree with what
you're saying because what I'm
saying is that this gives a
person the state what I said
this and you start to go to
court date and that still is
attorney's costs and time off
so.
Madam chair representative I
cannot support this bill because
I feel like it's just another
this this is very disturbing to
me and the fact you have to go
to court burden of proof and how
the emails attacks and trying to
prove that you have a things
correctly it just in this is too
much a burden on and also the
other question was not answered
at all which was the original
question to ask but I I kind of
give up at this point the
question I asked is if this
house is tied up for sixty three
or fifty two days whatever how
does that help the housing
market if there's somebody out
there that can't afford to move
in there and now they're sitting
there waiting and have no place
to move and I think I already
answered my question on that so
I'm finished thank you madam
chair thank.
Thank you thank you
Representative this guy.
so I have a few questions
regarding the Representative
Lord said but first of all I
wanted to go to page.
Twenty two of the bill if you
have in front of you madam chair
representative.
Yes the online seventeen it says
will start online fifteen
nothing in this section so
prohibit an owner from.
Refusing to renew a rental
agreement if the honor and good
faith seeks to take possession
of the property for personal use
and occupancy as a primary
residence or a media family
members so can you please tell
me what personal use means
because it's not defined in the
bill madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
believe that's already
I'll let I'll let my idea go
ahead and answer that the.
Thank you madam chair
Representative thank you for the
question Representative blocks
you are correct Representative
block that that is not defined
personal use is not defined in
statute
My recollection from previous
Committee discussions is that
It was the assumption would be
that it was just the general.
At the general.
Understanding about personal use
system not for business use so
for example
you know if you wanted to if you
were renting out a casita and
you wanted to move into you're
taking a take back your conceit
that and use it you know half
for you know for storage or and
that to reside at the not
provide you couldn't turn your
casita into a coffee shop for
example.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so you're saying
that it has to remain a domicile
cannot be used for business use
is that what that means madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative know
what we're saying is is that of
a landlord if they're planning
to use it for their own personal
use it that's they can they can
do that that's not seen as
not that that's not it let's say
legal that that's something that
they can use that's what that
that part of the legislation
means.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so if I let's
just say I own flagship and.
It's not the business that has
flowers but I want to I want to
grow some flowers in my personal
per se.
A place that I used to rent no I
don't with that following to
business use of personal use.
After.
Madam chair representative what
we're strictly talking about in
this legislation is people are
individuals who are renting a
space we're not talking about
any commercial businesses that
you might that you might on.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative well I think I
think that might be necessary to
define it this bill because your
experts said issues students
that the general understanding
is personal use but I certainly
wouldn't want to as soon as best
if we're gonna be going to court
this Madam chair representative
so Madam chair representative
the example that that my dust
using is the fact that let's say
that that you own a gusty down a
little space that you've been
renting the renter that is
living in that space is no
longer able to give to be able
to make rents or or you decide
or third the landlord decides
that they need that space for
their own personal use.
They have the right to to to
make whatever necessary
it's personal use its personal
use and the occupancy as
a primary residence the
residents that that is perfectly
fine.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative okay so then in
the same section it says primary
residence.
Seven a member of the owners
immediate family celesta status
sick great aunt.
With my stick great on to be
able to use the space since it
is not defined as immediate
family Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative all
of money and answer that.
Thank you Representative Rick
Rubio and madam chair and
Representative box
no I don't have at legal
definition in front of me but
immediate family is something
that is as defined I'm I know
elsewhere in in other statutes
but it I can tell you
confidently that a great bond
does not constitute immediate
family thank you madam chair
thank you Representative segment
the answer to that would be if I
wanted to fix my tenant or not
renew the lease rather.
Because my six right on me to
live near me I would not be
permitted to do that if the
tenant wanted to file suit Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative well
let me answer that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative blocks
Representative.
This part has to be read in the
entire context of the new
section so this section
is really designed around when
they're you have to address when
there is a declared state of
emergency.
so you know as with with the
onset of COVID as you know the
governor issued a state of
emergency.
And then following that the New
Mexico Supreme Court issued
orders prohibiting landlords
from terminating a tendency for
and for projecting a tenants
because of non payment of rent
during the declared state of
emergency.
What we saw what many
practitioners saw is that
landlords for using a loophole
saying well I'm just I'm not if
they can them because they can't
read I'm addicting them you know
because I just I want to I don't
want to renew the lease so I'm
just not going to renew the
lease
so that's the reason for this
new section of the law
And and so.
This section would prohibit
landlords from simply just
refusing to renew.
But if there is an extenuating
circumstance like the landlord
needs to use it for their own
personal use and and primary
residency or.
For the personal use and primary
residence you have an immediate
relatives and they can't so
that's it out for the landlords
that you know they I'm not
required to renew the lease in
all circumstances that they have
an extenuating circumstance for
themselves or for an immediate
family member and that's an
option for them.
Thank you madam chair
representative so that.
During this emergency timeline I
believe this is been.
Since twenty twenty.
This emergency has been declared
so it's been over three years
Adam chair representative so you
saying that I can't put my stick
right on into this room for over
three years there is an
emergency declared Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative it's
during yes during an emergency.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative I think that
that's just it's worked fine in
my opinion because if you have
an immediate family member needs
to go to live with you and
they're not able to especially
as long as this.
Urgency orders in place which is
been over three years Madam
chair representative that could
certainly be a huge impediment
to that individual who owns this
property so I would certainly.
say maybe change that language
Madam chair representative but I
will keep on going here so long
yes we have another.
One.
Three point five bills and we've
only got four thirty so.
Barely lasted two hours.
Size.
Many have.
Thank.
This bill.
Thank you
I will try to take it up as much
as they can so regarding this.
The COVID order.
What is the Supreme Court of the
state all rural.
Regarding more to our hands
madam chair.
Madam chair representative can
you can you elaborate please
under question.
Of course mentored
Representative currently the
Supreme Court they intervened
and they ruled.
I don't what it moratorium could
be under the circumstances.
An emergency order Madam.
Do you know what that is madam
chair.
Madam chair representative yes
we've had we've been following
with the Supreme Court has has
said.
It does not have to do.
Yes madam chair I'll get to that
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so that how does
this bill.
Differ from what the court said
madam chair.
Madam chair representative I'll
let you go on to them.
Thank you Representative Rubio
madam chair and and
Representative blocks to be
Frank I am not.
Exactly sure what the question
is
There may be a a ruling that I'm
not aware of I at.
Earlier I was speaking to the
order from the New Mexico
Supreme Court staying eviction
for non payment of rent if
there's a subsequent order
another or order to what you're
saying I'm not familiar with
that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well I just think
we might want to be looking at
what the court RT said because
they did state that we could
have this moratorium already and
that's already what folks who
are renting have to
comply with Madam chair
representative so I will go on.
At so regarding the number of
dates this is eleven days and
it's been extended three is that
correct madam chair for for non
payment of rent madam chair.
Madam chair representative we've
X. we are in this legislation
we're expanding time brings any
fiction to allow tenants instead
of three days we're allowing
them eleven days to get current
on rent before an eviction and
stockpiles.
Thank you madam chair
representative do you know how
many states.
I have an eleven day or larger
groups are requirements right
now madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative at
this point there's forty.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative are you saying
that forty states.
Have a lot of these are more
madam chair.
Madam chair representative there
are forty states that have more
a larger time frame and we
don't.
But I couldn't tell you
specifically what the.
What that what that is at this
point I we just know that we're
we're part of the ten that that
doesn't.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative what I'm looking
at now is only five states that
have eleven days or larger
requirements the rest of them
are less than eleven days Madam
chair representative so I see
states such as Maine there's a
seven Marilyn's they don't have
one yes this is fourteen days
Michigan is seven.
And we have a bunch stated three
of us that I want at seven but
the extreme minority of those.
Our eleven days and more and the
C. Massachusetts New York
Tennessee Vermont Washington and
Wisconsin that have.
Does that differ madam chair.
Madam.
Madam chair representative
I mean at this point that's what
we're we're trying to get ahead
of it is we're putting it at
eleven.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Seven I will I will go on.
Page twenty.
We see one seventy and
underneath that says a common
failure of the resident estrogen
to make the first partial
payment within five days of the
filing of the notice of appeal
jadi jadi out so can you tell me
what a partial payments madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative I'll
let Mrs right Griego answer
that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of a Mexican a
pass that over to Tom pretty
then he would be more be better
equipped to answer that
question.
Madam chair representative
currently
when a tenant files an appeal
from of action they may stay in
the unit if they continue paying
rent during the appeal
they have to pay rent every
month during the appeal because
of actions don't always happen
at the beginning of the month
for yield stories always happen
at the beginning of the month
They Might Be mid month
there is that first payment of
rent post
appeal is often a partial month
so the first month's payment
will be a partial payment that's
what that's referring to.
Thank you madam chair
representative so that payment
that partial payment would be
based on the number of days left
the month of the contract
extends or until.
What madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Mr pretty then if you can go
ahead and answer.
Yes that's correct
Representative Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
Have more questions now than I
did before but.
My last point will be regarding.
If this bill goes forward this
will incur more costs
administratively for the person
who owns.
Madam chair representative are
you concerned with those costs
being transferred on to other
renters thereby creating even
higher cost of living Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative our
legislation is purely providing
an opportunity for both the
landlord and the renter to be
able to mitigate it's in the
best interest of the landlord to
be able to do this because they
can keep a tenant without having
to
we.
Not only to move for with the
fiction but also to have to put
the the dwellings up big for all
the for rent process and
everything so we have seen that
studies after studies have shown
that there is a savings to
landlords we just this is just
something that we don't have at
the moment.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative well I would
certainly just take another look
at your bill I think that there
are just so many holes here that
could create hesitancy in the
market for folks to want to rent
and it also take.
Increased costs to people who
are renting and this could do
the opposite effect you know I
do think that there's a good
thought process behind this bill
but I think you practice chair
representative this just would
create increased costs
the very individuals we're
trying to help so thank you
madam chair thank
Representative.
Madam chairman for two passed.
Representative walked no ma'am.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Thomson yes vice
chair Rubio.
Yes.
Ferrary yes.
Sure we have a reason to.
You have to do passive voted
three to two.
Our in house bill six.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative send for your
patience for me using them at
this time thank you.
Thank you
okay we're gonna go back to
House Bill three forty three I
see Representative Serrato is
here.
And.
We've got about twenty minutes
for each of the next few bills.
So I'm going to ask committee
members to please
I'm gonna ask committee members
to please not repeat each other
other questions that have been
and.
Keep it up to the point of the
bill.
Representative ahead thank you
madam chair and thank you at
committee for hearing our bill
house bill I'm sorry this is my
experience I have block who's a
registered lobbyist with rally.
And so I wanted to briefly
explain that what this bill does
is it puts craft breweries on
par with what is already allowed
for wineries to directly ship to
be up to receive a permit to
directly ship craft beer you
know on a monthly or otherwise
basically and it also clarifies
that folks can come into state
for
beer or wine tastings wine
tasting competitions are allowed
in the state this clarifies that
there would be added to that I'm
I'm in my expert but I think we
can keep it fairly brief.
The madam chair thank you and
the interest of time I believe
Representative Serrato coveted
very well the legislature over
the past ten or so years has
done several things to kind of
keep that parity and equality
between the small winemakers in
the small breweries in New
Mexico one area that we had not
gotten to yet was shipping and
the a special events and this
Sen bill merely adds beer to
those two sections of refer
solely to one right now thank
you thank you we have great
respect for this committee and
everyone on and so I think with
that we stand for questions.
Thank you will go to the
audience anyone in
Support this bill.
Would you like to see I.
Yes please and if you could step
back a little bit from the.
Hi my name is Jeffrey Kaplan on
the on one of the owners rally
farmhouse ales brewery here in
town and we support this bill I
really think we need to do a
much because of the interest of
time thank you.
You there anyone on soon yes for
them to it.
Yep one minute please.
The head Santa.
Family can't hear you your you
don't look like you're muted
that are you speaking.
Okay is there anyone else no
okay as their opposition to this
bill.
Okay.
Good afternoon.
jazz madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon.
From the Sanchez thank you
better clear.
Good afternoon John Thompson I'm
a registered lobbyist rattle
beverage corporation I've
discussed Representative Serrato
and and had conversations with
Representative block on this
issue Madam we have some
concerns on this bill and and
attend I don't intend to come up
here to be a bully or or two to
say no on on bills that come up
madam chair this there are
serious policy implications as
as it pertains to this piece of
legislation madam chair in in
opening this up we also open up
for forty nine other states to
begin to ship products directly
to consumers and in the state of
New Mexico madam chairman we
have had issues in this round in
the past as it pertains to
collection of excise tax the
proper checking of ID's madam
chair in additionally I would
note that if you look in your
FIR and I cannot speak for them
but I will notice there is no
response received from the
alcoholic beverage commission on
this bill that would be similar
to a water policy bill not
having response from the office
of the state engineer and I
think it is very appropriate
that we should hear their
concerns on this bill because as
I understand they have some
serious reservations about it
madam chair lastly it was a
minute yes thank you just
because.
All.
We might drop.
This doesn't mean up wrapped.
Okay thank you is there anyone
else in opposition.
Okay how about on the.
Okay
do you have anything else you'd
like with that was ever
questions between chair okay
thank you will go to the
committee Representative Lord
thank you madam chair
representative so I have some
questions on this.
So is it.
I don't see reply from the craft
brewery association I don't see
reply from tax wrapper New
Mexico farm town don't see.
replies from the alcohol
beverage control division I
don't see a lot of replies on
this you know why that is Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I don't mention
because with that that madam
chair Representative Lord no not
really my understanding is for
speaking of the folks with the
brewers guild is that they were
divided on the bill so they
don't have an official position
because some members such as Mr
Kaplan from Rowley are in favor
others maybe against but since
they didn't have a.
Consensus they're not taking a
position I don't speak for them
that's my understanding not as
to ABC I really can't tell you.
Why they did not submit a
response thank you to rex
usually are the reason I'm
asking because normally all
these places are involved
replied you know that we have
that ridiculous alcohol tax
sorry that alcohol tax which is
not going anywhere that and
everybody was there to have a
thing called outcomes long lets
people to speak
to the doctor yes so I I was
just wondering why.
Usually and that might be why
they're split so.
That makes it difficult for me
to make a decision on this the
at the other question I had was
Are there other very so you're
saying the split time
introducing the kind of split
within the guilt yes on that so
we just said to kind of split up
okay as many questions
So my understanding is madam
chair representative I I
understand that if we can set it
out but my understanding is.
The other out of states like
Texas could literally come in
flat our market is that correct
they they have reciprocity they
could bring in as well thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
how this would be allowing for
direct sales in state
specifically so what that would
mean is that you know for
example if you're part of one
club right I have one
subscription and wondering
California and one in
Albuquerque and so you know a
lot of times that so people
that's how often times I would
argue millennials in order
alcoholic drugs or otherwise and
these are is often times special
teacher.
You know a scene from places
international beers you know you
might receive quarterly or
things like that so this does
not affect sales of you know
within supermarkets or other
places where you know I think we
would traditionally think of
flooding the market Madam chair
representative but you know I
think that's the direct sales
very specific brands and madam
chair representative lord if I
might add
That's exactly right this is the
one club your club kind of thing
right now there are several
companies if you go online
several companies that will ship
your item to New Mexico despite
the fact that she not allowed
so would allow it but these are
not necessarily you know a six
pack of bud light for you know
stone IPA beers that are already
working in New Mexico through
distributors usually usually
more specialized products like
Representative Serrato referred
to like really firm and sales
they do barrel aged beers they
brought them in the seven
hundred fifty liter bottles like
a bottle of wine and they're not
that expensive product they can
run from you know fifteen to
thirty dollars a bottle so this
isn't the the.
The crowd the table ordering
wine shipped and ordering beer
shipped in other states it is
not necessarily looking for the
cheapest thing out that they're
looking for something you can't
get otherwise and they're
generally the ones that would
come in here.
Are either already here through
distributors so they wouldn't be
doing it through shipping or
they're so small that they
cannot.
The the business of distributor
because there is not enough
volume there for for the money
to make sense Madam chair
representative can you show me
this bill where it says this is
for in state only and it's not
for out of state it madam madam.
Here Representative Lord that
that's not the case as a matter
of fact most of the
clientele that for example rally
has had increased from about
establishing a club
Representative Santa Fe tasted
their beers at once order is
shipped to them out of state so
that it would allow shipping
anywhere in the reciprocity
spoke of this is correct and and
I understand that the desired
ever we have some very good
years.
At that might.
So I've been listening to that.
Concerns about we haven't heard
from the people to make
educated decisions but how do we
what is.
Is there something already in
place madam chair representative
on how we do like beer wine and
club I mean shower the checking
ID's how they making sure other
than the film that thing online
this is yes I'm over to our car
we making sure it's not going to
somebody under twenty thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I know there's
essentially a three step process
like no two of them I'm sure
Mike expecting me to third but
effectively it's one is that the
age verification to is what it
says a very the second is that
it's a very clearly on the box
you to be that you need a
signature with a valid ID and
there is that they receive a
valid ID with signature so I
when I received anything I wish
of the mighty they and they got
can't deliver the leave a note
so that I can pick up to the
plate okay madam chair and
representative I we guaranteed
that if UPS delivers that that
they're actually checked the ID
or they leaving it up to
doorstep because my distance you
can leave it at the doorstep.
Madam chair representative lord
when it comes to an alcohol
delivery they do require a
person over twenty one sign for
it that's been my experience
we've also much like
Representative Serrato we've
been in one club here in New
Mexico and and one in northern
California and
when we weren't able to ship it
to a workplace where there'd be
someone there during the day and
the ship to our home they have
not done until they can actually
verify the age of the person
signing for it and you can find
that requirement in statute on
page.
Three eight five three two.
It's my understanding madam
chair representative sometimes
it does get mist
So my problem the only problem I
have with this is is I have a
lot of our current for me that's
where I got all my peers as far
more delicious craft the reason
we have some amazing beers in
the state but I don't want to do
the right the only reason not to
this point because I need more
information from everybody and I
just want to make sure I don't
make a vote on something and
have repercussions that are
detrimental because I I think we
were well known for our fears
and winds and I want to keep it
that way and I don't want to get
us flow to market so I'm not
going to support for now until I
get more information if you get
that to me before we move
further along so I think that's
all the questions I have thank
you madam chair.
Representative what thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
So my first question is just
crystal clear is this the only
in state breweries there
affected or can out of state
breweries directly sell to folks
in New Mexico Madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair thank Representative yes
out of state breweries can sell
with and once the the doctor
obviously go through the proper
licensing an oral the process.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so then part do
any concerns about the smaller
entities being.
Things aren't being outpaced by
folks that are out of state that
may be more sophisticated madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I really
appreciate that question because
it does come down to something
that Representative was bring up
which is economic
competitiveness for us if I may
briefly.
The the breweries of the
interest in this are not the big
ones that we know as we know
they can go to restaurants and
and three stores already and
that's a larger capacity to find
what we're looking at here is
ensuring that so so there would
be more that was coming in
however as noted New Mexico has
a very strong you know and
competitive
your space and so from my
perspective I think there would
be more however this is entirely
new opportunities for brewers to
sell directly so I think would
be a new on market that they be
able to access and Mr Chairman
representative block while we
all know that what happens in
other states is not necessarily
applicable here
the.
Experience states have
implemented this they have not
seen him disappointed that.
Technical difficulties get Mr do
it from speaking here's the
government affairs chair for the
brewers association there the
the national.
Trade association small craft
breweries and what he's told me
is that other states have not
seen it because this is a fairly
specialty in the show are market
so it's not like I said here US
expect K. K. bir it's kind of
specialty small run kind of
thing so that has not been here
experience of the other states.
You madam chair thank
representative so can you tell
me if there's been any problems
with wine which is currently in
statute outpacing smaller
wineries here in the state Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative that's an
excellent question I'll be
briefly but my experts at on
that basis we had a very nieces
it wine industry here as other
at with this was already in
statute for other wineries to
come in and start selling and we
seen the wineries grow and
flourish in our state and expand
it there's anything else on the
tax
of this too Mr chair now and
again I think that the what we
would expect to happen with beer
is analogous to what happened
with wine the bigger producers
are working through distributors
put in their product in the
stores and that's where the
majority of sold some of the
smaller ones like the the one
club we previously belonged to
does not sell retail they only
sell through shipping and that's
their their specialty so in
terms of flooding the market
that hasn't been the experience
other states to my understanding
it has not been the experience
with wine and therefore I don't
have any reason to expect that
we would be so totally
different.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative other questions I
have.
Thank you I just like to add
that
One of the key things to
reducing alcohol use in our
state we're not to that under
age have access and we shouldn't
have approved what was going
through for the wineries to have
them delivered because a lot of
times they're just dropped off
and the delivery person does not
check and I do just leave that
there are so under age can gain
access very easily
and so having it added with the
brewery
I don't think it's a good idea
to add to that we should be
going back and reducing even the
wind.
And so it that'll take a motion
from the madam chair yeah chair
representative madam chair I I
had sent a text us to to speak
if I can have a just a couple of
make a couple comments of course
can I'm sorry we didn't hear
pantries.
Okay thank you I just madam
chair Representative thank you
for this I I support I just
wanted to let you all know that
I did receive an email just now
from the state government
affairs chair for the brewers
association who who are
urging us to vote yes on this I
just wanted to be sure that
maybe maybe one of they didn't
have an opportunity to speak in
support so I just wanted to make
sure that Mr do it his email
just came through and I just
wanted to let folks know that if
there's that if you needed that
information they are in support
of this legislation.
Thank you Representative.
We did receive and pass out some
of the white pages that they
provided.
Okay the will of the committee
Madam chair representative.
A second.
Okay it's been moved and
seconded Purdue past.
It's awful.
Representative walk yes ma'am
Representative Lord no.
Representative Thomson.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Vice chair review.
Yes.
Chair for now.
Levels of.
Three to four to pass okay
They do pass the voted three to.
I'm
madam chair I I to share their
concerns about under age folks
getting and I mean if you think
about it if you're a delivery
driver you're not gonna come
back to a place five or six
times to get a signature you're
gonna you want to get your job
done for the day so that's a
concern
and then what that's all thank
you madam chair.
House Bill Page.
Did.
Close.
I don't have my speaker.
It's.
But we have.
Hello.
Because you.
you're you're there.
Thank you very much madam chair
this this house bill three
seventy six which had it
addresses the New Mexico medical
insurance pool.
Authorizing statute and in this
bill we are simply making three
changes the first is to allow
the board the authority to
participate in any health
insurance related initiatives or
programs of the state for
example
offering a that is a service
obviously and care management
for administrative services at
the request of the state that
could be focused on a very
specialized population for
example hepatitis C. care or
some kind of advanced
disease management program
secondly we are making a
technical change to the basis on
which the medical insurance pool
determines its premium rates and
and that is basically just
updating the language Act to
conform with the affordable Care
Act that changes that have been
made to the market.
And thirdly it allows the board
to design a low income premium
discount program rather than the
previous sort of outdated
formula the previous the formula
that's currently specified in
statute mandates certain
percentages of discounts across
broad categories of income where
is the market is is pretty much
a continuous adjustment based on
income so this would bring it
into compliance with or it
conformity basically with the
way that exchange premium tax
credits are done and the way
that the marketing sex now and I
have with me a couple of experts
which you may recognize so when
is that former representative
Debbie Armstrong and I have.
Yeah.
and Mr John Ringo who is a
member of the medical insurance
pool board.
and I don't know if they want to
add anything at this time.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I just
to let you know I was the
executive director for fifteen
years of the of the pool I'm not
the current executive director
but if there's technical
questions about the pool and how
it operates and
is so forth I'm I'm here to
answer those and Mr Rangel has
been on the board of directors
almost since the inception which
was thirty six years ago so the
pool's been around since the
eighties.
To provide primarily to provide
insurance for persons who are
high risk or unable to access
health insurance.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair with that
we stand for questions I thank
you.
There anyone in opposition to.
Okay this report.
The price.
That it's that back it's a
little bit sure sure.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Roy Moore
registered lobbyists for
America's health insurance plans
to national trade association of
health plans and we send a
respectful opposition to this
bill this morning we had a lot
good conversation with the
sponsor and with former
representative Armstrong and
went over some of the concerns
and I would point you to page
three lines twelve through
fourteen.
That adds an additional
authority for the high risk pool
New Mexico
Medical insurance pool and the
question that the concerns that
comes to our mind is what does
it mean to have a health
insurance related program or
initiative of the state the
concern there is that the very
broad description of what the
pool might want to get into and
as a representative of the
health plans that are here in
New Mexico it raises concerns
because the the way that the the
the that high risk pool was paid
for all other administrative
expenses is through an
assessment.
That man it goes really fast I
will I will close quickly the
plans that are here in New
Mexico paid for the pool so for
the pool to put drugs in
competition with other
commercial market is a concern
we would like to continue our
discussions with the the sponsor
and with former representative
and try to further explore what
that is and what that is thank
you very much for the extra time
madam chair.
Anyone else in the position is
there anyone in opposition on
the issue okay those in support.
Okay is there anyone in support
on to.
Okay would you like to us with
any thing else before we go to
the committee madam chair I
would just have we had a great
conversation with Mister Moore
this morning and we're looking
forward to looking at the
language and and continuing that
conversation okay and your.
Any questions in the act maybe
yes Representative what thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for settlement
with rather
could you please just tell me
more about page three the lines
that were mentioned
in of the concerns you brought
madam chair representative is
there any way that you would
consider tightening up that
language Madam chair.
Madam chair representative block
I think we are looking and for
suggestions and discussion about
possible language
but I think we're going to
continue the conversation
because they don't think that
some of the things that we're
concerns are actually being
contemplated by the board of
directors right now at all.
And I don't know if if either my
experts want to add to that.
The I would only say that I'd
say a couple of things
in the past the initiatives from
the state of included the
opportunity to use federal funds
to purchase insurance for
example for the in
the.
that the children's medical
program which at one point which
enabled the federal funds to be
stretched over many more kids
because rather than paying for
direct services they were paying
for insurance.
But I certainly interpreted that
particular phrase at that it
starts with an initiative from
the state and then we all
respond to but I should note
that in the roughly thirty years
and I've been on the board
there's never been a situation
where carriers were on one side
of an issue and that consumers
and community members were on
the other side we function
essentially by state discussion
of any initiatives this book
before us and creating more move
forward only when it's clear
that both the carriers and
community consumer members are
in agreement that this this
fills a vacuum which exists in
the insurance market what we're
not in the business of offering
up new services we're in the
business of filling gaps.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam with and experts so.
You know it's my understanding
that high risk customers receive
increased coverage than the the
premiums for low risk customers
all rights is that correct madam
chair Madam what.
Madam chair representative that
is one of the reasons for the
high risk pool exists is to
shield the rest of the market
from some of those extremely
high costs.
Individuals that are covered by
the pool that was most
especially the case at the
beginning of the pool and and
prior to the ACA's enactment but
it still continues to be the
case particularly with some of
the medically fragile children
that are covered.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam with so you know we're.
Where will these.
Individuals be able to obtain
health coverage if these
premiums going to rise it's such
a substantial cost of them that
they can afford it Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative so
that the changes to the low
income.
Premium rates
that language is not designed
to.
Create a dramatic increase to
the premium rates that languages
simply to allow for more
flexibility because currently
the discounts are in three
buckets if you will and Madam
chair representative and but but
similar program through the
exchange which doesn't have the
restricted criteria that the
pool does.
Varies continuously so it's sort
of a continuous sliding scale if
you if that makes sense
please please do.
Thank you the right the premium
rates that are established by
the pool are above market rates
so that there's not a false
incentive to come into the
market and have all the carriers
paid through assessments it but
but it's not a lot of market
rate and so are low income
discount program has nothing to
do whether they're low risk or
not but low income and we would
like to be able to align it with
what the market is so again we
don't create a false incentive
to get in the in the pool if
there is less more affordable
coverage available to them in
the in the exchange.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
I appreciate.
Representative Thomson.
Madam chair nice to see my to
all friends.
I have so I just wanted to say
that having uninsured people
raises the cost of insurance for
all of us the more people I mean
if people failed to get care for
cancer in the early stages that
could easily be cured end up
having you know millions of
dollars of chemo and things like
that so I think I need to really
think about what happens when we
have a large population of New
York New Mexico thank you madam
chair.
Okay what is the will of the
committee Representative Rubio
did you you were okay right.
Yeah madam chair I I just I want
just to move a do pass and I
think.
Okay.
We're.
Okay is there any opposition
okay the girl please.
Representative lock no ma'am.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Thomson yes.
I.
Yes.
Chair for yes.
Madam chair.
To to to pass okay yeah I would
ask you to.
Chair committee thank you just
as the ball we actually like us
on that okay.
That we have.
Local government refrigerated a
refrigerant you stands
Representative Castellano and
Dixon.
House Bill three seventy nine.
I think he's outside let me go
check Representative sincere
help thank you Representative
sincere.
Thank you madam chair you ready
for us to yes please go ahead
wonderful thank you thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee hopefully this will be
a short presentation we are here
to present house bill three
seventy nine which actually
would help bring New Mexico into
compliance with our rules
established by the EPA with
regard to substitute
refrigerants and that
Manufactures and prepare folks
are allowed to you do you I'm
gonna turn it over there if I
may and introduce my expert
witness who can speak much more
knowledgeably about this
and so I'd like to introduce
Keith Gardner.
To keep your numbers are
lobbyist with American at the
air conditioning heating and
refrigeration institute say that
three times fast top but it's
this is a unique piece of
legislation where you've seen
but all sides of the issue of
come together and in twenty
twenty when there was a federal
law passed that really
accelerated this our dependence
off of the normal chemicals that
are used in refrigerating and
and cooling and are trying to
get off on on to those that are
much less volatile I'm much less
damaging to the environment so
it's an interesting where you
see a very large group of people
have come together to say let's
get rid of these chemicals as we
possibly can what this bill does
is it requires that that the
state the only is able to use in
New Mexico were only able to use
those have been approved by the
EPA which is the federal mandate
not doing this would actually
put us at risk of not being able
to get new equipment into the
state as the old equipment times
out this doesn't require anybody
to change anything out it
doesn't require people to
deactivate this only is for new
equipment and new installations
in the future which we need the
time of a couple of years to do
so chair with that we can answer
any questions you might.
Here is the to the audience.
And is there anyone in
opposition.
But I do.
Anyone in support.
About two years at first and one
on
one person with their hand
raised.
Okay.
Go ahead please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me OK yes we can.
Thank you I'd like to speak in
favor of eight your name please.
Yes course was getting to that
no I'm Camilla I am and I'm the
director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club and
we'd like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill this bill
would allow the use of climate
friendly flammable refrigerants
without these bills or bills
like these we won't be able to
get the HFC phase down off the
ground because current building
mechanical and fire codes and
some states prevent use of
anything but high global warming
potential HSCs under this
legislation climate friendlier
alternatives that are approved
by the US EPA and Kerry third
party safety certificate
certification of appliances
you know that can then be
installed in homes and buildings
I'll make just one flag and that
is that the bill should be
limited to just local codes we
want to make sure that the bill
doesn't inadvertently take
NMED's at the already to
regulate refrigerants or other
chemicals away so slight
amendment there would be helpful
but otherwise we're we're very
grateful for at the action on
this issue thank you thank you.
would you like to respond to
that.
Chair if I may do we we had a
discussion before the committee
hearing today and we were happy
to work with us your clubs you
know you need so I think I
dropped off some letters of
support and so there's there's
support there and we we will
work with clarifying language
currently the the state
department farmers are probably
well aware receives their
ability to make regulations
based upon EPA sign off and so
we're happy to work together as
this goes to the process to
clarify that I'm sure it's.
And so you I do something before
you go to government elections.
Shares
are present so that would be the
to continue through the process
to to get it that's what we
agree with the this year club
that we would work within and
between committees to be able to
get that amendment on just so
that there's no question
whatsoever we think this we're
not is and some of these less
this legislation or there's
maybe some potential for someone
to say that this is allowable we
want to make sure this
completely clear we're happy to
work together to do.
Thank you appreciate that all
right we'll go to the committee
Sir are there any questions.
Okay I'll move it to pass.
We have a two passed.
Second I'll second thank you
okay.
is there any opposition.
Okay great you have in the past
with the.
Five two zero.
Here's to the male committee I
was on this for four years thank
you.
All right next
Madam chair representative has
had to run to the labor
committee but it's coming back
as soon as he's done okay so he
has a little bit of time
we have Representative Lara.
House Bill three eighty nine no
ID cards card feed for homeless
individuals.
Enter members of the committee I
do have an expert witness online
hello.
We can your access madam chair.
Casey.
Thank.
They not.
On.
Okay so I'm just going to I'm
just going to move forward if
she comes back on the mobile for
about on okay can you watch for
her.
So House Bill.
I'm sorry to tax for the soon
link or anything or she said she
was on.
It does you have another name on
the.
Computers using us as this is
when to be let in but she's not
on the list issue.
Okay.
Representative million.
Sure these are hand.
Should be a waiting room.
Yeah.
I wonder if she's on the wrong.
She may be.
Yeah
okay great.
She on mentor.
Yes yes yes yes it came along do
you want to go ahead thank you
yes yes chair members the
committee house bill three
eighty nine is of a bill that is
seeking to eliminate the ID fees
for homeless individuals whether
they be homes dolls homeless
youth what what what the what
we're trying to accomplish is
getting these individuals
identification cards in order
for them to access public
services in order for them to be
able to identify themselves as
needed with with law enforcement
or other agencies so this bill
and and in my opinion is is not
only an accountability bill
because we are making people
accountable to identify
themselves but it also is is an
opportunity for.
Persons who otherwise wouldn't
have access to certain
resources to give that access
with the state issued ID and
what that manager I'd like to
introduce my expert witness data
below data would you like to say
anything.
I thank you for listen to this
and considering this this is
really an important bill that
really could change a lot of
people's lives and pretty much
instantly
you know we've we've got a lot
of stakeholder input about what
we kind of felt like would be
the best thing that they could
possibly need right now and I
want you to tell I wanted to
make sure that you knew that you
are the ones who said that they
need us the most you know
providers of course we want to
make sure that we're helping
them out of the camp of the you
know that they need in order to
get benefits now you know the
employment a place to live
anything so you know five
dollars ten dollars is a sound
like a lot unless you don't have
five dollars or ten dollars.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair with that
with that we stand for questions
thank you okay we'll go to the
audience is there anyone in this
issue.
Okay continueing do.
Okay and those in support in the
audience.
Six.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee provided a
representing do you want to come
to the right just make sure
everyone can hear you.
Thank you very.
Linda Siegel representing the
coalition to end homelessness
and we strongly support this
bill.
Thank you.
Okay anyone on to okay.
NMCA.
Right go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Katherine
Montoya I'm with NM can an
organization that partners with
young people impacted by foster
care juvenile justice and
homelessness to improve their
transition to adulthood we
support House Bill three eighty
nine we see that accessing
identification documents is an
issue that most of the young
people we work with I struggle
with and lack of ID prevents the
room securing employment housing
banking and so forth we need to
remove barriers to access in the
fee is a barrier to someone in
this position this bill will
help ensure that people
experiencing homelessness can
get a ninety and can move
forward in other areas of their
lives I urge you to vote in
favor of house bill three eighty
nine thank you.
Thank you.
Are you able.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you to the representative for
bringing this important bill I
Maria Griego with New Mexico
Center online poverty in the
center stands in strong support
of this bill I'm having an idea
is critical to getting a job
finding housing and receiving
benefits unfortunately the cost
of obtaining ideas often cost
prohibitive for folks who are
surviving day to day or minute
by minute.
Similar legislation already
eliminated the department of
health statutory fee for birth
certificates for people
experiencing homelessness this
is one small step that we can
take as the state to improve the
lives of individuals
experiencing homelessness and to
mitigate the housing and
homelessness crisis our state is
experiencing thank you.
What we need.
Go ahead to enter.
New Mexico I've been born and
raised in New Mexico and I am
here in support of this bill
because I believe that people
who are impacted by homelessness
especially and you
are.
A greater risk of like the
little money matters in this
case.
When you're when you're a mother
you're homeless you know that
the the difference between you
by diapers for your baby or
hacking and get an idea so I
think this is a great thank you.
Three to get okay thank you is
there anything else you'd like
to add a note here with that
we're I stand for questions okay
thank you Committee the question
Representative locked thank you
madam chair thank you Mr
democratic this chair.
That's.
But
is this ID card this evening
whether a person is a citizen or
not madam chair representative.
Custer.
Madam chair of Representative
black no no wouldn't this is
just a basic idea.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr **** here so could this be
new staff for those who want to
vote on election if they want to
register for instance madam
chair Mr Coster.
Madam chair representative
I think when when someone
registers the asked for improper
license in the system I think it
just requires license but I'm
not I'd like to defer to miss
miss Malone if she has an answer
for that.
I really do not that that's a
good question I'm I'm not quite
sure about that.
So Madam chair representative
like I I believe that you need
the state issued driver's
license four two to register to
vote thank you madam chair thank
you Mr **** chair so then my
last question is just regarding
what constitutes a homeless
individual it's probably in the
building or somewhere but do you
have to prove homelessness or is
there some kind of.
Process that you need to go
through to get your ID Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative so
what we will the definition that
we used and in this bill is the
the definition used in the
McKinney vento act
and so it it doesn't applies
persons who are doubling up with
friends relatives for whatever
reason people were living in
shelters obviously and in in
million people are living in
inadequate the spaces of spaces
are meant for human habitation
and so on and so on so I think
up.
What they would have to do is is
usually these individuals on all
defer to my to my all US might
expert witness determine if she
if she has some additional
information but based on my
experience and my knowledge of
this if someone for example it
is living in a shelter they can
use that address or third
leading L. or staying at with
friends or relatives they can
use that address
Madam chair representative Dana
would you do you have anything
else that's about.
What we did for birth
certificates was create a
document that was a self
attestation form.
And so you know I know there
might be some concern that that
could be abuse but if we talk to
the pardon of health you know
over the past two years as we
passed that prefers certificates
it's only been about.
Was it fifteen hundred I believe
is what.
And see.
Okay just.
Just a second.
Kommentar thank you madam.
Representative missed.
I can't see that more one.
Thanks.
But that's okay I I just want a
new definition was but if they
bring this I can't even tell
acting that that satisfies my
question yes definition that
that all service providers use
that receive HUD funding so it's
consistent.
Perfect all right thank you
madam chair thank you Mr chair
this tier.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lord.
Madam chair and.
Mr **** chair.
The card is.
Supportability deal with a few
questions is there an age
bracket or age limit on who
would be eligible for this like.
To get this idea Madam chair
representative there's no okay
and I liked thank you
what address of the gonna put on
the idea if they don't have an
address I don't know how to use
in New Mexico mentor to many
other places can't appeal box so
what address what they put on
there.
Madam chair representative I'd
like to defer to the small one
for the.
Use the the staff at the address
for me the agency that they're
working with you know perhaps to
get mail there sometimes you
know any agency that they're
working with our schools would
be able to help them with that.
Yeah thank you Mr I just want to
questions of like okay yeah that
makes sense it would use an
agency the reason that I asked
you about the ages because I'm
thinking of this might be really
good way to catch some of our
missing children that are
right of ways because of their
they get that ID and a law
enforcement says what your name
is a C. Susie Smith and that's
really the name and have a day
they can see the Michael to
provide some are missing
children or children the sex
trafficker children that are
addicted to drugs were on the
street so I I completely support
the bill thank you chair thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative lord you're right
on the right here right all of
them thank you.
Any other questions from the
committee I'm of the past it
also I just wanted to ask going.
Posted
So when people go how did they
verify that they're homeless to
MPD.
So madam chair I'd like to defer
to agency will offer that.
Well first we don't have to
prove that we live anywhere if
we do if we are housed so we
probably would want to do that
them I mean.
So.
The question sure how does
someone verify hit their
homeless.
So it like we were saying you
know with the for certificates
we actually had a self
attestation form that you know
people can fill out while
they're there get their getting
their first certificate so we
would be the same sort of thing
that we would hope to do with
ID's there's nobody verifying it
again we don't verify you know
that everybody lives at the
address that they do put down
so.
Why would we do that for them.
Okay because in the D. don't
they have to have proof of
residency.
Yeah you know again I if you
don't have a please you know
maybe they would use the address
for the agencies are working
with.
That manager they would also
there's thing it's at the shop
for the would use that address
as well or there's with friends
or relatives in the.
It just it would put in the do
you know.
Sorry.
Yeah okay we have a motion for
do passes through second the
second okay thank you there any
opposition okay you have a due
to the I thank you madam chair
thank you committee.
Thank you.
All right we made it last one is
house bill two twenty five.
criminal offense definition and
we're bringing this back
I guess because we did table it.
So we need to have a motion to
bring it from the table madam
chair having.
Having voted in the affirmative
to table I move that we I'm
table it make it the next order
of business thank you very much
is there any objection okay
thank you
and we do have an amendment the
we could.
Have a motion to bring that to
this no we don't have to do that
for right we have to yes I move
it for discussion thank you.
And you have a copy of it yes
okay great
Representative would you like to
go ahead and explain your
amendment and at that yes chair
thank you thank you members of
the committee I think this
question on operating haven't
with the some of the
representatives here on this
committee we came up with this
amendment and madam chair if
you'd like to read line by line
the amendment to do that as
well.
then Trevor pulls the house
consumer and public affairs
committee the following
amendments to house bill two to
five I'm page for between line
seventeen and eighteen yes Sir
the following new section
section to section thirty one
dash twenty six dash four and M.
S. eight nineteen seventy eight
building laws nineteen ninety
four chapter one forty four
section four as amended it is
amended in red and demanded to
read.
Three thirty one dash two six
dash for victims rights a victim
shall have the right to be
treated with fairness and
respect for the victims dignity
and privacy throughout the
criminal justice process timely
disposition of the case see the
reasonable protected reasonably
protected from the accused
throughout the criminal justice
process the notification of the
court proceedings he attend all
public court proceedings the
cute has the right to attend F.
confer with the prosecution G.
make a statement to the court at
sentencing and and and.
Post sentencing hearing for the
accused H. R. to to shoot from
the person convicted of a
criminal offense that because
the victims were lost or in need
of injury information about the
conviction sentencing
imprisonment escape or release
of the accused how the
prosecuting attorney notify the
victim's employer if required by
the victim of the Mississippi
Mississippi of the victims
corporate cooperation and the
testimony in the court
proceedings that may.
The card.
Eight four this this is a date
the absence of the victim from
work for good cause but we
receive any property belongs to
the victim that is being held
for evidence evidentiary
purposes by a law enforcement
agency or the prosecuting
attorney unless there are
compelling evidentiary reasons
for retention of the victims
property.
I'll be informed by the court
the sentencing proceeding that
the office under is eligible to
earn.
You can see New Jersey.
Orient.
Yet stood towards which is from
the offender sentence and the
amount of meritorious
productions that may be earned
by the offender and.
And we notified by the district
attorney of the availability of
the procedures to apply for
crime victims.
Representative depreciation
including the fact and any such
recovery shall be offset by any
recovery eligibility for
recovery help available from
third party resource including
workers compensation private
insurance or settlement from us
with pursuant to section thirty
one dash twenty two dash
fourteen in a state nineteen
seventy.
That's the amendment.
Okay
other any questions about the
amendment.
I was just on the amendment okay
is there any opposition to
passing the of it okay you have
a deep pass on your amendment.
And so now go did you just say
anything else.
Your okay and of us go to the
audience those in support of the
bill.
Would you like to speak or just
show your.
One minute please.
Chair members the committee so
we saw deputy chief of the New
Mexico state police we stand
strong support of this bill
For the reasons mentioned state
because we're in the previous
version shows all the reasons
mentioned previously but we
think it's important that the
approval to the for our of
officers that are victims they
receive the same treatment that
they would get if they were a
victim off the job
and so we are sponsoring the
bill and we strongly support
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marcos certain on
behalf of the administrative
office of district attorneys
as was discussed in the prior
hearing of this bill I just to
reiterate that we believe that
this was a mistake when the
law enforcement officers were
Sir separated with with crimes
against them from the criminal
code that this was just an
oversight and that they should
fall under our receive rather
the same rights as any other
victim in the state thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Thank.
What else.
Support okay is there anyone in
support of the user how many
three three okay just one minute
please.
Good afternoon my name is
Jesse come may tell and I want
to support the bill as the wife
of a Leo.
Thank you next.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes I can hear you go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is David for
the summer chief deputy
Bernalillo county sheriff's
office and we are in support of
house bill two twenty five we
believe that it would help to.
Mitigate lessen the amount of
five stacks against law
enforcement officers and we also
believe that law enforcement
should be given the same
protections are provisions and
the communities we serve there
so thank you.
Hey next.
The.
The.
Go ahead.
Yeah I mean it yourself please.
The act please on mute yourself.
Okay we'll have to go on.
If you are.
T. cells are.
Go ahead you have one minute.
Hello madam chair representative
can you answer it yes.
I want thank you for allowing me
to speak I am so sorry condoning
assault assault on the police
chief for Las Vegas.
I am so in support of house bill
two twenty five.
I believe in today's society and
Clemente today's Clemente
officers are being targeted
because they're specifically
officers I think they should be
protected under the victim's.
Crimes Act it is for two common
that we see officers being
victimized because they do wear
that uniform and again I I am in
support of house bill two twenty
five and thank you for allowing
me to speak.
Thank you is there anyone else.
Hi Tracy.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you and you yourself.
Is yeah okay
But the staff to get.
Right no one else in support
okay thank you is there anyone
in opposition from the audience.
Okay funds do okay we'll go back
to do with anything else Madam
my experts would like to address
the.
Madam chair and committee
members I want to specifically
address one of the issues that.
Madam chair that you brought up
last time about conflict of
interest and I as I thought
about it more I do I can see
envision where there could be
situations where there could be
a conflict
I'm sure you know prosecutors
district attorneys already have
the ability to send cases to
conflict counsel for an
independent prosecutor if a
conflict arises and also I want
to point out that depend
defendants through their
attorney can also if they see a
conflict they can motion the
court to disqualify the
prosecutor's office the entire
office that is actually happened
to me in my career so that they
do have that option if they feel
there's a conflict that the
prosecutor does not feel
basically.
Thank you madam chair and also I
just like to in closing madam
chair you know our law
enforcement officers.
There are victims every time
they go on the street to protect
our families and I just feel as
a state we need to support them
and they're out there protecting
us it's time for us to predict
and then protect them madam
chair and what that will stand
for questions there's a new okay
thank you Sir are there any
questions from the committee.
of the two passed a second again
I've I need to question.
What do I do of the.
When you were mentioning
The disqualifying a person
Pat how would that process look
like or what have you what would
that look like well if if if I
is elected district attorney
feel that there's a conflict for
for whatever reason there have
been situations in the past
where
I think the crime victim for
whatever reason loses confidence
in us
and I respect that so at that
point I would just for either
one of the other district
attorneys to take the case or
AODA Mr Cernat could take the
case that's that's one thing
that we do not sometimes defense
attorneys and and prosecution
agree.
So if that happens then to put
the defense attorney can file a
motion to disqualify the
prosecution office the entire
office based on what they feel
is a conflict
I'll give you an example it
happened
We it was a re trial in the
murder case and the defendant
thirty two dependence father and
son and subsequent to the first
trial we happen to hire someone
who was.
Related to both of the
defendants and had in fact had
an interaction with them time of
the crime.
so the defense attorney filed a
motion to disqualify the entire
office and the district was
disqualified and the Attorney
General in.
K. so that's that's how it would
look normally hopefully as a
prosecutor I can see the
conflict one of my attorneys
brings it to me there's a
conflict here sometimes we have
defendants who are also victims
that can be accomplished by if
we felt like there was a time
click with a particular law
enforcement officer was
becoming too involved so to
speak and trying to go beyond
the victim's rights which would
be
Trying to control the case which
victims rights does not allow
anyone the victim to control the
case so we didn't feel that that
would be something that I could
contact one of the other
thirteen district attorneys or
Mr about is or Mr tortoise and
see if we if they would take the
K. as a conflict.
Also and if the officer is going
to receive all pay medical
insurance coverage workers
compensation and restitution how
would they.
need to go to about that those
kinds of what what kinds of
things we can do with all those
other
Average right madam chair that's
a good question and and actually
they may not the district as a
prime acting like I think it was
Representative Romero's
question.
And also Representative Thomson
is question that's that's why we
decided we did add that line
there was already the thirteenth
right in the victims of crime
act already said that the
district attorneys have to
notify the victim of CBRC in the
right to apply
however we added what is our
what is already a statute which
is already part of CVR C. which
clearly states that all
collaterals resources have to be
exhausted before they're
eligible and in fact as
sometimes happens CBRC gives an
award and then they get a big
settlement say they have to
reimburse the state to see the
Garcia for the seniors the money
so they they do it is in the
statute they have to exhaust
every
every other avenues so for
police officers it could be
personal it certainly would be
workers comp
Deported order restitution and
that's in every case
You know the restitution kind of
depends on the defendant or the
queues ability to pay so but
whatever compensation they get
from whatever source that has to
be taken into account and that
has to be utilized first an
exhausted before CBRC will
consider a payment to them and
if I may add to that madam chair
I think it's all going to be up
to the extent of the injury.
That's where they're probably
exhausted workman's comp
insurance probably it all
depends how he also really hurt
these officers are I think we
would be aware this act would
kick in particular receive
money.
So are there other avenues like
increasing workman's comp for
officers that could be done or
you know if they're already
getting
a salary and health insurance
for any injuries things like
that how many cases have had to
go or would have gone
for info that might.
Well madam chair the last time I
looked at the statistics it was
It was less than three percent
for example activated batteries
we looked at aggravated
batteries because that would be
the one move most likely we're a
victim would need some sort of
compensation potentially and out
of all the aggravated batteries
in in my district for example
which is three counties it was
less than three percent
so.
When you're using the word
picked up I'm using the word
police officer.
Okay so apologies mention.
So
police officers right now I I
can't speak to workers comp I
think that's a whole nother I
you know I'm that's an
employment law question and
unfortunately I'm Madam I'm not
an employment lawyer but I I
think that it would be more
difficult to to assist them in
that manner and the reason why
is because this this bill
frankly doesn't.
Change anything that they can do
right now it doesn't change what
CVR C. does really except for
and I I know that in the past
they have allowed officers who
are hurt even though they're not
enumerated to apply for CBRC
it's a very small percentage
because again you have to
understand is going to be after
every other avenues so after
their private insurance's
exhausted after workers
compensation because the workers
comp is mandatory I mean the
police agencies there officer
gets Hawker they have to pay
them for those injuries how long
that lasts I I really don't know
the answer to that madam chair
that would be that would be a
for a workers comp claim a
lawyer but I do I do know that
we're talking about also as
Representative Castellano
mentioned not everybody that
every officer who is hurt or
assaulted is going to apply for
required restitution omitted
from any source because
retirement aggravated assaults
as well
and at not all activated
batteries result in great bodily
harm but I don't know if you if
you remember the young lady on
the call on Saturday her husband
unfortunately was was shot twice
in the line of duty and her
workers comp she did tell me I
mean that that was exhausted so
but he's he's requiring long
term care he's requiring
physical therapy
and and some other things so
that it would be it would be
this would be a small
percentage.
Of the aggravated batteries and
then it would be a smaller
percentage of the aggravated
battery some police officers
because not all of them of any
gets hurt so badly that workers
comp won't take care of any
medical bills okay thank you
very much of the the madam chair
well it up Mr Representative re
take over I gotta go to veterans
right now I got another built in
there well it's alright I just
of we got word that that CD R.
C. is in support of this and I
have a nephew who sent these
officer involved in I could see
where the family I just want to
clarify a few things so we thank
you very much we do have a
motion for to pass in the
second.
Okay and is opposition.
For the past.
I see none.
Yes
As amended but I have a couple.
Please everybody.
We have a deep pass on your bill
as amended thank you members of
the committee madam chair.
Appreciate it thank you
Representative Thomson for.
Thank you guys you're welcome
thank you okay we do have a
quick note that
On another bill there was
someone who wanted to clarify
and Mr Thompson are you going to
make okay you're here to say
that I'm okay Mr park yes I
agree.
We're not quite done Mr park
needed to clarify something on
the other bill we have for
three.
So three four three yes good
afternoon madam chair
representative so I apologize
for not having been here earlier
my name is all part I am the
registered lobbyist on behalf of
the New Mexico brewers guild
along with Jason Weaks that is
not to be confused with the
national association of brewers
I.
On house bill three forty three
the official position of your
New Mexico brewers and I was
just looking why do you say your
New Mexico brewers because their
homegrown and they've been
supported by the legislature you
heard me yes I earlier on it so
it's your New Mexico brewers is
that we re specially neutral on
House Bill three forty three
there are and the reason we are
neutral so that the committee
knows I can clarify is that we
have a wide group of diverse
members from all over the state
some to exclusively brewing but
so also do brewing and
distilling and the exception of
the stealing from three four
three is what let your New
Mexico brewers to be officially
neutral on the on the
legislation because we are
trying to avoid any.
I think.
Internal turmoil between our
brewers endorsing to distilling
as well we understand the
national brewers like the
legislation and that's great but
now we're here in New Mexico we
do things a little bit
differently and I will say this
would have really thought
personal whatever really loved
about working with the New
Mexico brewers guild is that
there's so collaborative it is
really an interesting
organization and orange
interesting community because
their competitors right and
they're always fighting to like
who's got the best quarter staff
or whatever it is but I happen
to be on their list serve it is
really interesting because
you'll have you know Mr park if
you could keep it concise and.
So the point is they're very
supportive of one another and
that's what we're trying to
maintain so right now we are
neutral on on legislation I know
that there was some confusion on
that earlier but I did want to
quit I thank you for clarifying
that thank you madam chair
appreciate.
In in recess until Thursday one
thirty.
And.
