Like I said earlier i'm kind of
wanting to send a little sign up
to the senate go on record that
I think we need to do a lot.
I understand there's much work
to be done but to be able to do.
That I represent.
Yes on.
Conversation today yes we've had
other conversati.
If two different finance groups
right now one reviewing budget
trying to stick with.
Estimation where some.
Conversations on oh well we need
to talk about so we need to talk
about that and then we have
another finance group on the
senate side just trying to do
everything to hold it back
and I just don't see a good
total consensus on this my job
at the end of the day is
protected.
From a district two standpoint.
The conversation the day
congratulate to chair of the
work to check and i.
And i'm and madam chairman might
like my I was a yes but I said I
have concerns and they do have
insurance
registered right now she is a
big issue you know and I know I
don't think you should be
dependent on what.
We're gonna have a big problem a
little issue and in all
I you know you should be better
now do you think about these
seeing what what if they don't
do it now that we're worded what
if there's a big big word you
know that that's just my
construed madam chair and
appreciate what you've done I
will speak
in a mure to help you out as
much a possibly can in the whole
group the whole committee here
once you know what's going on.
And if I may mister chair just
during a through this process.
Perhaps we do start having the
house bill three consensus
conversation towards the
interest into the interim.
And perhaps we start asking for
these numbers earlier and
perhaps we take a deeper
interest before we come into
session the same way his c does
when they're getting ready to
put together their budget
framework so you know this is
when I opening for me i've
learned a lot thank you to every
single member on this committee
I I still think it's one of the
best committees if not the rest
what we have and let's continue
to make this process better
thank you and manager you know
and it is a learning thing for
everybody it really is to learn
I learned a lot.
In the last.
It's a my opener so we need to
be more of
the line more into our crime
and.
Will that be said we do have a
department holder three and
