Representative Senator Cortez,
here.
Rivers represent a small
Vice Chairana here.
Sarah McQueen.
Here. We have quorum. OK, um,
welcome everyone, um.
We have, we have 5 bills on the
agenda. Uh, it's, it's not quite
as ambitious as it might look,
uh, because we've already heard
3 of the bills and they're
coming back with uh minor
amendments or changes.
Uh, so hopefully those don't
take very long.
Uh, our first bill is House Bill
548, oil and gas.
Equalization Tax Act, before we
get started with that,
Uh, any questions, comments,
announcements on the committee?
OK, we are planning on meeting
Saturday at 8, in this room.
It won't get out an agenda, um.
After today's meeting.
Uh, so with that, um, let's
start with House Bill 548 uh
represent Dixon, are you
presenting that or is
Herman Small was here a moment
ago and walked out of the room.
OK.
Um, a gorilla, could you see if
Chairman Smalls out there and
tell him we're ready for him.
There he is.
Whenever you're ready, Chairman.
Excellent. Uh, thank you, Chair,
committee, uh, Ishmael Torres,
uh, who's our chief economist,
is here from the LFC, uh, LFC
serves in a technical capacity,
not in an advocacy sort of for
or against any bill, so they are
technical questions.
Uh, he is here to help answer
that.
I believe we also have our tax
and revenue department here
today as well.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee, House
Bill 548 proposes to equalize
the effective tax rates, state
tax rates for oil and natural
gas.
Mr. Chair, the effective tax
rate for natural gas for natural
gas is uh roughly 4%.
While the rate, Mr. Chair,
committee for natural gas is for
natural gas is 4%.
For oil is 3.15%.
Mr. Chair, committee, some of
this seemingly can be traced to
the mid uh late 80s and mid 90s.
In the late 80s, federally,
there was an effort to stimulate
production of natural gas from
tight formations, uh, and a
reduction in the federal tax
rate, Mr. Chair, committee, our
understanding is that in uh the
early 90s, early to mid 90s,
1993, um, New Mexico raised the
uh state tax rate on natural
gas, uh, in effect, compensate
for that.
Mr. Chair, committee, the um
production of natural gas has
been wildly and important and
leave successful or not only in
New Mexico, but for the nation
and internationally, um, that's
helped power uh electricity
generation, uh, and is driven
much of the replacement of coal,
for instance.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee, we've
never gone back to address the
unequal nature of the natural
gas and oil tax rates in New
Mexico. And so, Mr. Chair,
committee, we propose doing so
at this time.
Oil production as we've talked
about in this committee, many
others on the floor is
incredibly important for the
state of New Mexico. It is right
now the foundation upon which we
are investing in, I think Mr.
Chair, uh committee in many ways
transforming our state.
Um
And
This will equalize the tax rates
or natural gas and oil currently
again oil, uh, is taxed at a
3.15% effective tax rate.
4% for natural gas. Um, and, uh,
we proposed doing that.
With that, uh, I don't know if
there's
Yeah, I think that gets us
started.
OK, um,
So before we go to the
committee, we go to the audience
just by a show of hands, who is
here in support of House Bill
548.
Who is here in opposition.
So we have lots of opposition.
So we're, we're gonna take, uh,
you know, it's been our practice
to take 3 people from the
audience and uh two people
online. If you'd like to speak
in opposition, please step
forward.
And, you know, so unfortunately,
um,
Because we only take a certain
amount of people, sometimes we
have a little bit of a rush to
the center, um, but that was
very civilized. Thank you, um,
you have, uh, 2 minutes.
Is your mic on?
Let's use the other mic.
Testing, testing.
Testing. That's much better. Why
don't you start from the
beginning?
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies. I'm also speaking on
behalf of the Independent
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico and the Permian Basin
Petroleum Association. House
Bill 548 decreases the economics
of wells in New Mexico, making
our state a less attractive
option for development and
production.
New Mexico hosts two of the most
prolific basins in the world,
but this bill ensures that it
becomes less attractive for
business development and growth
potential.
A production loss means a hit to
the state's budget, less
resources for environmental
stewardship, potential increase
in abandoned assets and a loss
of jobs.
This bill will slow innovation,
research and development and
technology investment in New
Mexico. This is another
punishment on a politically out
of favor industry that provides
continuous technological
innovation and environmental
stewardship, nearly half of the
state's budget, over 100,000
direct and indirect jobs and
affordable, reliable and
sustainable energy production.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, standing in opposition
to House Bill 548. According to
the New Mexico EDD, our tax
climate has been recognized by
Ernst and Young and the Tech
Foundation for its recent
improvements. But too often
these advancements are not given
long enough of an implementation
period before legislative
changes are introduced. Economic
diversification and development
rely on a stable and predictable
tax environment. House Bill 548.
the exact opposite by disrupting
that stability, by imposing
additional burdens that increase
costs and create uncertainty.
Such instability will likely
harm existing business and
undermine our state's overall
economic growth. We respectfully
oppose HB 548, knowing it will
harm the current industry in the
state and create an environment
unwelcome to new business and
development. Thank you.
Morning, Mister Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bollington and I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, which
respectfully opposes House Bill
548.
Oil and gas industries
contributing nearly half of our
general fund revenues, making
our state awash in cash and this
cash is being invested in
various trust funds,
establishing a solid financial
future for the state, a future
where much of the general fund
in the future can be supported
from the interest of these
funds, a future where funding
for our children's education is
assured in a future where we can
confidently navigate volatile
economic times. So given this
backdrop,
The Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce finds it difficult
to support any tax increase on
any entity at this time and
therefore.
Thank you. Um, we're gonna take
2 people online, uh, if you'd
like to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand. Uh,
first up, we have Sany Chamber
of Commerce.
And to members of the committee.
My name is Bridget Dixon,
president and CEO of the Santa
Fe Chamber of Commerce, and we
respectfully oppose HB 548. This
bill would increase New Mexico's
reliance on oil and gas, making
it harder for other industries
to grow. Higher production costs
will be passed down to consumers
driving up fuel and energy
prices, which is fairly impacts
lower income communities even in
cities like Santa Fe where wages
and the cost of living continue
to fluctuate.
In, industries tied to oil and
gas such as construction,
logistics and manufacturing can
reduced demand
leading to job losses. If
production declines, the state
could actually see lower overall
tax revenues, harming businesses
and service providers instead of
Raising taxes on the industry.
We should focus on economic
diversification
by investing in technology,
bioscience, and sustainable
manufacturing expanding tourism
and supporting small businesses
through grants and lower
start-up taxes. We urge you to
vote against HB 548. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll take one more
online, Kyle Armstrong.
Good morning. My name is Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Kyle Armstrong. I'm
the president and CEO of
Armstrong Energy Corporation in
Roswell, a small independent
operator in the state. Uh, I
would urge this committee to
take a closer look at this and,
and what it might actually do as
it currently stands, uh, and it
could potentially actually cost
the state money. Uh, my company
ran projections based on current
tax rates and the new proposed
rates. It's certainly appears to
result in new tax dollars.
But it also leads to premature
shut in and new costs, uh, and
loss of royalty revenues in the
way we projected even if we had
a 10% royalty rate because it's
not all state, uh, leases at a
10% effective royalty tax rate.
It's a wash, it's not a loss,
and that's nothing to say for
income taxes, loss of jobs,
investment, and everything else.
So I think we need to have a
different approach to this. Uh,
second, do not object to.
so long as we have a purpose, as
others have said, we already
have billions of dollars that
we're stashing away right now.
What is the plan for this new
money? What, what purpose is it
going to serve? So again, I
would urge this committee to
look a little bit more closely
at it, what it will actually
accomplish in what it wants,
because it is currently at the
point where it is an inefficient
tax rate. Thank you.
OK, would anyone in the room
like to speak in support of this
bill.
It's then when they went online
like to speak in support of this
bill, please raise your hand.
Mill of Fielman.
Miller
Thank you. Sorry, just was able
to unmute. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Camila Feibelman with the
Sierra Clus Rio Grande chapter.
This seems pretty
straightforward, equalizing the
tax rate between the oil and gas
industries. These are publicly
held resources extracted public
lands and the tax rates are set
by the legislature to ensure
that our state is properly
compensated.
for the resources that we allow
to for their own private income.
So seems straightforward
seems smart. Thank you to the
sponsor and the members of the
committee.
OK. Well, um,
Youth, uh, yaka.
You need it on your end?
OK.
So I don't see any other hands
in support.
Back to the sponsor, uh,
Representative Small, is there
anything you'd like to add
before we go to the committee?
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you, um.
I, I don't think so, Mr. Chair.
I think we all acknowledge the
importance of uh production, uh,
one comment, Mr. Chair,
committee, uh, I think the Santa
Fe chamber mentioned, uh,
seemingly mentioned sort of
in-state refining.
Um, that Mr. Chair, committee,
as we all know the vast, vast,
vast majority of the oil
produced in New Mexico.
Vast majority of which is
produced in southeast New
Mexico, uh, goes, uh.
East, added Oklahoma a lot to
Texas and from there the markets
both nationally and
internationally. It's not
refined here in New Mexico. And
so the I think that, thank you.
OK, members of the committee.
Represent Murphy, Mr. Chair,
before, before I'd like to just
make one comment and a thank
you, if I could, I'd like to
thank the sponsor for adding,
uh, asking for this committee to
be added.
Um, initially, uh, Mr. Chair,
this only had one committee
which was tax and uh I did
approach uh Chairman Small asked
him to consider bringing it to
this committee because it this
is.
The substance of this, uh, would
be the expertise in this room.
And so I, I appreciate, uh, the
chairman.
Uh
Bringing it back here, knowing
that probably this is gonna be a
robust debate in here, so I
appreciate that.
Mr. Chair, thank you and thank
you to the ranking member for
suggesting it. Thank you for the
speaker for doing it and glad to
think it makes a lot of sense.
OK. Thank you for that, uh,
Representative Murphy.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, good
morning. Um.
Went to the restroom before I
came in, I realized that my eyes
were kind of bloodshot and it's
all your uh Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, it's all your fault and
probably representative Dixon
because I was up into the wee
hours studying your bill and
thinking about it and then I was
up early this morning.
And you've got at least uh one
regulatory compliance person,
uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, and
one accountant in Rosville that
also had bloodshot eyes, uh, and
are a little bit tired because,
um, I called to ask them how
this might impact my company
much as uh Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
uh.
Uh, Mr. Armstrong did, and so.
Um, this has a real effect on
small independent.
And um it adds a new reporting
requirements, uh, typically.
Reporting Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
uh, quarterly. This adds a
monthly reporting requirement.
Um, and then the financial
impact is huge. Um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, I asked for just two simple
numbers. One's, what is our
annual payroll? I've had a
pretty good idea of what that
was, but accountant confirmed
it. My little company, it's $2.5
million a year.
And then I ask um the reserve
and engineer.
Uh, what would this cost?
Uh
This company
And he came back with the number
of $947,000.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, it's
about 40% of my company's
payroll, which.
Is a big number uh for us.
Um
As I've done in the past, I've
tried to organize um uh my
thoughts and and notes.
And um I, I basically basically
brought broke things down into 4
sections. Uh, one is, uh, sort
of the history and purpose.
Uh, to, uh, is the structure.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, uh,
we're gonna, uh, I think go back
to why there is the difference
and I appreciate your
explanation cause it, it is
consistent with my recollection
of history at that time.
Um, I'd like to then go into um
some discussion about
competitiveness, comparisons to
other states and how this uh
positions us.
And then lastly um into the FIR
and some rough calculations that
I've made in terms of what this
might mean to the state. So,
Um, that's how I planned to
approach it, Mr. Chan,
um.
And I'll begin um by, by saying
I'm a little bit surprised. Um,
Uh, that we're, we're seeing
this bill, um, I'll, I'll say
that.
Um, at the conclusion, I think
that you will agree with me
that.
This does impact independence,
all companies in a big way, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair, I think you
also agree that that it impacts
small volume wells, what we call
stripper wells in in a very
major way and quite frankly, it
hurts.
Those, uh,
That
are hurting the most.
Even more and in that it hurts
the San Juan Basin, um, and in a
very big way.
So, um,
I appreciate that, that you
brought it in front of this, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair in front of
this committee.
Um
But I'd like you to
Because I've heard you talk
about this before, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, is the importance of
tax and regulatory certainty.
And I think this flies in the
face of that, but if you could,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, talk
about that a little bit and, and
Also to the stakeholder process.
You, Mr. Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
uh, you have a, a reputation for
robust stakeholder process and,
and using the interim process
representative Dixon, who Mr.
Chair, uh, is, is also on this
bill and it seems like those
principles were abandoned here
and, and I just, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, if, if you could, um,
talk about that a little bit
and, and, and perhaps why my or
my perception is, is, is not
right.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Murphy. Um,
just so I'm tracking that one is
sort of timing and stakeholder
process. What was the, I guess
the and then the, the first one
was uh regulatory certainty and
structure. I'll start with the
regulatory certainty and
structure, uh, along with sort
of tax rate, Mr. Chair,
committee, I, I fully agree that
regulatory structure uh and
business environment are very
important and Mr. Chair.
Committee Representative Murphy,
um.
The, uh, a great deal of sort of
what we see here, what we've
mostly seen within this
committee has been focused more
on sort of the regulatory um
side of things and that Mr.
Chair, Sam Murphy, uh, I
Increasingly take sort of a fine
like a look very at a detailed
level at that, um, in order, Mr.
Chair, I think and member Murphy
one sort of in the future,
ensuring that production
continues, um, and has a sort of
a strong playing field and they
were not inadvertently putting
in place things that um
Uh, give future administrations
the ability to curtail
production to be very blunt, and
Mr. Chair.
So I
I think that's very important in
this case, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, um, the
The inequity between the two tax
rates and learning a bit more
about the history of that.
Yeah, it seems like this is
something that was uh
But in place for good reason and
just never revisited.
And Mr. Chair, as we've seen,
obviously these massive
increases in production and well
over a 10x increase in oil
production, uh, sort of overall
or right it, yeah, over a 10x
increase. it's just something
that's been unaddressed. And Mr.
Chair, I think sort of
Feeling the responsibility to
make the a few and frankly the
fewest sort of tunes necessary
for this very important part of
New Mexico's industry and state
but to do that, um, in ways that
are uh make important uh changes
for the state was important to
me and Mr. Chair representative
uh Murphy, the, the fact that
our tax rate affect
would still be far below uh
other, many other states,
Wyoming, uh, Louisiana, those
places that are seeing increases
in rigs, although nowhere near
ours.
Um
That, uh
You know, that gives me, Mr.
Chair Repent Murphy, I think
continued confidence that New
Mexico is not sort of moving
into an outlier position we're
moving into a little bit more of
an equitable position, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy from the
timing and stakeholder
perspective, I think some of
that is just, it's part of the
session and uh
This has not been sort of a
robust conversation, although I
will say so, Mr. Chair, in terms
of the equalization, uh, I don't
know that that's been a robust
part of conversation, the tax
structure regulatory structure,
those have been and the
importance sort of the different
perspectives on importance have
been a robust conversation, but
um I think it is.
Bear to know that sort of the
You know, they, there are
Um
Yeah, that this wasn't a main
topic of conversation leading up
to this session.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, Mr.
Chair, I appreciate that
explanation, um, there are, I
think.
From my perspective, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair is, is sort of the
way this has been rushed is.
Has caused some structural
problems that I'd like to talk
about here in, here in a little
bit.
Um, but I would, um,
I want to go back to
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
the this, the idea of the timing
and
From what I've seen in my short
time up here, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, is, is that the state is
pretty flush with cash, um, and
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, the.
Um
You know, we're, the number I
recall is oil and gas is
generating somewhere around $13
billion or so a year uh to the
state.
Um, this is gonna take us to
maybe 13.4 in round numbers
according to the FIR.
And from my perspective is
there's not a.
A budget, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, budget emergency.
That I'm aware of.
And so this tax almost seems
punitive to me, uh, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, and could you
dissuade me from that
perception, uh, Mr. Chair of
some mercy, I will do my very
best to dissuade you from, uh,
as a punitive, uh, focus, Mr.
Chair, the committeesentative
Murphy, um.
There's
It is in my mind, very, very far
from a punitive, uh, tax, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Murphy, sort of the structure
and the time that we find
ourselves in is pretty
remarkable, uh, as we've talked
about in different ways.
The way I see it, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, we're in
the midst of the most important
time period in our state's
history, um.
Built largely in partnership
with production, Mister Chairent
Murphy, a great deal of the
extra revenue wisely by this
legislature.
Is, um, being.
Directed and invested in
strategic areas for the state.
And Mr. Chair, upset Murphy, the
um
SB 26, in fact, sort of all
direct oil and gas revenues in
our traditional track structure,
uh, after FY 25, so you're into
the foreseeable future, they all
go into the severance tax
permanent fund. None of those
direct revenues go into the
general fund. There are really
good reasons for that. It
provides a strong insulation,
but Mr. Chair I said Murphy, um,
The
The fact that we're unequal,
frankly, it surprised me when I
learned about that, and again, I
think that's largely a cases
where this was done many, many
years ago and hasn't been
addressed since.
Um
The with with uncertainty
federally, and I think with the
ability that the legislature has
shown in different ways. For
instance, we've reduced
childhood poverty by some
measures from 50th in the
country to 17th through
effective smart investment,
especially through our tax code.
Those are recurring costs.
And Mr. Chair Rep Murphy, in my
mind, this is very connected to
the sorts of
Um, not final, but really
important.
Uh, tuning of recurring
investments.
Either new investments or
offsetting on the tax side
investments that prepare the
state.
The best possible for the
future, and Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, during this
time where we see continued
strength and production, sort of
a solidification of our role is,
um,
The best place to produce.
It's
That ability to make some of
those final um
Tuning or tweaks, whatever you
want to call it from a recurring
perspective is very important
and we can't do that, Mr. Chair.
Seven Murphy in the budget now
without being um
Sort of
Going above our 6% annual growth
target on recurring spending and
risking the ability of the
legislature to make new
investments and be more exposed
to other uncertainties.
stay on the bill,
turn your mic back. It's it's on
now. Yes, sir.
So, um, one of the things that
that I'm very worried about is,
is that.
is that we've seen a number of
bills come through and they may
pass and they may not but but
with injecting a lot more
regular regulation into, into
the oil and gas industry.
And now we see an additional tax
and from my perspective as a
businessman, they're sort of the
same thing. The cost of doing
business, right? And so one of
the things that was really
curious that to me is, is that
This will affect development on
all lands, be it federal, state,
fee or tribal, or maybe not
tribal, correct, Mr. Chair, we
have the longer the practice
where tribes are able to impose
their own um make their own
decisions on the, yeah. OK. And
so, um, in one of the analysis,
I noticed that they had broken
out sort of the, the the
development by land ownership.
And what we find in the state
is, is that Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
that development on federal
lands is up some 13% from what I
recall.
Uh, state is down by about 9%
and fee is off by about 4%.
And so as we go through these,
these discussions on
regulations, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, and taxes.
Um, I hope that you can
appreciate that.
The trend seems to be that,
that, that oil and gas
production is being developed on
lands primarily administer
administered by the Bureau of
Land Management.
Less so by the OCD.
And that's worrisome to me,
quite frankly. And um
I won't belabor the point, but,
but as we continue discussions
in this committee, I hope we
keep that in mind because there
is this Mr. Chair Mr. Chair,
this connection between
regulation and tax, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, I just
want to briefly say overall, I
acknowledge and agree and Mr.
Chair Representative Murphy, I
think this, um.
Represents sort of.
Um
A strong sense that looking for
the financial best interest of
the state.
Is elevated andportance versus.
Many other sorts of potential
changes that we can be looking
at. That's obviously for the
full legislature, each and every
member to decide, but Mister
Cherupp said Murphy, looking at
our position now in the uh
strong continued and growing our
importance from a production
perspective.
I think it's fair to say that
for me this elevates that.
Um
Fiscal benefit for the state.
Versus sort of a focus across a
wider range. There are a few
other areas, Mr. Chair.
And not to go off the bill, but
I think acknowledging and
agreeing overall with your point
and that this elevates sort of
the thing that maybe is of the
most importance to New Mexicans
from affordability and other
perspectives that this village.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
the, I wanna um.
go back to the
To the direction of the, of the
money going to the general fund
and it was noted, I believe in
the FIR that that sort of Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, a reversal of
the course that that this body
has taken over the years.
Um, that by and large, the
funding that we're seeing coming
in is in many cases basically.
Hehold in the, in the trust
funds and so forth.
And the trend as I understand
it, has been that we want to get
away from general fund
volatility.
Yet this directs.
funds directly to the general
fund and will actually increase
that volatility.
And it sort of comes in also
with Mr. Armstrong, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair, Mr. Armstrong's.
Um
Point of
What is the purpose? Why is this
money needed? And for example,
I've been asked, is this?
Specifically gonna be used.
Or basically water structure,
water infrastructure or paid
family medical leave.
Is in Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair.
Given that that there's, there's
no real purpose stated did you
expand a little bit on how what
you see these funds going for
and and how they could be put to
use. Sure, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, um,
that's
Ultimately, should the bill pass
and going through the process,
it's part of the broader
legislative conversation.
Um
The purpose of going to the
general fund is uh Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, I think
fair to look at sort of
recurring needs and or um
values, and then there's some
uh.
Potential federal volatility
that may be sort of buffeted or
um by this bill, but Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, the, I
think.
Uh
As far as the specific purpose,
that's for the legislature to
work through.
I, I would note that again in
some key areas, including um
making life more affordable for
New Mexicans, particularly
through the tax code that's been
some of the recurring
investments of the state, um,
and that's, but the ultimately
the conversation is for the
entire legislature.
And some of the committees,
particularly where we head to
next for that conversation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, I'll, um,
Kind of leave my first section
of, of history and the, and the
process, except to say
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, given
The speed
um uh of that of this bill, the
lack of of of stakeholder
involvement.
I hope you can appreciate Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, that industry.
Feels like this sort of
contributes.
the uncertainty that we talked
about in the beginning. I'll
just leave it at that before I
move on, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair.
So off to the structure and I
appreciate your history because
I remember this history, and
that is, is that um there was a
uh
in the,
in the 90s, um, it probably was
actually tied to to the energy.
Bill at that point.
To develop a tight gas in uh
pipe sands that contain natural
gas and it was commonly referred
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair in the
industry, the section 29 tax
credit.
Um, I remember participating in
some of those hearings and the
thinking at the time was is
that.
Those tax credits were directed
towards tight gas sands, which
primarily exist in the in the
Northwest in the San Juan Basin.
And it was being used to
stimulate, um,
Development there.
Um, if I recall, there was a a
budget issue at the time and,
and as has happened, um,
Over the years, the legislature
has to look in all the
cubbyholes it can to fulfill
the, the basics of the budget
that the state requires.
And so, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, the thinking was is, is
that because of the large tax
credit given to the tight gas
sands.
That, um, the gas rate, the
percentage should, should go up
because of this federal credit.
Um, it actually almost, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, caused a split
in the industry because there's
gas produced in the, in the
Permian, of course, and there's
gas produced in the in the San
Juan.
And at the time, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, the, the thinking was is
that well the San Juan rate
might have to go very high.
6%, 7%.
Um, however, because of the way
the taxes were collected.
And, um, in order to kind of
equalize everything across
industry which just decided
that, well, the overall tax rate
really is perming gas or tight
gas sands from the San Juan
would go to 4%. That was.
Compromise within the industry,
the legislature and the
regulatory uh or the taxing
authorities.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, so,
You're right. This, Mr. Chair,
this should be revisited, but,
but from my standpoint because
that federal tax credit expired.
I want to say 23 years ago, I
believe it was in 2002.
The way to equalize this and and
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, is not
to bring.
The right, the oil rate up, it's
to bring the gas rate back down
to where it should be.
At 3.15, and Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, let me suggest to you
that
That I'm gonna return to the
statement and that is, is that
this will hurt the San Juan the
most.
And the reason is, is that
because.
The San Juan, a little bit of
activity that's up there is
based upon a new oil.
development
And by raising that rate, it's
gonna, it's gonna hurt them the
most and so.
Once again
Under the logic of equalization,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair,
shouldn't we, instead of being
here on oil and going to here,
shouldn't we be
gas and coming down to oil.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, could you
speak to that a little bit
because my logic and, and your
logic I think are are at odds,
Mr. Chair, Murphy, first, thank
you, um, for sort of the, the
context and I think it's really
a benefit to the legislature
that you're here with that
perspective, um, and, uh,
history and experience, and I
think overall the strong success
that we've seen in many
different areas around
production. Second, Mr. Chair,
Murphy, that would be a way to
equalize, um, I don't know what
the negative, uh, uh.
Reduction to our revenues would
be, but it would be obviously I
think significant. I don't know
if it would be as significant as
sort of the upward revision with
oil, uh, but it would still be a
significant reduction, um, and
Mr. Chair Representative Murphy,
the um
I think it's an interesting.
You know
How we balance the two and the
two basins in very different
parts of the state. We run into
that challenge, frankly around
quite often I would say on the
regulatory side, not just on the
tax structure side, uh, but Mr.
Chair, representative,
Um
With, you know, it starting at
this point, knowing that there's
a next committee and I think a
lot of conversation to go to
sort of balance.
Uh, interests and and uh values.
The oil right now is our is our
strongest obviously, um.
Export it's, it's driving as
we've talked about its
production, many, many things
and sort of the effective
discount.
That oil receives right now is
very substantial. So I'm
interested in, in that it's a
fair point. It would be a hit to
the general fund and Mr. Chair
of said Murphy, I think it would
um
For a uh not for a a resource
that's severed from the state.
It doesn't sort of move towards
giving more value back to New
Mexicans in the way that this
that 548.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
I, uh,
Um, I've asked for those numbers
as well and um.
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I, I
don't think it would be a huge
hit just because of of thinking
about the the the volumes,
especially out of the Northwest,
but you also have significant
volumes, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair of
of associated gas.
in the Delaware.
And so that would be an
interesting number to see, you
know, kind of where that, that
equilibrium hits and then um.
What that, uh, what that might
mean in terms of, of revenues.
And to me, um.
Where those revenues might go
because there's there's uh
there's certainly uh.
Um
There's certainly lots of needs,
um.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, now moving
on to the structure. I'm curious
about why
Are we creating a new tax.
Versus
Just simply amending the oil and
gas, uh, excuse me, emergency
school tax, which I think would
be the proper, the other way of
doing this correct, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Chair Murphy
committee, the reason is so that
the revenue goes to the general
fund and is recurring as if it
was if we amended that tax, Mr.
Chair of the revenue uh under SB
26 would go directly to the
severance tax payment.
Mr. Chairman, sure, that makes
sense to me. Thank you for that
explanation. Um.
Um
I think that probably gets us to
um my third area and that's, we
could, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair,
talk a little bit about
Um
Putting New Mexico in a
competitive position. In other
words, comparisons to other
states and so um I'm going to
look at.
A reference the FIR.
And um there's a chart on page
2.
That shows, and this has been
interesting to me, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, because
Uh, you can ask lots of
different people.
What is our effective tax rate
versus other states?
And they're all, uh, Mr.
Chairman, pretty close, but not
exactly the same, it seems like.
Um, it ranges anywhere from
Oh, a low of probably 8 or 8.25%
up to
Um, the chart here that shows uh
New Mexico at 9.1 and North
Dakota, for example, at 9.4. uh,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair and
Part of the difficulty, and
maybe this is, this is a
question for your expert that
Part of the difficulty it seems
to me, Mr. Chair, is we can't
compare apples to apples.
Some, some states have property
taxes that are very high, Texas,
for example.
And so when, when you start to
try to, try to do that, then,
then it gets a little squishy,
right? Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
but for now,
Um, if we could, um, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair, would you agree
that
The rates that are shown on the
FIR on page 2 or, or, or
generally.
Right? Would you agree with
that, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
particularly sitting next to the
chief economist who developed,
yes,
yes.
Good work. Um.
So, in going
To
Texas, for example.
Um
I show their
Oil tax rate.
At roughly 4.6%.
Oklahoma at 7%. North Dakota at
10% in New Mexico somewhere
around depending upon which
number you look at and the FIR
says 9.1, North Dakota is more
than 9.4.
Once again, there are some
subtle differences are are
actually important differences,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, is that
when you also look at the
royalty rates, those vary.
And, and that's a, that's a
factor, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair,
and then the other thing too
that I found, um, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, an expert you can speak
to this is that many states
have.
A lower rate for the early days
or the early months of, of
production.
And, um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair
and expert.
I, I show that Oklahoma drops
her rate down to 4%. They're
either tied to time, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair, or, or volume of
production.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair,
could you
Uh, uh, expert perhaps, could
you talk about that a little bit
about, about how you derive
these numbers and what some of
those differences are between
the states.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative Murphy, thanks
for the question. Um, our
approach was, as you mentioned,
because of the difficulty with
apples to oranges, you can't
simply sum these tax rates. We
take the production value by
state overall aggregate
production value by state.
And then we obviously divide
that.
Total tax revenue.
On these taxes. So we don't, we
don't actually need to get into
the weeds.
For this type of analysis based
on the timing of the tax rate,
we just take the total taxes
collected divided by the total
value produced and that's how
we're able to come to an
effective tax rate.
And for example, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair and expert, for
example, yeah, that makes sense
to me. So, so for example,
In Texas, you would include the
the property taxes.
Yes, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, make
sure you take the total of all
those taxes divided by the the
value of all that, and that's
the effective tax rate.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Expert, thank
you. Um,
Now on to some of the incentive
programs, um,
It seems to me that that
This bill does does is a is a
disincentive, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, for companies to come
into the state when they might
have
Um, a more favorable tax rate in
North Dakota or Texas or
Oklahoma because of what I'll
just say is our incentive
programs.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair and
expert, um,
as, as a general rule in tax
policy.
He find in your analysis, did
you find that?
That um that states that offer
that.
Um, many times, um,
Um, attract businesses that uh
uh versus states that don't.
Is that a fair economic
principle, Mr. Chair and expert.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Murphy, thanks for the question.
It's something that we think
about quite a bit and actually
the tax and revenue FIR has some
uh
References to that what we refer
to in the field as of course,
elasticity, and so, you know,
they, they go both ways if you
increase the tax, you may have a
negative effect on the from the
elasticity and then the opposite
can be true as well. Um, I think
that
What we find with elasticities
in particular is um effects on
the margins. So for those
producers who
could be on the verge of
becoming profitable or not, that
certainly matters a lot, but it
is likely not to be an
experience by the entire
industry who may not be on the
margin. So, for example, we
would see the broader economics
of the oil field being.
Much more impactful to um
locating decision making then
then maybe um you know,
Those on the margin that might
be affected by a change in tax
rate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, an expert.
Um,
I appreciate that. I'm, I'm
going to now move to sort of the
FIR and the financial.
Uh, impact in
I'm glad we have a an economist.
Uh, and
Here to help me with check my
math.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Chair and
expert.
When I do the calculations on
this.
I, I, I pencil it out as a very
bad investment, uh, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair, I want to take
you through that and and see if,
if you see it differently.
So what I did, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, as I took the FIR.
And just
It it basically, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, it's, it's gonna
generate.
The tax is projected to generate
somewhere between 395 million in
FY 26 to as much as.
Uh, 445 million in FY 29.
So for round numbers, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair, I, I assume 400
million a year.
For 5 years
Uh, which would be roughly $2
billion Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair.
Expert
Now
The oil and gas industry, I
think it's well documented, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair.
Is that we typically spend
between 110 and 125% of our free
cash flow or our profit.
Reinvesting
People many times will ask,
well, how can you do that? It's,
it's basically because we also
use that vehicles, uh.
Loan loan vehicles.
Loans and so forth.
So, in taking 110% of that
number.
Um, that equates 400 million a
year.
That equates to 440 million.
I rounded it up to 450 and
you'll see why here in a minute.
Um, is that it
Currently, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, the
Industry, um, probably the
average cost of a of a
horizontal well now is around
$10 million. They very probably
from 8 to 12 depending on depth
and formation and that type of
thing.
And so, if I took that $450
million and drilled with it.
I drill 45 wells a year.
450 divided by 10 million is 45.
Over 5 years, I would, I would
drill 225 wells.
With that money.
These whales make roughly a
million barrels of oil
equivalent.
And so that's um almost 200,
it's a little bit over maybe
1.1, 1.2, but let's call it 250
million barrels that will go
unproduced.
And at $80 a barrel.
That's roughly and it's and
currently we're at 68, but we've
been as high as 125 and just
somewhere between 50 and 100
seemed like a a reasonable
number.
And then I took the point, um,
9.1% that the FIR shows and that
would generate to the state just
that.
Almost $2 billion.
The amount of money that's being
collected over 5 years of this
tax.
Now, if you allow the industry
to invest that money, you'll get
the same amount of money, but
the, but Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair
and expert, the difference is,
You'll support all the jobs that
activity.
Um
Supports, right? Everything from
the local cafe to the local
grocery store.
And so
In my mind,
Why not
Let
The state get the multiple on
the investment.
The private company is making as
opposed to taking this tax.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, an expert.
Hey
Do you see my math and and be.
But my question is, why, why do
this?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Murphy. Um, I
think in our, in the, in the
FIR.
The
On the high end, there's sort of
an estimated 0.3% reduction in
production, if I remember
correctly.
That's based upon one study, Mr.
Chair Murphy out of uh
California so appreciate very
much your math and your
experience, uh, in our sort of
in my look at it, the um.
It it is
As the FIRs know, very
uncertain.
Unlikely that there is
Significant reductions in
production. Um, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I think there's
a fair likelihood that
production continues.
Uh, particularly with, uh,
pressures federally and
otherwise to increase
production, uh, continues on an
upward trend, not as steep as
it's been, but on a continued
upward trend, which um
So I'm not sure, Mr. Chair
Representative, that the sort of
negative effects that you
outlined there that uh sort of
Play, yeah, I'm, I'm less
certain.
And and see a very strong
continued upward growth in
production and the uh benefit
for New Mexicans, particularly
around affordability and other
ways if the legislature chooses
to prioritize.
That and then it goes back, Mr.
Chair Representative Murphy,
just to the recurring revenue
first question or uh just
dedication to the permanent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, Mr.
Chair, I think I'm
Getting close to the end of my
questions. I
I just, I, I did that math
because I had to look at it from
a from a business standpoint
with is this Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair and expert, is this a
sound business decision and you
can tell from my conclusion, I
don't believe it is.
Um, and, um,
I
I would differ, uh,
After 50 years in this industry,
I would, I would caution.
Um
Sort of relying on on a uh a
minuscule amount of of
Reduction uh effect, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, and the reason being
is.
The assumption behind that is
there's an unlimited amount of
investment pool that's
available. And quite frankly,
there's not.
And so, as companies make their
budgets,
This is 400 million a year
that's collectively out of that
investment.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, um, if,
if there was an unlimited amount
of money that could be allocated
to a company could be allocated
to drill horizontal wells in New
Mexico, then that might be true.
But Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, 400
and something million dollars a
year.
woe and over roughly 5 years.
There's a lot of
Development capital that's going
to go into the that's gonna go
onloyed.
For lack of a better term.
Um
I think that's
About got me covered, Mr. Chair.
Let me look.
Um
I'll just conclude by saying, I
think that.
Any time
There is this big of an impact
to any industry, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, there ought to be a
robust discussion and depending
upon uh the fate of this bill. I
don't totally disagree with,
with the reasons that you've
outlined, um, and there should
be probably a very hard look,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, at the
rate on gas and especially in
the San Juan, um, and I would
welcome the opportunity to
engage in that debate with you
at some point in those
discussions. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Senator Cortez.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, I kind of have a fun fact
for you. I have the largest
private and independent
exploration production company
in the nation in my backyard. I
mean, quite literally newborn
oil is literally right by my
house, Mr. Chair Representative,
and
Increasing this tax would cost
this company, Newborn Oil, that
is right in my backyard and
additional 46 million,
$864,000429.99.
Each year.
So Mr. Chair Representative, how
does imposing a tax of this
magnitude.
How does it not impact future
investments and jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative Senator
Cortez. Mr. Chair, Senator
Cortez, uh, particularly as the
within sort of the uh larger
producing um
Uh, ENTs that are out there and
you mentioned, I think Mr. Chair
said maybe right now per barrel,
one of if not the largest
producer in the state, um, the.
Their reinvestment is sort of
slowed a little bit. It's a very
stable sort of steady growth
path that and Mr. Chair
Representative, I think it
speaks to the tremendous value
that they're bringing to the
state through production, but
Mr. Chair Representative, it
also speaks to the uh
Really tremendous value of the
commodity that they're producing
in New Mexico, severing it's
publicly owned by all New
Mexicans, severing from uh New
Mexico soil in this case, oil.
So Mr. Chair Representative, the
um
Reinvestment and the continued
growth of the industry based
upon New Mexico's uh really
strong production profile.
I, I think should give us a
great deal of confidence that um
equalizing in this case is, is
a.
OK thing to do and Mr. Chair
Representative, it brings
enormous value to all the
citizens of New Mexico,
including through uh
Potentially things that are more
of making things more
affordable, uh, with the value
that would be garnered through
this bill.
Mr. Chair represented that
doesn't quite answer my question
about the impact to, to jobs.
Mr. Chair Representative Senator
Cortez, um, I think our strong
sense is that uh production in
New Mexico is um
As valuable as any place in
North America.
And in many cases sort of
internationally competitive, and
Mister Char says Senate Cortez,
uh, this change does not impact
uh in my mind, uh, in a severely
negative way, uh, that
Really that value for um the
private sector.
Mr. Chair Representative, and
maybe I just have a very
simplistic business perspective.
Would you agree that higher
expenses such as taxes means
there's less money for other
things, more money here.
Less money here. Would you agree
with that?
Representative, we've talked
about the tax and regulatory
structure is very important. The
value of the oil, uh, underneath
New Mexico's service is of is.
Overwhelming and of deep
importance. And so the value of
that and the value for producing
that, I think continues, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative, and we're
still, uh, in.
Below a number of other states,
whether it's Wyoming, Louisiana.
Particularly in Louisiana where
there's a 13.3% effective tax
rate under what the LFC did. So
uh
So I think the production
follows the resource and the
resources here in New Mexico and
this equalizes the tax. It
doesn't, um, it doesn't do
anything else.
Mr. Chair Representative, back
to my simplistic perspective in
business, more money here means
less money here and Mr. Chair
Representative, I keep hearing
about how we're making life more
affordable for New Mexicans, but
how exactly does driving up
energy costs do that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Senator Cortez, um,
As I noted, the oil produced in
New Mexico, uh, primarily it
gets shipped east where it's
refined or sent offshore
internationally, um, the, so the
That does not impact, Mr. Chair
Representative, the price of
oil-based products that folks
purchase here in New Mexico, by
and large, Mr. Chair
Representative, this oil goes
into pipelines. A lot of it now
goes to the port at Corpus
Christi and then it goes all
over the world in a way, Mister
Chair represented, it's very
beneficial to New Mexicans.
So am I hearing you say driving
up energy costs makes it more
affordable for New Mexicans.
Cortez, this does not affect the
overall energy costs that are
set at a global commodity level.
Mr. Chair Senator Cortez, New
Mexico's oil goes out of state
and across the world. I guess
we'll just agree to disagree, a
simple perspective, more money
here means less money here. I'll
move on. Mr. Chair
Representative, would you agree
that these tax bases would
Compromise funding for schools,
churches, nonprofits, roads,
emergency services.
Santa Cortez based on the FIR I
would respectfully disagree,
Mister Chair represents Cortez,
uh, the recurring revenue will
increase to the state of New
Mexico under this, Mr. Chair,
Representative Santa Cortez are
non-recurring revenue will
continue to increase, um, in, in
the sort of uh one.
in a potential scenario where
there is a very slight decrease
in production, according to the
FIR, the recurring revenue to
the state continues to increase
substantially, and there are
very small, very small
decreases.
But Mr. Chair, Representative
Senator Cortez, this will be
revenue positive for the state
and the permanent funds will
continue to grow, uh, eclipsing,
you know, continuing to go over
the $60 billion combined market
with their at currently.
You know, my terminal degrees in
in business and not just.
I'm having a hard time with all
of that adding up, Mr. Chair
Representative, according to the
New Mexico Tax Research
Institute, my county
specifically Lee County received
almost 800 million in funding
from the oil and gas revenues in
2024.
So you're saying,
With an increase.
In taxes in this industry, that
would not impact the money
coming into my county at all.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Santa Cortez in the FIR
production continues
to increase.
Mr. Chair Representative, and
so, uh, we're not the FIRs, um,
do not forecast decreases.
Uh, there's a
Yeah, and Mr. Cher says Senator
Cortez. I would note
representative Senator Cortez,
uh, Mr. Chair, that we're
producing far more far more oil.
With far fewer jobs now than a
few years ago, there are fewer
folks working, Mr. Chair,
Representative Senator Cortez,
thanks to the industries gains
in efficiency, they're able to
produce far more oil.
With fewer people. And so, Mr.
Chair Representative Senator
Cortez, um.
This continues to see production
rise, those private sector
trends will be what they'll be,
but Mr. Chair, representative
Senate Cortez, this will mean
new recurring revenue for the
state.
Um, that the state can uh that
is up to the members of this
body and stakeholders all across
the state, the best prioritized.
So represented the new
reoccurring revenue that's gonna
take place, you're saying that
it's not gonna impact Lee County
with almost 800 million
received. It's not gonna impact
Ed County, um, from
2024, they received over 500
million Chavez County received
over 300 million San Juan over
400 million. So in the projected
years to come, Mr. Chair
Representative, you're saying
with this increase in tax, we're
gonna receive more money.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Senator Cortez, this the, this
is revenue positive.
Mr. Chair Representative, and I
guess we'll just agree to
disagree and I'll conclude my
marks remarks with this.
More money here.
Going out always means less
money here and higher taxes in
the oil and gas industry matters
specifically in my county
because people matter. And Mr.
Chair Representative raised
taxes means less money for jobs
in, in my community, raise
taxes, Mr. Chair Representative,
means less money for the
children in my community, means
less money for the churches,
less money for the nonprofits,
less money for the schools, less
money for the roads and less
money for emergency services,
Mr. Chair Representative, I
strongly
oppose this bill. That concludes
my remarks. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Representative from
San Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um
of questions um about how.
Some of these numbers.
Our pulled together and the
process of the legislative
finance Committee.
And tax and revenue, uh,
developing FIRs and looking at
numbers.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, and Chairman
Smi, could you or your expert.
Walk me through how, you know,
particularly with an industry
like this.
What are some of the
considerations that are used and
how do we get to the numbers?
Um, that we do it.
In the FIR. Um, and I may have
some additional questions along
the way.
Mr. Cha, Representative Dixon,
um, the
Fiscal impact reports are always
based off of the consensus
revenue estimating group
forecast for whatever variable
it is that we're taking under
consideration. So in this case,
that group forecasts oil
production into the out years as
well as natural gas and prices
as well. So using those price
and production forecasts from
the consensus group. We then
apply these, you know, changes
under
And compare them to collections
under current law and the
increment is what's included in
the fiscal impact reports.
Um, when we're considering maybe
sort of the
Secondary ancillary effects of
this, um, you know, we may look
to other research as in the tax
and report where they cite the
California study, but we also
have, you know, New Mexico
specific information that we
use, um.
In part those considerations
include the breakeven costs for
wells in New Mexico, which are
certainly the best or the most
profitable at the world in the
world right now, um, and we're
also considering things like,
you know, uh, um,
The potential increase to the
break even.
Christ that could be incurred by
attacks like this, and that that
informs helps us, helps to
inform our understanding of
potential secondary impacts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, uh, Mr. Torres. Can you
actually, uh, talk a little bit
more about the breakeven cost of
wells and how of production, um.
And
How you would look at a tax
increase in relation to that.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair and
Representative Dixon, um, from
our uh industry experts, Ricead
analytics is, is a commonly used
resource for the group um and
their analysis has indicated to
us that maybe in the upper $30
per barrel is a break-even price
in New Mexico, um, if you want
to look at operational break
even, it might be in the mid-40s
to upper 40s versus just well
head break even and uh so for
example, this tax at a 0.85% if
prices were 10%.
dollars per barrel, that would
increase the break-even price by
85 cents per barrel. So,
Uh, hopefully that helps answer
your question a little bit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Torres. What's the current,
uh, price per barrel today.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, I keep it on my phone.
It's currently 70 trading at $70
per barrel.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Torres. Um,
I want to talk a little bit
about the um
Reinvestment, right? I mean, I
think that there's
There are some fundamentals
with, with how businesses
operate, um, and can make
choices, um.
How, how does the legislative
finance Committee or our
economists, how
Are we able to assess
Uh, reinvestment.
In
particularly in this industry.
How do we see or measure.
Whether companies are
reinvesting their profits and to
what level? How is that
calculated? Representative
Dixon,
thank you for that question.
There's, there's a couple ways
that we can do it and I'm I'm
very excited to uh hopefully
learn more from Representative
Murphy on, on how he's able to
determine his own reinvestment,
um but we again have studies
from Ryad analytics, which to
represented Murphy's prior
point, we had seen.
Reinvestment of over 100% for a
long time in New Mexico and
across the industry, um, we,
we've seen and Read's seen in
their studies, a reversal since
maybe about
2019, except in 2020 where the
pandemic caused reinvestment to
go above 100% again. But in
general, we are seeing,
especially among the majors,
reinvestment well below 100%.
I'm, I'm, I'm looking at the
study here and it's averaged
around 50, 58% um the record
high was hit in 2023 in the last
five years of 72% and really
what we've seen is a broader
narrative, specifically among
the majors that uh the priority.
From
Gaining market share and
increasing production has
shifted from that to return to
shareholders and shareholder
value. So we're seeing a shift
in New Mexico oil production
from a price sensitive.
Uh
drilling activity to steady
drilling activity regardless of
price sensitivity as these
companies plan out investments
into that years and then hope
that any profits above that can
be mostly returned to
shareholder.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and,
and thank you, Mr. Torres for
that. That is a, you know.
As someone sort of who follows
the industry from the
perspective of, um, it's impact
on the state and budget. One of
the things that I, I do recall
hearing is sort of the shift.
Um
The national level of
What some of the
Majors, what they, their
approach to working with
shareholders and reinvestment.
Um, so I appreciate that. Um, I
do, um, you've mentioned, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Torres,
you've mentioned Reistad
Analytics. Could you explain,
uh, for folks what that is.
Absolutely, uh, Mr. Chen,
Representative Dixon, that's a
global energy analytics firm
that um from what we understand
many of our industry partners in
New Mexico, private industry
partners in New Mexico also use
for their own analysis and
information and it's something
that the consensus revenue
estimating group, the State
Investment council also utilized
to help inform our expectations
for production.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, Mr. Torres. Um,
In the FIR, uh, there is, um.
Uh, a phrase that I'm hoping you
can elaborate on, it's a uh.
Horizontal equity.
Could you please explain, could
you, could you talk me through
exactly what that means.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, um.
Yes, uh, the legislative Finance
Committee as
Many others including the the
tax, New Mexico Tax Research
Institute and I believe the tax
department as well have
generally accepted um best
policy principles for taxation,
which include horizontal or
equity in general, but
horizontal equity is a component
of equity, and that is that
similar taxpayers are treated.
Similar but different taxpayers
are treated the same and so I
think in reference to the the
fiscal impact report, it would
be that operators of natural gas
pri primarily natural gas wells
and operators of oil wells would
be taxed at the same rate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Chairman Small, um,
It
Was horizontal equity, one of
the factors, uh, that led to uh
this bill.
Representative Dixon, yes,
that's the core. Mr. Chair, uh,
Chairman Small, um, one of the
other things that has been
discussed, um, is sort of the
impact to the budget of uh
attacks.
equalization, such as uh what's
being proposed. And the
difference between um
This proposal ends.
You know, simply modifying the
existing tax. Um, could you
speak to the difference of what
happens if the if the um.
Funs go into the severance tax
permanent fund versus the
general fund. If you don't mind
just reiterating that for me.
Absolutely. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative Dixon. Um,
it's a very important
distinction. If these funds go
into the severance tax permanent
fund, then it'll uh take years
for them to come back to the
state, Mister Chair
Representative Dixon, uh, in
contrast going into the general
fund allows the state to
make very strategic intentional
decisions focused around
affordability and support for
New Mexicans, um, with New
Mexico's most important resource
right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you,
Chairman. Um, the LFC budget
guidelines that were um adopted
um by LFC and just to, you know,
make sure everyone knows the LFC
is the interim committee that
is, um,
Made up of both parties, both
chambers, um, and meets during
the interim. The budget
guidelines that were adopted
this year, what was the
recurring target and the
reserves target,
please. Representative Dixon,
the recurring uh target is 6%
growth.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
the reserve target is 25 to 30%
reserves, Mr. Chair,
Representative, as we talked
about on the floor, the house
corporation and finance budget
uh left below that 6% at 5.8%
recurring growth and left at
31.2% uh reserves.
But well within those targets.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you, Chairman Small, um.
Why is it?
Uh, sorry, I'm gonna back up for
a second. So, one of the bills
we recently heard um in this
committee that that I'm also uh.
sponsor of, um, deals with, uh,
keeping funds in the oil and gas
reclamation fund, uh, for the
purpose that, you know.
They, those taxes are levied,
um, and they should be used for
a specific source. Uh, when
When we were discussing that
bill, one of the things that we
talked about is the impact of
the general fund.
Um
Chairman Small or Mr. Torres,
could you explain to me why?
How that affects the general
fund and whether or not that's a
recurring or non-recurring
expense.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon,
uh, because there's a current
distribution in current law.
From the conservation tax to the
general fund.
The rediversion of that to
another fund, as you mentioned,
would be a cost to the general
fund and it is recurring because
I believe that bill did not have
a, a, a sunset or
Otherwise
Reversion back
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and,
and thank you, Mr. Torres. Um, I
do, um.
Obviously, I support.
Both bills. Um,
When we talk about the drivers,
Mr. Chair and Chairman Small to
the general fund and or sorry,
not the general fund, but, uh,
our target of 6%.
Uh, for recurring increases.
What are some of the largest
drivers, um, that.
Um, the legislature doesn't have
as much.
Discretion over.
Hey, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Dickson. Um,
those, uh, within the public
education budget, uh, some, Mr.
Chair, representative, although
buffered by the creation of a
trust fund higher education has
seen some significant growth.
And then Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, by far is
healthcare authority Medicaid
and sort of health overall, Mr.
Chair, Representative, if you
look at the budget, the
significant recurring new spends
occur in.
Public education, um, I think
roughly 6%, well over $200
million. And then uh in the
healthcare authority and those,
Mr. Chair Representative, um, we
should hope to pay more in
Medicaid match, Mr. Chair
Representative sort of get a
little bit less from the federal
government because Mr. Chair
representative, we should hope
to and work to uh be raising our
per capita income in New Mexico,
which would result in slightly.
less of a Medicaid match from
the federal government, for
instance, that will necessarily
cause a recurring um increase in
budgetary in and that's well
before you, you know, the 150%
uh baseline is.
And the other.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, and Chairman Small, um.
Sorry, the question literally
went in and out.
Um
Oh, totally divert where I was
going, since I don't remember.
Um.
Mr. Chair, um, and Chairman and
Mr. Torres, we've talked a
little bit about, um,
Comparisons of tax rates, uh, on
this industry between states.
And um,
Seems to me that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, and Mr.
Torres in the calculation and uh
when LFC looks at.
Potential impact
Um
Could you remind me again.
How you ensure that.
Um
When you're looking at tax rates
across states.
That it is.
You know, I think we all know
it's not apples to apples all
the time, but how do you get it
as close to being that as
possible so that we really know
where New Mexico is.
When businesses have a choice of
where to locate.
To represent
Dixon uh small. I'm just going
to jump in here. Uh, we've been
on this bill for over an hour,
um, I think this is an important
bill and should be thoroughly
vetted. Uh, I would just ask
everyone to keep their questions
uh brief and your answers brief
as well.
Mr. Charon and Representative
Dixon, um.
Again, just
The, the, the best way to do
that to keep the comparison.
Um
At a high level and and valid.
is by using the total taxable no
the total actual value of
production in each state divided
by the total tax revenues. I, I
do want to clarify it and I
think you all may already
understand this, that this is
excluding royalties. So if, if,
you know, and that's also
helpful to keep apples to apples
because a royalty on a public
land versus a private land is
certainly going to be different
as well, and much more difficult
to quantify.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Chairman Small and Mr.
Torres, I will, um, wrap up just
by saying that, you know, I
appreciate the.
Sort of the thoroughness, um,
with which, uh.
We try to make our decisions and
look at the data and figures,
not just um
You know, with what's going on
in New Mexico, but uh
incorporating reliable, um,
figures from.
From other sources and, you
know, but really on a
Just recognize the detail that
goes into this. So, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you represent Dixon
represent Montoya.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair.
And Chairman Small.
Um
I, I would, uh,
Initially, I, I want to talk
about two things initially
before I really get into the
questions.
Um
But
They're both one's gonna be
philosophical and one is going
to be a slightly for this group,
uh, a little bit of a a
discussion of of just good tax
policy that's been brought up.
And so I, I wanna, I wanna talk
about that a bit. But um,
Philosophically, um, Mr.
Chairman and Chairman Small.
We've had discussions in this
room.
Uh, this year.
Um, about
How taxes.
Um, affect.
Whether or not, uh, uh, it would
have a chilling effect.
On industry. In particular,
we've talked about that, uh,
concerning renewable.
Energies. We've talked a little
bit about.
Uh, raising taxes and, uh, and
Mr. Chairman and Chairman Small,
I believe you've made.
The point, um, that in this
committee that uh raising taxes
on a
A committee could drive
investment elsewhere.
And
And I'm just
As I, as I've heard from the
testimony of uh
Representative Murphy, that is
exactly.
The contention he's making,
particularly small.
Uh, independent companies in New
Mexico, um, particularly those,
um, Mr. Chair and Chairman
Small, I, I would suggest.
Uh, those who are, uh, drilling
in the Permian Basin, where
there is
A choice to invest those dollars
just across the border in Texas.
So, I'm, I'm just
Curious as to why this
Tacked here, um, because Mr.
Chair and and and Chairman
Small, uh, as to the point of
Having tax equity and and some
of that that that's been part of
the discussion. This purely as
if it were a tax discussion only
a likely someone who serves on
tax would have been
Bringing this up for the purpose
of equity. Um, so I, I'm
confused a little bit on
Um
As to why a different uh
philosophical.
physician, maybe on, on
Uh, oil and gas as compared to
renewables when it comes to
whether or not we wanna
Uh
Potentially drive investment
elsewhere.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, and thank you ranking
member. Mr. Chair, ranking
member.
First, uh, as we've overall
talked about the uh
We don't believe, I don't
believe that this will drive
investment out of New Mexico.
Mr. Chair Representative, the um
I, I just, I don't believe that
it will drive investment out of
New Mexico, particularly getting
the horizontal equity and um
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
acknowledging the need for
regulatory um sort of
consistency that we also talked
about, not in this bill, but
also important. Second, Mr.
Chair Representative, um,
renewable resources and uh uh
Oil and gas are.
Fundamentally different in that
one is severed from the state
here and one by definition, Mr.
Chair Representative, is
renewable. And so Mr. Chair
Representative, I think it's um
the fact that these are severed
once it's gone from the state,
it's gone forever. The value of
that, which is, is that we've
all acknowledged deeply
important to the state, that
value once it's severed and then
transported in this case,
transported primarily.
and then parts all over the
globe is sort of lost, is gone
from the state.
And so Mister Chair
Representative, um, I think
that's the fundamental
difference is one is severed and
then gone, Mr. Chair
Representative, the other is
renewable and repeats itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
And representative Chairman
Small.
Um
I
Generally knowing how we, since
I've been in this um
Legislature now for this is my
11th year, which
Uh, Chairman McQueen made sure
to point out I was shorting
myself a year, um, but, uh,
being my 11th year.
We know that.
Budgeting
We generally don't do dynamic
scoring.
We generally do
Static.
Scoring. However, I, I did hear
A slight bit of dynamic scoring
here to make an assumption.
As to uh
What percent of production might
go down. Once again, I, I did
not write that down. I don't
know if you're your expert would
repeat that for me. Mr. Chair,
FIR, there is one study that
suggests a potential drop.
Or a 1% increase in tax of like
0.2 to 0.3%, but Mr. Chair
Representative, um, I cite that
because that's part of the FIR
my strong sense is because that
was uh in out of California in a
far different basin, Mr. Chair
Representative, I think it is
equally uh likely and quite
credible to uh expect Mr. Chair,
representative for production to
remain.
Very economic for companies to
produce in New Mexico and for
production to continue to climb
in New Mexico.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and, and
Representative small light.
I, I, I heard as well that that
study was out of California.
Um, do we know when that study?
was produced.
Mr. Chen represented Montoya,
2018.
2018. OK, Mr. Chairman and, and
Chairman Small, I would like to
point out since 2018 until now,
Chevron has pulled all the way
out of California.
And Mr. Chairman and, and, and,
and Chairman Small, that is my
concern here.
Industry does get to that point
where they say, to quote Roberto
Duran nomas.
I think we're getting
dangerously close to that for
independence is, as I was
listening, Mr. Chairman too.
Um, uh, Chairman Murphy's or uh
Representative Murphy's.
To many chairman and
Discussion here.
Representative Murphy's
discussion.
Uh, besides the
The the tax costs.
For compliance, regulatory
compliance, I'm hearing a 40%
increase.
To his small company.
I would, I would suggest.
That alone
Is a pretty heavy expense on a
on a company who's considering
doing business here.
Um
Mhm
Mr. Chairman and Chairman Small,
I, I, I, uh,
tended a few years ago with uh
with Lieutenant Governor
Sanchez, a lieutenant Governor
association.
Meeting in Texas, and at that
time, uh,
Uh, he's now the governor of
Texas, but Governor Abbott
addressed us at that point and
talked about how
Texas went from middle of the
pack, upper middle of the pack,
but to a powerhouse.
In a world economy.
And they did it, and he, he gave
4 steps. He, he said it was a,
it's a road map.
to prosperity for your state.
And the first one was Mr.
Chairman was tort reform.
That limiting
costs that the unexpected costs
and uh and this does apply, Mr.
Chair.
Limiting those costs.
So that way it was more of an
expected cost instead of a
dramatic cost that could put
somebody out of business. The
second thing was
Uh, regulatory reform.
Once again, so that the
regulations could be expected
from year to year.
That certainty was very helpful.
The third thing that they say is
invest.
In the businesses that are
already in your state.
Allow the businesses currently
in your state to do well.
Because they will reinvest.
And production will go up, at
which results in
Higher tax
Uh, higher amount of taxes
coming to the state.
Um
The, the last thing he that he
talked about and in in that
order was
Tax reform
The taxes
Was important.
But that was the first thing
that they did in this roadmap,
and I, and I would suggest, Mr.
Chairman,
And Sherman Small.
Mm
Businesses don't just look at
taxes.
And, and I, and I think with
this, and this is a dramatic
increase. This is, this is
nearly a 25% increase to the
current tax rate.
This is not just a 1% increase.
We're talking going from near 3%
to 4%. That is, that is almost
It's almost a 25% increase.
That's dramatic.
Um
But that
Uncertainty and then the year
after year after year after year
of
And it's been here since I've
been here uh uh uh my this is my
11th year.
is every year as dramatic
changes in dra dramatic pressure
on the, on the oil and gas
industry. Fortunately, we've
been able to survive it because
of
The Hermian.
Frankly, up to this point, it's
been more advantageous to invest
those dollars on this side of
the border.
I'm very reluctant.
To, to, to even consider this
much of a
Tax increase, first off without.
Having the folks who are going
to be taxed.
have a chance to say whether or
not.
They will reinvest elsewhere.
I think that's very, very
important. As a matter of fact,
Mr. Chairman and Chairman Small,
I, I've got a, I've got a
Give a little bit of credit to
Representative Murphy for
Just having an even
Hi
Debate today.
Uh, because the reality is, most
of the folks in the industry
are, I gotta tell you,
They're tremendously angry over
this spill.
They are very, very upset with
this bill in part because they,
they had no input whatsoever.
And that because it's such a
dramatic increase.
It, it, and without Mr. Chairman
and Chairman Small and without
there being a dramatic need.
I mean, we, we have a 10.
Uh, recurring budget this year
uh of a little over $10 billion.
But total revenue income.
is at about 13 billion. It does
not seem to be a need for this,
and I've not heard Mr. Chairman
and Chairman Small. I have not
heard you.
Produce
A specific
Reason for the increase at or a
specific purpose.
Um
Mr. Chair and, and, and, and
Sherman Small, there, there's
usually two reasons to increase
the tax.
One is
budget shortfall that you need
to
Because we have to balance the
budget.
Or
A specific need or a specific
purpose.
Where are those taxes going to
go?
I have not heard either one of
those. From that standpoint,
increasing taxes.
During
Years of, of, of, of
Blooming.
economy in one industry, not all
industries in New Mexico one.
The the timing of this is, is
very, very
Let's say questionable.
Instead of using what would have
been probably a worse word.
Uh, but Mr. Chairman,
I, I, I had, I didn't have this
conversation with you, but I did
have it with your co-sponsor.
And uh
Um
Representative Murphy kind of
asked why.
Why not, if we're worried about
equalization.
Why not bring
The, the, the gas rate down.
And I understood your
you and your answer was
appropriate, which is that would
leave a budget hole.
But if we're going to equalize,
why would we not drop
proportionately.
The natural gas rate.
Of attacks in in slightly bring
up.
The, the, the rate for oil and
gas, that would get us to an
equal.
That would, that would equalize
it.
And it wouldn't bring a
tremendous
Put 4 400 plus.
Uh, um, a million dollars.
Of new taxes on a, on a.
On an industry
That frankly, we, we
are reliant upon. And, and Mr.
Chair and, and, and represent a
small. I don't see that reliance
dropping through this, by the
way.
As much as we talked about
diversification.
I don't see how this
Makes us somehow less reliant.
Uh, I mean, if I were an
advocate of
That that is wanting to see less
reliance on oil and gas, I
would, I would be staunchly
opposing this bill.
This just makes it, now it's
directly to the volatility now
goes directly.
To our yearly budget.
So
Mr. Chairman and Chairman Small,
I guess the question is,
Why now? I, I don't see the
need.
And, and
And, and, and, and so quickly
and without industry having a
chance to
to address this, why now?
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
Ranking Member Montoya. um, Mr.
Chair, ranking member Montoya.
Uh, property taxes and the
effective tax rate is higher in
Texas.
Mr. Chair, uh, ranking member,
the royalty rates is has been
talked about by the legislature
or higher in Texas.
Um, so, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I think this um
This equalizes in our state and
is does not create uh a um
An uncompetitive nature.
Particularly given our geology,
Mr. Chair, ranking member
Montoya in New Mexico.
Um, second, as was pointed out
by uh chief, our chief
economist, break even points
range from sort of the upper 30s
to mid-40s in our oil prices are
in the low to mid 70s, I think
the worst is dipping into the
high 60s, uh, for short periods
of time.
Um, and Mr. Chair
representative, that's all
reflected in the continued
increase in production. That's
what we're seeing under this
legislature under previous
legislatures is um my first
year, um, we were, I think, 17
million barrels per month in
that January of 17, and this
January we're gonna be north of
62 million perhaps as high as 65
million barrels of oil.
produced. And so our
competitiveness.
Is not impacted, Mr. Chair
Representative to the question
of why, um,
Affordability
is a chief concern for us and
all New Mexicans, Mr. Chair,
ranking member, the um some of
the challenge, uncertainty and
high in Mr. Chair, ranking
member, um, expectations for
inflation across the nation in
2025 are now increasing. I think
there are real and serious
concerns about affordability,
and Mister Chair, ranking
member, uh, Montoya, one of the
reasons to
Do this equalization now to do
the horizontal equity now is to
be able to have capacity for
this legislature, to support New
Mexicans and.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman and,
and Representative Small I.
I think that's the first.
Maybe that I've caught an
explanation. It, it, it appears
we're doing this.
So we can spend more money in
the future.
I mean, we, we're currently, we
have a surplus today.
We're not, not, we have more
funds.
In place now than we've ever
had. We've, we've, we're storing
money here and there and, and,
and we have created all these
funds. We're not starving for
money, and I guess that's what
I'm, I'm, I'm wondering, is
there a specific purpose and the
answer might be no, but is
there, is there a specific
purpose? Is there something that
we see that is an expense that
we're gonna have to cover that
we have to get ahead of.
Or, I mean, without that need, I
don't, it's not good policy to
raise taxes just to raise taxes.
Uh, Mr. Chair, ranking member
Montoya broadly I stand very
strongly by this continues to uh
Will allow us to make uh and
support a making life more
affordable for New Mexicans, Mr.
Chair, ranking member Montoya,
one example is Medicaid, Mr.
Chair, ranking member, federally
a budget was just passed that
could reduce New Mexico's
Medicaid.
Far more than this by up to a
billion dollars, Mr. Chair,
Ranking Member Montoya.
About half of New Mexicans
received medical, medical
services through Medicaid and um
that could be a drastic hit to
their access to affordable and
accessible healthcare as one
example. Um, Mr. Chair, ranking
member Montoya, I think we all
hope that those cuts to Medicaid
and cuts to New Mexicans'
healthcare at the federal level
don't go through, but that's one
example of what in the near term
we need to be prepared for.
So if if we could get like to
get back on the bill if we're
talking about Medicaid, that's
pretty far afield. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
I, I would disagree with that
because I did not bring that
point up. I just asked what
would the money be used for and
generally in a tax bill, that's
what we're looking for is what
is the purpose? And that
comment, you know, it's for
Repentative small as well, just.
Um, I'd like to focus on the
bill. Thank you. So thank you,
Mr. Chairman and
Uh,
term small.
The reason I brought up that
Texas example earlier is
Folks who
Invest their money in anything
in business or anything.
They are looking on rate of
return.
We can agree on that. I, I, I
assume.
This is, this is a discussion
that needs to have.
Input from industry because
All the projections and
everything else that I've heard
are, are really based on
conjecture at best.
Without discussing it with
industry.
We're, we've not asked them.
Whether or not this would
Cause them to go elsewhere
without us having the ability to
do dynamic scoring.
And we have to rely on
A, a
Uh, study that was done in
another state, as you stated
another basin, different.
Economics
This, this needs to be
Brought to to to them and Mr.
Mr. Chairman and Chairman Small,
what I've heard overwhelmingly.
Is there are many companies. If
this
Increase
goes into effect.
That the rate of return is
better elsewhere.
They're still gonna invest their
money. The question is, will
they invest it here?
And that is
We can't answer that, in
particular, we cannot answer
that without asking him.
And I, and I'm, I'm
We're gonna do something.
This big
This is this is and by some
estimates of at least folks that
have been business for for for.
Several years
are saying this is the largest
tax increase on that industry.
In their memory.
We're gonna do a tax increase.
Like this on a particular
industry.
I, I think it it's just.
Common decency, Mr. Chairman and
Chairman Small to at least talk
to the industry that's going to
be hit with the increase.
And Mr. Chairman and Chairman
Small.
To the point that
Representative Santa Cortez.
Discussed. This will hurt the
communities more than it hurts
the state.
If the state sees a
A a decrease.
That's exponential if you have a
company leave.
If you have a company just
relocate from this side of the
border to that side of the
border. That is a dramatic, and
Mr. Chairman.
Uh, and Sherman Small.
I've seen this in my community.
I'm not talking out of hand.
We've lived through the ETA.
We've seen in particular the,
the those jobs.
Leave. We've seen people chase
other jobs because they're not
those good jobs there.
You lose population.
You lose
It it it is.
There, there
Because of this being of this
magnitude, Mr. Chairman, I'm
glad it's going to taxes because
this, this, we have to discuss.
Whether or not this is good tax
policy, and I, and I can tell
you,
This is not good tax policy.
This is not good tax policy
based on the fact that this is
such a high percentage of an
increase.
And it's very targeted on one
industry.
And Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna
finish with this, which is in my
community where this will hurt
my community again. San Juan
County again.
this will harm.
The viability of horizontal.
Drilling
It is already very, very
expensive to do horizontal
drilling.
But the reality is, from the
standpoint of being uh more
friendly to the environment.
It's very friendly because one
horizontal well.
Replaces up to 8.
Vertical wells as far as
production goes.
And so what they're able to do
is the footprint is much
smaller, what you're going to
find it with those who
happen to live in my community
that don't want to go anywhere
else and we're going to live
within the parameters of the law
and invest when they can. It
means reduced.
Dollars, so likely the
abandonment.
Of the expensive horizontal
drilling and going back to
vertical.
In the short term turnaround
because now what we're talking
about is an investment of
dollars.
Capital
With cost of compliance with
this going up.
It means fewer dollars to
invest, so it it the whatever it
does to the state.
It exponentially.
Causes harm
In the local community. So, um,
I, I do appreciate, Chairman and
Chairman Small for bringing this
here so we could have this.
Very educational debate, uh,
well, I'll look forward to.
Uh
Poking holes in this in tax if
it gets there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Reserve,
Representative Henry.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
I've got a couple of quick.
Questions
I say they're quick.
Um, I'm gonna ask one more time
because I'm gonna expand upon
the question.
Overall we say it's an
equalization tax. Why did we not
look at lowering natural gas,
and I understand that the answer
to some extent is it might, it's
going to decrease our budget.
Can you tell me by how much?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Henry, uh, the chief economist,
uh, estimates roughly $100
million.
So Mister Chairman
Representative, did we also take
into account
That by reducing the natural
gas, could it possibly have
helped spark maybe future
investments in that industry.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would
I think this is sort of quick,
uh, math, Mr. Chair
Representative Henry, I would
say from my understanding, um, a
great deal of our gas production
is related to the, um, much more
valuable production of oil right
now. And so when you see 10 X
growth in oil production in
associated with a lot of gas
that's found with that oil.
That that's oil, Mr. Chair,
Representative Henry is right
now still very much the driver
of uh increased development.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, did
we talk to
I guess I'm gonna really want to
know a lot about the
stakeholders.
So with the
Answer that we just got, did we
talk to the stakeholders to make
sure that
That is correct.
And that they feel the same way.
Uh, Mr. Chair Repent Henry, I
haven't asked, uh, folks
specifically on that. That's Mr.
Chair Representative Henry,
that's based upon my
understanding in the past
several years being on uh
different committees, including
LFC just sort of seeing the
overall production profile.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Brief answers which are, uh, you
know,
Gas at times has been seen in
the Permian as almost as much a
hindrance that's driven a lot of
some of the um
Efforts around pipelines and
also methane regulation and
other things. The oil, there's a
lot of gas. There's a lot of
oil. Oil is by far the most
valuable part of that equation.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, what
about in the San Juan Basin? You
mentioned the Permian, but what
about San Juan? Is the same?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative, I
think it's different up there. I
think the gas, you know, gas
traditionally, from my
understanding has been a very
important part of things up
there and Mr. Chair
Representative, um, as I
understand it, there's actually
two ways, gas is sort of
penalized if you want to call it
that.
They've had a higher effective
tax rate since 1993, so, um.
What is that? 32 years, maybe
31, 32 years, they've had a
higher effective tax rate, um.
Uh
21 of those so years they've,
they haven't had that federal
credit that existed.
Also, uh, Mr. Chair, as I
understand it, gas that goes
outside of New Mexico is taxed
at a lower rate than gas that's
processed inside of the state of
New Mexico. So, um,
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, again, I think if we
didn't ask the uh stakeholders
in this. I think that's a huge
mess.
Because I don't think we, we can
definitely sit here and say this
is what's going to happen.
It was a huge piece that since
I've been on this legislation
and, and in this committee, it's
been something that's been asked
almost every time is how were
the stakeholders approached on
this and what was their input.
Without that, I think we have a
lot of guesses at this moment
based on our general knowledge.
I have some general knowledge,
obviously living in the Permian,
um,
But if, but if I had a question,
the first place I would go is to
the industry that's being
affected and say, help me
understand how is this going to
impact you?
I think that's a major miss with
this piece of legislation,
number one, I'll move on to the
next piece when, when we say
that we don't think this is
going to impact production or
future drilling again, did we
ask the stakeholders to see what
their thoughts were on that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
in specifically with this.
I've had several conversations.
There was, it's not, as we've
acknowledged, it wasn't a part
of the interim robust interim
process, Mr. Chair
Representative, the um the break
even well costs.
are, I think a very important
point for us to consider. We
want to stay well above that,
which means that it's uh more
and more profitable for the
producer, break even well cost
of sort of high 30s, maybe
mid-40s, um, we're well above
that price, Mr. Chair
Representative, and um this
equalization doesn't change
being well above that price, um,
Mr. Chairs representative.
Mr. Chair, and I'm glad you
mentioned the interim committee
because I sit on another
committee, we just had a debate
yesterday, and the big push was
is
We did not have good input from
industries. So let's put this to
an interim commit an interim
committee and see if during that
interim we could actually come
to good tax policy.
As representative of Montoya
pointed out, there might be a
better way to balance this where
we're not hurting industry.
What?
Why would we have skipped that
process within this legislation?
Mr. Chairman
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
uh there are uh one just a
feature of the session timing
that we're in session, uh, to
Mr. Chair Representative, we've
talked a little bit, um, federal
uncertainty and potential large
federal changes that would
undermine health care for New
Mexicans, and generally make
life less affordable for New
Mexicans or some of the driving
factors that make
Sort of addressing this in the
session important?
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman,
you've mentioned it a number of
times and, and I know the
chairman said don't get off the
bill, but I've heard a number of
times it makes makes New
Mexicans more affordable minus
the Medicaid, which of our
Medicare that you've already
talked about.
How does this raising taxes on
the one industry that's one of
the
biggest
Producing industries in our
state, how does raising taxes on
it, what are we doing to make it
more affordable for New
Mexicans?
I'd like an example, Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, this bill
should pass here. We'll go to
the tax committee and that's a
great responsibility that the
tax committee enjoys, Mr. Chair
Representative has examples are
um the child tax credit and
other thing, uh, reduction in
income tax rates and different
and changing of different levels
for New Mexicans, Mr. Chair,
representative, I believe
overall,
In some cases, Mexico family
thanks to the work of the
legislature have seen a reduced
state burden and taxes of up to
$2400.01 of the largest state
child tax credits in the country
that's reduced childhood poverty
by some measures from 50th to
17th. I think, Mister Chair
Representative, those are the
sorts of things that uh the tax
committee has led in the
legislature has worked on that
make life more affordable for
New Mexicans.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, we,
we need to send this to tax. We
need to increase the tax so that
the tax committee can figure out
how to give more to New Mexicans
through a child credit type
thing, which I believe is, is
fairly well funded at the
moment. So are we looking to
Create more funds to help New
Mexicans.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
I, I've had the privilege one
term of serving on tax. I no
longer served there, but Mr.
Chair Representative, I think
the tax committee broadly is has
focused.
Uh, on making life more
affordable for New Mexicans. Um,
there are other Medicaid, Mr.
Chair Representative, that's
more sort of on the
appropriation side. And there's
great concern there that a
reduction in federal Medicaid
spending could severely,
essentially, it would make it
harder for New Mexicans to find
healthcare. It would make it
more expensive for them to do
so. Those are all reasons to
consider, uh, having recurring
revenue.
Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, I do happen to sit on
the tax and rev committee and
the committee I was speaking
about was tax and rev yesterday
when we were looking at a bill
to reduce the Social Security
attacks.
That bill got put into an
interim because we didn't have
enough time to figure out how it
was going to impact New
Mexicans.
Now what we're saying is we want
to pass this legislation to tax
and rev so that we can increase
taxes to make it more affordable
to New Mexicans.
Is that not contradiction if,
if, if we went ahead and made
that bill go through interim to
make sure all stakeholders were
uh, discussed, and now we're
going to pass this one with the
same type of message.
Mr. Cha, I, I don't serve on
that committee. I can't speak to
sort of what happened. But Mr.
Chair Representative, I
appreciate sort of discussing in
detail, um, in this committee
sort of all aspects of the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On to
the next one. When you are
saying, I, I believe you said
that some of these companies
might just be on the cusp for
this would maybe put them out of
business or make it difficult.
Do we have any idea of how many
businesses are on the cusp but
this might impact and Henry,
um.
Uh, apologies if I was unclear.
The discussion on tax
elasticities. um I was
referencing applies to those
companies who would be on the
margin. Unfortunately, we don't
have a measure of how many
companies those could be.
So Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
we don't know how many
independent possible companies
in the state of New Mexico, we
could be impacting bypassing
this, is that correct?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Henry, we, we can, we certainly
can look at how many
independents exist, um, but how
many may be on that margin and
on the verge of leaving, we
wouldn't be able to do that, Mr.
Chairman and and Mr. Chairman,
do you think that's something
that we could have done if we
did a stakeholder and or an
interim to get better
understanding of how this would
impact small independent
companies.
I think that Mr. Chair
Representative, I think we'll,
we robustly um this particular
bill has not been a part of the
interim process.
Uh, equalization has been out
there this unequal tax rate has
been out there since 1993, um.
So Mr. Chair Representative, I
think uh it is a fair point to
always ask for more stakeholder
involvement, Mister Chair
Representative, I think it's
also very fair that
In a, we're in a very mature
place as a state to be able to
understand uh and look at a very
important part of our state's
fabric, our state's revenue, uh,
which is production and in that
case, Mr. Chair Representative.
Uh
I remain confident that
production will continue to
increase.
Even as this is uh this tax is
equalized as there's horizontal
equity.
So Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Chairman, to keep production
flat, what has to happen, Mr.
Chair Representative, there
needs to be continued drilling.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, if
this was to reduce drilling,
which it possibly could, I think
you, you referenced one of the
things that said there could be
a slight decrease. We're not
sure.
Uh, what would that do to the
production overall of New
Mexico. Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, it's a great
question. Um,
The chief economist can go into
greater detail, Mister Cher, I
think, as I understand it, the
uh new drilling that's required
to maintain production levels is
actually decreasing that because
the wells are getting deeper and
longer and more efficient. One
well is now producing more in
2024 and then 2025.
As one well and say 2021 and
2022.
And so Mr. Chair Representative
are rig count, which is, uh, as
of last Friday, I think was 105.
That um
We used to estimate like 100
rigs to maintain flat
production.
Uh, I think that number is
probably decreased, even though
the sort of the volume, the
amount you have to keep has
increased and so that
efficiency it all translates to
telling us that production is
headed higher and is increasing,
and Mister Chair, as was pointed
out federally, there is a push
for more production, more of our
production is federal.
All signs point, Mr. Chair
Representative, to increase
production and uh I don't think
this horizontal equity doesn't
doesn't affect that.
So Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
when, when we're talking about
the uh
Having a low break even cost
for, for our wells and doesn't
that make our oil fields since
we do have a low cost.
The most a very stable.
Oil field in the country.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yeah, I think they're, they're
they're very important and I
think maybe the chief economist
wants to add something here.
They still, Mr. Chair
Representative sort of deplete
relatively quickly versus
something like offshore
drilling, but Mr. Chair
Representative, they're very
important this um.
No doubt about that and there.
That's in large part because of
our geology, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I think we can
always do more on the side of
making sort of.
Uh, many of the state processes
were more efficiently and
effectively, uh, with producers,
which I know we've tried to do
over time.
I don't know if the chief
economist wants to add anything.
Oh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
If, if we're trying to make our
That break even is, is, is
stable as we possibly can.
You think by, and this I think
is what representative Senator
Cortez was sort of alluding to
is if that stability, if that
cost goes up.
Because I do know we've compared
ourselves to some other states
on taxes and things like that,
but I also know that compared to
other states that that break
even is such a small number if
we continue to hit them with
these kinds of taxes and
regulation, does that number
increase?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
this would, uh, by a very small
amount increase that breakeven
cost.
Representative, it increases the
revenue to the state and that
can be dedicated to important
things that help the help New
Mexico. But Mr. Chair
Representative, I don't think it
makes us uncompetitive based
upon our geology and the
resource that we have here. So
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, no, I
understand that we need
apparently need.
A whole lot more taxes so that
we can help New Mexicans right
now because of the federal
government. I've got that piece,
but if we increase the, the cost
of that well.
Or that break even is higher.
I'm not saying it makes us
uncompetitive, but as those
prices fluctuate, we see in
other states that is that price
dips, they do shut off a lot
faster than us because their
break even is so much higher.
So where is this might only
increase it a slight bit. I'd be
curious exactly how much it
increases it as well as with all
the other regulations that we
passed, how much that increases
it because it's a very important
factor in not only the state,
but as the counties and the
cities, both of which I have
represented it at times. That's
how we create our budgets is
making sure that we're
comfortable with the stability
of our industry, and as that
wealth, as that break even price
goes up.
Our stability isn't as strong
because as if the oil price
slips a little bit, they're more
likely to stop producing. Is
that, do I understand that
right, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair Representative,
yeah, I think that's very fair
and you, as you, you know, you
have a great deal of knowledge
and leadership and experience in
this area, which I think is
deeply appreciated and
beneficial to the legislature.
So Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I think
that's why I would go right back
to I, I would really love to see
this go to an interim before we
really
Take action on it so that we
could understand the impact it's
going to have on our local
communities, um, our local
counties and our industries.
Because if we, if we
Or to her production in any way.
I'm also worried about the meal
rates when we're going to
hospitals, schools, to all the
things that are affected in my
communities and this body is so
anxious and interested, and we
should be in bolstering health
care and bolstering our schools.
I don't want to see a negative
impact because we have now hurt
production in any way. And I
think all of that has to be
taken into consideration.
And Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I, I.
If I understand this right, and
if I mischaracterizing it,
please tell me, but it feels
like this came pretty fast
because we came up with this
idea deering session.
To me, that tells us that we
should take more time to make
sure that we fully cover this
bill. Make sure that we look at
the impact, see if there's a
better equalization that
Helps create a better field for
everybody, including the state,
including the industry,
including our communities.
Um, because I think I, I think
you might have referenced it
when we were talking about
winning, wind energy.
You know, if, if we do get, I
think it was Wyoming.
Got a little robust on their
taxing of of wind, what
happened?
I, I think you said it went
away.
And so I want to make sure that
we're not.
Over robustly taxing an
industry, assuming it's not
going to go anywhere. In fact,
it might.
So, I'll leave it with that, Mr.
Chairman, but I do think this,
this would
Be very interesting to talk to
the stakeholders, um, and maybe
have a lot further discussion to
see how do we equalize this, uh,
possibly in a better way for
all. It's just my thought. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Representative
Henry
Representative Beta, did you
want to be on the list?
a beta briefly if possible.
Thank you, chair, of course.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Chairman.
Expert witness for being here.
Quickly, very quickly wanted to.
You decide to
Idea about
the opposite way, I heard you to
call it the general fun
punitive.
My one and only question. Thank
you.
My one and only question, um,
and just looking overall we've
heard a lot about the
stakeholders.
Industry that
Friends here have talked about,
but can you tell me how?
Will this and how it will
benefit the state.
Stakeholders entirely. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Avia, uh,
Mr. Chair, Aveda, uh, recurring
revenue is sort of the most
precious resource that the
state, uh, it supports our
school teachers, it supports
state police officers. It
supports healthcare workers, uh,
and Mr. Chair Representative,
importantly, it is also sort of
the foundation for some of the
tax credits and other
Investments that the state has
made, Mr. Chair Representative
after wise decisions, the
legislature has made recurring
revenue is um is very measured
and the increase is slowed
substantially. um, Mr. Chair
Representative, and so to have
some recurring revenue with
which to support New Mexicans,
including making life more
affordable is uh
as we've talked about with some
of the challenges, including
federal that we see right now is
very important.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, and your witness.
my question
Thank you, Representative Peter,
uh, so Representative Murphy,
um, we've been on this bill
coming up on 2 hours, including
40 minutes from you.
Uh, yeah, a lot of the
questioning has been repetitive.
Uh, do you have something new
and discreet. I do.
Briefly, OK, Mr. Chair, um.
German small, actually I have 4
questions, but I'm only gonna
ask one.
I promise you, it has to do with
breakeven prices because I think
this came up after um I, I asked
questions.
There's two kinds of break-even
prices, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair
and expert in my mind. One is
the operational break evening
price, and the other is the
investment breaking price when
you talk about mid-30s to 40s,
which one of those is that?
Mr. Chen and Representative
Murphy, thank you. Yes, the
upper 30s is the well had break
even the investment break even
and the mid-40s is what we've
seen from Ryad on the
operational break even.
OK, so, um,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I
That surprises me because the
sort of the operational break
even prior or the investment
I'll call an investment break
even price that is fairly well
recognized in in the Permian is
somewhere around $60 a barrel.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, the only
reason I bring that up is we may
be closer to that point and the
committee realizes.
I'm, I'm done, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Represent Murphy,
I appreciate your brevity.
What's uh
German small,
Do you have anything you need to
add?
OK, so what's the pleasure of
the?
I do.
With emotion that Dust motion
from Seria, the second from
Dixon.
Uh, we have not amended the
bill, so that's a proper motion.
Nina, can you take the vote,
please?
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
No.
Represent
Represented Montoya.
You can help me twice, no.
Or was there Murphy? No.
Representative Santa Cortez? No.
Representative Small.
Viana, yes.
Chair McQueen. Yes.
So you have to pass. Thank you
very much.
OK, so, um, committee, that,
that did take a long time, um,
uh, we will not hear us 41,
that's my bill. I will roll that
bill. Um, I would like to get
through these other bills which
are coming back for a 2nd time.
Um
So our next bill is House Bill
222.
Um,
What was that murmur? I can't
hear you.
Mr. Chair, um,
We've already heard much of
this, but we have a community
sub before you, hold on, so
if you're exiting the room, I
need you to exit the room and
not talk in the back of the
room.
Thank you very much.
Um
Do we have a committee sub with
someone like to move the
committee sub for discussion.
OK. So Representative Romero,
can you explain the differences
in the committee sub from your
original bill.
Uh, sure, Mr. Chair, um, and
again, my expert here um is Tim
Davis with the, uh, Wild Earth
Guardians, the changes in
negotiations with folks, um, if
you'll recall this bill is about
um eliminating PAS and helping
us with disclosure on the
process of um hydro hydro.
Fracking. We'll go with that.
Um, and so, um.
If we can, uh, just the, the
changes were in negotiation for
how that disclosure would work,
um, and we're still, um, you
know, essentially moving into
the direction of how to make
that make sense um with trade
secrets and those that were
trying to, um, you know, get our
hands around with proprietary
knowledge and information. So
before you is, is that
compromise, um.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
And with any details we'd love
to.
For any questions we'd love to
disclose.
OK, thank you very much. We've
already done public comment on
this bill, so we're not gonna do
it again.
Um
Uh, can have a motion to adopt
the committee said, just adopt
the committee sub, not ask the
bill.
Is there any objection to that?
Um, so I, I would like to limit
the debate to the changes in the
committee said.
Um, with that in mind, in my
toy.
Uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative Romero, uh,
specifically, you, you're
talking about some compromises
and some can, can you point to
those in and, and why not just.
Where they are, but why they
were made. Uh, sure, um.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
page 5 is where the changes were
made.
Um, directly.
And the changes were about
ensuring that we have a
compromise on how.
Information that we're
disclosing to um the.
To essentially the government
for ensuring that these
chemicals being used are not
harmful. Um, we are
understanding the sensitivity
toward the trade secret piece
because some chemicals could be
better that, um, maybe go
through the process that our
proprietary, um, and so we want
to essentially protect that
proprietary information, um,
while also ensuring that they're
safe. And so this allows for,
uh, protection of that trade
secret while also disclosing um.
to um a state government, what
what's actually going on without
having the trade secret, um.
were disclosed among the trades.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman and,
and representative, but that was
the only
Only change.
So. Yes. OK, uh, so, uh, Mr.
Chairman and, and
Representative, who
Who was this negotiated with?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
we are working with um
Representative Small and a
number of industry uh partners
within the hydraulic um fracking
community to look at how this
language works and operates
essentially within like an
encrypted sort of setting.
So, uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman
and, and, uh, representative,
um,
I, I
There was a brief discussion
about whether or not
Industry was even using.
These, um,
Uh, POS, uh,
Different chemicals in hydraulic
fracturing, and since uh
The, since we've met last, uh,
there has been
A very good survey among uh
industry and really no one at
this point.
is using the information I
believe that was given to us
was, it was very, very
That it was an older study. I
think it went through 2000, it
was a decade, but it went
through 2000 or 2022.
But, uh, today, because of all
the concerns that industry has
gone away from it. I mean, so I
guess the question is,
That being the case, is there
even a need?
For this and why.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, there is a need,
as you say, industry sort of
standards have changed, we hope
that's the case. We'll continue
to monitor that, but
understanding that 10 year
study, we just want to ensure
that this is preventative, um,
use and in statute, not through
rule, but certainly, um,
protecting our communities in
statute in that way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, I, I would
actually
like to request one more change.
OK, and I, I can't really do it
here. I'm not gonna, I'm not
prepared to make it as an
amendment, but this is something
that as further discussion has
been uh had.
On the process
The way this is written,
That it would have to be filed.
Uh
Ahead of time, uh, before.
Uh, the drilling of that well
were to take place.
Um, Mr. Chairman and and
Representative, I'm not sure if
you're aware of this, but
And I, I wasn't, so I'm I would,
I would.
I think you, you likely wouldn't
as well, but
When I, a, a well is being
drilled.
Even though the chemicals are
specific.
Uh
The options of chemicals that
are specific.
Uh, depending on what occurs.
Down hole
different uh directions may be
taken.
This, this
Composition of these chemicals.
This composition of these
chemicals.
And sometimes mid drilling,
they'll have to stop.
And change because something's
not working.
So, I, I'm
I'm curious as to
Whether or not this would allow
for full just disclosure of what
could be.
Used because it's not, it's the
way, the way it's written, it's
very specific that it has to be
Uh, prescriptive.
At the front end.
Mr. Chair Representative, so if
you read the bill, it's just
about when it commences the use
of these chemicals and then that
was a change with OCD the rest
of the disclosure piece.
Mr. Chair Representative
Montoya, the language that um
represented Romero was
referencing um was in addition
from OCD, the amendments that I
explained last time we were
here, uh, to, to change the
disclosure to happen upon the
commencement of downhole
operations. And then if you look
at the committee sub on page.
7, that's uh section 3F. I
believe that this provision,
which is um a further disclosure
if there's a change in chemicals
being used would address the
situation that you just
described.
So, um, Mr. Chairman,
And uh Representative Kay
expert.
Explain how that would
In practicality, how that would
happen if they
Happen to to have to change.
Midstream
What
Would be required, would they
have to stop?
And present new disclosure, or
could, would they be able to
continue?
And then
continue
Uh, just provide disclosure
after I, I'm not seeing that,
that, that it allows for
After the fact,
reports, so it says directly on
page 7, line 16 and 17 that the
operator shall submit any
changes to the info, um, to the
division within 30 days, so.
That's correct. OK, that is just
wanting to make sure that that
was in there. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. That's, those are my
questions.
Thank you, Montoya represents
small.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Mr. Chair, I just have brief
comments. I want to thank the
representative and stakeholders
for continuing to work on this,
Mr. Chair, um, I, I know this
will go to uh judiciary
afterwards. I've been in want to
highlight, Mr. Chair, the
benefits of disclosure are
immense.
Um
The Mr. Chair representative, I
think there's, you acknowledge
that there's still work that
we're trying to do to ensure
that we maximize and make very
clear that there's uh disclosure
regulators know for the safety
of people, um.
Under their, you know, safety of
folks in the state. Secondly,
Mr. Chair Representative, it is
good for us as the public to
know.
But 3, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, I'm still very interested in
continuing to make sure we have
that perfect balance on um not
backing into uh sort of
proprietary secrets by
individual well that could
inhibit the development of um
better and better, um.
You know, uh,
Thrilling, uh, liquids.
I think that's Mr. Chair, I just
want to acknowledge, I want to
thank the representative for her
work here. I think we're moving
in a strong direction.
There's still some, I think,
opportunity to uh move, you
know, to
Make the New Mexico way where
it's uh companies are
incentivized to work here, Mr.
Chair, that we work to innovate
uh outside of the oil field as
well and disclosure is part of
that.
Um, but then we protect
companies' abilities. This is a
lot of progress, which is why
I'm comfortable moving ahead
today and I wanna again just
Thank the representative for her
leadership here uh in the
continued work that we have
together and her experts as
well.
Thank you.
Thank you it was a small, or was
it Murphy on the changes?
Um
Mr. Chair Representative, and
this may be a question for the
experts. Were there
Or the expert excuse me, um.
I'm trying to remember.
And perhaps you answered this
last time, um, forgive me for
asking again.
What whales are what operations
would this apply to? By that I
mean federal if we just divide
that federal state fee.
Chair, um, representative and
expert.
Is this, does it apply to
federal lands, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, um, yes,
this would apply to any
Well that the OCD um,
Permits.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
OK, I'll, I'll end there. Thank
you.
Ribsson Murphy representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Representative. Um,
Can you remind me why we are.
Not simply using
And the existing database of rat
Focus.
Why we're doing something new,
Representative Dixon, if you'll
recall our conversation from the
previous hearing, um, Frack
Focus currently, um, allows for
the response trade secret to
essentially carry the day for a
lot of this disclosure, but the
state is trying to do here is
essentially have that
disclosure, um, you know.
Maintained within the purview of
the regulators, um, and so that
we know as, as a state, what's,
what's going on there as far as
any disclosure on any
potentially harmful chemicals
that are being used in the
process, whereas now the Frack
Focus website just allows trade
secret to response necessary at
this point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Dickson represent
Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I've just
got one quick question. I think
it's on the changes. Uh, I've
learned a little bit about this
geothermal thing, apparently
they use the same technology.
How do they disclose it through
this through this.
Would they have to disclose it,
I guess.
Mr. Chair, Representative Henry,
I do not know the geothermal
disclosure regulations, but this
bill would only apply to the
downhole oil and gas operations.
Oh, Mister Chair.
Why would we not include,
because my understanding is
geothermal is something that
we've discussed within this
committee, hydraulic fracturing
is used in that.
Why would we not want to try to
capture it before we pass this
to try to capture all of that.
Data. I mean, it's still
downhole operations, geothermal,
so are we not wanting to include
that?
Mr. Chair, Representative Henry,
this bill, um, recognizes that
prior fra focus disclosures have
disclosed Pfast chemicals and um
that disclosures made to frack
Focus also include.
Um
Missing information for
chemicals when those are claimed
as proprietary and the OCD does
not verify trade secret claims
in any way, so it's attempting
to address that issue, uh, and
Sorry, it's attempting to
address that issue and there is
um
You know, only a um an attempt
here to
Uh, address the oil and gas
downhill operations that we know
have trade secret claims and
where we know TAS has been used
in the past.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I just
I find it interesting again that
the only thing we're concerned
about in downhole operations and
fracking is just oil and gas
when there is a new industry
supposedly coming that's that
supposedly, I don't know this,
I'm just, that's chat GPT
information. What I'm trying to
learn about you earlier, but
they do use hydraulic fraction.
So, I have an issue with only
one industry having to comply
when, when we don't know what
that other industry might be
doing, so I'll leave it at that,
Mr. Chairman, and if you'd like
to.
So
I think it's important to
continue to watch that as well.
Fair enough.
Any further questions from the
committee? What's the pleasure
of the committee?
There's a Romero, do you need,
is there anything you need to
add? OK, thank you. What's the
pleasure of the committee?
I move a
do pass on I, I do not pass on
house 3.
87, right?
And I do pass on Camilia no 222
and I do pass on community
substitutes for House Bill 222.
OK, and I should have done this
at the beginning of the hearing,
but could you read the 202
number just so we make sure
we're
230822.2, that's what I have.
OK, um,
Nina, you take the vote, please.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon, no, and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry? No.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
No.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Representative small, vice chair
saidana. Yes.
Chairman McQueen. Yes.
So you have a you pass 6 to 5
representing Dixon to explain
your vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I think it's a,
a well-intentioned, um, I have
two concerns. Number 1, that OCD
can compel, uh, the disclosure
of that information already, and
I think that Representative
Henry's point about geothermal
is extremely important.
OK, thank you very much, uh,
Representative Lu Han.
Uh, so we have 2 more bills. Uh,
we've heard them both before so
we won't hear public comment on
these either.
Um
Uh, they both got ruled to make
changes. I think the changes are
pretty straightforward.
I am hopeful that we can proceed
through these quickly.
Um, so our next bill is House
Bill 392 single-use plastic bag
at.
Um, representative Lujan, you
have a committee set on this.
Is that correct? Yes, um.
Mr. Chair, uh you and the number
is 0231349.3.
OK, so that's being passed out.
uh, could someone move the
committee sub for adoption or
for consideration? OK.
Um, represent Lu Han, could you
just highlight the changes in
the committee?
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair.
I'm gonna
Work with my expert to go over
those changes as we do, we do
have a substitute, we work
together with on those. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Vice
Chair members of the main
highlights of the changes are,
um,
That we've, um, one of the main
issues was we've clarified um
that uh when a 10 cent paper bag
fee is paid.
Um, that it's directed to the
municipality, um, and it's
clarified that the bill would be
used, I mean that the funds
would be used for waste and
litter reduction programs, um,
it also allows it it clarifies
that the municipality, if they
wish to accept the funds would
pass an ordinance, uh, and then,
uh, if they don't want to accept
the funds, they don't have to,
so essentially they can opt out.
Then it clarifies that if the
local government, the county or
the
the municipality opt out that
the funds paid would be directed
to the environment department
and they would be deposited in
the raid fund, which is
specifically to grant out for
recycling infrastructure and
illegal dumping abatement or
local governments in
municipalities. So this way the
local governments get to choose
the best way they want to
participate, um, there were also
some cleanups of uh definitions.
wrought by day rather than by
events um because it was that
was an unintended um amount for
uh.
For those um enforcement issues
and um we clarified that we that
we removed the date, uh, to for
rule making and the effective
date, uh, is just for the
environment department rather
than uh to, to enforce it rather
than when cities cities can at
any time pass an ordinance, and
those are the main highlights.
Of the committee's substitution.
OK. Luhan anything that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would just say
that um thank you for working
with us
on the committee.
had a lot of input and I believe
it's represented in these
changes, and with that we
separate questions. I do have an
expert that just briefly like to
introduce, you have any
questions that
we can't move the mic um
you could just introduce your
expert and we could ask
questions if need be.
morning of chair and members
representative, I'm Randall
Kippen Brow, executive director
for Santa Fe Saloway Management
Agency.
see the, the landfill and the
transportation here in Santa Fe.
I strongly support this bill.
Thank you.
Um
Questions from the committee on
the changes. Represent Montoya.
Um
Mr. Chair and uh and
representative. This is uh more
to
Suggestions that were made that
you did not choose to put
changes in the bill.
And so I would, I would like to
talk about that just briefly. I
is there any reason why the
escalation clause, let's call
it.
was not removed that.
That cities, uh,
The, the provision that allows
cities to even go more than a 10
cents.
Uh, per bag cost Mr. Chair, I
believe we we did address that,
um, maybe it wasn't pronounced
through um the highlights we
just gave, but that that is now
allowable, and if you wanted to
add more.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Montoya by
clarifying that uh uh a city
council or a county commission
pass an ordinance. That's a
public input process and of
course having to be approved by
the governing body, um, that,
that will give the government
still local control, but we'll,
um, that should control any, any
kind of excessive fee on bags,
10 cents is pretty well accepted
across the board.
OK, so, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, it was not.
Prescriptively
Addressed, it was more.
I don't, I really don't see a
difference between, it seemed
like that was left in there
before as well that they could
add more. I, I, it, it appears
to me as if they wanted to
charge more, they still could
charge more if they so choose.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
one last item that
Uh, that was a suggestion once
again that
Uh, that this was unnecessary to
have both a carrot and a stick.
Um
And I'm, I'm just
Just questioning why.
Why
Did we not just say it's
required.
And then stick to the cost of
the bag being passed on 3 cents
per bag.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I'm,
I apologize. I'm not sure if I
understand the question.
Well, the question was, part of
the discussion, something that I
was hoping to have addressed in
the bill would be that we would
just limit it to 3 cents a bag
and just say,
It shall be done.
I'm not sure why.
I still 10 cents and why we're
still prescribing what they
would use that money for.
Mr. uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, it's just, it's
just a number that we feel is.
The value across that most
people are using or more loose
to local governments have
already implemented and like we
said, they can um choose to
increase that as you asked
previously.
So, so, Mr. Chair and, and, and
representative, that's not what
I heard. What I heard was they
could choose to do it, and it
would be a 10 cents cost. I did
not hear that there.
That there was any discretion,
they either choose to implement
it.
Or choose not to implement it.
Mr. Chair Representative, the,
the banners to the retailers and
the retailers are required to
pay the fee. So, um, the cities
or local governments can decide
whether to receive the fee, um,
in that uh in the opt in or opt
out discussion or if they don't,
uh, if they don't choose to, uh.
Want to enforce it or do any
education, then that fee goes to
again to the environment
department. The the carrot and
the stick, it, it, it serves
several purposes, um, it, it, it
helps to encourage people to
bring their own bags because
really ultimately our goal would
be nobody pays the fee.
People bring their own bags. We
reduce waste across the board.
Thank you.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
just, just to uh just inform
you, I, I was hoping those would
be addressed. I am likely gonna
be bringing amendments to this.
Hopefully, we can talk about
this offline because I would, I
would prefer.
That if we're going to do this,
that, that
That
Local communities would have the
discretion to not
Charge more than what the actual
cost of implementation is.
And so I, I think that 7 cents
should be, if they chose to
implement it themselves, they
should have the discretion to
not charge the 7 cents.
Extra, if they did not want to.
So that I, I was hoping that be
addressed.
Hopefully we can address that
going forward. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Henry. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I'll be very quick.
In a hurry
I've got 2 quick questions. One
thing since our last discussion
and with the with the paper bags
and I understand your hope is
they'll carry their own bags.
Um, but again, I've been to the
grocery store a couple of times
since I've been here, and I've
noticed the local grocery store
are, are still heavily using
paper bags.
Um, so upon my research, I found
it shocking. Is it really true
that paper bags are actually
more expensive and a little more
difficult to recycle in plastic.
Um, Mister Chair Representative
Henry, paper bags are easy to
recycle and plastic bags are not
recyclable in any New Mexico
program.
So Mr. Chair Representative is
the information I looked up
incorrect when it says in
general paper bags are much more
difficult to recycle, a little
more by cost. It costs more if
the bag has ink, you have to
deal with the ink before it can
be recycled. Was, was all that I
researched incorrect in.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
not having read what you read, I
I would say that is not the gen
that's not the general consensus
of the 22 years I've been in
recycling. I have to look at
exactly what you read to be able
to comment on it.
Representative, thank you for
that. I just found that
interesting cause I had never
thought about it until
I had to go research it and
that's kind of what the research
and generally continued to tell
me was, was that information,
um, the second part after that
discussion, I've talked to a few
communities. I think this might
have.
The opposite effect in a sense.
Uh, when Santa Fe dictates down
to the rural communities and to
the cities and counties.
These types of, of
They say it's local control, but
there's really is no local
control. You either do it or
y'all will enforce it, the
state.
Um, I've had communities that
have thought about doing this or
in the process of thinking, and
I think it flips them into the
other side of, well, now we have
no interest because we're being
told we have to do it.
Why would we not try to have an
opt in on this.
And that way as it's.
As it's progressing throughout
the state and folks are seeing
the benefits. They're more
likely to opt in as it's their
idea, and you get more buy-in
from communities rather than
just saying you have to do.
Just curious why we took it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative for the question.
I believe we answered that
question, um, last time as well,
and, and the fact being that.
This has been on the table for
quite a while, if you will, and,
and communities have had the
opportunity to um opt in, we are
just in a place now where we're
at a critical.
place where we need to take the
action and that's what this bill
delivers, Mr. Cha. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Henry.
For the question of many.
Was the pleasure of the
committee,
we do not pass this bill 392 and
I do pass on house energy
environment and natural
resources.
for
92.
I
We have a proper mission in a
second, uh, Nina, can you take a
vote, please?
Representative Abada? Yes.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gorola, yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Representative Small.
Vice, said I, yes.
McQueen.
Yes.
OK, you ever do pass on your
miso. Thank you very much, uh,
representative Lujan,
staying with us.
Yes, Mr.
Chair.
This.
So our final bill of the day
will be.
Excuse me, um, House Bill 394
energy and Natural Resources
Board, also Representative
Lujan.
Um
Do you have a committee sub on
this as well?
Yes, Mr. Chair, I have a
committee the number on that is
0.231411.1.
2314 11.1,
um.
We move the committees up for
consideration.
Um, representative Lujan, could
you highlight the changes in the
committee so I love to do that,
Mr. Chair, and I also would like
to thank the the committee, uh,
committee members for working
with me on this as well.
Um, so what we changed, Mr.
Chair, was uh the title, uh,
you'll read now relating to
energy, creating the state
energy advisory Board
prescribing duties and making an
appropriation, Mr. Chair, um.
After that, uh.
The bigger, uh, the big
highlight was the number of um.
Members that would be um part of
this.
Um, this board, so we limited
that, we went from 19 to 11, and
you'll see that on pages 1 and
2.
And those are.
Essentially the biggest um.
Changes
And really that's with that, I I
would stand uh for questions,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, again, we're
skipping a public comment
because we've already done it.
Uh, questions from the
committee.
Murphy.
Um
I, I talked a lot about this
bill, uh, last time, so I'm not
gonna repeat all that. I just
wanna uh thank uh Representative
Lujan for approaching me and,
and working with me on on some
of these changes and I think
it's a good bill. I'm glad to
support it. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Rosa Murphy, Rosa
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Also, just
a, just a brief comment. Um,
If this, um,
Allows going forward for
The consolidation of other
boards, I, I would agree with uh
Representative Murphy that this
is a good bill.
I don't see that it requires
That
And, and
For that reason, I, I'm, I'm
glad you worked with
Representative Murphy on this,
but because of that, I'm, I'm
worried about the, uh, potential
duplication.
Africa that I, I, I really don't
want to see.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
it back up. I did do some, um, I
asked more questions from the uh
from Mnerd and from others, and
at this point, it doesn't look
like it that's um, that's
something that they want to do,
so I want to respect that. But
if we can work together to see
if there are duplications in it,
I'm willing to work with you and
seeing where those things are
and where those concerns are
and, and moving this along.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do
appreciate the opportunity to
collaborate with you on this.
Thank you.
Further questions from the
committee. What's the pleasure
of the committee?
Mr. Chairman, I move a do not
pass on House Bill 394 and a new
pass on house energy environment
and natural resources committee
substitute.
That's 394.
We have a motion from um
Representative Sarama in a
second from Murphy.
Just want, just want to note
that for the record, absolutely
Uh, Nina, you take the vote,
please.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Rola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Represented Murphy, yes.
Representative Santa Cortez,
yes.
Representative Small.
Vice chair said Reno.
Jerem McQueen.
Yes. Yes.
OK, you have a new pass.
Um, committee, thank you very
much for, uh, powering through
those those final bills, we will
roll 481 to a later date, um, I
believe the governor was having
a press conference.
So we actually haven't missed
anything on the floor, but I do,
of course, encourage everyone to
go down there.
