This implications.
By the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa.
What is a.
Holy father.
Thank you.
Thank you for family thank you
for your friendship.
Thank you for community.
And thank you for the grace and
love you pour out upon all of
us.
We lift our hearts to you and
ask you to continue to guide us
with your wisdom open our eyes
to see.
The people of New Mexico and
their needs.
To see the plan that you have
created and how we are to care
for it.
To see one another.
And the good intentions we carry
inside.
Keep us all in health and keep
our families healthy well we are
far away we just this in your
name amen.
With the gentleman from.
Sunglasses Representative
Martinez leaders in the pledge
of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
Really from Santa Fe percent
hundred as in the pledge to the
flag.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Play ball.
The gentle lady from million
percent Casey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation seen objection it is
so ordered clerk to read.
Twenty.
House Bill to ninety introduced
by representatives De La Cruz
Castellano and Johnson and act
making appropriation to the
department of health to contract
for the support of individuals
living with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis and their caregivers
and families House Bill to
ninety introduced by
Representative Stella Cruz
Castellano and Johnson.
Oh sorry back up twenty nine.
House memorial twenty nine
introduced by representatives or
tests Castellano Lujan Mason and
to assess.
A memorial the clearing February
second two thousand twenty three
Waterloo bay Hidalgo treaty day
at the house of representatives
recognizing the twenty sixth
annual celebration of what if
they Hidalgo treaty day and
commemorating the one hundred
seventy fifth anniversary of the
signing of the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo the time
between the United States and
the Republic of Mexico.
House memorial twenty nine
introduce the representatives or
taz Kasiano Han Mason and
process.
Because most women have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and plays on the
speakers table.
Related familial.
This is the primary we go to the
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered.
The gentle lady from Taos.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial
twenty nine be removed from the
speakers table and he made the
next order of business to no
objection it is so ordered
speaker would Mr speaker would
you get me to that point the
record reflect that all action
is for placing House memorial
twenty nine on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the generated to
explain the memorial thank you
Mr speaker House memorial twenty
nine recognizes the one hundred
and seventy fifth anniversary of
the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
which is stab wish to.
The groundwork for the modern
state of New Mexico.
We honor today the full legacy
of that treaty which is still
being lived in the state through
our traditions our cultures and
our land grant communities today
we honor the resilient community
members who faced.
Hardships over the centuries.
And we also celebrate their
resilience so we take a moment
today for the chamber to
recognize this important
anniversary and resilience and
beauty of the land grant
committees thank you Mr speaker.
Internet is a debate on house
memorial twenty nine in.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia thank you
madam speaker with the gentle
lady from passing on.
Yes Mr speaker will yield thank
you thank you so much because
and gentle lady from the house
this is a million commemorative
event in the legislature a
and we just ever since I got
here which is back in nineteen
ninety seven is the most speaker
and the and we're still
continuing with that tradition
to the state.
Most important is that
our Spanish language communities
of rural.
Out.
The essence of the creative I
love the done go.
As have our.
Our brothers and sisters in the
state.
By a as the most Peter by
continuing to struggle.
Because it's the most because
the culture.
Of the.
Senator.
Population in the culture.
Of the native New Mexican this
panel population was forced to
struggle.
For protecting our land rights.
Our water rights.
Our civil rights.
Our human rights.
Our cultural rights.
And of.
Family value rights.
Some the state is significant
and real important to reflect
this the most picker.
On those gains.
That we need especially in this
chamber since two thousand and
three.
The creation of the land grant
interim committee.
Of which money provided shin
created back then and of which
my junior signing funded.
So you can see how creative we
can get some dentures the
speaker with a junior mining.
Use it to create a committee
that some of the speaker and
so again you know I've by the
lady for bringing this
legislation forward and and I
see that she has some
commissioners up on the rostrum
in terms of some of the
outstanding leaders of our
Spanish language communities in
our state and it's also point is
much bigger for this body to
know and understand.
Land tenure structure.
The main population structure.
That meant that the colonial
period.
Populated the colony from
sixteen ninety two to nineteen.
Forty six.
Was the Spanish land grant there
was no other land tenure
structure.
In the state.
That group populations that
communities.
So every Spanish.
Download Spanish based community
in our state as the speaker.
Stamps.
From the Spanish land grants.
By population.
And if you're a native.
Hispanic New Mexicans more
speaker.
Income from land grants.
And if you are still trying to
kind of figure out which one.
Income from.
The family tree.
The research.
Nineteen and that if you're a
native New Mexicans panic.
General rules are one of these
ancient land grants that go back
three hundred years in our state
so thank you Mr speaker thank
you doing thousand building this
among four.
Further debate the gentleman
from San Miguel in Torrance
Representative Castellano.
this is a great day for me as
well being a proud member of the
tickle of the land grant which
isn't that going to the New
Mexico of the one of the other
treaty has given land to my
community so I thank you for
bringing this forward madam
chair and being a licensure land
grants is really important and
I'm glad to be in support today
thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady gentleman is there for the
debate the gentleman from grant.
Going Katrin Representative
Cadena us.
Thank you Mr speaker for the
kind of lady please yield thank
you Mr speaker will yield to the
gentleman again I want to of.
Thank you all the the previous
comments I think it's absolutely
a wonderful thing thank you for
bringing this legislation and
let me bloody maybe part of that
and part of the committee we had
a great
to Torio today that I really
appreciate Mr chair and madam
chair I think you guys did a
beautiful deal and thank you for
bringing this and remind us of
this wonderful treaty thank you
Mr speaker the Germans are for
the debate the gentle lady from.
Jenny was on the well Santa Fe
and Taos Representative at a
thank you Mr speaker one of the
the gentle lady yield thank you
Mr speaker I gladly the yield I
thank you Armstrong I stand in
strong support of this memorial
of for those of you who don't
know I I think I representative
Garcia and I are long lost
cousins we both our families
both stem from the at the school
and grant and I remember sitting
at dining room tables as a young
child with all of my aunts and
uncles city listening in this
sit around talking about how the
outcome of the entities go land
grant
was going to come in there a
heated conversations and it was
it was really kind of the most
exciting conversations they had
at the dinner table if you want
my opinion was very passionate
and and the thank you for
bringing this from our four.
Thank you lady seeing no further
debate.
The gentle lady.
The gentleman from Chavis eighty
in the reserve Mason.
Speaker will the lady yield
Mister speaker I will yield to
the gentleman.
Being from south eastern New
Mexico we really don't have the
culture of the land grants as a
representative said today we got
a good.
Food Torio on it today in
committee but as I've always
said.
You know we need to celebrate as
our salute to our flags says the
diverse cultures of the state of
New Mexico no matter where you
come from or what you know of
these people these rights go
back to before Columbus came to
America.
Stay in the I just like to stand
in support of this this treaty
of day for the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo and
I wish all of your my blessings
thank you thank you gentlemen
this there is for the debate
generated from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield I do.
Thank you Sir and lady thank you
Mr speaker thank you.
I stand and and strong support
in as Representative Meghan
Garcia previously mentioned I
had the honor of joining him
since I became a legislator in
sponsoring this legislation
previously and I welcome the
gentle lady and all the newer
legislators to please carry on
this legacy and thank you for
carrying out on the out of this
get or that a stress test
thoughtlessness the models the
is the mass Hispanic equals
consultant so I lost on the
Lammas.
on ram also listed a story on.
On the Rommel's.
Western Latinist this battle.
The right one Semel's line for
funds.
They lied NCSL.
It was then I present them.
He they've animals the state
needs.
But I thought of those laws can
see again.
This is almost less grant part
of that that I hope he listens
once was guests and.
It is not a whole.
It does IBM on the in in.
As they the.
Good us yes.
Thank.
Yes yes I'm on.
Zero for the debate.
The gentle lady from does close
thank you Mr speaker I'm honored
to carry this legislation and to
honor those who have come before
us and who live here in
resilience and passion so thank
you I now move that house
memorial twenty nine do now
pass.
And delayed you ask unanimous
consent of the house of the
record show that the rule has
been called in all members
present voted in the
affirmative.
I do there's been a motion to
show all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered we are on final
passage of house memorial twenty
nine the vote is now open.
What is now closed level to
seventy the affirmative zero and
then it negative house memorial
twenty nine has duly passed this
house.
Graduations.
Members I'd like to take the
opportunity to introduce to
introduce a number of special
guests here in the chamber today
I've got I've got to be a goal
from the community got me Land
Grant limiting is from this on
quite keen to the other chamber
Land Grant predicted could just
got rid Sierra is what those
land grants three to but yet
with the endless town of Thome
Land Grant Kwan Sanchez agency
of the point of the GDP land
grants.
Los.
And we also have in the gallery
heirs of the commune to cut may
land grants so **** the daily
let's try the German land grants
and I'm doing it as well as land
grant out of the man and grant
said it but know that you the
land grants and I want to
welcome all of you we don't know
what that was like a colossal
totals thank you for your
historic fight and thank you for
all that you do for your
communities and for this entire
state welcome land grants to the
New Mexico state house.
Gentleman from.
All those beautiful counties are
Senator maybe twenty twenty
percent figure.
Thank you Mr speaker and no you
are blessed we we represent one
county and so that makes it easy
for me to remember as well Mr
speaker I rise to.
The knowledge in front of our
house.
I think we can all agree The New
Mexico's greatest asset is our
young our use of our children.
And so today Mr speaker I rise
and in support of the boys and
girls clubs.
The club was actually been
enable all young people
especially those include in
need.
To reach their full potential
productive be productive caring
and responsible citizens.
To provide a world class
club experiences sure success.
Is it was within reach of every
young person who enters those
doors.
With all members on a track to
graduate from high school with
the plan for the future
demonstrating good character and
citizenship and living a healthy
lifestyle.
Mr speaker in the gallery today
we have club members leadership
and staff for mass to central
New Mexico and Mescalero Apache
tribe.
We're proud to have the boys and
girls club throughout the New
Mexico very excited to have them
join us today in the roundhouse
Mr speaker if you wouldn't mind
introducing some of our some of
our guests up in the gallery.
Certainly gentleman thank you
thank you for that up in the
gallery we have fasted central
New Mexico Mescalero Apache of
boys and girls club members and
staff.
It's a career BPO strategies for
three sixty boys and girls clubs
Alliance welcome to the state
house of representatives thank
you for joining us this morning.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative role metal.
Thank you Mr speaker so we do
have a memorial I want to turn
the body's attention to its
house memorial eighteen but we
will not go through it I will
not make the motion as want to
make the body aware that today
is also school board
appreciation day the school
board association has Samuel
conference in which we're all
invited to breakfast I hope I'm
not speaking out of turn but we
see Education Committee for all
invited to breakfast tomorrow
morning to said he'd talk with
our school or our local school
board members or even school
board members from other parts
of the state to discuss
education policy with them
they've been fantastic partners
in all of our ventures to work
with us I'm sure you all have
heard from your local school
board members about education
policy
but these are the folks that are
putting in the work at the local
level so we really appreciate
you all and if I may Mister
speaker I just like to introduce
some of the guests up on the
rostrum we have to me maker
Mexico school board association
president Christine moody the
president elect Pauline had a
meal the vice president Terry
o'brien New Mexico school board
association secretary and
treasurer Marvin how to meal
past president Dr Jon Hein
executive director of the
national school board
association lily may R. T. is
are provided liaison and Jody
and are executive director for
the New Mexico school board
association so welcome to the
house of representatives and
it's a pleasure working with you
all on behalf of New Mexicos
children thank you so much thank
you gentlemen welcome to the
state house of representatives.
Thank you for all that you do.
Further announcements the gentle
lady from.
Can't instead of support
and Belen said representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker I
just wanted to take a moment to
talk to you all about rural
health care in New Mexico during
the pandemic it was brought to
our attention how horrible it
was across our state but how it
really affected rural New Mexico
a personal story is that the
McGee the health clinic in
Sapporo County closed.
he has ever heard of a clinic
closing during the pandemic so
we got together we got it fixed
and I had to do that with my
junior money to help keep the
clinic open and I just want
people to know that in rural New
Mexico how important it is not
only rural New Mexico but urban
the rule is really suffering
right now with health care and
the other the other part is
retention and recruitment of
nurses and doctors in the state
of New Mexico or any health care
industry across the state is so
important and the expansion of
that in rural New Mexico is
important as well a lot of
people in this body don't
understand that EMS services and
fire in rural New Mexico is an
unpaid position it's volunteer.
And that should be shocking to
you and we need to make some
changes for health care in rural
New Mexico thank you Mr speaker
they could delay the there are
more elements the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
but.
Thank you Mr speaker I think
this is the appropriate time
so Mr speaker and members of the
house I want to introduce to you
a certificate for meals on
wheels of Albuquerque of meals
on wheels of Albuquerque has
served our community with fresh
home delivered nutritious food
and friendship since nineteen
seventy two and I would like to
if I can Mr speaker introduce
the individuals who I have here
today
to accept the certificate.
I'm just opening my phone really
quick if I can Mr speaker and
members on a real Italian the
two to ten a meals on wheels
vice president Shawna frost
meals on wheels C. L..
Van Billups meals on wheels
secretary.
Jamaica's Soyuz Linda Atencio.
David Natcher.
David is up above.
Dennis Plummer to achieve
strategy officer.
Many Roybal chief advancement
officer
again Zamora forage program
manager.
Season with food services
director.
Time judging begins T. FOB
permissions officer
Haas Kerr's kitchen associate.
Thank you members and Mr speaker
phone of welcoming our guests
and I just also want to mention
that all of the bills that are
in front of you today are part
of meals on wheels and someday I
think part of their goal is to
see that our entire state of New
Mexico has a program like deals
on wheels so thank you members
for adult Jeannie Mr speaker
thank you Charlie.
Thank you mails on wheels
welcome to the New Mexico state
house representatives.
The gentleman from the north
Dona Ana Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker I'd like to
ask everyone to look at the old
thank you card that there that
we have in front of you this is
from our grade students from gas
and I end up in school district
order that that just on and on
you know women to school this is
just a thank you for everything
that you do thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Thank you students for those
critical cards.
The gentleman from multiple
Representative block thank you
Mr speaker this morning I just
want to acknowledge the great
folks and Alamogordo public
schools for all they do and I
believe you may have some names
of individuals in the gallery if
you would like to speak about
those folks I I I do gentleman
thank you folks in the gallery
we've got folks will be
available to the public schools
we have Carol to really Judy
Raban can if someone Amanda
jewel and Colleen tangle welcome
to the New Mexico state house of
representatives thank you.
The gentle lady gentleman
by way of a quick run of show
today members we're gonna do if
anyone else miss we've got some
committee reports we are going
to get to do third reading this
morning there are a couple of
bills that we've already talked
to the sponsors as well as the
minority and majority leadership
so those those will be coming
this morning a fact the
conventional right now those
will be.
Items number one.
And number three.
If any other announcements.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative SEM estimates
bigger we cannot forget to
mention that the.
The training day activities will
be ongoing in the rotunda.
Starting at the twelve forty
five with the in location and
and and then
At one PM we're opening the box
by some of our leadership of our
land grants
and then from one to one thirty.
Be someone special recognition
and also
Service awards presented to
some of our standing in the
leader's no rostrum are are
included in that but there's no
speaker boards and and and and
then of importance to this
legislative bodies at two
fifteen that are opening up the
Mike to any legislator that
wishes to go down and reflect on
the significance of their
support for land grants a and
their recognition also of on the
efforts on any requests and
struggling to maintain those
land rights and water rights in
the in our communities to this
day so all legislators invited
to partake in that specific time
frame of the agenda at two
fifteen thank you so much
because thank you gentlemen
thank thank you for the reminder
anyone else miss.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
We go to that order of business
committee reports in addition it
is so ordered to read.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
house bill eighty two has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that a do
pass as amended and insert for
to the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair the
speaker move adoption of the
committee report production of a
favorable committee report on
house bill eighty two of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one oh two has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the labor
veterans of military affairs
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair the
speaker move adoption of the
committee report and optionally
Federal Committee port on house
bill one oh to all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was named the eyes have it could
report on that.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house bill one sixty nine has
had it under consideration point
same with recommendation that do
pass and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption we're
not sure if it will come to a
port on house bill one sixty
nine of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Those may be as have a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house joint memorial to has had
it under consideration alright
same with recommendations to
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption rate option or if
it will committee report on
house joint memorial to all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Opposing the S. have a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee
to home has been referred house
joint resolution line has had it
under consideration point same
without recommendation and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption branded
option of a report without a
recommendation on house
resolution nine of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose may just have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to home is
been referred house bill one
thirty one has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair Mr speaker move
adoption for adoption of federal
committee report on house bill
one thirty one all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose Nate the as having
committed for adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to home is
been referred house bill one
thirty three has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that do pass and
it's referred to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thomson chair move adoption
branded option available
committee report on house bill
one thirty three all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe the eyes have it
could be reported opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee tomb is been
referred house bill one forty
four has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and this referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair Mr speaker move
adoption grunted optionally
Federal Committee put on house
bill one forty for all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Posted the eyes have it
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker in health and Human
Services Committee to whom is
been referred house bill one
sixty seven has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that do pass and
then see for to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
report on house bill one sixty
seven all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Apple's innate the I. seven
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to home is been referred house
bill forty eight has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair.
Mr speaker move adoption for the
option or federal could report
on house bill forty eight all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those nay the eyes are committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to has
been referred house bill seventy
seven has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that a do pass as
amended and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair Mr speaker move
adoption but a doctor referral
committee report on house bill
seventy seven all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Does make the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
one eighty five has had it under
consideration point a with
recommendation that a do pass as
amended and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
The option for a doctor's report
on house bill one eighty five
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
The school's name the eyes have
it committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to miss been referred house bill
one ninety five has had it under
consideration point same with
recognition that it do pass as
amended and that's referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair the option
for an adoption of federal
committee put on house bill one
ninety five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe.
The eyes have it barely
committee report that opted.
Mr speaker you're enrolling in
and grossing Committee to home
is been referred house memorial
one house memorial three House
memorial six House from fourteen
has more than fifteen have had
them under consideration reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Eleanor Chavez chair.
The record.
Production federal committee
reports.
House memorial is one three six
fourteen and fifteen all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Posted may.
The representative committee
report up to.
The record reflect that the duly
rules echoes copies of house
memorial is one three six
fourteen and fifteen were signed
by the officers of the house in
open session.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business third
reading of legislation no
objection it is so ordered.
The gentleman from earlier
percent limit on item number one
thank you Mr speaker let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
one twenty five on final passage
has been taken.
The gentleman explained will
thank you Mr speaker of the
house bill one twenty five
creates a temporary provision
that would create a task force
between higher education and the
public education department to
review various issues related to
dual credit so funding streams
programming educators alignment
between the two and provides for
reporting from Mr speaker I do
have a floor amendment for this.
I believe gentleman that the
amendment has been passed out
would you like to read the point
two to four number Mr speaker I
would beg to differ I don't know
that the amendment has been
passed out.
It's just being has a right now
Jim and we'll take a plus all
right thank you.
So if I may what we give some we
time Mr speaker made the motion
to move house floor amendment
one to house bill one twenty
five.
Thank you gentlemen and while we
wait for the passed out you can
begin.
To explain the amendment great
thank you Mr speaker
so the amendment comes out of
our discussion in the house
Education Committee one of the
oversights in the bill again the
independent colleges three
representatives but it left the
branch colleges out in
conversation with the
independent colleges and with
the branch colleges we've
included one representative from
the branch colleges and two from
the independent independent
colleges so we're removing the
three from the independent in
place to and then from the brand
colleges one
in their place so it was an
oversight it was a good catch
and in my conversations it's
been very fruitful to get to
this agreement and I think our
Education Committee colleagues
would agree.
There is debate on the amendment
the gentle lady from Chavis
representatives L..
Mr speaker thank you very much
well the gentleman from
Bernalillo yield please speaker
I yield to the gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for bringing this ammendment
the.
I'm sure it was just an
oversight I think this is what
you're trying to do here is very
pertinent to what we want to
accomplish through the Education
Committee but as soon as we
posted I was starting to get
calls from the French
universities and so I do
appreciate you bringing this
ammendment forward and I do hope
that everybody will support this
thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you John lady any further
debate on the amendment consider
objection to adopting the
amendment.
I see none the house floor
amendment number one to house
bill one twenty five is adopted
thank you Mr speaker and with
that I'll stand for questions
there is debate the gentleman
from but as a representative
Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman the.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
contenders to briefly tell me as
far as the what this bill
intends to provoke to town of
for this for the study.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen for that question
the task force is appointed to
work together to and synchronize
issues such as the
qualifications for teaching dual
credit what sort of content with
the in those dual core
programming dual credit
programming should be funding
streams because some of that
cost is paired on the AG decide
some of it on the PED side some
of the with the colleges but to
start straightening those issues
out.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman Jennifer Berman could
you just briefly for the the
body explain as far as what
actually is dual credit Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman dual
credit is where students can.
Take a class that they'll get
credit college credit and high
school credit for so thus the
name dual credit so if you take
a class may be in the sciences
it'll count for your credit in
high school it also count as a
credit toward college and
sometimes your
elective class or also clear
classes in college but they're
taught during high school hours
typically.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman so it also don't
really what's far as the
transcripts or was or what as a
both a high school credit for
college credit Mr speaker and
gentleman it's still credits of
the show up as both.
So you would get the college the
college credit for you know it's
good I school credit for thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen are gentleman on the
page two lines fourteen through
nineteen.
the question that comes out to
me is
Mr speaker and gentleman
watching will be teaching these
classes as far as instructors
and also how those will be paid
or who pays for the dual credit
the credit costs Mr speaker Mr
speaker and gentleman that's a
good question and that's
something that through this task
force were hoping to get
straightened out in this so as
far as
Page two point fourteen through
nineteen
Those are some of the issues as
far as trans for bility of
credit faculty hiring practices
what's being taught are some of
the things that we need to
straighten out as far as our
dual credit programs.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so is it possible for
a high school teacher to
actually been instructor for
both the high school and the
college credit Mr speaker and
gentleman it is very much so.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Gentleman from Bernalillo on
lines on page three line
thirteen as far as agreements
between public post secondary
educational institutions.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Currently have agreements in
place with all of our secondary
the this far as learning
institutions in the state for
supporters to actually create
those agreements with our
institutions of higher ed Mr
speaker and gentleman the
purpose is to try to create
those and make sure that we're
having some sort of uniform
system or at least some sort
come closer to a uniform system
would be part of the goal.
Thank you Mr speaker
on the same page page three we
talk about sufficiency as far as
the
As far as for who pays for it so
what Mr speaker and gentleman
from Bernalillo do we have a
both the insufficient funds both
that the K. twelve level that
the higher education level Mr
speaker and gentleman I said
would say that we do and that's
part of the sort of tension
between the two sides on dual
credit.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo of this at the bottom
of page.
They talked about this first
performance measures of how
these majors developed Mr
speaker have those the
performance so they've been
developed or is is the purpose
of this group to actually
develop how measured Mr speaker
and gentleman I think we're kind
of all over the place and that
this would be to try to set it
straight any uniform process and
get these conversations going.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Bernalillo.
The last page bottom line as far
as the report Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr Manny January first
of twenty twenty four is that
correct Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentleman yes it is.
Gentleman from Bernalillo this
also be kind of intermittent
reporting order will come before
the L. E. S. C. as follows in
the arm in arm sessions speaker
and gentleman no this would be
the report
that submitted but there would
be nothing to prevent the
legislative education study
committee from looking into the
issue during the interim as
well.
Mr speaker gentleman I thank you
for clarification I don't think
this is a great man a great bill
distended for support a past one
twenty five thank you Mr speaker
thank you Mr there's further
debate the gentleman from Chavis
representatives L..
Mr speaker thank you very much
most of my questions have been
answered by the representative
down here from Valencia County
but will the gentleman from
Bernalillo yield for the second
time Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady for the second Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo.
In debate whenever this bill was
before Education Committee it
was understood I think by every
member on the committee how
important this was and.
It does my heart good Mr speaker
and gentleman that.
Whenever I have families come up
to me and say.
Thank you for supporting this.
This child is the first member
of our family to ever graduate
from college to Mr speaker
gentleman would you agree with
that statement that this is
helped numerous families from
throughout the state of New
Mexico Mr speaker gentle lady
you said it best yes it is very
beneficial.
It does person could know that
there is that type of pride and
Services Orton families.
Whenever they're able to make
that statement with this
amendment that puts on their Mr
the what is going to be put on
there Mr speaker.
This is a very substantial bill
for all of us in the state thank
you very much for your responses
that thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you is this for the debate
the gentle lady from countries
had also quotable is here
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield speaker I yield
to the gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker I just wanted to make
sure I see in here that you're
you have hiring practices and
faculty hiring practices
specifically in the bill I want
to make sure that that the that
you include rural New Mexico in
the issues in rural New Mexico
where sometimes Mr speaker it's
not a certified teacher that is
in that classroom running that
and so Mr speaker and gentleman
can you attest to how you think
that might look.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
mean that's really the impetus
for a task forces to bring PED
ATD and the representatives from
each side the colleges.
Public Education together to
really start talking about these
issues there is a provision
within the bill if you look at
page two down at the bottom line
twenty four it talks about high
school students in urban and
rural school districts I know
that's students but we thought
it was important to include
urban and rural as a way to
emphasize in the selection
process of who's going to sit on
the task force the urban and
rural are both representative so
while this is an outline nothing
would
prevents the task force from
taking on other issues as well
as you're speaking of thank you
Mr speaker and thank you kind
gentleman I I just one size does
not fit all and I would hope
that this task force really
takes into account the with the
real differences between urban
and rural you know I did drive a
hundred ten miles one way to
school and that's not a joke
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Mr thank you gentle lady there's
further debate the gentle lady
from us is someone
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm
actually from just McKinley
County will the gentleman yield
please speaker I yield to the
gentle lady thank you Sir I'd
like to to clearly explain who
actually pays for dual credit.
The speaker and gentle lady
currently it's higher education
colleges.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
creates the conflict for you're
trying to correct.
Speaker gentle lady sometimes
it's the materials that are
associated with that there's a
cost associated to it so we're
going to try to clear that up.
Mr speaker gentleman wouldn't
you say that there's also
conflict and how it's being paid
for this gentle lady yes.
Mr speaker gentleman do you have
a sense of how much is going out
now in terms of paying for dual
credit in the state of New
Mexico Mr speaker gentle lady
it's quite high but I have a
feeling you have the figure for
it I do but I just what I
thought maybe the body Mr
speaker gentleman might be
interested in that I I think the
issue Mr speaker gentleman isn't
whether or not dual credit is
important everybody agrees that
it is it's the conflict in terms
of how it's paid for and how it
gets calculated inside those
funding formulas thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman Mr
speaker and and gentle lady I
totally agree with you part of
it as well as the content that's
delivered in making sure that
you're getting the content for
high school the content for
colleges well and that there in
alignment with one another so
that the students that go on to
higher education are set in
their skill base for what they
need to succeed later on as
well.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Senior for the gentleman close
speaker I move that house bill
one twenty I do now pass.
We are amended we are final
passage of house bill one twenty
five as amended.
The vote is now.
What close.
Voters are close by boat of
sixty two in the affirmative not
in the negative house bill one
twenty five as amended has duly
passed this house.
The gentle lady from.
This item was on the one is on
the Fe Representative Chandler
are you ready and item number
three yes Mr speaker will you
get me to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
twenty six as amended on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill
I guess Mr speaker and I do have
a small amendment how would you
like me to handle that explain
the bill first and then talk
about the amendment.
Gently has the amendment that
passed I believe it house.
Explain the bill please first
and then move on to the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
the bill Mr speaker as presented
to you and it has been amended
will reinstate the long standing
practice that the tax department
had employed over many years we
are in it would annually publish
lists of abandoned property that
it had accumulated over the
previous year.
And many of you who have been
reading the newspaper all these
many years no doubt solve that
publication and what it was was
a long list of people in your
neighborhood or your community
or your county of who had
property or who might have
property in the possession of
the tax department and and it
was a way to alert them that
they should go try to claim it
and sometimes the amounts of
money or property were at a very
low value other times it could
be in the five figures or six
figures so it's a wide range of
property but
in advert well I don't want to
say and overly but in twenty
twenty one as part of our annual
tax cleanup package as proposed
by the tax department that
process was eliminated and
instead a much more streamlined
and I would argue perhaps less
accessible for some people
process was in place where the
tax department simply publishes
a little notice in the paper
indicating a website that the
and the parties might go check
to see whether there's abandoned
property and they would engage
in some public service
announcements and stuff lots of
type things and and and radio
announcements and perhaps TV
where they tell people to go go
look well
our concern is although that's a
great I'm glad that the tax
department is pursuing now
there's still a lot of people in
the state who don't have ready
access to broadband don't spend
a lot of time in front of the
television I may have missed
those momentary public service
announcement so this goes back
to the thank adds the old
process back and certainly the
tax department it can continue
doing what they're doing but
once a year the list of
abandoned property under my bill
of the bill we're proposing
would be reinstated and the
amendment Mr speaker Mr leader
would you like to move the.
I would like to move the
amendment in the on two oh two
number is two two four six eight
four two and it's been passed
gently please explain the
amendment the amendment
corrects some technical aspects
of the bill that was pointed out
to us by the tax department so
this is in response to attacks
Department requests that we make
it more workable for them so for
first we eliminate this
amendments that were done in
Judiciary and let me explain
what those were Mr speaker those
amendments changed
where the address from address
of the individuals of the
publication used to say John
Smith twenty two you know court
of a drive we're eliminating the
change we made where we just
simply said the county would be
posted as opposed to the home
address and instead inserting
municipality and that is at the
request of the tax department
because that is how they're
electronic system works and
county would not be part of
their address system so that
simply a kind of a tactical
fixed so that it can work
electronically for the tax
department and lastly so that's
essentially what it does instead
we add the terms municipality in
the appropriate places
there is one last fix Mr speaker
and that is on page one we make
it clear that the tax department
does not need to publish all the
abandoned property that is
holding because that could be
the size of a phone book Mr
speaker but just those aspects
that just the previous years
abandoned property that's been
accumulated so those are all
things that the tax department
recommended to make our bill a
little clearer and tighter thank
you Mr speaker is a debate on
the.
Minute the gentleman from.
Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Los Alamos yield yes
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
the the change that was made
is a word municipality and it's
not defined in the statute is a.
Mr speaker gentleman it is not.
And so Mr speaker and gentle
lady the the.
Municipality.
That you're referring to is not
technically a municipality as
defined normally in statute but
it would be the.
Municipality identified with the
zip code on an address Mr
speaker gentleman you got it
exactly correct.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm just wanting to know of.
Tax and Rev is very comfortable
just same municipality of not
to further clarify that because
there's a lot of people in New
Mexico that don't live in the
municipality Mr speaker
gentleman from Chavis yes and I
actually called the secretary
myself this morning to verify
that and your question Mr
speaker and gentle it was
exactly what I asked her because
I had the same question in my
mind as well Mr speaker gentle
lady I'm glad the two percent of
that question and and if that's
what they want I guess that's
what to do but I just want to
make sure we weren't using it in
a very narrow defined term as we
normally think of municipalities
and Mr you're welcome Mister
speaker I just want to the
chamber to note that Larry
haraam lobbyist for the press
association and the Albuquerque
journal is here just in case
there any questions that I need
some help with I just want to
inform the you and the body Mr
speaker Sir for the debate
amendment.
Is there objection to adopting
the amendment.
I see none health for women
number one to house bill twenty
six as amended is adopted given
amended bill Is there debate on
the bill.
The gentleman from Chavis.
Representative Nibert thank you
Mr speaker does a gentlelady
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Chavis county
Mr speaker and gentle lady
really no questions I I support
of the bill in committee but I
do want to reiterate one thing I
said in committee and that is I
would certainly like to see the
state of New Mexico move toward
an electronic legal notice
database that that we can
publish all sorts of legal
notices on I know that this is
taking it back to the newspaper
but it certainly would be handy
for for I think the.
Generally to have one place to
to go to to find not only
abandoned property the legal
notices regarding probate it's
regarding lawsuits regarding
other things that are required
to be published in a newspaper
local circulation there should
be a database of the state
maintains that would have that
information can refer people to
a particular court but our
agency or what have you and
would be very efficient so I
just reiterate that request I
think that maybe that several
times of the course last few
years but I use this as an
opportunity to do so again thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield Mister speaker happy to
yield to my from my friend from
Sandoval County.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
help me remember I was two years
ago that we passed legislation
and as per the tax cleanup bill
to remove this requirement to
publish in newspapers Mr speaker
Jim I believe it was twenty
twenty one so it's about about
two years yes Mr speaker and
gentle lady I'm interested in
the comments from the gentleman
from Chavis because.
That's exactly what I thought we
did two years ago.
I I saw that what we were doing
was saying.
We need to now move to what the.
I mean I I guess what we're
doing this century which is
doing electronics.
And and the department's doing
great job and they still don't
publish some things in
newspapers and here's the
website he'll come and look and
see so it was speaker generally
keeps playing why we were going
backwards.
Mr speaker gentle and I don't
think we're going backwards and
Mr speaker gentleman it's not
exactly what I understand
Representative the gentleman
from Chavis saying it's part of
it but it also he's he's
suggesting all legal notices and
so on so that's like probate
notices in the like the all
electronic or we move in that
direction so little bit of a
distinction this is a narrow
thing it has to do with
abandoned property and
technically I don't believe it's
a considered a legal notice just
to clarify what we're talking
about and it happens only once a
year where is legal notices are
coming out on a weekly basis on
all sorts of topics and so on
and so having that said
I think in twenty twenty one
this was not a topic that was
highlighted in our omnibus
package as you know Mr speaker
and gentleman there are all
sorts of things in that hundred
page bill I think it was about a
hundred pages that year and we
touch on various things in
committee and some things are
messed so those interested in
this particular topic didn't
seek notice it was within that
hundred page bill and I'm not
even sure I was aware of it as
on the committee so as point one
a terms of going forward going
backwards I disagree this is to
me
a supplement what they're doing
now Mr speaker is great.
And it's even going to be better
Mr speaker with this additional
publication record requirements
there are many people in the
state Mr speaker who don't
cruise the internet like we do
you know they don't have access
to reliable broadband they don't
spend as much time as many of us
do perusing all sorts of fast
you know resources and then
there used to reading the news
for there and actually look
forward to reading the newspaper
so I think it just is one
additional step Mr speaker
gentleman in helping ensure that
we do everything we can to get
that property back to the people
who actually own it not the
state of New Mexico Mr speaker
gentleman.
Speaker Joey thank you I I very
much appreciate that perspective
and I can understand where
you're coming from on that.
I do.
Read very respectfully disagree
on on some of those items
I I think
if you polled the number of
people the state actually still
read newspapers you would get a
disproportionately high number
of people in this chamber.
To the average people out there
in your local city or county
right.
and and I'll also ask speaker
gentle lady to the Department.
Ask for.
This legislation or who who was
the one that came for with this
legislation Mr speaker gentleman
I I can first respond to your
question about who read
newspapers actually Mr speaker
gentleman there have been
surveys as to how many people
read newspapers and believe it
or not seventy five percent of
New Mexicans still read
newspapers Mr speaker gentleman
I get to newspapers delivered to
my house every day I get three
newspapers delivered to my house
on Sundays and I know my
neighbors do as well because I
see who's has paper sitting in
their yard so I understand the
kind of urban legend thing is
we're moving away from
newspapers I guess Mr speaker
gentleman I would dispute that
to some degree so that's point
one point two no the tax
department did not come and ask
for this change the newspaper
organizations contacted me and
asked me if I would help they
did not notice it Mr speaker in
the hundred page bill that we
considered and twenty twenty one
and Mr speaker I don't think the
tax department consulted with
the newspaper organizations to
see whether or not they would be
amenable to the change Mr
speaker and gentle lady I I.
I I could see why perhaps they
did not consult with them
because the newspapers are gonna
be losing money from the
advertising and set that goes
when the department is required
by law to make these notices Mr
speaker and gentle lady do you
do you know how much this will
cost the department to go back
to this this practice.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
FIR indicated a certain sum of
money but it was based on the
original bill the secretary
pointed out Mr speaker and
gentleman that the cost would be
cut down some when we remove
this the committee home address
and the county situation so we
don't have a current estimate Mr
speaker and gentleman on what it
would cost
Mr speaker and and generally I I
appreciate that I I see in the
FY are here you know we're we're
talking you know roughly a
hundred issue thousand dollars
so we're not talking huge sums
of money.
I'm just trying to make the the
point here I remember very
clearly in that bill all the
provisions I remember that we
spoke about this one in
committee and said this is a
great way of the secretary
brought up I remember testimony
saying that this is a great way
to modernize we don't need to be
going to the newspapers anymore.
I can understand why the
newspapers would come and say
Hey we miss this we like to get
that revenue we can so I totally
get it Mr generally I just
respectfully I'm gonna stand
opposed
I I think there are other ways
we of this out of the tax
purpose doing a great way a
great job of getting that
information out and ask them to
take this cost and time away
from their staff which are.
Forty you know I'm working
really hard to have a to to help
our our tax form do well I just
respectfully and and get a novel
for your bill thank you gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker
there's further debate the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan Representative Johnson
thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield Mister speaker I gladly
yield to my friend and colleague
gentle lady from McKinley County
thank you Mr speaker I just want
to thank you for bringing this
bill forward I am speaking on
behalf of my communities and
rural northwest New Mexico.
In my communities our elders
still rely and read the
newspaper on a daily basis as
part of their coffee time they
visit they communicate and share
information so for those who
still don't have broadband
access and internet capabilities
this bill works so thank you and
I support your work on house
bill two six thank you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady please Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady.
Mr speaker thank you very much
I understand what you're trying
to do here Mr speaker gentle
lady.
I to take and subscribing to to
local newspapers.
And we get three on Sunday.
Unfortunately the newspapers
that I subscribe to.
They don't publish on Saturday
they don't publish on Monday
that the newspaper prints
Thursday only.
So it does make it kind of
difficult but I love reading the
newspapers and a lot of my
constituents do as well.
But Mr speaker I guess my
question to you is whenever
you're implementing this.
Do you have any idea of the cost
that it's going to be to have
all this information public.
Published in those particular
counties for this claim property
or abandoned property might be
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that question we don't have
a break down we did not receive
a break down from the tax
department on how much per
county they were spending on
publications I apologize but we
don't have that data.
Mr speaker gentle lady I know
what it because to have an
published notice of water
transfers or whatever the case
may be I know what that does
because and it can be pretty
staggering so if they are
running a list of every
abandoned property in those
jurisdictions or if its
statewide that you're exactly
right it can be the size of the
phone book by the.
There might be an easy way to do
that maybe just this notice of
unclaimed property is being run
and all of our statewide
newspapers and too few each
individual listing you might
want to go to the website at WWW
whatever the case may be
unfortunately though Mr speaker
and gentle lady we have lots of
areas of our state that do rely
on newspapers because they can't
get internet service so we're
kind of face with this is
happening here and I don't know
how you go about solving that
problem other than word of
mouth.
And so.
If a person.
Does think that there might be.
A possible notices of.
Is a tribute to to the as far as
a band a property goes maybe a
neighbor might be able to pass
that word along but I think the
cost of advertising all of this
will be.
Leaps and bounds of of of what
you think might happen so Mister
speaker gentle lady that's all I
have thank you very much.
There's further debate the
gentleman from labor percent of
Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from also to Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
Mr speaker gentle lady lose
purple and more community.
The.
One or two that are still in
business or economic ferry St
and don't publish everyday of
the week trim the presenters to
be continuing or excel rating so
Mister speaker gentle lady.
This direction which seem to be.
If you will contrary to the way
people are getting their
information if that trend
continues could you.
I guess justify why we would be
going back in this direction Mr
speaker gentleman first of all I
don't think we're going back
that came up and second of all
of.
One does not need to publish
every day to publish the list of
abandoned properties it would be
published in the paper at the
time on the day that it
publishes once a year so just to
be clear Mr speaker and
gentleman there is a required
there was a requirement that was
deleted we're putting back that
requirement it would be
published once a year in the
paper of general circulation for
that area yeah I agree with you
Mr speaker and gentleman often
it's once or twice a week now
the their papers but people
still read those papers and the
data we have Mister speaker is
seventy seven percent of New
Mexicans.
Turn to local print or digital
news for information I am what I
am suggesting Mr speaker as we
keep newspapers publishing this
list and we continue to the and
continue to have the tax
department do what it's doing so
its belt and suspenders keep in
mind Mr speaker the property
that's being held by the
government isn't the
government's it belongs to these
individuals and I believe Mr
speaker I hope you will too a
gentleman that the government to
do everything they can to get
that private property back to
those individual citizens.
Speaker gentle lady I apologize
for the poor choice of words and
I completely agree with your
last statement just one more
question with the electronic
version of this of this list if
you will.
Table two one for review.
Twenty four seven three sixty
five.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
certainly the told the press
association has all notices on
their website it's also
available on that taxed Rev
website digital.
And the digital version of the
newspaper all have it reminding
all of us Mr speaker and
gentleman if you have access to
broadband that's reliable and
you can use it Mr speaker
gentle.
Thank you Mr thank you
translated few answers.
There's.
Representative one.
Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
Santa and Santa Fe yield Mister
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan County.
Mr speaker a it feels like home
again debating the gentle lady
on the house floor I think I'm
finally feeling more welcome
here.
Mr speaker I have a question.
and I think this might help the
body so let's say that that I'm
a private citizen and and I have
abandoned property on this list
Mr speaker what happens after
all the notice goes out.
I don't claim the abandoned
property what happens that
abandoned property.
Mr speaker my understanding is
it sits there with the state.
Mr speaker is there a process
for that to eventually be sold.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan what I have been told
by tax and revenues they just
keep it.
Mr speaker that surprised me
with this seems maybe we need to
take a look at that as a
separate bill.
That seems incredibly
inefficient use of taxpayer
dollars but Mr speaker I to me
this and I I appreciate the cost
discussion and and that
perspectives I think it has sort
of the appropriators we need to
be wise when it comes the
taxpayer dollars but Mr speaker
this for me really is a due
process issue this is what this
boils down to and so there may
be a generation that that still
reads print there may be
generation that doesn't but when
the government has seized
private property or or obtained
it maybe in this perspective
being in band and
to me I it makes sense to use
whatever method we think is most
likely to find that notice.
And make sure that our systems
are able to obtain the private
property that belongs to them so
Mister speaker that's that's the
ones which of you this I think
this is really just a due
process clean up to make sure
that the property gets in the
hands of who belongs to thank
you Mr speaker.
Is funded by the German from
members of the ones on the fence
on the Quan Representative thank
you Mr speaker one of the gentle
lady from sand and to settle
Santa and Santa Fe yield Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from reality by.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I stand in full support
of this bill and I just want to
talk about what happens on a
local level when the newspaper
comes out with these lists I
remember being in an office
years ago I just come maybe
thirty years ago to to Rio
Arriba I was working for a
nonprofit called see it that on
our day and the weekly paper
came out and of course it was a
list of all the abandoned
properties everybody sat around
the table reading that list they
checked off everybody they knew
on that list and then everybody
got on the phone and started
calling these people say you've
got to go pay your taxes here on
the list a lot of older people
don't know they get sick taxes
you do the you know they just
don't know and so the whole
community gathers around
restasis and then goes and helps
those people and I think that's
what this bill is all about and
that's why we needed and it.
Will pay attention they're not
on the internet we don't have a
good internet in the north we're
trying but we still don't have
it and people do read these
weekly newspapers and they stay
on the the state on that coffee
table for a week so if somebody
doesn't catch it another person
will so I would like to thank
the Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
Simple maybe the generated close
Mr speaker I move that house
bill twenty six as amended do
now pass when we are on final
passage of house bill twenty six
is twice amended the vote is
now.
Eight months.
The vote is now closed.
Level of forty one in the
affirmative twenty two in the
negative house bill two is
exists was amended has duly
passed his house generated.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation see no objections is
ordered contributed.
House Bill to ninety introduced
by Representative Stella Cruz
Castellano and Johnson and act
making appropriation to the
department of health to contract
for the support of individuals
living with.
Amiot trophic lateral sclerosis
and their caregivers and
families House Bill to ninety
introduced by Representative
Stella Cruz Castellano and
Johnson House Bill to ninety
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee bands the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to ninety one
introduced by representative
Thompson and act relating to
insurance amending the life and
health insurance guaranty
association act to include
health maintenance organizations
as members of the life and
health insurance guarantee.
Association repealing section
fifty nine A. dash forty six
dash fifteen in M. S. A.
nineteen seventy eight being
laws nineteen ninety three
chapter two hundred and sixty
six section fifteen.
House Bill to ninety one
introduced by representative
Thompson comes with one hundred
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee advance the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to ninety two
introduced by representatives
Thompson Ferreri and Trujillo an
act relating to medical cannabis
amending the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act to update
the definition of the safety
sensitive position House Bill to
ninety two introduced by
It was my title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee vans the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to ninety three
introduced by Representative
Trujillo and Thompson and act
making appropriation to the
Legislative Council Service to
hire a contractor to analyze
health care costs drivers
analyze the feasibility of
applying to the New Mexico
health care systems more methods
for managing those drivers and
report findings and
recommendations House Bill to
ninety three and introduced by
representatives Trujillo and
Thompson house rules committee
amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to ninety four
introduced by Representative
lane and act relating to public
employees allowing certain
public employees to return to
work under certain conditions
House Bill to ninety four
entities Representative Lane.
Because will continue for a
minute twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
the house government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill to ninety five
introduced Representative night
Burt and act making
appropriation to the public
education department to fund
software for detecting firearms
on school property House Bill to
ninety five introduced by
representative Nibert House Bill
to ninety five having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill to ninety six
introduce the Representative
Lara and act relating to public
school finance including
instructional support providers
and the teacher cost index House
Bill to ninety six introduced by
Representative Lara House Bill
to ninety six amended twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to ninety seven
introduced by representative
Cadena an act relating to
corrections and acting the
corrections advisory board act
requiring the public posting of
proposed rule changes making
appropriation house bill two
ninety seven introduced by
representative Cadena House Bill
to ninety seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee then
as the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill to ninety eight
introduced by Representative
Castellano.
And act making appropriations
from the public project
revolving fund to the drinking
water state revolving loan fund
the water and wastewater project
grant Fund the cultural affairs
facilities infrastructure fund
and the local government
planning fund House Bill to
ninety eight introduced by
Representative Castellano.
House Bill to ninety eight have
equipment was my titles are
printed in front of the house
agricultural sake it's in water
resources committee in the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to ninety nine
introduced by Representative
Castellano and act relating to
construction industry enacting
the elevator safety act fighting
for it providing for inspection
and registration of elevators
House Bill to ninety nine
introduce a Representative
Castellano house bill two
million nine and been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee then the house
commerce and economic
development committee.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Stella Cruz and Johnson a
memorial declaring February
ninth two thousand twenty three
jacket and M. day in the house
of representatives House
memorial twenty seven entities
by Representative Santa Cruz and
Johnson House memorial twenty
seven amended twice by title is
ordered not printed in place and
speakers table.
House memorial twenty eight
entities the representatives
Kate's Andrea Romero Thompson
still are creating is and G.
Andrés Romero.
Morial requesting Congress to
admit Washington DC into the you
as a state of the United States
of America.
House memorial twenty eight
introduced by representatives
Kate's Andrea Romero Thompson
data Cruz and G. Andrés Romero.
House memorial twenty eight
amended twice by title is it a
printed and referred to the
house government elections any
offense Committee.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve OO one PM thousand.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
reading phone approved a subject
to revision and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee if there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we go to that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous business see no
objection it is so ordered
announcements the gentle lady
from catch instead of support of
an answer Representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker I
wanted to now announce that the
Republicans will be having a
caucus media fully following the
floor session in room three
eighteen I also wanted to
announce that the New Mexico
federated Republican women will
be having a get together from
six PM to seven thirty PM at the
Hilton on Friday night thank you
Mr speaker the delay members
signaled the gentleman from the
Oneonta Management serves not a.
It is already time as far time
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
The house democratic caucus will
be having a meeting immediately
after the first session in room
three seventeen.
The gentleman from the Jana
Representative small thank you
Mr speaker house appropriations
and finance will be meeting your
house appropriations and finance
committee meeting at one thirty
in room three oh seven or ten
minutes following the respective
Republican and democratic
caucuses thank you number signal
generated from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker I want to announce
that health and Human Services
will be meeting tomorrow in room
three oh seven at eight thirty
and how I would like to take
this opportunity Mr speaker to
thank the chief clerks office
and chairman small and everyone
else who helped make it possible
for us to be in the big room we
were in there yesterday and it
was about half full which would
have been about ten percent of
what it would fit in our old
room so it's very much
appreciated thank you thank you
Gillian letter were respecting
the fire code it's a good thing
the gentleman from spending less
on the one is on one percent of
lead thank you Mr good afternoon
good afternoon members tax
revenue committee will meet
tomorrow morning eight thirty
four you'll hear a couple bills
thank you Sir all there were
signal to delay from learning
and Representative Ferrary thank
you Mr speaker the house
consumer and public affairs
committee will meet in room
three seventeen as soon as we
kick out the democratic caucus
and also we're meeting this
Saturday so thanks committee for
giving up their Saturday member
signal the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative and as
a middle thank you Mr speaker
your house Education Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine o'clock so members please
note the time change nine
o'clock to the committee members
going to the school board
association breakfast in the
morning at Santa Fe convention
center seven o'clock the house
Education nine o'clock room
three oh nine tomorrow morning
thank you Mr we just need to
announcements and one.
Hello generated from Santa Fe
Representative set up the thank
you Mr speaker your house
commerce and economic
development committee will be
tomorrow at one thirty and three
seventeen we will be hearing up
of the retail crime bills and of
bringing back the creative in
industry division in the EDD
thank you.
Representative the gentleman
from San Juan and McKinley
Representative Alcon get us.
Your house labor and military
Veterans Affairs committee will
meet this afternoon immediately
after we get out of the caucuses
acid Kakissis thank you Mr
speaker Representative know the
gentle lady from Los Alamos on
the one in Santa Fe
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting tomorrow at one thirty
we have a number of bills on our
agenda and Mr speaker we will
also be meeting on Saturday
starting at I know I know I know
Saturday at two PM we have such
a docket folks such a docket two
PM we have we'll have we'll be
hearing a few bills as well
thank you Mr speaker members
take note in there now so this.
Members I'd like to thank guests
in the gallery Christina APIS
from the central consolidated
school board she is the
president as well as McKinley
County school board member and
guests who have joined us today
welcome to the state house of
representatives.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Before we go to that I've been
informed last chance for
photographs today there's a
number of you have not taking
your full facial photograph yet
please take care that in the
house lounge or the chief
clinical use year old high
school year book picture and put
it on the website for the next
two years.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move the house
stand in recess until eleven
thirty on Friday members take
note of the time change eleven
thirty tomorrow seeing no
objection the house is in recess
until eleven thirty tomorrow
morning.
In the.
Right.
And.
Yeah yeah.
Yeah I think that's right.
Differently for an.
Sort of.
Far be it from.
Previous.
Like to go back some of the the.
Now.
The
