OK, let's try that.
I don't have to start over, do
I?
Uh, I would pick up where you
left off.
Uh, so, uh, the electric vehicle
purchases uh can go to public
school facility authority. Uh, I
hope we passed the House Bill
32, that I think it's on your
floor, um, because it, it does
infrastructure through the PS
PSF.
public school facility authority
to use funding for electric
school buses.
Economic development
opportunities and finally
workforce training extension.
Uh, so, uh, folks wanting to get
these grants, um, have to work
with the communities and look at
what we're calling overburdened
communities, and that definition
is on page.
Bottle of page 3 of your bill.
So, projects that propose to
meet these requirements because
we have put requirements for
these funds. I think of uh
Roswell with its flooding after
that incredible rain and the
bridges, the highways, the
walkways, uh things like that to
mitigate the effects of climate
change or to prepare for the
future. So those projects that
we know are all over the state.
Uh, some of them are itemized in
this sheet. We just did a
cursory look. We found a lot
more projects on Bern Leo and
San Juan, San Juan still is
dealing with the closure power
plant, but we came up with 1.3
billion in projects that have uh
been requested but haven't been
filled.
So, the type of the applicants
for these funds are local
governments, state governments,
a nonprofit organizations and
they have to go through a grant
process that we already have in
our state agencies, energy
companies, private companies,
again, only through that grant
process, educational
institution, tribal governments,
labor unions.
So on page 3,
To the requirements for working
with overburdened communities,
so it's one of two ways. You
either uh document that two
meetings regarding the project
were held within the community
affected.
Or there is a community benefits
agreement that has been
negotiated with the community.
So we, we're going to rely on
the each a screener by the EPA,
but they have closed that down,
but before they did, several
other states, uh, including
Colorado, have downloaded that
screener, so several states
around us are looking at the
overburden, and they have uh
used that mapping. It's this
incredible mapping process that
uh overlays uh your entire
state, and we want to develop
our own.
or use one that will work for
us, and the that requirements
are on.
the first part of the bill.
It's on page 4C. So this is the
data tool and we've amended this
to ensure that we will get data
from tribal and indigenous
communities in that data tool.
So that's a very brief overview.
I, I will say that the majority
of this funding that we proposed
originally is in the budget. Um,
there's been some changes, um,
because, uh, everybody's asking
for these kind of programs have
a large request for solar
projects from local governments,
uh, to create modernization is
key. We passed that grid
modernization Act that came from
the house, I think it was.
I forget who it was. Was it
Melody Stansbury? It may have
been.
So that grant program is already
in inner M nerd, uh, gets a
large share of this because
they're the state agency that do
run these projects. Uh, you'll
see on this sheet where
everything goes.
So, I can't stand for question.
uh, I, I can also ask Julia to
make a few comments if she wants
to. Nope, or, or you can go to
the audience.
OK. Thank you, Senator. Um,
we'll go to the public uh first
off just by a show of hands, who
is here in support of this bill.
a lot of hands, who is here in
the opposition.
OK, so, uh, our practice, uh,
this year, which seems to work
pretty good, is we will take um
3 from each side. Um, in the
room and, and we'll go online,
and it'll take 2 more. Uh, we're
gonna start with opposition.
So if you'd like to speak in the
opposition, please support me.
And you'll have 2 minutes.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, Jim Winchester with
the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. This
morning, I'm speaking on behalf
of my colleagues at the Permian
Basin Petroleum Association and
the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association as well. Um, we
stand opposed. The confusion
here is that we have a $340
million bill where we know at
least half the money comes from
oil and gas to deliver hundreds
of millions of dollars of this
money too, and I quote
transition away from fossil
fuels.
While at the same time, this
committee just approved a
potential $500 million tax
increase in HB 548 that directly
hits the industry.
All of this is happening at a
time when oil prices have fallen
$10 per barrel since the
beginning of session, and
industry is tightening its belt
to prepare for this.
the fact that under a new
Republican federal
administration, we historically
see an increase in production
that leads to a decrease in
commodity prices.
Bills like these with the damage
being done to our industry that
funds the state. We fear that
the very communities that this
bill intends to help will hurt
those community members.
With that, again, we stand uh
respectfully opposed. Thanks.
Uh, with anyone else in the room
like to speak in opposition?
OK then, if you, if you're
online, would like to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Uh, Enrique now.
Mhm
OK, is there anyone else who
would like to speak in
opposition?
OK, Singan, we're gonna come
back to the room. We're gonna
take 3. So if you'd like to
speak, please line up.
OK, and sometimes we have this
problem that we have more than 3
and we're only gonna take 3.
Go ahead and we do have um
Uh, translation services
available. Do, do we know if we
need that? OK. Uh, sir, would
you like to, would it be helpful
for you to come up front?
But it's up to you, whatever
works best.
Dia, in your
industrious gas,
petroleum grante losing migrants
contribute Mexico
retoia representado.
Uh empower New Mexico,
Una coma for civic Policy Pole
cafe in Sosamos stos
contribusova.
superior
divisions programma special
ruralles
he uh DWServio transport or
stipends.
tobacco
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Gretel Barrita, and I am
a member of Somos Pueblo Unido.
Tomos is a statewide
organization with members in 8
counties, working in different
industries, including oil and
gas.
Immigrants contribute greatly to
New Mexico, although we
represent 10% of the population,
we are 13% of the workforce.
I am here representing empower
New Mexico, a coalition formed
by Center for Civic Policy, Olay
cafe and Somos.
We work in high demand
industries, and we are ready to
continue to contribute.
We need to be considered when
opening up opportunities for
jobs in emerging industries, and
we need support to access
training for these types of
jobs.
We ask that you allocate funds
to the Department of Higher
Education and the division of
Adult Education for the creation
of these programs, especially in
rural communities.
And to DWS for comprehensive
support support services such as
computer stipends,
transportation stipends or
stipends for time off work and
retraining in these industries.
I therefore ask that you support
SB 48-4 initiative. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Travis
Kellerman. I'm here from the
governor's office.
I'm the senior climate advisor
to the governor, and yes, this
bill is about climate change. It
addresses both adaptation and
mitigation.
Supports both of those actions,
which are important.
But it's also about economic
opportunity, as we've heard
before.
The governor issued an executive
order last year to create
thousands of new apprenticeships
across the state.
was called our Climate Ready
Workforce initiative, connected
to what the US Climate Alliance
did.
Now I know as a former clean
energy developer for every $1
you invest in sectors like solar
and wind energy storage, you
bring in $3 to $7 of private and
federal investment.
Private markets in particular
are really important now as
federal investment waivers.
That this bill supports multiple
areas.
But most importantly, it
supports economic development in
key areas that are not going to
be maintained by federal support
any longer.
New Mexico can take a bold step
forward, create many new
thousands of new apprenticeships
and full-time jobs from this
initiative. We need adaptation,
we need mitigation, and we need
diversification in our economy.
I urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you. We're just gonna take
one more from the audience.
Morning, Mr. Chair and committee
members Aa Chavez from NM Native
vote I'm Dane born Ferua Pueblo.
Our tribal communities are
facing the most outsized impacts
of the global climate crisis
after dealing with the legacy of
mineral extraction and
displacement. Our lands are
drying fastest. Our community
health is impacted by air
pollution, especially in urban
areas.
The community benefit fund
centers the solutions, the jobs,
and the opportunities to to step
towards more traditional land
stewardship, land restoration,
Clean Water initiatives,
renewable energy projects and
other efforts that reduce
long-term environmental harm and
increased sustainable community
practices.
Funds for grid modernization
will help build out our electric
buildings, which are ever
emerging on tribal lands, bike
and pedestrian investments will
protect our urban communities,
weatherization and efficiency
programs will help our community
members save money on their
electric bills and stay safe and
from extreme weather.
We shut down half of Santa Fe
and the grid for safety and
missed our basketball game.
Let's start prior prioritizing
long-term sustainability. Please
support SB 48. Thank you.
Thank you. Sorry, ma'am. Uh,
we're gonna go online. Next up
we have Felix Rodriguez.
OK, thank you for that. Did we
have a translation of
That see
No, OK.
OK.
Thank you. Um, we're, we're
gonna take one more, uh, Una
Porter.
Thank you, uh, and that, uh,
that's gonna end our, our public
comment. Uh thank you to
everyone who participated or
wanted to participate, um,
Senator Stewart, do you have
anything to add before we go
back to the committee?
Uh yes, Mr. Chairman. Um, I want
to point out to the committee
that the the bottom of page, I
think it's page 4, it's it's C
and D. Um, this talks about the
evaluation of this that the
administering agency uh has to
submit a report to the
appropriate interim legislative
committee.
Mideast, probably I think LFC
with this, uh, with the progress
or final results of the project,
and any other information the
committee requests. So we have
that interim evaluation built
into this.
Sanford question.
Thank you, uh, Senator, uh,
going to the committee. First
up, your representative Garcia.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman, uh.
I brought him could see me here
this morning, um.
Mr. Chair, um,
You know, this is a very
Kind of a proactive effort in
addressing climate change, I
applaud your efforts, Madam
approached him.
In bringing this forward, I do
have a couple of questions
relating to legislation, um.
I don't see a definition for
overburdened communities.
So Mr. Chairman.
The overburdened community.
is what the EPA has determined
should be the title.
And so we defined it in other
places, um, but this is, this is
the data tool that we first have
to develop to determine these
overburdened communities, so
that's on page.
I, I have a amendments in
context so I don't have accurate
page numbers for you, so we'll
find that.
So, on page 4 in section C.
This is where the DFA
consultation with Mner is going
to develop or identify.
The data tool that uses the
spatial data sets to identify
overbi communities, which are
communities experiencing
disproportionate burdens and
climate change, energy, health,
housing, legacy pollution,
transportation, water, and
wastewater and workforce
development.
So the department shall ensure
that the data from tribal
indigenous communities are
including in that data used by
the data tool.
So we will identify them with
this data tool as I mentioned
before, the EPA had a good one,
that we all referenced, but
that's been taken down, but
before they took it down, other
states downloaded that, so
Colorado um has probably the
best tool. We're gonna look at
that, um, but we're, we're going
to uh look at that for New
Mexico through our own folks.
OK, thank you for that, Madam
Chair.
Um
To really expounding on.
On the clarity of that
definition in terms of how it
applies.
your legislation.
So that that was good, Mr.
Chair.
Um, also on, uh,
Item B
uh 96, page 2,
It starts off with reducing
methane leaks.
Um,
It is
Uh, Mr. Chair is
Part of uh.
The remedies that you see apply
to that clause.
And while carbon sequestration.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, we're
neutral on that. Um, I certainly
hope we get to the carbon
sequestration, um,
There's some projects there
there's a few projects in the
Pervian Basin, um, there's
certainly projects in Europe,
but we don't mention that here.
Um,
I, I don't anticipate people
looking to this phone for money
for that cause that's so
expensive.
I certainly am looking at the
research and the data around the
development of it, but um at
this point, it's, it's not in
here.
Well. And if I could ask Julia
to respond to you.
Thank you. Um,
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the
question. I, I just wanted to
point out that
A and B that you were
referencing.
Because it's a grant fund, it's
intended to ask, and many people
already are going over and above
the minimum that's required in
the state, so the um buildings,
the international Energy
Conservation code is one of the
highest standards, and on this
section that you were just
referencing, the industry is
making a lot of strides and uh
the greenhouse gas emission
reduction strategies, and then
just to add on to what the pro
tem was just mentioned
to you
The industry is evolving so
quickly, the innovation is
happening so quickly, and the
creativity and the innovation
that's available in this space.
It's, it's just
Happening exponentially, so
there is an intent in this bill.
To require the best things that
we know of at that moment when
the grant is given, but not to
limit or pin it down, um, so I
just wanted to point out that
the key in that section are
these emission reduction
strategies, which are, are being
developed constantly.
Well, thank you for that.
Chair and
And
Protem.
Uh, I for one and not sold on
the.
notion that uh
garden sequestration is a viable
technology.
I feel it's an unproven
technology.
And uh
uh I don't see kind of really.
efforts.
In this legislation, uh, mainly
because of that mountain chair.
I mean, uh, Mr. Chair. Um, also,
Mr. Chair, on the
item 6, 1924, page 2.
Uh, assisting public entities in
the purchase of electric
vehicles, um.
And we later charging
infrastructure.
Um
child we, how do we create
equity?
With that.
concept in terms of
Um, rural versus urban.
Because
on the, on its face value,
Mister Chair.
The urban areas would really
gravitate towards us.
Mainly because they have
infrastructures in place,
charging stations, etc. etc.
Then you get out in the rural
communities.
rural, uh units of government.
Um
And it's a different story.
So, how do we avoid, Mr. Chair.
The urbanized areas that have
infrastructures in place.
Not overwhelming.
this
Approach in terms of making it
equitable.
In terms of
taken into consideration.
Rural areas that need not be at
the level.
bringing electric vehicles on
board.
In terms of their motor poles.
Mister Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, what a, what a
great question.
I'm not sure I have a good
answer for it.
So it
The
The bill sent 60 million to the
public schools facility
authority just for this.
And and they're set up to look
at everyone.
Um, they
They focus a lot of things on
the rural communities.
And I, I do anticipate that it
will be mostly the rural
communities.
If they want to, if those rural
school districts want to. That
would apply for this. Uh, so it
is up to those agencies that are
gonna be responsible for this,
and uh
the public school facility
authority has an an interim
committee set up is designed to
approve what they're doing as
public school or capital
outlayover sight task force,
Pascua for short.
Uh, so Pascuda is the one that
approves these kinds of uh
programs through the public
school facility authority, so
that committee, and I, I've
served on it for many, many
years, um, is able to ensure
that we have that kind of
equity, but also there's a
public school couple outlet
council that directs the public
school facility authority, and
that's where House Bill 32 is
important uh for this bill too.
Um, because it adjusts those
parameters in the public school
facility authority to do this
kind of work.
Uh, so, um,
You know, none of these funds
have enough money in them to do
everything. Uh, it's a start and
um I'm hoping we learn from this
first batch, um, that will be
requesting these funds.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
Uh, I mean, Mr. Chair, Madam
Prote.
Um
Another, um,
kind of impressive.
Aspect of your legislation.
page 3, item 89.
establish or expand worker
training.
activities, um.
That just meeting the objectives
of the legislation.
Um
Why are you holistically looking
at that?
um
Are you looking at?
Worker training
equitable
Um
In terms of
Community College in the
Northwest.
He sighed
was New Mexico.
Northern New Mexico.
Um
How are we being, are we
addressing?
The class
working class in terms of
Equitable training.
Of that class
In proportion.
To the state.
So that
Training is confined to Las
Cruces,
you know, and, uh, so that's,
that's what I'm where I'm
trying, that's where I'm going
with this question, Mr. Chair.
Madam prote.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, another great
question. So the expanded worker
training funding goes to
workforce solutions.
And they already have a requests
from all over the state for
additional training.
Now the one of the uh projects
that we found through this, uh,
was a request for 7 million for
a solar technician
apprenticeship program for
displaced workers in San Juan
County. San Juan County has
really tried to improve worker
training, and I, I predict that
if this passes, that they'll be
one of the ones first at the uh
at the workforce solutions, but
Workforce solutions is already
looking at.
Training firefighters. We don't
have enough firefighters.
They're looking at a training
recruiting and training
firefighters. Um, they've had
several, they've had multiple
requests to do trainings. Um, we
do have good community colleges.
Um, I think that they're finally
stepping up, especially with
their expansion of pure
technical education at the high
school level. Uh, so there are
technician training programs,
but certainly I
I think you probably heard this
from the Somas books is that
there's a need to train workers
that want to transition out of
the active industries. Uh, so
it's, uh, again, it will be up
to the workforce solution to
ensure that they do this kind of
equity and look at all workers,
and if I can ask uh Julia to
answer. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, representative, I
I just wanted to add a little
bit of information first within
the bill that outreach to
overburdened communities has two
parts to it. One is if an entity
wants to apply for a grant, they
have to go out and do outreach
to the community, however,
workforce training and economic
development, which have
opportunities which goes
directly to your question, they
have an obligation in the bill
to identify those overburdened
communities and make direct
outreach.
but it's to encourage them to
participate. So the overburden,
the, the look at overburdened
communities comes in two
different ways, making sure you
aren't
Adding additional burden, but in
our two
state agencies that do a broad
outreach to the community
economic development workforce.
Development, they have to go out
and encourage them, um.
One of the things that we did in
researching a lot of this bill
was go and find out where are we
in New Mexico. And for example,
workforce training did an
excellent job with the ETA, the
energy transition money that
went to them. They pulled 21
businesses, um, brought them
together, convened them,
convened Sanmon College, Navajo
Technical University, Northern
New Mexico College, um, they
have, they've identified.
Uh, I count over 20 areas in
which climate ready jobs could
be developed in all areas in the
state, for example, in um
Public safety and getting caught
in communities ready for the
mitigation kind of work,
electricians, uh, parking
recreation, environmental and
health and safety specialist.
I'm actually reading from a list
of the type of apprenticeships
they have available.
So one of the things that we
found is all over the state,
People are ready, people have
been held back by the lack of
finances.
This routes that there in in an
intentional um way with the
focus that you are.
That you were questioning about.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madame
Fontaine. Lastly,
Um
Your request
Oh.
She here um.
Mr. Chara, I'm very impressed
with the request.
coming in from Qua County.
41 million, 500,000.
I would think
that request might be related to
the state of the art.
Uh, wind turban curriculum at
Mesa Community College.
Uh, are you, uh, is that the is
that the case, Madam Protem, in
terms of that request.
Mainly having to do with the
further expansion development.
Of uh that wind turbine
curriculum.
a community college.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, that's probably
a good guess. So,
This were just projects that we
found. This isn't, you know, the
bill isn't saying these are the
projects, so they all have to
come forward, so we just were
curious about how many types of
projects have these communities
have been trying to do, and how
much does it cost, so that's
probably it. Um, they have a
great program there uh for work
for training and, and now we
have a manufacturing business in
Los.
Lonos where they're actually
building wind turbines, so, so
that, that's uh
Renewable energy community is
coming together and, and that's
probably what it is, but I don't
know. Thank you, uh, Madam
Protem, uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh, represent gorilla.
Mr. She, um, I do, um, I move
the motion uh onenate Bill 48 or
to pass.
I think there's
OK, we're not gonna discussion.
OK. So we'll, we'll, we'll come
back to you for that motion.
Uh, schedule from the committee
or is that my toy.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator, um, Main. I'm gonna go
with senator going forward here.
Just looks a little easier,
easier to flow. So, um,
Mr. Chairman, Senator.
Um
I'm looking at this, it says
that this is a, a money to
kickstart.
This, so are we looking at this
in the future being a
Uh, a recurring fund? Is this
gonna be something that we're
gonna have to
As dollars come out, we're gonna
have to pour more.
dollars into it. I'm looking at
the the total.
And once again, I, I, I just
heard your explanation, um.
Senator to to uh Representative
Garcia.
That
That these are just this is just
a list of projects that you saw
that could potentially apply for
this, so, um, but
Once again, as I also read this,
it says to kickstart. So,
This is not
A one time only.
Investment that we're looking
at. Do you have an idea of what
We're gonna be seeing in the
future for future investment in
this.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
I
I don't think we've done this
type of bill before.
So to me, it is an experiment
with our communities. You know,
will they come forward? Can we
get this money out fast. I think
the answer is yes. Um, certainly
who we've heard from.
Um, but this is non-recurring
funds, you know, so it's not
Uh, it's over a two-year period,
but it's non-recurring funds,
so, um,
I, I don't have any intention of
thinking that we're gonna do
this every year, but if it
works, I certainly would be part
of those folks who would want to
do it every year.
consider myos calls this uh this
uh couple outlaid bill for
communities. Uh, you know, which
is sort of, I mean, it's not
capital, it's for projects that
are partially capital.
So, uh, so I don't, there's no,
there's no trust fund, uh,
there's no attempt to continue
this, uh, if it works, I
certainly will want to continue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Senator, I'm, I'm seeing kind of
different numbers here, um, I,
I'm looking at the fiscal impact
report and it says uh the cost
over a three-year period or over
the two years that it's
implemented and being a $200
million but I see
That
In the handout that we're
talking $340 million.
What, what's the number? What's
the correct number?
So, Mr. Chair, uh, 340 is where
it started. I think in the
budget they have um moved some
funding um out of this for
economic development incentives
to economic development, uh, so
I think the rest of it remains,
but we've adjusted it a little
bit in the budget, so I think
the remainder in the budget is
somewhere around.
250 million. OK, so 200 so the
fiscal impact reports not not
exactly they did it on, on the
original bill.
OK, so, uh, thank you for that.
um.
Um, Mr. Chairman and uh and
Senator.
Um
I, I am concerned about a couple
of things. Uh, one being that it
this really is a very broad.
Um, it, it appears that
Obviously there's a heavy
emphasis on renewable projects
or projects that would help
reduce greenhouse gasses.
Um
But it, it also appears that
some of this could go just for
I
job training, but not
necessarily adjusting the
renewable.
Area that is that still in this?
You talked about some money
going out.
Uh, to economic development, um,
but is there is some or some of
these dollars still represented
in just uh
Uh, job training. Uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative,
yes. The 25 million for
workforce solutions remains in
the budget.
OK. Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator. So, um,
Once again, this is really
pretty broad in scope, and some
of this is somewhat redundant
with uh the grow projects. Uh,
can, can you tell me how
How we're gonna differentiate
which pile of money communities
need to go after.
Well, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, I think we've
stopped doing the girl money
this year. We're still in the
process of it. We just did it
last year, so we've got 2 or 3
years, some of the girls 2
years, some is 3 years. We've
got still time to evaluate that.
And that really was more from
individuals make that grow work,
although the governor also had
uh girl money, and, and I think
the finance committees put girl
money into projects. Uh, this
really is for our communities,
uh, to go out, uh, but it's run
by our state agencies who
understand grant applications
and who have been under the
governor's executive order for 6
years to try to
or adapt uh in our communities
with climate change. So, um, I
see this is sort of more global
and also more focused on trying
to either adapt or mitigate
climate impacts in our
communities.
Um, well, I, I, I guess the, the
reason I'm concerned about this
is is I actually prefer the way
the grow projects work because
there was a way of ranking
projects, there is a way of
determining uh what criteria was
used. I, I, I don't see anything
in here that
Would rank projects either by
how effective they would be or
as uh Representative Garcia said
here.
How equitably
They could be distributed within
the communities, especially um,
Mr. Chair and Senator, since
these dollars are going to
individual departments.
Uh,
there doesn't seem to be any.
Consistent, well, I don't see
any uh.
Way for projects to be ranked,
for them to be fair, uh, uh.
Every single department could
choose as their number one
project to project in
Albuquerque.
And there's no, there's no
discussion between departments
to to make that happen, so I'm
very concerned that there are,
there are no guardrails here and
there's no way to rank projects,
um, could, could you address
that, um, senator. Sure, Mr.
Chairman and Representative.
The purpose of the overburdened
community issue is for these
districts for these agencies to,
to actually have these projects,
uh, with overburdened
communities. So they have to
have either 2 public meetings,
or they have to have an
agreement of community benefit
agreement with those
communities.
This is the main focus of this.
You don't
You know, you have overburdened
communities in Albuquerque, but
You know, not, not, that's not
really what we're talking about,
and we're gonna have the data
tool that identifies those. Uh,
so these agencies have
guidelines uh in this bill, um,
they're not really strict,
they're not prescriptive because
this is a, this is different.
The communities are different
all over this state. Um, so I
believe with that requirement to
look at and work with
overburdened communities. You're
gonna see projects all over the
state.
Uh, so, uh,
And then, uh, they have to
report to us.
Uh, so they have to report to uh
interim committees, um, about
how this is working, the
agencies do, they have to do a
report every year, uh, either to
show progress or to show it's
been completed.
So we are relying on our state
agencies, but as I say, they are
our uh tasked by the governor,
and they have been for 6 years
to work on these issues. They
have grant programs up and
running that they don't have
enough money for, um, they have
uh projects that they're doing
all over the state, uh,
workforce solutions in
particular, uh, so I believe
that we have good state
agencies and that we've got
enough guardrails.
in here, so that they will be
more equitable, and we'll have
it checked on that too, when
they come to the interim
committees.
So thank you, um, Mr. Chairman
and and Senator, uh this, this
whole uh uh overburdened
communities. Could you explain
that a little bit more for me
cause I, I'm, I'm not.
Understanding that because I, I,
I do believe in some of the
metropolitan areas.
Uh, Salo County is, is, is a
statistical metropolitan area.
115,000 people, which qualifies.
So, um,
I'm, I'm, I'm not sure.
Whether or not
Uh, that would mean we, we
Wouldn't.
Uh, be as high priority as other
communities. I, I, I don't know
how, how overburdened
communities.
How that's judged, and I, and I
don't know that there's enough
in here that's prescriptive to
explain what overbirth community
is. So, Mr. Chair,
Representative, if you look at
page 4, item C.
Department of Finance and
Administration and consultation
with energy minerals and natural
resources.
develop or identify a data tool
that uses the spatial data sets
to identify overburdening
communities which are
communities experiencing
disproportionate burdens and
climate change, energy, health,
Housing
Legacy pollution.
Transportation, water, and
wastewater and workforce
development.
The department shall ensure that
data from tribal and indigenous
communities are included in the
data used by the data tool.
So, we, we had a great data
tool uh by the EPA. We've been
using it. They took that down.
Colorado has one that they've
adopted. We can do the same. Uh,
so we understand our
communities. We have
overburdened communities all
over the state.
Um, they are do tend to be
clustered around our extractive
industries where the pollution
is an issue where the health of
our children is an issue where
um there's a higher incidence of
uh cancers, uh, so that's the
legacy pollution and it's the
industry pollution. So, uh, data
set will help us determine these
overburdened communities which.
We already really know all
about.
So thank you, um.
Mr. Chairman and and Senator, I
think once again there, there's
words used disproportionate is
another thing.
If I were to look at
Let me
Uh, just play out what I'm
thinking in my mind. If I'm
looking at
The metropolitan area of
Albuquerque.
Uh, air quality there isn't as
bad as anywhere in the state.
Um,
it is true statistically, it is
true, but it's different. It's,
it's mostly from exhaust, car
exhaust, and that type of thing.
It's not from
But but from industry, it's,
it's from individuals
contributing to that. And then
uh we would probably say there's
a higher homeless population.
In Albuquerque.
Um, I, I just, it seemed when
we're saying that that
That we're leaving it up to a
department to come up with the
metrics.
And, and, and the way that's
written, it does appear as if
Albuquerque could potentially
be.
Uh, with, with certain aspects,
higher unemployment, potentially
in certain communities within
the community, maybe not
Albuquerque as a whole, but, um,
maybe more uh the uh
international area or the
Or extended areas, so I'm, I'm
just concerned because it's not
I understand from the standpoint
of what you're saying, I'm
getting what you're wanting to
happen.
I'm not sure.
That that would
Uh, so other areas of the state
that are poor.
Um, and have
Uh
high poverty, potentially maybe
in north central New Mexico, or
where there's not high
pollution.
It does appear as if they might
be left out of this.
I'm trying to figure out how,
how do we make this equitable? I
don't know how the way this is
written, I don't know that
there's any.
Any mechanism to try and make
sure that, that
That all communities. Now, now
if we go away from
Disproportionately impacted.
Uh, I, I'm afraid some of some
of these communities are
proportionately impacted if that
that to to use a different
terminology that there's some
poverty all across.
Uh, um, certain areas of the
state that could benefit from
the job training and those
things. I'm just, I, I don't
know within this.
I, I don't see anywhere in here
where there's a way to rank
projects throughout all of the
dollars allocated.
I, I, I think probably it'll be
easier within certain
departments like for instance,
instance, uh,
Um
Emer
Uh, they, with certain criteria,
I think probably projects in San
Juan County would probably be a
higher priority.
Because of
Uh
reliance on extractive.
industries.
However, I, I see one of the
projects that was mentioned on
here.
Uh, is, uh, workforce
development, $7 million for
solar technician apprenticeship
program.
Um
Mr. Chair and Senator, we had an
apprenticeship program.
In Allen County at our college.
There weren't any jobs.
There there was no
Um, Mr. Chair and, and
Um, um
Senator
After the ETA we were, there
were dollars that were set aside
for workforce training to try
and transition towards these
towards uh greener jobs.
Um, but those jobs never
materialized. They still have,
they're still not there.
In San Juan County, um, so what
happened was, uh, someone on
Community College.
Initially created a program in
expectation, and we, we did get
some dollars.
Uh, from the displaced worker.
Fund that was created in the
ETA.
to help um recover.
Um, that training, the, the
problem was there just was not
jobs available for that
training.
So
For example, I would hate to see
in San Juan County.
This be where we put our money.
So we can create training for
jobs that don't exist in San
Juan County.
Um, they're just not there.
Now,
If we get
Uh, some of these solar projects
that are trying to
come into Sanlo County, uh,
there, there would be some
temporary jobs that would come
with that, but there's no long
term jobs associated with that.
The there's
Uh,
a couple of the projects that
are that are going forward in
San Juan County right now just
with private equity dollars.
Um
Once we get to around 300
megawatts.
Of, of power. There's 4
full-time jobs at that facility.
To maintain.
There's just not, so I'm
That's what I mean. I'm, I'm,
I'm curious as to how we rank
these projects properly.
To to make sure that
that it actually impacts job
creation.
So I, I appreciate what you're
trying to do.
Um, I, I'm very concerned that
there's no way to rank these,
that there's no way.
That but each
Set of dollars will be siloed
within the different
departments.
And there's no way to determine
that their equitably distributed
throughout the state, um, so
once again, I appreciate, I, I
know that this has been
important for you for a long
time.
Um
I, I just
It it seems uh
Seems to me other other ways,
uh, anytime we create any other
fund, we generally do something
uh that reads to this department
to promulgate rules to make sure
this happens. I, I don't even
see that language in here.
It just appears that
We're asking them to say,
On Mr. Chairman and and and
senator were asking them to
Look
And prioritize overburdened
communities that have been
disproportionately impacted. I
don't believe either one of
those have any definition.
Not, not clear definitions, and
so I'm gonna, I'm gonna not
belabor the point. I'm, I'm just
having a hard time, um, Mr.
Chair, and and and senator in in
figuring out how, how
This, as you say, experiment.
distributes money fairly across
the state. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, representative
represent Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you expert. I've
just got a couple, couple of
quick questions, I think,
um, one of the questions Senator
Mr. Chair, and Senator, that I
was going to ask is uh really
trying to understand the total
project request that you see
over here, and I, and I know
some of that's training, some of
that, but can you help me
understand what are some of
those other projects that that
maybe y'all discovered in there.
Well, Mr. Chairman, it's really
the sheep that you could look
at.
Um, it's got examples. I do have
other examples. Um,
And that's OK. I, I, I see on
your sheet, uh, so this is
primarily what, what we're
trying to accomplish that, Mr.
Chair Mr. Chairman, I always get
in trouble when I hand this out
because people think, oh, there
they all are, um, these are just
projects that we've discovered
through our research that
communities have been trying to
do and have failed to do it
because there's been no money.
So, these are just some examples
of things that we think would
qualify for this. Uh,
Pre-weatherization for
low-income New Mexicans, um, the
workforce development that we've
already talked about, the one
project in San Juan County, of
clean energy. Our communities
are different and need different
things. You know, I really think
of uh
Roswell.
Who needs to rebuild uh so much
of their infrastructure, and the
northern part of the state
that's been so devastated.
Uh, so the projects will come
from community if we pass this,
and uh and our state agencies
will be responsible for
following the tenets of the of
the bill.
Oh.
But
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for the question. The, the
bill is
Brown did and all of the areas
where we can make.
climate, um, where we can reduce
greenhouse gasses. That is, that
is has been the intention of the
pro tem and from the beginning
in the series of bills that
she's brought forward, and in
each one, it's kind of got a
different focus, which is what I
think you are kind of looking
at. So, uh let me just go over
them quickly. So the first one
is um grid modernization, which
is actually I'm just gonna say,
I know a lot of people on this
uh committee are very interested
in the details of that and
there.
And it's a huge need in our
state. There's a lot of
different communities that could
apply for these grants that
could expand electricity and
infrastructure into their area
for a lot of reasons. We hear
very often in the protema heard
often in bringing these bills
forward, the needs for a lot of
housing that they don't even
have electricity, but in
addition, in the southern part
of the state, we hear and have
and have heard loudly, frankly,
from like the oil and gas
industry that need the electric
electricity to the oil fields in
order to electrify that, um,
because right now if they're
only energy source is gas and
you can get rid of pneumatic
equipment or you can electrify
the equipment on the oil and gas
pads, then you can have a
substantial reduction in methane
leaks, which the oil and gas
companies are very willing to
step up and do that, but there
is a barrier, so those are two
very different examples on what
the need for grid mod.
Um,
the energy efficiency, um,
increased renewable energy.
There's lots of opportunity
there. I think that
representative Montoya was just
talking about that. There's an
ability to do wind farms in
various parts of the state.
There's all kinds of opportunity
that a community could say we
are interested in that.
The community doesn't have to.
Energy efficiency is the
community energy efficiency
development block grant that is
low-income housing, that's
affordable housing and um
bringing essential household
services to every single one of
your communities. I'm guessing
that no community in the state
has a sufficient amount of um
That that that no one has come
near completing that project.
So each of these is allocated
money, um,
You know, there's another
section on finding walkable
communities and improving
pedestrian safety, maybe someone
in the Protes district would be
interested in that and coming
forward because they have seen a
lot of pedestrian injuries and
deaths. You don't have to do
that. So we can go through all
of them, but it's focused.
Um
Those targeted areas that are
going to reduce greenhouse
gasses, and those are the 8
criteria in the grant and in
the, in the, in the bill that
results in grants.
Then I think the protein is also
mentioned how,
how I'm sorry not to go through
the entire bill again.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for those examples. I was
just looking for a couple, but I
appreciate what you're going
through.
One of the ones I found
particularly interesting is this
clean energy you have a kind of
highlighted in the project
examples.
It's in Eddy County.
That's $230 million for 30 acres
of land. Can you tell me little
details on that. I think I know
something about it, but I want
to see if it's the same one.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I don't
really have any details on that.
OK, Mr. Chairman and Senator, I
just figured since it was one of
your highlighted items that
maybe we knew a little bit more
about it. If it is what I'm
assuming, uh, actually, when I
was in Eddy County commissioner,
this, this came in front of the
commission at the time. Is it a
battery storage? Is that what it
is? They, they wanna put those
some a couple big battery
storage pods for lack of a
better word, in Carlsbad is
that.
Do we think that might be what
that one is. I think that's what
that one is, Mr. Chairman. It is
a battery storage, Mister Chan,
Senator, thank you for that. You
know the reason they came to the
Eddy County Commission for an
IRB on this project, and the
reason the commission didn't do
this project is because over the
life of this project.
They were going to generate 1 to
2 jobs, and that was it. And so
when we looked for jobs when
we're doing IRBs in our
communities and in our counties.
We're looking at how many jobs
is it's gonna create over the
long run, and this project
really didn't create, but maybe
1 or 2, and the bulk of them, I,
if I remember it right, they
were going to have to come from
out of state.
So this project was interesting
to me at the time. I fully
understood what it was going to
try to do, but as far as a job
creator in our community, it
just wasn't gonna do it. So
that's gonna lead me to my next
set of questions, um, with, with
all of these projects that we're
looking at, let's call them
solar and wind and all those
things, and we've heard a lot
about that on this, uh, this
committee. So Mr. Chair and
Senator, do we know about how
many jobs, permanent jobs, the
solar industry have in.
New Mexico. I have a pretty good
guess. I just wanna see if I'm
close.
Mr. Chairman, I don't have that
data with me now. I do know that
the, the renewable energy
industry is increasing their
jobs and that were 2 or 3 or 4th
in the nation with that.
Uh, so with our wind energy and
our solar, we have increased
those jobs, but I don't have
that data. OK, Mister Chair, I
was hoping you might have
something cause I don't, I don't
know if my numbers are right,
but doing the research I did
before we came in here, I found
that as of 2024, the solar
industry has about 2000
permanent jobs in New Mexico,
2000 permanent jobs in New
Mexico. The wind energy has
about 150 permanent jobs in New
Mexico. That's what they've
created. Again, could be wrong,
this is.
Just from my search. That's why
I was hoping we had something
else.
The oil and gas industry has
30,000 permanent jobs. That's
direct jobs in New Mexico.
Um, so what my fear is, is as
we're looking at spending these,
these funds and we say they're
creating jobs. I, I would like
to know how many jobs permanent
jobs do we really see?
Because on some of the other,
other legislation that has come
through here, the thing I've
heard of, uh, you know, we had a
bill talking about transition
lines, transition lines, I think
that's the right word. Um.
And they use Corona as an
example of showing that the GRT
had grown so much.
But my question, I didn't ask it
that day and I wish I would
have. It's how much of that was
a permanent growth, or how much
of that was a huge growth in
their GRT why that line was
there. And as that moved on, how
many jobs stayed behind.
And so when I'm looking at
legislation like this fully
understand where you're headed
with it, um.
I'm just curious as we do this
and as we say we're creating
jobs in these communities. How
many jobs do we truly think
permanently we're going to have
in these communities once the
projects have been completed.
Mr. Chairman, I don't have an
answer to that question.
OK, Mister Chairman and Senator,
thank you for that. Um, that,
that's one of the things I
concern the most, obviously a
district that I represent, it is
obviously heavy oil and gas
industries, um, and, and it
worries me every time cause that
30,000 is direct industry jobs.
That's not the indirect jobs.
And so when I'm looking at my
communities, um,
It, it scares me that as we're
trying to, to say we're creating
jobs. We really don't know how
many jobs, permanent jobs we're
going to leave behind, and then
I don't really understand where
New Mexicans, not just in my
area, but New Mexicans across
New Mexico.
Once we start eliminating a lot
of these things, where are the
permanent jobs going to come
from?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I don't know
what eliminating we're doing,
we're not doing any elimination
of any oil and gas jobs in this
bill, you know, it's my
understanding that permian Basin
is going great guns, you know,
even though we passed uh a
pretty intense methane rules in
22, a production is double. I, I
don't think you have to be
afraid of this bill. This is for
communities that want to.
Increase their ability to
mitigate climate change to adapt
to climate change and to do some
projects that communities want.
So, this is not a job creation
bill. This is a community
benefits bill. I hope it creates
permanent jobs, but it'll depend
on the community and what they
want. Uh, so it, it's, I've
never tried to say this as a job
creating bill. Uh, I, I'm very
proud we've got
25 minutes workforce solutions
because they have all kinds of
projects that they would like to
move forward with, uh, I
mentioned the firefighters. I
think that's really at the top
of their list. So I understand
where you're coming from also,
but, you know, it's kind of
amazing to me that oil and gas
doesn't support sending money to
communities to help with uh
climate change. So that's what
this bill does. It tries to help
communities mitigate
her apt to our changing weather.
So Mr. Cha and Senator, I, I
hear what you're saying and I, I
completely understand, but is
this not to help us transition
away from oil and gas and
nuclear.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I mean,
eventually we'll have to do that
because eventually it'll run
out. So I think it's important
that
Way before that happens that we
uh expand our economy. I just
can't use oil and gas forever,
um, so this is also an attempt
to where there's needs in
communities where they want to
promote economic development in
other industries, they can do
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. OK, I fully understand
that. I, I think some of us are
on the side of a.
I I agree before oil and gas
runs out, we should have figured
something out, but I think
that's where a lot of the
disagreement comes from is, is,
is there's, there's folks
that'll say it's gonna run out
in 10 years, it's gonna run out
in 20 years. Uh, I think I have
it on pretty good authority's
head in our lifetime. We don't
ever see oil and gas running
out. I think with the new
technologies and the new
extractions, uh, that is gonna
run for a really long time. Uh,
that being said, fully agree
that that we
We've got to find that
transition, but as we find that
transition, are we worried, uh,
that let's take solar and wind
energy that take those very rare
minerals to make those projects
work. Are we worried that we
might run out of that as well?
Um, Mr. Chairman, I don't really
have an answer to that question.
You know, this is a complicated
issue. Energy and how we all
Reduce it, how to live with it.
I don't have an answer to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. The, the only
other thing I'll say, and I
think, uh, Representative
Montoya sort of talked about it,
but with the list that, that you
gave earlier with Walkways, uh,
you've mentioned Roswell a
couple of times and I think you
said bridges, is that right?
We're, we're hoping to, to maybe
help them put their bridges back
or, or
Help them get back on their
feet, which is great. I think
there's another piece of
legislation going through the
house now, I hope, is it?
They're moving, OK, good. Uh, I
didn't know if it's still moving
or not. I thought I'd checked
that, that wants to help Roswell
well, and I think that's
definitely needed. Um, but with
that kind of of
Shot.
I'm afraid without a narrowed
focus, all of a sudden, um, I
would hate for this to get just
taken apart with a lot of
projects and not really get your
overall goals completed, um, so
maybe we are a zero focus or
zeroed in focus might help me
understand it a little better,
um, to say, hey, here's what
we're really trying to
accomplish with these, these
cities, cause the, the kind of
the definition that's in the
bill as to what, what that looks
like. That's kind of
Everything in New Mexico with
some of the bills we've heard,
so I, I think pretty much every
city would be eligible with is
that a pretty fair statement,
Mr. Chairman, yeah, everyone's
eligible. It doesn't mean
they're all gonna apply, but.
Right. Yes, ma'am, Mr. Chair and
uh Madam Senator, I, I agree. I
just think with us saying that
it kind of fits everything. It's
walkways, it's roads, it could
be sober, it could be wind, it
could, it, it makes me worse.
that this amount of money isn't
going to actually accomplish
what you're trying to accomplish
because we've made it so broad
as let's just, let's just try to
grab everything, um, whereas a
lot of the legislation that has
come through here, especially
this session, I'd be curious how
much, whether it be tax
incentives or just money we've
given some of these industries,
what kind of movement and shift
have we seen, um, again, the
quick search that I did on the
solo over the last 5 years, we
went from about 6% of the
state's production and energy.
To 11. So that's over the last 5
years, and I, I have a feeling.
You would be better at this than
me. There's been a pretty hefty
investment into solar, um,
through this, this legislation,
um, and legislators over the
last 5 years. So that's not a
huge shift, that is a big shift,
I guess, I guess I just
contradicted myself, didn't. It
does seem like a good shift, um,
but I, I would be curious how
much that cost us to make that
shift and how much more it's
gonna take over the, over the
life of this to actually make
that shift, especially
We're talking about the
significant increases in what
we're trying to obtain with this
AI type industry that's coming
and uh the amount of energy it's
going to take off the grid. So
just very.
Not confused necessarily, a
little confused on why it's so
broad, um, but I do appreciate
it and thank you for your time.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Senator and Ms. Barnes. Um,
I, I'll try to, uh, keep my
questions to 4 or 5 cause I
think a lot of the, the
questions that have been asked,
um, mirror some of the, the
questions that I had initially,
um.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator.
One of the
Concerns I have is without the
definition of
Overburdened community, and I
know that uh we're talking about
having data, a data set
developed to provide
Uh, a definition and metrics for
us to make determinations. How
long will it take to have that
data set.
Uh, developed in New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I don't think
it will take very long. They're
already working on it. They're
looking at Colorado. They have a
good one. And the definition is
on page 4 and C.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you, Senator. The reason that I
was asking is because I was
wondering if it would delay the
implementation or the out uh the
giving out of grants, um, but it
sounds like you're not concerned
about that. Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
senator.
I want to acknowledge some of
the, the comments that were made
earlier about the contributions,
um, to the, the state budget,
um, and, you know, as a result
to the community benefit fund
proposal from the oil and gas
industry. Um, it is obviously a
resource that um is a resource
of the state, um, which is why
so much of it goes back to the
state, um, but I was wondering,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, in
section 1B.
If some of the projects that uh
could qualify, um, I think Ms.
Barnes mentioned some of the
ways that um the oil and gas
industry could electrify, uh,
and you mentioned pneumatics,
and so I'm wondering if um there
are other parts of this proposal
that would directly help, uh,
decarbonize the oil and gas
industry.
Well, Mr. Chair and and
Representative.
Uh
They could, they could apply for
this. They, they do have
problems with electricity in the
in the Permian Basin, so
You know, we're not saying oil
and gas can't apply. It's there
and that these pneumatic devices
that they've started using in
Colorado, I think are are very
innovative. I'm very excited
about that. They just asked that
in Colorado, so they certainly
could apply for this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, that's what I'm,
what I was hoping to hear, um,
that they would certainly be
eligible and that some of that
funding could go back to help
those um companies in the
industry decarbonized. Um,
Mr. Chair, um, Senator,
I think Representative Montoya
brought up um some of the
questions about um availability
of jobs and job training in
certain areas. And so it made me
wonder how uh will we ensure
across these programs that
there's a holistic approach and
that there's collaboration
between departments to ensure
that if, if there is a project,
for instance, um, her job
training in San Juan County,
that there are the appropriate
jobs there.
Uh, to go with it.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, the, just
directly for workforce
development on page 3 line 9,
the workforce development is
directly tied to the numbers up
above it. So they are provided
this funding in order to support
that those initiatives up above.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ms. Barnes. The question though
is,
How are we going to work to
prioritize or try to ensure that
the jobs that we're training
folks for are within the
communities that they live.
So that they're not having to
move to perform those functions.
So, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, it's, it's a
good question and I, I hear all
these worries from here. I, I
trust the state agencies.
They, I think they've done a
really good job the last 6 years
following the governor's
executive orders, and she just
did a new one, the end of last
year, about apprenticeships and
workforce, and workforce
solution is already looking at
that. So they've had to work
together, uh, they're, they all
have to be part of the
sustainable economy task force,
which they are, and they've
worked together on those kinds
of projects. So, um, you know,
it
It, it's always a a balance
between being too prescriptive
and being too broad, uh, so I
trust these agencies. I've met
with them, they support this
bill, but the governor supports
the bill you heard from um
Travis, so I, I believe that
there's, they're working
together right now on these
issues because they've had to do
that under her direction.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, I tend to agree
that I, I think that um on the
whole, our agencies do work well
together, um, and there is good
collaboration. I think it's fair
though for the committee to ask
some of the questions and
express concern because it is a
large sum of money and the bill
itself doesn't have some of the
guard rails that might exist in
some of the programs because it
is, you know, this bill is
sending money to existing.
funds and so we don't see all of
the information in one place. So
I think that's, I think it's um
Worthwhile for us to be asking
some of these questions. Um, Mr.
Chair, uh, Senator, my last
question is, um, how do we
ensure that um funding for
projects are gonna be technology
neutral.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Gosh, I can't
answer that.
Um, I don't know exactly what
you mean.
Perhaps you could all of him
short. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. So what I
mean is that um as the state is
distributing funding for
workforce training or for some
of the projects that the state
is taking a very technology
neutral approach and not a
predetermining the success of
certain technologies, for
instance, um, will some of these
funding, um, opportunities be
available to advance nuclear.
Will some of the funding go to
San Juan College?
for a carbon storage, uh,
training program. Um, I'd like
to make sure that with this
large sum of money and um as Ms.
Barnes mentioned, the, the
rapidly changing technology, um
that uh we are not excluding any
potential solution.
Another great question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, but
The bill is written.
So that projects like that.
would be on the list. I
certainly am very interested in
the decarbonization uh
technician up at San Juan. I, I,
I want us to research
decarbonization. I do think it's
important moving forward. So we
didn't eliminate any of those
projects from the possibilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. That's um what I could
hope to hear. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Grola.
Thank you, Mr. She, uh, thank
you, Senator an expert. Um, I
just have questions to clarify
after that debate that I heard
some of the questions, um, when
we talk about uh overburden
community. Do you know what
other states have done to
identify those other worldly
communities.
You
Mr. Chairman, so, uh, what I do
know is that this is the
definition that Colorado is
using. They're really kind of
ahead of us in all of these
areas. Um, it's also was part of
the EJ screener that was on the
EPA, the US EPA website that's
no longer there, but this is,
this is why we switched from a
previous definition we were
using to the one that came out
of the EPA.
That's part of the screeners
that we were using, uh, so it's
kind of modernized our
definitions uh in these bills.
to be able to use those EPA
screeners and have it be more
uniform.
Thank you, Mr. Thanks sir that's
about the air quality, right?
Is that the air quality, um, I
was looking into the, um, New
Mexico energy department page,
they have a dashboard. I think
it needs to be some more extra
work there, but it has some of
this I um areas identified so um
it's really nice to see that
like the state and the areas are
more affected, so things like
that I think would make it
really clear for all, for all
the communities to see where are
over.
Of the communities, um, also I
think I heard about um Mr share
uh reaching out to schools and
since I heard I think people
from Dulce and Lake Arthur
testified, right, um, and they
are like leading the way in the
electorate school buses. So
initiatives like that could that
be this community fund used to
Mr. Chair, absolutely.
Uh, we have 60 million and for
electric vehicle infrastructure.
Thank you, thank you, uh,
Senator, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think those are the things
that I wanted to clarify. I
really like this, this fun, um,
oh.
Is a fun sustainable over time,
Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chairman is this goes for
several years, and, and we'll
see. I mean, if this works as we
would like it to, I'm hoping
that we would continue it, but
it's non-recurring funding, so,
uh, it's not, it's not in, in
perpetuity.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Sharon
Senator, one of the things that
I've been since I've been in the
committee here, I've been
hearing a lot about the health
disparities, especially in some
marginalized areas and I believe
this plan is going to help on
that, so I really like the way
that it's been approaching me,
um, it's whatever is needed,
we're gonna find it and trying
to help uh with climb with all
the climate change, I guess my
last question will be how will
this initiative work with other
um align with
Existing efforts in the uh
effort for for climate change.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, this is a line
through the governor's executive
orders, um,
The these agencies that we've
identified have been working
together for the last 6 years
on, on climate change. Uh, she,
uh she just directed them all to
do that. Uh so the source of all
of these climate bills I'm doing
are off of that executive order
to try to continue it.
Thank you, Mr. Sir. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Carla, representative
small thank you chair. Thank
you, uh, Madam Pote. Thank you,
Ms. Barnes, uh, chair, uh, Madam
Forte and Miss Barnes. One, I
wanna thank you for the approach
around sort of technology
neutrality and the openness to
investments across the area to
chair presenters, um.
The existing this goes through
existing funds of folks have
said, it seems like some of that
is because a great deal of work
has been done over the last few
years in either creating new
programs or fine tuning existing
programs. Is that your sense?
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, yes, the,
you know, the seed that you all
pass
uh representative Ortiz, um, has
been phenomenal for rural
communities that have, um,
really had a need to upgrade
renewable housing. So that's
part of it. Uh, the great
modernization fund, um, again,
that you passed. Um, we've
upgraded that, we've updated it,
we've made it more.
flexible. Um, so that, uh, is an
inert and hopefully that will,
it's not enough, it's 100
million. It's the largest amount
we have much more a need for
electricity than that, but at
least it's a start. Um,
Let's see, the
The outdoor recreation access,
uh, land and water conservation
Fund. That's an established
fund. Uh, yes, the public
schools facility uh facility
authority is established fund
and
I think that's it. Workforce
solutions goes directly to them
for job training, economic
development, and I think those
are the funds that were moved
out of this bill and into the
economic development department.
And so yeah, we, that's what we
try to look for. We looked for
funds that people had wanted to
use, but they didn't have any
money in them, but that they
were uh useful for the for the
departments. Uh, we started with
trying to change all the funds
decided that that was too much
work, uh, so, uh, so we backed
away from using some funds that
were just not appropriate. Thank
you, chair. Uh, thank you, ma'am
Protem and uh put time, I wanna,
uh, compliment.
that because I think that really
focuses on implementation, which
has been um I think a sort of a
core focus chair, um, presenters
want to also point out that it
We're seeing more of a blending
of sort of different ideas that
have come forward from different
sources that are now being more
and more blended, uh, in chair,
I think another uh metoprote,
another area we're seeing this
in is sort of implementing the
idea of community benefit
agreements into other proposals,
including uh uh carbon
management, carbon storage,
which is really positive, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator.
Would you agree with that, that
sort of
You've blended some ideas from
the house. Obviously, the house
is really excited to blend some
of the really good ideas that
you and others have started in
the Senate. Does this represent
more of a blending of those, do
you think?
That's a good way to describe
that, and I, I, I'm proud of
that. I want us to work together
and I think these ideas behind
this bill are solid and good,
and as I said, a lot of these
started here in the house, the
see back, the grid moth.
Great. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for time. I'm
excited to, to support this. Um,
it's a very significant amount
of money, which is appropriate.
I think we see the need and as
we implement effectively, we
want to make sure that we can
continue doing that and
supporting communities and
diverse communities and diverse
needs that all connect back to
our.
connection to a hard climate. So
thank you.
Thank you representative said
Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
I've got 5 or 6 questions but um
I think probably many of those
won't add to the debate a whole
lot, so I'll I'll get it down to
one.
Mr. Chair, um, pro tem expert
and I think this is probably for
you, um, is
On page 4.
Line 9.
You talked about spatial data
sets and I'm somewhat familiar
with geospatial data sets. And
so this is gonna
This is gonna be a long-winded
question, but in order to save
time. Um, so what, what are we
adding? I'm, I'm very aware that
GIS technology is well
developed. You can get on Google
Earth and see all sorts of
things, um, there are all sorts
of commercial programs and, and
systems and data sets there that
are now contained within these
various agencies, methane,
satellite data, all these sorts
of things are so my question
specifically, what is it?
That we're trying to either
develop or identify that isn't
already out in the commercial
sector, um, you know, I'm in my
business we use uh simulation
technology, um, you know, early
on, um, Monte Carlo simulators
and those types of things. So
what is it that
What tool is needed that doesn't
already is not already
available.
Well, I'll try that, Mr.
Chairman. So,
These tools are already
developed.
As I said, Colorado has one that
they're using. Um, there's
several other people in the
industry that it developed these
tools. Oh, I thought originally
we would just use the federal
EPA EA screener, um, but they've
taken that down now. Um, so we
will look first. It doesn't say
we have to develop it. It says
develop or identify. So I think
these tools are already there,
and I think our departments are
already looking.
at them and possibly using them
now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Protem
expert, I'll conclude with that.
Thank you.
further questions from the
committee before I go. Um,
Center, I had a couple of
questions mostly about the
mechanics of the bill.
Um
I see that the, the money and
the fund is subject to the
appropriation by the
legislature.
It is the idea that
these projects, a list of
projects would be selected and
then there be a preparation
specific to to those projects.
Or is this a fund that agencies
get to dole out.
Mr. Chairman, uh, this funding
will go directly to these
agencies in these funds that
we've identified.
Uh, without
Having to come to us, they have
to come back to us, uh, every
year in December to tell about
what projects, how they're
working, whether or not they're
working or not.
So we have that kind of check on
it.
OK, but the legislature is not
approving specific projects like
uh some of the water funds,
there's a list of projects that
we approve every year. That's
not the stand up. No, it doesn't
work like that, Mr. Chairman.
OK. And
It was unclear to me which
agencies are approving which
projects.
Well, and you, you can look at
this, it's a short.
So the M nerd.
As the grid modernization fund.
Uh, the innerd has the grant
programs for energy efficiency
and renewable technology.
the seed, uh, your community
energy efficiency development
block grant that you passed, uh,
is at the nerd, uh, Department
of Transportation, uh, is doing
all kinds of things, uh, with,
uh, funding to try to mitigate
pollution around the state that
goes to them. Um, then you have
the supplemental land and water
fund that we upgraded a couple
of years ago, so that the state
offered technical assistance for
communities. We've been using
this fund for 30 years. We get 3
or $4 million a year, and then
it stopped before the pandemic,
and Senator Heinrich got money
put back into it. So we upgraded
that uh program, so that sits
also an M nerd, the electric
vehicle infrastructure and buses
at at the public school facility
authority, um, overseen by
public so.
Is that what you mean?
Can you point to me to me where
that is in the bill, not the
hand out the bill.
I like, I, I didn't see those
funds called out in the bill. I
didn't see those agencies called
out in the bill.
So I don't understand how the
fund, how the money moves from
the community benefit fund to
the different agencies. So it
goes to DFA.
And then DSA distributes it to
the agency.
And so the agency it's an HB2.
The language to do that is in
HB2.
But it's not in this bill.
Well, the DFA certainly is.
So
What we did was we did 2 bills,
set up of 49 is a companion to
this, but all the money for all
the funds into the budget.
So that was an extensive. I have
a copy of it here.
Uh, that you can see, but this,
um,
So, Section 1 $40 million
propriated to the community
benefit fund from to the
economic development department,
etc. So, it's all these
sections, but this is what the
finance committee kept to put
into House Bill 2, saying that
we don't, didn't need this. This
is like an appropriation bill,
it's an appropriation bill
section, each section identifies
the funding, the fund, and the
agency. So they, they
Paes
past this, and then they put
this in house bill too.
OK, so this fund,
Funds other funds. Pursuant to
other mechanism mechanisms.
Not in the legislation for this
month.
House Bill 2.
Yeah I guess I, I kind of don't
understand if it's in-house Bill
2, if we're directly funding the
other funds, how this community
benefit fund comes into play.
Well fund requires activities to
identify the overburned
communities to work with those
communities to have a community
benefit agreement or meetings
with that community, and it
describes for each of these
agencies the parameters around
these funds.
So, we, we just don't pass
appropriation bills, um, I, I
can, I can show it to you. It's
4 pages and it puts all the
funds in the right place, but
this goes to the appropriators,
and they put it in, so um we
didn't need it in this. You
certainly referenced that age.
OK.
Um, let me ask you a, a
different
Line of questions, um, uh, in
the uses, I see, for example,
uh, there's public building and
this is public entities
sometimes we talk about
infrastructure, but then other
times we talk about things that
don't have a clear public nexus
in my mind. So for example,
reducing methane leaks
attributable to extractive
industries are these publicly
owned facilities or are we
talking about grants to
Um,
Industry.
Uh, Mr. Chair, if I can try to
address your question. Your
question, um, looks to the
anti-donation clause in in state
law, so it's a very good
question.
Um
The various, um,
Agencies have requirements to
comply with the anti-donation
clause. So, let me take the seed
grant, um, the seed program,
that is not an that is an
exemption from the anti-donation
clause within it based on
affordable housing and the other
exemption is um the uh essential
household services, those are
two exemptions to the to the the
broad anti-donation that have
been passed in our
an exemption for, so for
example, that complies with
anti-donation. There are
economic development, for
example, can also um provide
things for that you've already
passed in legislation, for
example, the LED requirements.
So if they wanted to provide
some of the funding through
that. So there are checks and
balances throughout state
government to not provide funds
directly to I, I uh private
entity.
or private people unless they,
there is some exemption already
for the anti-donation clause.
So, if I can take grid mod, I
don't wanna go.
I don't want to try to read to
tell you about every single
section of the bill, although
I'm happy to. The grid
modernization, the problem is we
need to get the electricity
lines out into the communities.
What typically happens then is
if you're in oil and gas
country, then the oil and gas
industry takes it from there,
but their problem is, is that
they
There that the infrastructure
isn't there. So the grid
modernization bill, which you're
gonna see some amendments to
that, I think immediately after
this bill, um, provides those
compliance with the
anti-donation provisions. The
grant, um, and it's just an
interest of time I'm gonna jump
in, um, specifically, maybe
could you address methane leaks?
Where's, where's the public role
there?
So
What that section of the bill is
doing is it is requiring
A higher standard if there is
something that addresses a
methane leak. So what that
provision effectively says is
you must use the highest, um,
Let me just find the exact
language, greenhouse gas
emission reduction strategies if
something is funding that. So
this isn't saying that you have
to fund something, but if
Uh, one of, let's say Lee County
wants to
assist and improve and
identifying methane leaks and
they wanna, you can do it from
school buildings, you can
identify methane leaks in those
have to ensure that any methane
production strategies that are
used are the highest and best
standards. The one above it is,
is relying on buildings and you
have to use the International
Energy Conservation code. So
it's ensuring that anything that
can qualify, anything
that is allowed under our
anti-donation clause has to meet
these higher standards.
We are not gonna ask one more
time,
uh, extractive industries,
methane leaks.
Where, where's the public
expenditure funds.
Extractive industries, which is
and methane, so not school
buildings but
Extractive industries.
One is electric sites, sighting
for electric stuff. So it's the
infrastructure for electricity
that we need.
That would be part of that. So,
You know, the industry is trying
to lower their greenhouse gas
emissions. I mean, it's really
stunning what happened in
Colorado in February, where they
unanimously voted to use these.
What is the name of the
pneumatic devices to lower uh
methane emissions. So, you know,
they, there could be issues like
that, um, that they come for
the, they tried to do this, but
now they'd have to look at the
overburdened community aspect of
it.
Uh, so,
Thank you.
Um, before we take the motion
from the committee, do you have
anything you'd like to close
with?
Uh, just wanna thank everybody
for being here at 8 a.m. on a
snowy Saturday morning for all
the work we all do. I don't know
how much sleep you're getting,
but it's serious, my house. So,
thank you for being here.
and girl.
Mr.
Shira I do more um to pass a
Senate Bill 48.
So.
of a motion as a second, um, you
know, you take the photo.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Garcia.
Yes
Representative Gola.
Representative Henry? No.
Montoya, no.
Representative Murphy? No, I'd
like to explain my vote.
Representative Senacortes? No.
Representative small.
Jerry McQueen.
OK, hold on one second. We're
trying to get a beta.
Peter,
would you like to vote on this
bill?
Yes, yes. And you vote yes, is
that correct? OK, beta is a yes.
OK.
Sure. Yes.
Center, uh,
you have to pass. Thank you very
much. Would you like a copy of
Senate Bill 49. No.
All right.
Reson Murphy to explain as well.
Thank you, Chairman. I recognize
that some of these, this funding
could benefit my home of Roswell
and Chavis County, and even my
industry. Um, however, it's also
my responsibility to spend their
money wisely.
And therefore, um, I
respectfully voted no, because I
find supporting a $350 million
experiment as being fiscally
irresponsible and extreme. Thank
you for that.
OK. Thank you.
Uh, we have one more bill today,
Sam Dixon.
Rips and Dixon whenever you're
ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
morning, I am presenting um
house, or sorry, Senate Bill
142.
Uh, which is the grid
modernization roadmap.
Um, the grid modernization road
road map, uh.
Just 4.
Primary functions has for
primary functions. First, it
directs in statute, uh, that are
energy, minerals and natural
resources department coordinate
with the public regulation
commission to develop a roadmap
for grid modernization.
It adds language to consider the
speed of project deployment when
considering applications.
It establishes school districts
and charter schools as eligible
locations to apply for the grant
program.
And finally, it amends the
definition of grid modernization
to better reflect the true scope
of necessary modernization
efforts, including projects that
integrate net zero carbon
resources, increased grid
capacity or use artificial
intelligence to detect or reduce
methane leaks. Um, thank you,
Mr. Tay. We will, uh, my expert
witness is um Toyakori from
Public Regulations Commission.
will stand for questions.
Thank you, um, by show fans uh
who's here in support.
Who's here in opposition?
OK, so we're gonna do public
comment, um, I'd really like you
to keep it brief, uh, but we'll
take 3.
Uh, if you want, if you need to.
Good morning, Chairman McQueen,
members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with the Public Service
Company in New Mexico.
And PNM supports um Senate Bill
142, and the reasons are, it's,
it actually expands the previous
grid modernization projects to
include projects that increase
distribution or transmission
capacity and the artificial
intelligence projects as the
sponsor's mansion. So for these
reasons, we can support policy
like this and PNM supports
Senate Bill 142. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for this
opportunity. Charles Goodmacher
speaking on behalf of Healthy
Climate New Mexico.
Healthy climate in New Mexico,
we recognize the absolute need
to improve the grid and grid
reliance, otherwise, so many
important projects that we
believe will reduce greenhouse
gasses and create a healthier
environment for us all, just
can't go forward, so we
applauded the sponsor and hope
you support this bill. Thank
you.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Camilla Feibelman
with the Sierra Club also in
support of this legislation,
adding schools to the grant
program makes tons of sense,
especially as you think about um
building out solar on schools,
having electric school buses
that could serve as backup, um,
battery for the school system,
but in addition to that, if we
don't keep our grid modern,
whether that be on the
transmission and or the
distribution and we can't.
keep up with demand. So this is
basic support for building out
our economy in the state to be
ready for whatever these new
industries may be that come our
way.
OK, thank you. We're gonna go
online if you would like to
speak in sport online, please
raise your hand.
Qingan, uh, is there anyone in
the opposition online.
OK.
Um
Dixon anything to add before we
go to the committee.
Uh, no, thank you, Mr. Tay.
We're ready.
members of the committee.
and Moto.
Uh, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
and Representative Dixon and and
Choya.
Um
I
just have just a couple of
questions.
And obviously, um,
I, I see the, the
Chief of staff from the PRC
sitting here, so, um, and should
we as a committee, um,
Are, are you sitting there just
To inform or is a PRC in support
of this legislation.
Mr. Chair Representative, we've
been asked to be technical
experts on this bill, the
commission has not taken a vote
to officially support it. OK.
Thank you for that, um, Mr.
Chair, and, uh, and
representative, um, another
question for your expert, um,
has the PRC
been able to have input into
this legislation.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
actually, we worked with the
sponsors prior to the
introduction. We saw the
commissioners have seen it, and
we've been following it and
working all along.
OK, thank you for that. So, uh,
with that, um, Mr. Chair and,
and Representative and, and, and
Choa um has the sponsors, uh,
been
Amenable towards input from the
PRC.
has, has this, has uh
Has this not just been a, a
one-way street, but has there
been a back and forth.
Mr. Cher representative. Yes, in
fact, uh, prior to its
introduction, the sponsors did
take some suggestions from the
PRC.
OK, so last question for uh your
expert, uh Mr. Chair. Um, does
this allow the PRC to remain to
keep as much flexibility.
Um, as possible.
In decision making and in making
decisions on rape cases, uh, Mr.
Chair and uh Choa.
Mr. Chair Representative, the
PRC doesn't see this is actually
impacting uh what happens in
adjudications at the at the
commission at all. In fact, we
currently are working on uh
distribution planning and grid
modernization as one of the
primary efforts at the
commission. So, uh, while this
helps us work with our sister
agencies, we don't see it as
impacting the internal
operations of the agency at all.
OK. Um, Mr. Chair and
and Representative Dixon, um, I,
I appreciate the efforts.
Uh, to work with the commission.
There, there have been other
pieces of legislation that I've
seen this session that did not.
Did not do that, and I, I had to
vehemently oppose those.
Um
I'm probably gonna encourage the
members of the committee to help
pass this along. I'm gonna have
a hard time voting for it
because I, it, it just it just.
So, you know, I, I'm doing my
explanation for my no vote ahead
of time.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, the problem I
have with this is the concept
that we are going to ask.
Current
Ratepayers
To pay ahead for grid
modernization for future
ratepayers, potential ratepayers
to to come in. So, um, mister
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Dixon as, as you
both well know.
Um, I've had a hard time with
The increased costs that um that
Ra ratepayers have seen on their
bills, not just in rates, but in
fees and in other uh expenses
that have been passed along to
the on the bills going to uh
customers and utilities,
utilities are well aware of my
opposition to that as well.
Um
However, that being said, even
though I cannot support this,
I'm not gonna dissuade anybody
else from supporting it. I can't
support this because I just
Knowing
Uh, that, that we, that
If we're going to head down this
road.
Um, and we're going to continue
to push folks.
Uh, to use more electricity.
Um,
We are, we're likely not
adequate for that, and if we are
going to have any
Uh, future potential.
Uh, to bring
Uh, to attract other business to
New Mexico, so we can diversify.
I understand why this
legislation is necessary.
Um, but Mr. Chair and and
Representative Dixon, I just
have a hard time doing that on
the backs of our current.
customer base. So with that, Mr.
Cha.
Leave it to you guys to decide
what to do with this bill.
Further discussion from the
committee.
It's a pleasure with me.
If you passed you a second.
The second, if you take that
vote.
Representative Obeda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya? No.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Santa Cortez? No.
represented small.
Yes.
Representative Henry.
young.
McQueen.
Yes.
Uh, you have to pass, uh, that
