Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez,
here.
Represent a small
Vice chairana.
McQueen.
here.
of work.
OK, good morning, everyone. Um,
Uh
Before we get started this
morning, just sort of wanted to
talk about um agenda and
process.
Um
Let's see, first up, um, I hope.
everyone who went to the
Huntersville party last night,
had a good time. Uh, I.
Heard it was fine. I myself, um.
But we had the opportunity to do
that.
Um
We have a very full agenda today
and I think that's why we had
all of the activity, uh, filling
up the uh the notebooks, uh,
usually we have 234 bills, and I
think we have 8.
Um, so there was a lot more work
for the attendants today.
Um
We have, I know judiciary is
starting in um
Like 10 minutes?
Um
I think house government, I was
told House government's meeting
this morning as well.
Does, does anyone else have a
competing committee or bills to
present in another committee
that I should be aware of.
So represent that Beta has a
bill up.
Representative Dixon, you get
your bills covered.
Yeah
Um
So there could be some in and
out and uh if, if they're.
We need bodies over in
judiciary, we might actually
recess uh for a brief time.
Uh, Vice Chairarana.
Uh, has some family, uh, matters
to attend to and will not be
joining us.
Um
And we have this long agenda.
It's been my intention that
today is our, will be our last
day.
On house bills.
Um, so if we don't get to the
House bills, uh,
They likely will not come back.
Uh, I did speak to the ranking
member, uh, we are going to roll
House Bill 270 because the
sponsor doesn't have her expert.
Um, and we'll have a
conversation, ranking member and
I we'll have a conversation
later about whether or not that
comes back.
Um
Uh, if we, if we run out of
time, we run out of time.
If we lose too many people.
You know, we might just adjourn
before we get to the agenda and
of course we're expected on the
house floor, uh, by one o'clock.
I certainly would like to take a
break before then, rather than
just push straight through.
Um, so we'll watch the clock and
we'll watch, um, you know, who's
in the room and, and we're how
we're doing on the agenda we're
just sort of play it by ear.
Any uh, questions.
Um, or comments before we go to
the first bill.
announcements, anything? OK,
good. Um, so the first bill is
actually mine, uh, uh, small,
will you share?
German Spa, are you ready for
me?
Ready, Mr. Chair, please, go
ahead.
Um
Chairman members of the
committee asked 481.
Uh, is an extended owner
operator liability bill. um.
I'm joined today by uh
Ben Shelton, general counsel of
Energy Minerals Natural
Resources Department, uh, the
agency is neutral on the bill.
He's just here to answer
technical questions if we have
them.
Um
What this bill does is
Sets up a system where if you
own or operate a well.
You're responsible for plugging
it.
So if you own it,
And you operate for a while?
And then you transfer it to
someone else.
And they failed to plug it and
you're still on the hook.
If you transfer it to someone
else and then they transfer it
to someone else and the third
party fails to.
Properly plug it
Then you're still on the hook.
So the idea is if you've ever
You know, basically been
involved in this well.
Your, um,
On the hook, you're responsible.
And what this is intended to do
is prevent.
A pattern that has occurred at
times in the past.
Where a well is um completed.
Uh, it's very productive when
the production starts to
decrease it's transferred to
someone else.
Uh, they, uh, produce what they
can for a while.
Uh, maybe they, they transfer it
to a smaller operator and so
forth and so on.
And at the end of the day, we
have.
Liability responsibility for
plugging wells and not enough
resources to do that.
What I believe this bill will
accomplish is have the industry
police itself.
So I would expect uh.
People who want to transfer
wells.
First of all, I would be very
careful.
about who they transfer those
wells to.
And they're not going to
transfer a well.
To an operator that they don't
think has the capacity.
To properly plug in the band in
the wall.
Um, and you know it's easy to
put in a contract, you could
have a
A right to reclaim the well if
something doesn't happen, you
can put an indemnity provision
in the contract.
They failed to plug the well,
but it's just, it's basically a
way for the industry to police
itself.
Um, we talked, when we talked
about hospital 403.
About the um reclamation fund,
conservation fund.
And about how that was sort of
um.
Uh,
Like uninsured motorist.
Insurance for the state.
So that was how we protected the
state and the public from being
responsible for plugging and
abandoning wells.
Uh, if the operator failed to do
so.
My hope with a regime like this.
Is that at some point in the
future we won't need that
uninsured.
Motors fund
Because the industry would be
policing itself.
And these things would be taken
care of.
By the owners and operators.
Who benefited from the wealth.
And that's pretty
straightforward concept and
we've seen it done in other
areas of law.
I think it would be appropriate
in this circumstance.
And with that, I'd be happy to
answer any questions. Great,
thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, we're gonna go to
public comment first for those
in the room who are, is anybody
in opposition? Please raise your
hand.
OK, great. There's 4, let's go
ahead and uh take folks.
Or in support for or for
opposition.
Uh, and then for folks who are
in support.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
Nimoa opposes House Bill 481
because of the unintended
consequences such as an increase
in bankruptcies and well
abandonment. The exact opposite
of what this bill is trying to
accomplish.
We are concerned that this bill
will have a chilling effect on
leasing and transfers because
potential buyers may hesitate to
acquire wells if they could
inherit unexpected future costs
and higher compliance costs may
be passed on to the consumers,
increasing fuel and electricity
costs in New Mexico.
We also questioned the legality
of this bill because it violates
established contracts by
interfering with private
agreements by holding past
interest holders responsible,
even if contracts previously
transferred liability elsewhere.
We ask you to oppose this bill.
Thank you. Thank you.
Good morning, Chair members of
Queen. My name is Alison Riley,
public policy director with New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce here
to oppose House Bill 481.
This bill raises serious
concerns for New Mexico's
economy and the oil and gas
industry by placing financial
liability on both current and
prior operators, it could deter
investment, slow job creation,
and introduce uncertainty for
businesses that sold their
interests years ago.
The potential retroactive
responsibility creates major
risk, making companies as it's
in to operate here in the first
place.
Additionally, the bill's vague
language could lead to legal
challenges with companies caught
in prolonged litigation over
unclear responsibility.
This uncertainty doesn't just
hurt businesses, it impacts
state revenue and the workers
who depend on this industry. We
urge you to
Consider the unintended
consequences and oppose House
Bill 41. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Mike
Miller, Premium Basin Petroleum
Association, most, most of my
points have been covered, but I
would certainly like to stress
that expressed that the
retroactive liability is
unprecedented, and this will be
challenged in court and will
lead to lengthy litigation that
actually delays actual well
remediation. Thank you. Thank
you and our final in person and
we'll take 5 and support.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Winchester, uh,
executive director and the
Petroleum Association in New
Mexico. Um, just want to frame
this bill in terms of past,
present, future.
If we're looking at past wells
whereby the state wants to take
recourse. There are questions
right now.
Of the legality of being able to
do that retroactively. If we
look at the present,
I want to emphasize that this
bill is putting in place
redundant powers that already
exist.
In fact, this bill in all of the
oil and gas reform bills that
have been introduced this
session can be addressed.
If the division
would engage with the Attorney
General's office to seek damages
in recourse on any operator that
they feel.
The state has left on the hook.
But they simply do not do that.
As for the future.
Any print and responsible
outside entity in oil and gas,
looking to come into the state
and produce.
wants and is willing to take the
risk to invest in the state.
would ultimately ask themselves,
despite our great rock.
Why invest if there's liability
in perpetuity.
When there's no opportunity for
divestiture.
So we respectfully oppose this
bill. Thanks. Thank you. OK,
we're gonna go online to see if
there's anybody in opposition.
OK, uh, uh, Enrique now.
Is Mr. Nell, are you an, uh,
first, please raise your hand if
you're in opposition to House
Bill 481. Yes sir, we are in
opposition. OK, please go ahead
then. OK, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee and speaking today
on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We are opposed to House Bill
481. The oil and gas industry is
contributing nearly half of
general fund revenues. We are
concerned that this bill will
have a negative impact by
decreasing economic activity
which could lead to
Fewer jobs and lower tax
revenues for New Mexico. We're
also concerned that retroactive
liability places an unfair
burden on past owners, some who
may have sold their interests
years ago from an economic
development standpoint, the bill
will have a chilling, um, a
chilling effect on investor
activity in New Mexico and the
gas sector and investors will
fear future liability for
properties that they no longer
control. We respectfully ask for
your opposition to.
81. Thank you. Thank you.
OK. Uh, for the folks, uh, in
support, please raise your hand
if folks could line up. Um,
let's try to take 5 folks.
I want to note that more than 5
folks raised their hands, um.
Please go ahead.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Mary Elanasi, uh, on behalf of
New Energy Economy and our
5,000+ members. In 2021, the
state land Office projected an
$8.1 billion gap between bonds
and actual remediation costs, a
number that continues to
increase as financial assurances
do not meet the actual cost of
plugging and remediation. There
are more than 2,391 abandoned.
sells on state or private land,
but there are thousands more
wells that are known as orphans
in waiting, unquote. The risks
of unplugged wells are enormous.
The environmental and health
issues are mainly the release of
large amounts of methane, a
potent greenhouse gas, and
groundwater contamination, which
can introduce carcinogenic
chemicals into drinking water
endangering public health. The
financial risks from abandoned
wells are many. Please
vote to support this, um, bill
because there's a real and
present danger that abandoned
wells will also erupt and uh and
and and cause blowouts. Um, and
that's why this is such a
serious issue, not just in New
Mexico, but across the country.
Please support this bill. Thank
you. Thank you.
Good morning, Chair, committee
members. My name is Colin Cox
with the Center for Biological
Diversity. Um, we support HB 41
because it'll give OCD another
tool to ensure that the industry
pays to clean up its mess.
Right now, OCD has teams of
people going across the state.
Plugging, you know, dealing with
unplugged, polluting wells.
Um, cleaning up.
The mess that oil and gas
producers have left behind. The
state is paying for that. We are
paying for that.
We shouldn't be.
HP 41 481 is a modest step
towards holding the industry
accountable for its pollution.
We urge you to support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Melissa
Bernardin here from the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter in
support, the FIR tells about a
recent agreement between the
state and Ridgeway, Arizona, an
active oil and gas company,
which resulted in OCD taking
responsibility for plugging 299
of the companies inactive wells
with the company reimbursing the
state at least 30,000 a month,
as long as it remains in
business, but OCD spent roughly
1.3 million in FY20.
for plugging 6 wells belonging
to Ridgeway for an average cost
of 210,000. We do not want a
precedent whereby an operator
that claims it cannot plug its
abandoned wells is able to to
shift responsibility to the
state. Not only that, but
there's a pattern of less
solvent companies purchasing
lower producing wells from
larger companies. Hillcore, for
example, has been the nation's
largest methane polluter with
60% of their operations in New
Mexico, purchased mostly from
ExxonMobil. Let's make sure that
previous owners are held
responsible for cleanup, not the
New Mexico public.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chair, committee
members. My name's Athena
Christodoulou, Energy
Environmental engineer, this
concept of holding all previous
owners responsible is not new.
It is actually used in coal
mining to hold previous coal
miners responsible for the
environmental damages that the
mining has done. So I urge
That this this bill passed.
Thank you. Thank you.
Good Morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright. I'm
a master's prepared science
nurse, registered nurse, retired
Air Force.
And um I follow Naomi Klein,
award-winning New York Times
bestselling author in 35
languages, the University of
British Columbia professor of
climate justice. Naomi Klein's 5
planks of a just transition,
number one, energy democracy,
#2, front lines first. Number 3,
hair work is climate work.
Number 4, no worker left behind,
and number 5, the polluter pays.
Please vote for House Bill 481.
Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, now we're gonna go online.
Please raise your hand online if
you wish to speak in support of
HB 481. It's like we're balanced
there one as well. Uh, we're
gonna go to Seneca Johnson.
And then we'll close it at
Charles Goodmacher. Annika.
Uh good morning many members of
the committee. My name is Seneca
Johnson, and I'm here on behalf
of
we strongly support 41.
For decades, corporations have
extracted wealth from our lands,
waste, and walked away, leaving
frontline communities are the
costs
and abandoned orphans are
exposed to dangerous chemicals
and
suffers
a legacy of our land, air,
water, and people, communities
living by the corners power
plant and the generating station
are still played by the
contamination ash and unplug
that.
There is, um.
thyroid disease and reproductive
failure and neurological harm.
This would be an average of
$163,000 per well,
HP 41 hold polluters accountable
and not pollution.
It ensures that profit from oil
and gas are held accountable for
not plugging the plugging the
remediation and clean up our
environment and we'll save
hundreds of thousands and
resources that can address our
community needs. In Mexico
should not be sac.
we deserve to drinking water and
contaminated land
and so thank you for your time
you pass H41.
Thank you. OK, we're gonna
conclude with Charles
Goodmacher.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for this opportunity. I
democracy on behalf of
Earthworks. I want to thank the
sponsor very much for bringing
this bill.ers have stated it's
the responsible thing of the
industry to be held accountable,
but really it's not about the
whole industry. It's about the
bad actors who aren't cleaning
up their wells on their own.
There's absolutely no reason
this industry should get special
privileges that other industries
don't get. Everybody else is
responsible for their.
Please support this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. OK, that concludes
public comment. We're gonna go
back to Chair McQueen and then
to the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want
to address a couple of the um
comments that were brought up in
opposition, um, first off, it
suggested that the buyers would
be chilled from acquiring wells.
And I think that's, I think
that's flatly wrong.
Um, or if it is correct, it
shouldn't, it shouldn't be.
Um, if you're a buyer.
You should, you should be
acquiring a well with the
thought of at some point, you
know, covering the cost of
plugging or abandoning it.
Like why would you, why would
you?
Purchase a well if you thought
you could just pass that cost
on.
That's troubling.
Well it might chill is sellers.
Because sellers are going to be
careful before they transfer
well. They're only going to
transfer it well.
To a party that they have
confidence will be able to
properly plug or abandon it at
the end of its life.
Otherwise they remain
responsible.
So that's one thing. I have 2
more.
Uh, it was suggested there was
unclear responsibility under the
bill.
And the the responsibility.
Bill is everyone.
So it really can't be more clear
than that. If you own or operate
the well, you're responsible.
Yeah.
straightforward to me.
Finally, several people's
questioned the legality.
Um, I, I would say, uh, two
things to that. First, uh, this
kind of approach has been done
before.
And is in operation in the
United States.
Second, um, even though I think
I could make it retroactive.
I didn't
So if you look at section 2.
Provisions of this act apply the
owners, operators, and lessees
with an interest.
We're controlling the oil and
gas oil facility pit or
insulation beginning on or after
July 1st, 2025.
So the bill by its terms is not
retroactive, it's prospective.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great.
Thank you very much, chair.
We're gonna go to the committee.
We'll start with Representative
Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, Mr. Shelton.
Um good morning.
Um, I'm gonna take a point of
personal privilege here for just
a moment.
And uh it's because of some
things that were said during the
public comment section.
And I recognize that everybody
is entitled to their own
opinion.
Right.
But we're not entitled.
Making up facts. And so I want
to talk about facts for just a
minute.
Said twice.
If the Mexico pays for
industry's messes.
And if anybody has been sitting
in this room or has heard the
testimony over the last several
weeks.
Or listen to the reclamation
Bill discussion.
They would know the industry.
Pays for this.
And so
From now on, if people stand up
in this chamber.
And call my industry looters and
polluters.
I'm gonna take a point of
personal order and call them out
on that Herman, because it's
offensive.
And I've had enough.
I'll now go to my questions.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
Early in one of our meetings,
um, I think you were testifying
on a bill, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman.
And he said
There were 3 things that you
expected from the industry, from
what I recall.
I think I'll get this right. If
not, you can correct me. One is
you're welcome to come to New
Mexico.
2 is
We appreciate the business that
you do.
In 3 years, we expect you to
play by the rules.
I think I've got that pretty
close.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Murphy, I
think that is very close. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair.
And the thing that disturbs me
the most about all of the bills
that we've heard recently.
I I feel like you're changing
the rules.
And I'd like you.
To square this bill.
With that statement because I
think you are changing.
In a big dramatic way.
Not only for this industry, but
for
Uh, all of real property.
And I'm gonna go into some
questions because you're an
attorney and I'm not.
And I'm gonna also ask
Uh, you to help me sort of
navigate those legal waters, not
only from, from your experience
as an attorney.
Does your experience here.
As part of this group and, and,
and.
Your experience on the energy.
So the first question is, how do
you square it?
Mr. Cherubs and Murphy, um, to
me, one of the rules or
certainly it's not a rule,
certainly one of the principles.
Is that you're responsible for
your own messes.
And you just mentioned, you
know, your hospital 403, which,
which I supported.
Um, and I think that's um it's
appropriate to use those funds
that we collect for that
purpose.
Or the purpose for which we
collect them. I support that.
Um, but as we discussed when
we're discussing that bill, it's
sort of the uninsured motors
fund.
Version of cleaning up oil and
gas wells.
And I think
Fundamentally, owners and
operators they create problems
to clean them up.
And this is a way for the
industry.
The police itself
You know, because that's, that's
what will happen and we've seen
this in other contexts. And so
that to me, this fits squarely
within my
Um, characterization of uh what
what we ask of the oil and gas
industry.
Um, and that's to be responsible
for their own messes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
um, and I want to get into that
a little bit because I, I think
we are, um.
Let me ask you, in, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair and Mr. Sheldon,
um.
Will this
I want to talk about
retroactivity. I want to talk
about a few things and I'll
just, I'll just tell you,
retroactivity, application,
federal state fee.
Um, impact on business. Those
are gonna be the general
categories. So, let's start with
application.
Um
Is it
Your intent, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Shelton, for this
to apply to all lands, federal,
state, and fee.
Um
The chairs and Murphy, yes.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, um, and,
uh, Mr. Shelton, um.
I can see where it can apply,
and this is where I'm, I'm, I'm
gonna ask you to put on your,
your legal hat. I can see where
it applied to the state lands
and fee lands because obviously
state law could.
could, uh
Would impact those.
Can you walk me through how this
can apply to federal.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Murphy, the
OCD received some federal funds,
um, both from BIL as well as
some BLM specific funds to plug
up.
plug abandoned wells on federal
lands is abyss.
Um
It's a, it's a little bit out of
camera for for this legislation,
but I think that we would.
Um, be able to pursue in the
grant from particularly from BIL
does seeking indemnification
from uh.
From producers or wells that are
used that are plugged or
abandoned with its those funds.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton, I've, um, probably
Given that this is not my area
of expertise. I did call, um,
some friends that, that Garrett
Hembury Representative Hemery,
and, and folks and we talked
about this issue in detail.
And he was of the opinion, and
I'd like to know why, uh, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton, your opinion would be
different.
Is that um.
He questioned
Uh, I won't say that it, it was
a formal legal opinion but he
questioned whether this could be
applicable federal that and
because federal, um, statutes,
not only the lease form, which
is a contract.
Um, but overall federal
statutes uh would not would not
allow this. uh do you, do you
think that opinion is, is too
far out of the center lane or,
or how do you feel about that,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
Shelton. Mister Chat Roseanne
Murphy, um,
I I guess I would uh sort of
describe it in a slightly
different way. I, I don't think
we're addressing jurisdiction
between state and federal land.
I think we're addressing.
When the state becomes
responsible to plug or abandon
the well.
And that would follow existing
law. So if the state is plugging
and banning abandoning existing
wells have been.
Uh, orphaned or abandoned.
Um
On private land or state land or
I don't know to the extent to
which they do that on federal
land.
But the, the state could then
seek reimbursement from the
owners and operators of that
wealth.
So from that perspective that
that.
The nexus between the the bill
and the state and the
responsibility is whether or not
the state is spending money to
plug in abandon the well.
It's not the ownership of the
land itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, I appreciate that
explanation so that
In, in practicality, in reality,
the federal government is
ultimately responsible for
plugging federal wells. So they,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Sheldon,
correct me if I'm wrong.
I understand that
They
Many times will contract with
the OCD.
To actually perform the work
because you have people on the
ground.
But the responsibility is
ultimately with the federal
government. So, um,
Given
Chairs this case this chairs,
um, it sounds like that.
It would only apply to federal
land if that well.
Failed to be plugged by the DLM
it became OCD possibility. Do I
have that right, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Murphy, no, um, the rec fund is
explicitly able or available for
use for plugging on federal
lands, that's NMSA 70-2-38B.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sheldon, thank
you. I, I, uh, I understand the
reclamation fund could be used
for it.
But if the BLM maintained the
responsibility for the well in
this.
Law would not lie, right?
Because the OCD is not taken
over the responsibility to plug
it. My understanding that right?
Mr. Char Representative, that's,
that's correct. We received BLM
specific funds that are able to
be deployed on BLM wells after
BLM has gone through their own
federal.
process
Mr. Charon, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Sheldon, thank you for that
explanation. I'm, I'll move on
now to um
Retroactivity.
And I appreciate, uh, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chair, you pointing out
the fact.
That it becomes effective, uh,
in July.
But she also said something to
me that I find a little curious
that she could have made it
retroactive, and Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, did you explain?
How that works legally, because
once again, I, I received some
difference of opinion on that
particular issue.
Mr. Sheridan Murphy, um, you
know, first off just to be
clear, Bill's not retroactive,
so we're speculating here, um,
but the to me the.
the concept of this bill, um,
comes from circle, um, the
federal Super Fund Act.
And circle was certainly
retroactive circle's been in
effect for
30, 40 years
Um, it certainly was withstood
any challenges based on that
retroactivity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that. And, and I'm
somewhat familiar with Circle,
um.
Not, not to the degree I'm sure
that you are, Mr. Chair, but uh,
That
And correct me, Mr. Chair, and
once again.
Pending on your legal habit, if
I recall circular.
It's really designed mainly for.
Mining operations and large
industrial sites, is that
correct?
Um
Mr. Chair Murphy, I don't think
of circle is being directed at
mining. I, I think a circle
being directed at
Um, mostly toxic pollution, so a
lot of pollution was just dumped
in the landfills or left behind
at manufacturing sites or or
leached out of tanks.
So it's really addresses that
kind of pollution under any type
of land and I believe circle
extends to, it might not be
circle, it might be Rickra, but
there's a federal law that
actually extends to the producer
of the chemical whether or not
they were ever in control of the
land in which it was uh.
Disposed of. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, yeah, and so
I'm, I'm, I'm recalling it. So
it's probably industrial waste,
primarily, Mr. Chara.
Um, Miss Sheri and Murphy
industrial hazardous toxic, that
sort of thing. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair. Um,
There's been, um,
There's been some discussion
about in I in um it may have
been from the AG's office, I
don't recall, but about the, the
issue of, of
Interference in in um
Existing contractual
relationships.
Um
That many times, um, if I recall
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton, the bill basically
proposes.
Um
Or allows for private parties to
um contract.
Between themselves as to that
liability.
Um
But there are also some, some,
some issues with respect to
Interference into private party
sales contracts.
Um
Mr. Chair, Mr, could you talk
about why you don't believe that
that is a problem or, or it
won't.
Be, uh
Don't fail at some point on that
legal challenge.
Uh, Mr. Shers and Murphy, uh,
first of all, let me amend my my
prior answer
on circle, it was also apply in
Uh, it often applies to things
like gas stations, leaking
underground storage tanks, so I
didn't want to suggest that it
was just hazardous materials
that could certainly include
petroleum products just for
that.
Uh, as far as the contract goes,
first of all, um, the bill's not
not retroactive.
So we're not impacting any past
contract. Uh, secondly, I, I
think it's um.
You know, as an attorney, as
someone who writes contracts,
you know, indemnity clauses and
contracts are really important
are frequently negotiated this,
I think we go to that issue. So
if you are going to transfer it
well after July 1st, 2025.
Um, you would address this, so
we're not impacting existing
contracts. um I think if parties
on either side understand that
they're responsible.
At least potentially
responsible.
For for clean up uh abandonment
plugging of a well.
That's an opportunity for them
to address that liability in
that contract.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
the, and see, and that's, that's
part of my concern, Mr. Chair,
is that many times property is
transferred as is whereas I'm
sure.
And that's a layman's way of
saying, probably something that
you would, as an attorney would
take 20 or 30 words to say, but
at any rate, it's um
And, and so, if I transfer the
property, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair to another party, and I
said,
All right.
You know, you need to go out and
do your environmental
inspections. You need to go and
and do whatever due diligence
you need to do. But understand
this.
You know, you're taking it as
is, whereas, and you're
responsible. So now,
That is a contractual
contractual undertaking
responsibility of of the
purchaser.
So this bill says that that that
provision doesn't mean anything,
right, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair?
Um,
Mr. Chair Murphy, working on
corporate transactions and
Um, the, when you, when you
looked at indemnity clauses,
there were two things you want
to, you want to think about. One
was what did the class say.
And the second was how deep is
the pocket?
It's going to pay that, pay out
that indemnity clause.
Um, so what this bill would do
would be to effectively prevent.
Some from washing their hands of
a liability. Does it still be
responsible?
You know, and so because they
would still be responsible.
They'd be very careful about who
they transferred it to.
They would probably negotiate
indemnity provision that said if
it ever comes back to us.
And we have to plug or abandon
this well.
We're going to come after you.
We're gonna sue you for that
liability.
Um
You know, that gets to that
second issue of indemnity
clauses.
Like that indemnity isn't worth
much if, if that company you
have transferred your well to is
out of business.
So you know what would happen in
the negotiation of these
contracts is you would look at
both those issues.
And you would be careful. So,
This kind of goes back to the
comment that
Um, you know, that I made or
someone made I address the
buyers will be chilled, and I
don't think buyers would be
chilled or they shouldn't be.
Um, sellers might be chilled and
by chilled I mean careful.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, thank
you for that. I, I think it's
gonna, quite frankly, haven't
been involved in
In business for 50 years, I
think it will have a major
chilling effect because of just
the opening liability. We'll
just have to, Mr. Chair and Mr.
disrespectfully disagree on that
issue, um.
Because it is, it is open-ended.
Um, I wanna, I'm, I'm nearly
finished. Um, the, the thing
that that I wanna talk about a
little bit is
Um
What I call the failure rate, I
guess, um, in the industry. Um,
and from what I understand,
There are
Roughly 350 wells at the OCD is
currently looking at.
Out of some 66,000.
That's half of 1%.
And we're having, we're we're
seeing a slew of bills that
seemed to be designed.
To address in a very chilling
way.
What appears to be a pretty
small issue, because I don't
know a very many people.
very many industries that have
that sort of quote unquote
failure rate. If you walk
through
Downtown Albuquerque.
And you encounter 200 people.
And one of them might be doing
something bad.
It just might.
And so
That's what that, that's that's
what in in terms of, of the, the
issue, the liability issue means
in this industry. And I think
that is
A pretty astounding and
successful.
Um
You know, if you're 99.5% right.
And how right do you really need
to be? I mean, that's a pretty
much an A plus in my book.
Now, even with that though,
And this is
The circle back to kind of a
legal point.
Practical point, perhaps.
Um
And in addition to that, we have
the, the uninsured motors fund.
For the industry, 403.
That you mentioned
And what I want to talk about
here is, is that those past
owners.
have already paid for their
share of the liability, the way
they did it, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Chairman.
As they paid their part of that
emergency school tax on every
barrel of oil and every MCF.
they received out of that well.
So they paid into the insurance
program.
And I just suggest you, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair, that
that
Having this big of an impact.
On industry is going to be
chilling.
Um
So my question is,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, um,
And I just thought of one other
question, but I'll make it
quick.
Um
Why is that not enough, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
They, they paid, they paid their
their part.
Um, Mr. Chair and Murphy, a
couple of things first, um,
On the ciliary, um.
Talking about the existing
failure rate and under good
economic conditions.
If there's a downturn in the
industry, or I should say when
there is a downturn in the
industry.
Because we know uh it's from the
boom and bust cycles.
Um, that failure rate could go
way up.
And I believe that the state um
Is is not protected, that are
not sufficient funds in place to
address the problem when the
problem gets bad.
So that's what we're trying to
address.
Um
To your, your latter point about
people have already paid into
the uh the insurance fund, um.
I would say this.
Uh, going back to the metaphor
of uninsured motorists.
Um, you know, my insurance rates
are higher.
Because of that
Right.
And if, if everyone had car
insurance.
My insurance rates would go
down.
So if if this law is in place.
And owners operators are
responsible and they're plugging
abandoning wells as that
happens.
You know
Under your bill 403, we're going
to see that fund go up and up
and up.
And at some point we're going to
say, hey, wait a second.
We're good. We've got enough
money.
We can lower that rate.
So, so this bill is good for
responsible operators.
Because eventually it will lower
their costs. It will lower, uh,
the, the rate that we charge for
the insured motorist insurance.
And that's good for the
industry.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I've
got a, I've gotta go against
your logic there a little bit
and the, and the reason being
is, is that we've never ever
seen attacks be reduced or come
off this industry.
Matter of fact, we heard Bill
the other day that um
Where we were doing this, right?
Trying to figure out why a gas
rate wasn't coming down the oil
rate when the federal subsidy
disappeared.
So
Um
I understand why you, why you
would, you would make the point.
But I would challenge you to
ever to show me where, where
attacks on oil and gas industry
has actually gone down.
Mr. Chair Rison Murphy.
valid point. I, I, I appreciate
that. I, I will, I will go back
to your bill though, you know,
and here's a tax, here's a fee
that we were we basically turned
into attacks and was directing
to the general fund.
And you know, I don't know um.
Uh, I don't know if your bill's
gonna get across the finish
line. Um, it's, you know, we try
to uh try a version of it was
over in the Senate last year. I
think you got good traction. I
think your bill got good
traction and I would say God how
this committee unanimously and,
and that's not reducing the fee,
but it's taking, it's taking the
fee and putting it where it
should be, and that's, you know,
that's, that's a good thing. I
think that um it is evidence
that, you know, under the right
circumstances.
in the future, we could
certainly come back and look at
that.
I'll, I'll finish up here, um,
I've been through a lot of booms
bust, and, and sat on the edge
of the bed at night wondering
how I was gonna make payroll. So
I know exactly what you're
talking about during those
times. Um, matter of fact, um,
my first real professional
entry, uh,
Into the industry.
Uh
Resulted in a in a major bust
two years after I was there and
I seriously wondering if I'd
made the right career choice,
but
It's taken
This industry's been drilling
wells for over 100 years in this
state.
And over that 100 years, we come
up and we have a number of 350
wells out of 66,000.
That represents at least 5 or 6
booms and busts that I can
think.
And the only reason that there's
350 wells unplugged out there
because this body.
And others
Rediverted the funds which we've
corrected through 403, and I
appreciate this committee's
support and
that
But it would have to be, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
I mean, you could, you could.
You can multiply.
The failure rate by 10 times,
and you'd still only be at what,
1% failure rate or half of it,
oh, maybe you'd be it.
Yeah
55%.
And so then you've got, then you
then you've got um
Um, no, you'd be at 2.5%, excuse
me, trying to do the math.
At any rate, it would still only
be a few 1000.
Which the Reclamation funded
more than.
And so
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chairman, I'll
just finish with this because
I've been at it for 36 minutes
now, I think.
Not quite the 40 and that I had
the other day.
But
I feel like that this is taking
a sledgehammer.
To um
To pretty minor problem. I'll,
I'll conclude with that, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton,
thank you for your testimony.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy. We have obviously a
number of folks, uh appreciate
the questions. We'll try to go
efficiently, but no, this is
important and give folks time
and space, a ranking member
Montoya is up next.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Um
And Mr. Chair,
I would also like to address,
uh, something, and that, that,
that's the concept of public
dollars.
OK, uh, because what we're
talking about here, talking
about increasing
Uh, uh
Liability here.
Uh, responsibility.
And, and Mr. Chairman and, and,
and Chairman Queen.
I, I get frustrated when I hear
People refer to tax dollars that
have come in.
That all of a sudden they take
on this new title of as public.
Dollars, those are our dollars.
In particular
We're talking about
The conservation fund.
Um, Mr. Chair, those dollars
going into the conservation
fund, and I, and, and I realize
it's off this bill. So I, I, but
I, but I, I, all of my questions
are gonna be come directly from
that.
But
When I hear folks say that the
industry has not paid.
They've been compelled to pay.
We have a conservation fund that
only 20%.
Of those dollars in that
conservation fund go for the
purpose for which they were
collected.
And that has been the case for
many, many years.
And so, um, Mr. Chair.
And Chairman
Um, queen, I've actually worked
with
Environmentalists.
On certain issues. There,
there's there's been alignment.
And it makes it hard to work
with folks.
When certain statements keep on
being made.
That are just factually
inaccurate.
And, and Mr. Chair and and and
Chair McQueen.
When, when, when we say that the
industry is being negligent.
I just don't believe that's the
case, even if we're changing as
to Mr. Chair, Chairman Queen as
to what your bill is proposing
to do.
To maybe reduce
The uninsured motorist portion
of liability.
Mm
But to ignore the fact that the
uninsured motorist portion of
liability that currently exists.
Somehow it's not there.
Just because we've appropriated
it differently, doesn't mean
industry hasn't paid into it for
all these years.
And so it makes it very, very
difficult.
To, to even be open and, and,
and to have a dialogue, Mr.
Chair, I think you and I have
created a better dialogue this
year.
But to even have a dialogue.
We got to be talking from the
same set of facts.
And it makes it very, very
difficult when I hear that.
Industry
Has not paid.
To clean up their messes.
And Mr. Chair and Chairman
McQueen, that the fact is they
have.
It's just because those dollars
are not going for that, and I
stated this before and I know
that you, you, you disagreed
with me, but I think we
As legislators are the reason
that
We don't have every well plugged
right now. It's not for the lack
of money coming in that would
have paid for it.
It's just that we're diverting
almost 80%.
To the general fund.
And so when I, when I
Not to belabor the point,
because I will go on to my
questions that they're related
to this.
But when, when that fund exists,
For something like as was stated
by Representative Murphy.
That this industry has been
around for 100 years, and, and
A, a very small fraction.
Or what we're talking about
because
Mr. Chair
And Sherry McQueen, most
Wells are plugged by the
industry that has bound along
the way that they're no longer
profitable.
And that they're not going to be
profitable for somebody else, so
they don't have a value to pass
on to somebody else.
So I, I, I too just, just share
that frustration because I've,
I've heard it.
Over and over and over again,
this session and and
And I just since there are
advocates in the room, I, I
would just like to be able to
say that. I would like to be
able to work with advocates
going forward to what degree I
can, but
The facts are the facts, so.
Mr. Chair and Chair McQueen.
I, I, I heard coal mining
mentioned.
But
I
I'm just wondering,
What industries in particular.
Are we holding
A line of previous owners.
Liable
For the, for everyone's actions
throughout that chain cause uh
cause Mr. Chairman,
Chairman McQueen, that's what
we're talking about is there
could be
5 people
In a future cell 55.
Companies
How do we hold every one of them
liable for the for potentially
the actions of one company.
Uh, Miss Sheriffs in Montario, I
think that's for two different
questions. Uh, 1st, 1st being
what industry and circle applies
to any industry.
So any and every industry that
results in
Um
Contamination, pollution.
Is potentially subject to
circle.
Very broad, so.
Uh, the second in terms of um
Um, how do you hold, uh,
You know, 5 companies, you know,
in a chain.
responsible. I think the the
first thing to point out is.
The fact that there might be 5
companies in a chain has been
part of the problem in the past.
That the the wells get
transferred from one operator to
another in the general pattern
is that.
With each transfer, there's
less.
Bill
To adequately uh properly
plugging the bin and all.
I mean that's just sort of the
pattern.
So if we have these multiple
transfers, we're we're trying to
address that.
And the, you know, the points
you make, especially the, you
know, the fact that we've
diverted the conservation fund
in the past, I mean, I think all
those um
You know, are potentially good
arguments to not make this
retroactive.
Hence not
Yeah, so this is perspective.
Um, it would simply.
Before you transfer it well.
You would think about this.
You know, and you would also or
that contract would say,
probably say before your
transferee transferred the well.
They would consult with you.
Right, because you would, you
would want to know not only who
you're transferring it to who
that party is transferring it
to.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, and, and Chair McQueen, but
I, after I have transferred it
to another company, I have no
say so into the next.
Transfer.
So there there's been a little
bit of discussion of of
Uninsured motorist.
Versus
How do we make our other rates
go down as an owner.
But reality, um, Mr. Chair and
and Chair McQueen, is that,
that's
Really
I think maybe a good example.
Because if, if
Once I transfer a vehicle to
somebody else, if they get in an
accident.
I'm not being sued after I've
sold the vehicle to someone
else.
So
I just, I don't see if we want
to hold the actual bad actor.
Liable
In a, in a
In a chain of cells.
There might be one bad actor in
there, and I had nothing to do
with it, and I didn't sell it to
them.
Or I didn't purchase it from
them.
So I'm, I'm just curious as to
just the fairness of this and
maybe I think that's what I'd
really like to have you address
the fairness of holding a
company that when they were
owning
An asset
We're good stewards of that
asset.
Passed on an asset that was in
good shape.
And in complete
A regulatory compliance.
And without issue.
Sell it to someone else.
I I just don't understand the
fairness of holding the company.
That is not the bad actor
responsible.
Um, Mr. Chair, Ribs, I'm gonna
tell you, um, again, I think, I
think you raised two points.
Um, to the first.
Um, your ability to influence
the second transfer?
You can negotiate for that
ability.
I mean that's, that's not a
difficult contract provision to
draft. I could do that.
Yeah, so, so it's just thinking
ahead and putting that in your
contract, that's not gonna be a
problem.
Second question, you know, and I
think using the car example is
good and it's why um.
I think I can use to illustrate
why this is different.
Um
Tars an acid
Right, so.
You know, a used car is worth
less than a new car, um, more
mileage, more, you know, the,
the pain starts to come off,
maybe a few fender benders, it
works, it's worth less and less.
But it's very rare, and I can't
really think of a situation
where that car becomes a
liability.
Right? Like your car stops
working.
If you can get it to the scrap
yard, it's probably still worth
a couple 100 bucks for the scrap
metal.
An oil well has a big liability
at the end of its life.
And that's different. And so
when you're transferring it,
you're not just transferring an
asset.
You're also transferring a
liability and certainly the
concern has been my concern has
been that the companies
recognize that and they, they
get what they can get out of
that well.
And then they know someone else
can get something out of that
well, but when they transfer it,
they're not only transferring
that production capacity,
they're transferring that
liability.
And we don't want that liability
passed on and on down the chain
until it gets to someone who
can't cover the liability.
And so this bill was address
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Chairman McQueen.
Uh, I, I believe.
If, if going back to your first
answer about being able to
negotiate that into a contract.
I don't believe I could then
negotiate that into the next
contract.
So maybe one cell, I can be
involved in who that could be,
but down the road, there's no
way to guarantee my company
would down the road be able to
have influence in that.
Um, I don't even know what that
contract would look like. That
would be
be very unique.
But Mr. Chair and Chair McQueen.
I would like to refer back to
something else that that we
talked about and really this is
my my my last point, my main
point.
And this is about it having a
chilling effect.
I, I think I want to talk about
what I believe the chilling
effect would be and what
I believe the end result would
be.
You, you did discuss how.
At a certain point, Mr. Chair,
for a maybe a larger company or
the initiating company.
A asset becomes less valuable to
them, but it's still valuable to
someone else.
I think the chilling effect with
this.
I believe is you're, you're
exactly right. The major
chilling effect will be on the
My willingness to sell it to
somebody else, because no
telling what they may do.
No telling what their financial
circumstances.
could become
That could allow a
Well, or series of wells.
Uh, to maybe not be, uh,
Maintained
could be anything from a uh
owner of a company.
Getting dramatically sick and
Everything that goes with that
and and
Just not financially being able
to take care of the business the
way that they should.
That's a possibility.
Um, we've, my family's picked up
more than one business.
Uh, when someone was in such a
financial dire.
Straits that they had to let go
of a an asset. Um, Mr. Chair and
Chairman Queen.
I think the chilling effect
would be.
Under with this, if we put this
law in place.
I don't believe anybody would
want to even drill.
In New Mexico if if
If they have to run it all the
way out.
because I would never want to
sell.
Yeah
Asset
And so I think the end result
would be
Rather than us,
Being good stewards.
With
Once a hole is drilled that we
get that we extract.
Virtually all that we can out of
that well.
What we're gonna have is a
premature.
Plugging of wells where there's
still.
More asset in the whole.
And I think that
is not what we want to do when
we actually spend the money to
have.
A well site drilled. I think we
want to extract all that we can.
As safely as we can.
As environmentally friendly as
we can for as long as we can to
the end of what that
Life is
Without then having to disturb
another site. I think what will
happen is,
Those who do invest here.
Will never transfer to someone
else because they have no
control as to whether that
company somehow
Financially is no longer viable,
and now because I have
The deeper pockets and it's time
to sue. You can't go after.
Someone who doesn't have money,
you're gonna go back.
So I think this would have a
major chilling effect on our
larger companies.
I think the majors would say,
Why would I drill in New Mexico?
If we do this, I would see them
saying,
The reality is, I would never
ever be able to sell that asset
off.
To someone else, as is their
business model.
I think they just pick up and
take their business model
somewhere else where there's not
this liability.
That they can never get out from
under.
So I think the, the unintended
consequences are 2.
One being
No future development in New
Mexico. Why would you?
With that type of of of
Uh, liability, uncertainty. Why
would you ever drill a new well
in New Mexico.
Why would I be able to drill,
why would I drill in New Mexico
when the business model is to to
get the major production that I
can, and now when it's starting
to decline and still really
worth something.
Sell it to someone else who then
can
Maximize it and get the rest of
it.
So I see this.
Having a major chilling effect
on future production.
Secondly, I think what we would
have is
I'm not going to transfer well
as I currently have.
Because I have no idea. I can't
control how that business is
run. I can't control if that
becomes
Not viable in the future.
And so, every well would be
prematurely plugged.
Because
It's just no longer in the
business model.
And we would be leaving.
I think that would be
mismanagement of our natural
resources.
I think those are the two
consequences.
And uh Mr. Chair, I think, I
think you want to address those
so, please address that.
Thank you, uh, thank you for
that, uh, Mr. Chair, um.
So
you know, in terms of getting
all the assets out of the the
the well. I mean, I get that,
right? I mean, it's like.
You know, squeezing that last
little bit of toothpaste out of
the tube. I mean, I'm, I'm one
of those guys. I want to get
that last little piece face out
of the tooth.
again, the difference though is
when, when my tube is done, I
toss it in the trash.
There's not a big expense to.
Remediate the tube.
And so, while I agree that.
Um, you know, it's logical to
one that get all of the asset
out out of the well, out of the
hole.
You don't want to do that in a
way where when you're done.
You don't have assets left.
The plug and abandon the well
because you have this tail.
Expense is tail responsibility
at the very end.
And you don't want an operator
who thinks I'm gonna squeeze the
last bit of toothpaste out of
this and then someone else is
gonna clean up the mess.
And that's what, that's what
this addresses.
Um, in terms of, you know,
whether or not
This would end drilling in the
Mexico. I, I really don't see
that, um, you know, I, I think
major operators are
Yeah, I really think they're
they're big responsible
companies, you know, they have
the assets to do this, um, I
think there are a lot of um
Uh, mid-level operators who have
the assets to do this.
And there's probably a tear
after that.
Um, at some point though.
The parties are gonna
Stop and say, well,
You know, I don't want to
transfer this to someone who I
know doesn't have the capacity
to plug plug in well, uh, plug
it and abandon it.
Or I'm gonna have them, you
know, put up a bond that I can
draw on.
Um, and, and
I think, I think it'll work
itself out.
Uh, I certainly don't see it
preventing drilling in Mexico by
a stretch and the last point
I'll make is just
From a contractual point of
view, this can be done. I mean,
I don't work in the oil and gas
industry. I don't draft oil and
gas.
Uh, contracts
You know, I can do this.
It's, it's just not that hard
from a contractual point of
view.
Mr. Chair,
Charm Queen.
One thing about squeezing the
last bit out of the tube, but we
know is with oil and gas
extraction were not everywhere
close from squeezing the last
bit out of the tubes.
What happened several years ago.
Uh, when we found uh horizontal
drilling and how that worked.
That
took what we thought was a
depleted asset, and we were at,
we were at least able to double,
if not more.
What with previous technologies.
We believe
That
Initially we were getting
Maybe 15% out with previous
technologies.
But now we're in the somewhere.
South
Of 30
Not north of 30%, so we're still
leaving as from what we
understand currently by
geologists is that there's still
70% of the asset in the ground.
When we're currently plugging
wells in New Mexico, we're
currently plugging at that
level. What I'm worried about is
we're going to start plugging
back at 20% again.
Uh, and I think, I think we
don't want to be at a certain
point now where we're extracting
more.
And then move that back
artificially because of fear or
liability. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Senator Cortez
and then Representative Henry
Santa Cortez. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chair, Chairman, Mr.
Shelton. Um, I always learned so
much after hearing our industry
expert Representative Murphy
speak and even our ranking
member Representative Montoya
speak, but I really liked that
vehicle example so indulge me a
little bit just so that I, I
understand, so let's compare a
well to King Ranch truck.
And you're the owner of the King
Ranch truck.
Or Mr. Chair Chairman, are you
more of a Tesla kind of guy?
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Cortez, I drive a Honda, let's,
we could do Honda. OK, so Honda
in comparison to a well. So you
bought your Honda, Mister Chair
Chairman.
You used it and then you sold
your Honda, so are you on the
hook for the final disposal of
that Honda.
Mr. Chair Chairman
Um, Mr. Chair in San Cortez, the
final disposal of that Honda is
likely an asset, not a
liability, and this, this is why
that that analogy doesn't carry
all the way forward.
I understand what you're saying
cause you explained that to
Representative Montoya and Mr.
Chair Chairman, but just indulge
me for a little longer, just so
that I can understand where this
is going. So,
If you sold your Honda to
someone else, and they got into
an accident and the new owner.
Didn't have insurance to pay for
the damage.
The damages, so would you, as
the previous Honda owner be
responsible to pay for the
damages of the accident by the
new owner.
Um, Mr. Tubbs and and Cortez,
the analogy doesn't work. The
answer is no, but you know, the
analogy breaks down because of
the liability factor of the
wealth. Yes sir, I understand
that, Mr. Chair, Chairman, that
one's a liability, one's an
asset, but it's just simplifying
it so that, that I could
understand. um.
But in essence, that owner would
be responsible for the well
forever.
Um
Mr. Cherubs and Saint Cortez,
no, that be responsible for it
until it was properly plugged
and abandoned.
OK.
OK, that makes, that's helping
me a little bit more. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Chairman, I do
have some regulatory and
administrative concerns. So
let's talk about the cost
calculation. So how will OCD
determine the cost of plugging
remediation and restoration of
each well and will there be a
process to dispute the costs?
Mr. Chairman Representative OCD
currently triages wells based on
um.
A variety of factors including
age, expensive costs, we tend to
go after the toughest.
Um, the toughest ones first, the
ones that are more likely to
cause environmental or health
impacts, the ones with extensive
environmental remediation,
remediation needs. So that's
kind of what drives what we
tackle and how much we pay, uh,
to tackle right now.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Chairman,
and Mr. Shelton. So let's talk
about enforcement priorities.
Will the state pursue all
responsible parties equally, or
will it prioritize a current
owner over a former.
And their interest holders like
when seeking reimbursement.
Mr. Chair Representative, the
preference right now is always
for the current operator to, to
plug the well.
That's, that's what we will
typically pursue at end of life
if there is no identifiable
current operator, the next best
option is to go to a third party
operator for the leaseholder. So
whoever's holding the lease for
that property will, so there's
actually some precedent for
third parties coming in and
plugging these um these
otherwise unaccounted for wells,
but under the bill, the way I,
the way that we understand it is
that we will be able to go
through any single prior
operator and then they would be
able to go back.
out and try to seek recovery
from other prior operators.
It
Mr. Chair, representative Santa
Cortez, if I can add, um,
typically.
Uh, if you're seeking recovery,
you would name any party who is
potentially responsible in the
lawsuit and part of what this
bill would do would be to say,
The
Parties are responsible.
And they cover the cost for the
state, and they can work out.
between themselves who owes who
money.
But that's, that's not we don't
want the state involved in that.
We don't want the state.
Um
You know, having to go
sequentially one after another.
So all the people that own or
operate the well would be
responsible.
And they might have contractual
obligations to one another, and
they, they can negotiate that or
work that out separately.
But the public is protected.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Chairman,
and Mr. Shelton. So my next
question is more about resource
allocation. So does the bill
ensure that OCD has the
necessary resources to track the
past ownership.
And then enforce the
reimbursement effectively?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we already
captured that information each
well has uh O grid numbers,
which is sort of the, the
numbers we attach to operators
for every prior operator is part
of that file, so we have that
currently.
OK. And then I do have one last
question, Mr. Chair, Chairman
and Mr. Shelton. So let's talk
about the state's role versus
industry role. Given that the
state already has a well
plugging fund. Why are we
shifting more responsibility to
private operators rather than
just strengthening the state-led
efforts right now.
So Mr. Tubbs in San Cortez, you
know, as, as we've discussed at
some length in this committee in
the context of different bills.
The industry should be
responsible for this, this, if
the state didn't have to step in
and plug in abandoned wells,
that would be a win. I certainly
for the public.
But I think that would be the
true measure of an industry.
Um, operating well.
Yeah, so like I, I don't think
we want to get to the point of
You know, why should the state
pursue one party or another, I
think the goal here is the
state's not involved.
So does this Mr. Chair,
Chairman, Mr. Shelton, so does
this strengthen our efforts with
the bill that Representative
Murphy and the rest of us are
co-sponsoring with the
reclamation fund. Does it
strengthen it or does it go
against it?
Um, Ms. Sherris and Senator
Cortez maybe I understand your
question better, um, I, I think.
If this bill's in place, that
fund becomes less necessary.
Um, and you know, you know
Murphy made the point which I
understand that.
Uh, we've a hard time reducing
taxes, um, we were, we are often
more we're looking for sources
of revenue, so I get that, but
um, you know, I, I think that
fund is as we've described it is
sort of the, the fallback
position and if we don't have to
draw on that fund, that's a good
thing.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Chairman and Mr. Shelton, I
think that any time that we can
take the approach with more of a
partnership instead of fees,
fines and penalties. That's
always a better approach for our
industry, and that concludes my
remarks. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chair, Chairman, and Mr.
Shelton. Thank you very much
Representative Senator Cortez.
Next is Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair.
I've got a couple quick
questions.
When we say there's not a
chilling effect. One of the
questions I have cause, cause
talking to industry, I've
started to learn quite a few
things.
So when you have somebody drill
a well and it's producing really
well at the start.
Do they pay more into the
conservation fund because of
that high production?
Uh, Mr. Terres and Henry, my
expert tells me yes. I think
it's based on the.
The fee barrel fee?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, there's.
It gets assessed at 2 points.
There's about a 20%.
Um, fee on the operator and then
there's another percentage of
that that winds up going into
the rec fund. It's closer to
10.5%, right, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, and so I, I can't
remember at what point in this
discussion we said, but as it
gets, as it moves down the line,
we say that that original
producer should be responsible
for that. Well, in essence, they
are.
Because they're the conserv what
they paid into that conservation
was at a much higher rate than
Company B. Would that be
correct, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
Um
Mr. Chair, and Henry, I don't
think I'd use the word
responsible, you know, they have
paid into the fund, um, again, I
would, I would go back to the
point I've made a couple of
times is.
It'd be better if we weren't
using that fund. I mean, we're
using that fund if something's
gone wrong, if someone has
failed in their responsibility
to appropriately plugging the
abandon the well. That's when
that fund comes into play. So if
we have a system where we're not
using that fund. That's a better
system.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, no, I
understand that. So if this
system was to work.
And I think we know the answer
because you've kind of already
alluded to it. Uh, we're
definitely not going to reduce
that conservation fund, right?
We're going to continue to
collect at the same rate, even
though we've solved the problem
through supposedly this bill.
Um, Mr. Cha representative
Henry, uh, I certainly wouldn't
say we were, we will definitely
not reduce it. Um, I, I do
sincerely believe, especially,
you know, if House Bill 43
passes and we're using the money
we're putting the money in the
fund as it was intended when it
was originally passed, you know,
if that fund exceeds, uh, you
know, a level that.
We would not foreseeable need
that um uh.
That money
It would be firstly reasonable
for the industry for uh our
legislators to bring forward a
proposal to reduce that fee.
Or pause that fee or some other,
some other way to lessen the
burden on operators because I,
you know, I agree with Murphy,
you know that.
That fee is in place, that fee
is in place for a specific
purpose. If it's not needed for
that purpose, we should address
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, and what is the
purpose of that fund?
Um, Mr. Chair Rosette Henry,
that, that fund is.
to provide
funds to plug an abandoned wells
that have been orphaned or
abandoned by the.
industry operator.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
And that fund is only, we only
use 20% of that is that I think
I've heard that number before.
We only use around 20% of that
fund currently. Now if House
Bill 403 goes through, which I
hope it will, I think we've
changed that to maybe we collect
50%, use 50%. There's, it's a
staggered thing to come in over
the next 3 years. But do we
currently only use about 20% of
that fund to actually do.
What was collected for that
fund?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Henry, I think your number is
high, um, the number that we,
20% is about what is collected.
The amount dispersed into the
wreck fund from total
conservation tax receipts, I
think it's closer to 10.5%.
5%
So, out of, out of the entire
fund that's collected.
Help me understand that.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
we, we collect about
Approximately $16 million a
year, uh, goes to the direct
fund from the conservation tax,
the total conservation tax that,
you know, amounts collected from
the industry or significantly
higher than in most years.
That's great. So, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, remind me one more time,
what is that conservation tax
collected for?
Uh
Mr. Cherry, your my
understanding is that it's
generally collected for the
purposes of the re fund. I think
that's when it was established.
It was established a long time
ago, so I'd have to go back and
consult that stat, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, who pays that
conservation tax?
That's a tax on industry on on
on oil and gas industry
producers. Is that correct, Mr.
Chairman, that's correct. So,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, when we
hear from the public on a
regular basis that it's New
Mexico taxpayers in its essence
that's somewhat true, but it's
New Mexico taxpayers that are
only in that industry that pay
into that fund. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, represent Henry if
the fund were insufficient.
Uh, then you start getting into
other taxpayers.
OK, Mister Chair, Mr. Chair, if
the fund was insufficient, but
we're paying $100 million.
OCD is getting
Remind me one more time of the
number that you're actually
receiving to do what the tax is
intended for, Mr. Chairman, $16
million.16 million dollars. So
Mr. Mr. Chair. So if my numbers
are right,
Let's just do round numbers
because it's easier for, for the
public and for me.
I'm not a math genius. Let's say
we collect $100 million a year
from industry in the
conservation tax, that tax was
intended to help plug abandoned
wells.
I understand if it became
insufficient, we would have to
go to the taxpayers, but
currently we're only taking 16
million of that to actually go
to the purpose of what the tax
was collected.
Does my math make sense? Am I
fairly
Close
Uh, Mr. Sheriff Henry, I, I
think, I think your math makes
sense.
I'd like to maybe just a
different way of looking at it.
Um, I, I personally think we
should protect the public and
protect the taxpayers. I think
this this bill does that. um I
also think we should protect.
Responsible operators.
So again, we're we're, you know,
this is, you know, going back to
the uninsured motorists analogy.
Everyone's insurance is higher.
Because there are some people
out there without insurance.
You know, like we have that fee
in the first place because we
had wells that weren't getting
plugged and abandoned.
That's, that's how that came
apart about so if we can address
that.
Um, you know, I think that's a
good thing.
Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I, I
agree. I mean, I would love to
make sure we're protecting the
industry and those that are are
doing it right.
So I guess that goes back to my
original question. When that
well was first drilled, they
probably did it right because
we've had a whole bunch of bills
come through here that are going
to make them do all kinds of new
things to make sure they're
doing it right.
So that was a responsible
company that drilled the well
that did what they were supposed
to, and now they've sold it.
So where I'm gonna go next is
because I think I, I, I think
I've been given a pretty clear
number to those in the public
that constantly say it's a state
that's paying for this, the oil
and gas industry pays into this
to take care of it.
That's the first part I, I kind
of want to make sure everybody
in here understands. The second
piece I want to is when they do
sell it.
The stripper wells.
Let's call them strip. Well,
that's what they're called. So
stripper wells. They're not as
high producing wells.
How much of, of the production
in our state comes from stripper
wells.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, I don't have that
number right off the top of my
head. I can tell you stripper
wells are.
A little over half the wells in
the state are are stripper wells
and those are wells that we
define as basically 10 barrels a
day or less. Right, yes, sir,
Mister Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
I, uh, the number I've got from,
from an expert in the oil and
gas industries, they guessed
those to be about 20 to 30% of
the production in New Mexico.
Now that seems like a pretty big
Part of our production in New
Mexico. So if this was to go
through and as Representative on
Toya pointed out, if we started
plugging wells early.
How much of that production do
we fear would go away because of
early plugging rather than
selling it to those companies
and I know what the answer
probably is gonna be is, well,
if we sell them to responsible.
Companies and I agree with that.
We want to make sure the
responsible companies, um,
But if I'm a responsible company
that sells my wells to somebody
who at the time is responsible,
but now I own that forever.
I might pull back on that and
go, well, you look pretty good
today.
But if there's a decline in the
industry, you might not look
good tomorrow. So I think I'm
gonna hold that well and plug
that. Do you think that could be
unintended consequence of this
legislation.
Uh, Mr. Cha, and Henry, uh, I
think that could be a
consequence of this legislation.
I think there are a number of
ways to address that, um,
including first, you know,
due diligence making sure the
financial responsibility of uh
the the end the operator, the
last operator. Um, you could set
up a fund, you could set aside
money.
Uh, to plug in and in in the
well, you could require, you
know, we have, we have a bonding
system that runs to the benefit
of the uh
Um, the state, you could, you
could do private, you know,
insurance, you could do a letter
of credit. There are any number
of financial instruments that
you could put in place to
continue operating that well
through its useful life and
ensure that you had the funds to
plug up the it without it
becoming a burden on the public.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
could we also think that if I'm
a responsible producer when I
drilled that well.
And the state benefited a great
deal when it was producing high,
and I paid high into that
conservation fund, assuming that
if ever down the line somebody
became an irresponsible.
No fault of my own. I did do my
due diligence because I did pay
into that conservation fund on
the off chance somebody did
become, could that also be
something that we would think
would make sense.
Um, Mr. Chair, Henry, uh, you
know, I, I, I think the, the
concern has been that
Companies haven't necessarily
been doing their due diligence
that they've been transferring
wells, and they know someone
else is going to produce it and
maybe maybe be able to, you
know, get some economic benefit
out of that well.
But also part of the business
model as, as, which is a term I
think was used.
Is, is to offload that
liability.
You know, this, this bill would
address that issue.
Of offloading the liability.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I'm glad
you kind of helped me to my next
little segue here when, when
major producers do go to the
stripper well, as we've just
said, about 20 to 30% of our
production.
Y'all probably won't know this
answer, so I'm not gonna ask you
just to prove a point.
Before horizontal drilling,
stripper wells made up about 70%
of our production.
After horizontal drilling.
Because of what represented
Montoya said when technology
changes and everything else
changes, those wells become much
more valuable. So a lot of times
what might happen is the major
producer, whoever drilled that
well, might sell it to a company
as a stripper well.
It might operate at 20 to 30%
for years.
Technology might change and all
of a sudden that becomes a major
producing well again.
So if we're preplugging these
wells because now we've put into
place something that is a major
producer, I might be a little
leery on the off chance that
there is a downturn, which I
think we all acknowledge at
times there will be a downturn.
So if I hold back because I'm
fearful of that day, we don't
get that 20, 30% production over
the next 5 years, 10 years,
whatever that wells life does.
I can never buy it back when
technology changes with
horizontal drilling, um, there's
a, a, a, a slew of new
technologies that have come out.
That have now made that 20 to
30% producing well, much more
attractive to the state of New
Mexico, which in fact benefits
all of the New Mexicans in this
room because then it becomes a
major producer again, and it
doesn't become an abandoned
well.
I think that's something that
really should be taken into
consideration when we're looking
at legislation like this, number
one, we did pay into the
conservation.
We did make sure to do the due
diligence as a major producer,
as even a minor producer, we did
what we were asked to do.
The funding is there, the state
changed where that funding goes.
Oil and gas industry.
This is a shot in the dark, but,
but I think I'm probably close.
I don't know that any of them
ever came to us and said, please
use our money for something
else.
That money when they paid it,
they assumed was attacked to
solve the problem that we're now
trying to solve.
Is that a fair assessment, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Henry, I think
we're back on House Bill 403.
And I think you know this
committee took steps to to uh
address that issue.
And Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I, I
100% agree that the industry is
doing what they're supposed to
do. And so when folks stand up
and say they leave us abandoned
and pollute the state and bail.
I, I really find that and I'm
glad that the other two
representatives said the same
thing. It's becoming very
offensive to hear the same thing
over and over. The other thing
I'm interested in is when we're
talking about the abandoned
wells. I hear numbers all over
the place. I've heard there's
10,000 abandoned wells. There's,
there's 5 that can y'all tell me
how many abandoned wells Emner.
As for the state of New Mexico
as of right now, abandoned
indoor orphan.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
part of this is that we don't
have a state definition of, of
orphan wells, um, I can tell you
right now we've got about a
little over 2000 wells that um
that have plug orders on our
list, OK? Oh, Mister Chair,
Mister Chair, I nerd as of 2023
when I looked up the numbers, I
guess that's the last time it
was updated.
It showed 1700 wells.
That would make sense to me. So
if we're dealing with around
2000 wells that need to be
plugged into or abandoned again,
shouldn't be there. I understand
that. But with the conservation
fund, do we have the funding?
If we hadn't diverted.
80% of the funding, would we
have the funding to have already
resolve this problem. Yeah, Mr.
Chair and Representative, no.
Um, that would not cover it, uh,
the 100% of the conservation tax
would not cover our existing
plugging liability and that's
without getting into the
2000 additional 2.5 1000 wells
that produced 0 in 2024 or
getting at the 6,000,400 wells
in 2024 that produced less than
90 barrels of oil in the entire
year, some percentage of which
stands to reason based on the
operators are going to come
under the state books as well.
So we're getting into numbers
that are more with a B.
In terms of billions of
liability between plugging and
environmental.
Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I
guess my question is, yes, the
money collected in the last year
might not be enough, let's say,
let's pretend that's correct.
If the state had never diverted
the funds 80% to the general
fund and had been using the tax
for what it was collected for,
for its entirety of existence,
would we have this same problem
right now, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, you asked me to
speculate about how a fund would
have performed financially.
In previous years, I want to
make sure I understand the
question, Mr. Chair, I'll help
you out. If we would have been
collecting $100 million every
year.
Let's even put it for the last 5
years, that's $500 million.
So, just by what you're and and
our numbers, the numbers I'm
seeing are quite a bit
different, but just for the last
5 years.
If that money had been used for
what the tax was intended for.
We would not be in the same spot
we are right now. Is that
correct?
Mr. Terry, Mr. Car.
Mr. Chairman, representative, I
think you're correct to say we'd
be in a different spot. I don't
know if it would cover the
entire liability.
Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, if
we would have been taking care
of the liability since the
get-go, which is what the
conservation tax was, I would
argue that over the life of this
existence, we would be in a very
different spot.
I'm not going to speculate on
that. That's my assumption that
if, if what we collected the tax
for.
is what the tax was used for, we
would be in a very different
spot, but because we didn't do
that.
Now we're where we're at.
And now we're trying to correct
that through uh Bill 403, which
would actually put the tax back
into the spot, which is what it
was collected for.
So that it can be used to plug
the abandoned wells.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, with that,
I'll
Yo, thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
representative Gurola, then
representing.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, I'm an expert for
bringing this um I have um
actually a follow-up question.
My question was also the number
of um abandoned wells because I
was also reading that is um
we're on the top compared to
other states, but I couldn't
find more data on that. Do you
have any data, Mr. Chair, about
uh compared to the nation where
we lay in abandoned wells.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Guilla, I think that we are, I
think you're correct. We're,
we're very near the top. I don't
exactly know where we are in
comparison to other states, but
if you give me a minute, I can
probably get that for you. OK,
yeah, I couldn't find the
information. I know we were
comparable to other states who
are much more larger and with
more history of uh well
drilling, and that was kind of.
Shocking for me, um.
Do you know where in location in
our state, the biggest
percentage of abandoned wells
through our state where is a
specific area where we have more
whales, abandoned whales.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative of the two major
basins in our state are kind of
the northwest of the state, the
San Juan kind of up and around
Farmington area and then of
course, the Permian down in the
southeast.
Off the top of my head, I'm
going to guess that the majority
of our liability right now, even
given the historical activity in
the San Juan in the northwest, I
think probably the majority of
our liabilities in the Permian.
Thank you. Um, what are the
recent consequences of having
that concentration of abandoned
wealth, Mr. Chair, in that area
he, environmental, what are the
risks and consequences of of
those abandoned wells.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman
Representative, that's been a,
that's been a topic of a lot of
debate in the last couple of
years, you know, we are not a,
we are not a health focused
regulator, I think that the
secretary over the corner there
might be the better person to
ask that question to at some
point, but there is certainly a
lot of evidence to suggest that
um particularly very old.
Uh, some of the old vertical
drill wells are are leaking or
are presenting some, some
hazards. We have wells that are
on the list to plug that were
drilled before World War II.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm, I'm trying to understand
this, um, you know, I'm on this
committee, so, um, how much is
taking, how much is costing
federal or state money.
To take care of this, and you
may have that already share this
information. I'm sorry if I am
asking that question again. Um,
how much is taking care, how
much it's costing to take care
of this um uh abandoned wealth.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, we pay about
150 $155,000 per well just to
plug, but that's just the
downhole, uh, the environmental
on a on a really good day when
you're just pulling equipment
off the well pad that's about
$30,000 it can go up into the
many millions if you get a lot
of um.
If you find a lot of
environmental remediation needs
around.
OK. Uh, and my question is
because having this
concentration in these areas,
Mr. Chair, um, I'm a teacher
when we work.
Going to copy that we have to do
a lot of online work and a lot
of reaching out to the
communities in those areas. I
was very shocked to see the lack
of um like internet access,
water, and other infrastructure
in those areas. So having those
issues and spending all this
money in lying.
And taking care of these whales
who could actually led to more.
Health problems, environmental
that we don't know, but also um
I wondered if that money instead
of being using it for that
reason.
If we are helping or, or, or the
industry takes care of it. Can
it be used to help the
communities around the area.
With all the needs that they
have, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative of
the wreck Fund is solely for
fairly fairly narrow purposes
which is uh plugging abandonment
and environmental remediation.
Think you will, that's sad.
Thank you. Thank you for your
answer. Um, so let me ask you
one last question if I
understood that the, the debate
here. So basically if um this
bill passes and um the industry
will be calling each on each one
another and say, hey, you have
to take care of this, so I don't
want to be putting extra money
because of you and some kind of
a agreement in that sense, so,
uh, they're gonna be working
together to help on this so it
it kind of help.
the people of the industry
companies or individuals were
actually being responsible, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
would say that the industry
tends to pug wells quicker than
we do, um, so, uh.
They also tend to plug wells,
um.
closer to the end of their life,
so you don't wind up with the
while sitting through of idle
or.
Almost inactive for many.
under
in its industry, you know,
industry parking standards.
So potentially
OK. uh, Mr. Chair, panel, so it
will be more effective.
That's what you're saying the
process probably.
But anyway, um, that was those
were my questions. Thank you. I,
I think I can see a better
picture of what's going on.
Thank you. Thank you Gurova.
Next is Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I just have 3 questions, um,
chairman, um.
We've sort of talked about it,
but are there any other?
Industries.
Um, that have some of the same
transfer of liability.
That you can point to.
Uh, Miss Sheriff and Dixon, as I
mentioned before.
The circle applies across
industries.
Uh, and certainly operators with
the knowledge that they'll be
responsible.
Under circle for pollution.
Or inclined to address that
contractually.
Mr. Chair and Chairman, um, but
outside of, you know.
For commercial realty or we've
talked about cars.
But if you're selling uh
commercial or residential
property.
When you
Conduct that sale, the transfer
of liability goes to the current
owner.
And so I'm wondering if there
are any other, um, instances
that we can look at.
Where this would be similar.
So, uh, Mr. Sheriff Dixon, um,
if you transfer commercial or
even residential property that
has environmental pollution, uh,
that liability doesn't go
exclusively to the new owner
because of Circle.
So you're still the, you know,
the prior owner would still be
responsible. Typically, you
know, if you have
You know, I said Murphy talked
about, um, you know,
transferring the property, you
know, as is where it is with all
faults, that sort of thing, um,
you know, typically there's an
opportunity for inspection.
There's disclosure if you fail
to disclose a liability that um
you can be responsible for that,
but you know for the most part,
um, you know, I understand that
if you
You know, you sell your car and
someone else gets in an
accident, that's, that's not
your responsibility. Uh, what
we're talking about is the
liability, not the, not the ass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Chairman, that I, I appreciate
walking through that that
description, uh, seemed to work
better for me than some of the
others. Um.
Is there a sense, chair chairman
on how this would affect an
operator's ability to um.
Get bonding
For some, you know, cause we ask
operators.
For financial assurance and
bonding.
Um
Currently
Will changing the liability and
extending it.
Uh, to past ownership, will
that.
Of an impact.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Dixon
Meister, can you correct me if
I'm wrong, but my understanding
is the, the bonding is currently
a blanket bonds with maximum
amount, so it would, you know,
it would not affect that. I
think one of the um one of the
issues that would argue in favor
of this bill is that the current
bonding regime is inadequate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, uh,
Chairman, what I actually I'm
getting to though is the
companies that.
Um, the insurance companies
that.
Sell the bonds.
Will it make it more difficult
for operators to secure.
Those instruments.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
generally the larger companies
that are doing the majority of
certain horizontal drilling or
operating under enormous
insurance policies, um.
I
Don't
It's hard to imagine a scenario
where because of potential
future liability for clean up
that.
They would discontinue writing
those policies for large
operators, I think how those
policies and how that, how that
coverage may be transferred with
the well, I think that's a
conversation that you may see
emerge, but that would.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Chairman.
Great
Thank you, Representative Dixon.
I, I don't have anybody else on
the list, Mr. Chair. I want,
we'll go to you for closing
comments briefly, um,
I want to thank you for bringing
the bill. I want to thank the
committee for a lot of good
questions. Apologies if we went
a little long, but this is an
important issue, uh, Mr. Chair,
my sense is that this would um
Put us in a very unique and
potentially disadvantageous
spot.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
The importance that you're
highlighting here and the, I
think the committee is really
wrestling with a very important
function is super important. I
want to thank you for your
leadership in bringing this
forward, but also the other
conversations the committee has
had around other ways to deal
with um
Plugging abandoned an orphaned
wells, while also maximizing the
state's competitiveness.
Uh
Mr. Charity, you for closing.
Uh,
thank you, Chairman Small, um,
so I just in closing, um,
This, this bill is separate from
the conservation fund. I mean, I
think it's useful to discuss it
to you.
Um, and I think we're taking
him, you know, thanks to Murphy
and Dixon were taking important
steps to address the
conservation fund, and I
appreciate that. I do view this
as separate and I would just
like to close with this thought
that.
To me, one of the beauties of
this approach.
Is that it creates a market
situation where the industry.
Regulates itself.
The the the purpose of this
bill.
is to keep the state out of it.
And I think the industry has the
ability to do their due
diligence.
To take
Care and caution when
transferring wells and to
contractually uh allocate
liability so that the state
doesn't have to get involved.
And the industry ends up being
the responsible player, which is
the way I think the industry
should work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, chair. Hey,
I'll now entertain emotion. What
would the best recommendation on
House Bill 481, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair substitute motion to
table. OK, there is a motion and
to pass in the second, however,
a substitute motion does take
the tabling motion takes
precedence, does not require a
second. Uh, can we ask the
committee to take the role,
please?
The vote, this will be on the
motion to substitute motion to
table.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Yes, to table.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garrola, no.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya, yes.
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Senator Cortez,
yes to table.
Representative small.
Viana.
Jerry McQueen.
OK, uh,
By a vote of 6 to 3 uh House
Bill 481 has been tabled.
And
go to the next.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for chairing. Thank
you for the discussion and thank
you to my expert.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
expert.
OK, once again, thank you to uh
Chairman Small for chairing, um.
We are aware of the strobe light
behind us, and it's giving me a
headache too, so I
apologize for that. Uh, we
might.
Uh, not be able to get that
fixed until after uh the end of
the committee, unfortunately.
Um, our next bill up is Hospital
581 NMED inspections before new
permits, uh, with Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm almost
there.
OK.
Mr. Charon and uh members of the
committee, I'm here to present
House Bill 581.
Relating to the environment.
Requiring the Department of the
Environment and local agencies
to complete all inspections on
existing sources.
Owned or operated.
I permit applicants.
Before the issuance of operating
or construction permits for new
or modified sources to such
applicants.
HB 581 would provide New Mexico
Environment Department, the
ability to require compliance.
With the oil and gas Act
standards for venting and
flaring of natural gas by oil
and gas facilities.
Before issuing new permits for
construction or operation of oil
and gas facilities under the air
quality and Control Act.
And to conduct periodic
inspections to determine
compliance.
In essence, the HB 581 would
amend the air quality and
Control Act.
to require compliance with
standards preventing and flaring
of natural gas by oil and gas
facilities under the Oil and Gas
Act.
Mr. Chair, I have with me today.
Jang Yi
With a renowned regulatory and
administrative lawyer with over
35 years of experience, and I'd
like for her to um offer an
opening.
Mr. Chair McLean and members of
the committee.
Um, and thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you
about this important bill, House
Bill 851 fills an important um
regulatory gap.
Uh, and then, uh, 581, uh, thank
you, uh, Phil's uh regulatory
gaps in many important ways.
First, it creates an incentive
for oil and gas companies to be
uh good corporate citizens.
We've talked about that a little
bit today and uh I've heard talk
about that a little bit today
and uh by coming into compliance
uh.
Oil and Gas companies, uh, the
good companies would have a
competitive edge over those
companies uh that are uh
laggingtaining uh.
Compliance with uh the air
quality control uh act um.
fluton standards and uh with the
EPA standards under
and conservation divisions of
venting and flaring standards.
Um, so that the compliance with
all those standards are, are,
are really, really important and
uh we believe that Houseville uh
581 uh.
Will address that important
issue and also create a a
healthy economic environment
where the good corporations will
thrive. Secondly, uh, house Bill
581 uh creates a regulatory
structure and purpose within
which New Mexico Environment
Department, uh, can effectively
uh uh recommend increase
permitting fees to cover the
costs.
Of, of the inspection program
and the environment improvement
Board can improve those
increased permitting fees for
very specific reasons for um.
A transition to a new regulatory
structure that will be people of
New Mexico.
Uh house Bill 581 addresses uh
the widespread noncompliance, uh
within the oil and gas that
enemy discovered in 2024, uh, in
a joint, um.
Inspection initiative uh that uh
enemy did.
Enemy uh conducted with the EPA
and that um.
It's almost a pilot project for
what uh House Bill 581 is
suggesting, um, uh, in, in that,
uh, initiative.
enemy D and EPA.
I think quite shamefully
reflecting shamefully on the oil
and gas company,
uh, I, I.
Uh, as you'd be courteous and
respectful.
OK.
is that
ask your testimony to be
courteous and respectful. Oh,
I'm sorry. I
My apologies, Mister Archer, and
I, I will do better.
Um
That, um
This, uh, campaign, uh, this,
uh.
Inspection campaign found that
60% of the Permian Basin
facilities that were in super%
were in compliance.
So, um, that wouldn't a
situation that House Bill 581 uh
would address.
Also of 581 would uh the
increased compliance, this new
regulatory structure, uh, would
address this issues.
And as this committee has heard,
um, and, uh, testimony, um, the
oil and gas industries, the
pollutants that are by this
industry are very harmful to the
communities cause asthma, lung
cancer, and other, uh, uh.
a serious finally methane is a a
a very uh lethal greenhouse gas,
um, it is uh 20% more powerful
than carbon dioxide entrapping
of gasses on the earth and
causing uh the is resulting in
the wild wildfires and uh
extreme all our communities,
especially in the Southwest
orperiencing, uh, now is the
time, uh, to, um, enact a bill.
Like House Bill 581 because of
the science has not only
discovered the noncompliance,
but it has uh is offering ways
that uh inspections can be done
a more cost-effectively.
And um for all those uh reasons,
urge, uh the uh committee to a
vote to pass on House Bill 5.
OK, we'll go to the audience.
I, I was just gonna say we stand
for questions.
Thank you.
uh, we'll go to the audience,
uh, just.
uh, start off with a show of
hands who's here in support of
this bill?
Uh, quite a few hands, who's
here in opposition to this bill?
Uh, also a few hands, so, uh,
we'll do, um, what we're gonna
do is uh 3 on each side in the
room, and then we'll do 2 in
line. We'll start with
opposition. Uh, so if you want
to speak in opposition to this
bill, please step forward.
We're just doing 3 in the room.
Um, and you'll have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
Nimoa opposes House Bill 581
because it will increase denials
and delays in permits, decrease
money to the state's budget and
increased burdens on NMED.
This bill will ask NMED to
certify all of the company's
operations, including those
outside of New Mexico.
In ensuring that they're in
compliance with state and
federal error standards. This is
a burden far beyond the scope
and capacity of the department.
The bill further lacks checks on
third-party technology that are
included in the EPA, SEP
program, including checks on the
performance of the detection
technology.
There also does not appear to be
a mechanism for disputing or
disproving agency findings in
the periodic, uh, inspection
reports from remote sensing
technologies or the aency's
interpretation of those
measurements. Please oppose.
Thank you Mr. Chairman of the
committee, Mike Miller, Permian
Basin Petroleum Association.
HB 581 mandates that all
existing sources owned by a
permit applicant undergo
inspections before any new or
modified permits can be issued.
This requirement could result in
significant permanent
delays, disrupting planned
projects, limiting investment in
New Mexico's energy section and
ultimately hindering job growth.
Secondly, the requirement of
proof of compliance across all
facilities prior to new permits
creates an unrealistic
compliance timeline. Many
factors outside the operator's
control, such as agency backlog
or infrastructure constraints
could lead to delays in securing
compliance and verification
effectively halting development.
Finally, this industry is
already subject to stringent
state and federal air quality
regulations, including the oil
and gas Act's venting and
flaring standards, adding
redundant inspections and
compliance hurdles only increase
administrative inefficiencies
without providing meaningful
environmental benefits. We stand
in the post. Thank you.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, Jim Winchester with
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. I'm
not going to repeat the points
that have already been made, but
we'll simply say that the result
of this bill, whether or not the
intent is for more inspections,
and we're not here to advocate
for more or less inspections,
but the result of this bill will
definitely lead to bureaucratic
gridlock in a very dramatic way
and will certainly cause
production to dramatically fall
along with revenues. So for that
reason, we do.
stand uh respectfully opposed.
Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online, uh,
if you're online and would like
to speak in opposition, please
raise your hand. OK, I'm not
seeing any hands online, so
we're gonna go back to the
committee room for support.
We'll take 3.
But you're gonna wanna step back
just a few steps.
Good morning Chairman and
committee members, um, thank you
for this opportunity. I've been
asked to give you a little bit
of background of this bill. This
is a real grassroots effort.
This started, um, there, I'm
sorry, um, the Democratic Party
isn't only about putting
legislators in office. It's also
about creating a platform, a
policy that is for the common
good that we expect our
legislators to follow. Could you
state your name
My name is Muriel Carpenter.
Thank you.
Um, um, now we, we expect our
legislators, of course, to
follow our platform and also
their Republican colleagues to
consider some of the our issues.
This started with 3 citizens
deciding that they were going to
put together a resolution
because they were concerned that
the unhealthful admissions of
methane from oil wells, although
they are controlled somewhat,
there's no enforcement for this
controlling. That's uh uh by
law. So they brought a
resolution to the Berna Leo
Resolutions Committee, and that
went up to the state platform
committee, and that went up to
these are all elected uh people,
and that went up to
the um state central committee,
and they all agreed that the,
yeah, there has to be some
enforcement for emissions to a
compliance to occur.
So, um, please pass this
sensible fix so that only the
bad actors who are not complying
with law that is on the books
today will be regulated. We
really um appreciate your
movement toward protecting the
health and well-being of our
climate and of our people. Thank
you.
Chair, committee members, my
name's Athena Christodoulou,
environmental engineer. Why this
obsession with methane
emissions. We know it's a more
potent greenhouse gas than
carbon dioxide, as has been
mentioned, only 20%. However, it
is really way more than that,
because at 25% is actually
spread over 100 years when it's
actually only in the atmosphere
as methane is about 12 years,
and then it hangs around its
carbon dioxide for about 1000
years. So it's been seriously
underestimated.
By EPA.
And um right now, scientists are
perplexed as to why the last two
years have seen such a high
increase in temperatures. Could
it be because of the oil and gas
industry operations emitting
more methane than reported, or
it being undercounted. We want
to make sure that it's not us.
This bill will help that
situation and the effects will
be immediate. We're playing
chicken with nature and thumbing
our nose at a natural phenomenon
like, like gravity as we walk
close to the edge of a cliff.
Imagine all four seasons back
next year, skiing available all
the way down in Riodoso. A few
extra years before air
conditioning is needed by
everyone in New Mexico. Please
support HB 5581's intent to
truly provide a solution. Thank
you.
Morning again Chair and
committee members. My name is
Colin Cox with the Center for
Biological Diversity, and we
support HB 581 because it will
encourage polluters to follow
the law, um, and polluters
clearly need encouragement, um,
NMED data for 2024 shows that
70% of facilities are violating
air quality laws and
regulations, um, and air quality
in the Permian Basin, again,
according to NMED data, air
quality in the Permian Basin
fails to meet basic federal
health standards.
HP 581 would increase
compliance, improve air quality,
and ensure that we don't reward
bad actors with more permits. We
urge you to vote yes. Thank you.
OK, so that's 3 in the room.
We're gonna go online, um.
Uh, first up we have.
So I said 3 in the room and 2
online. We'll see if we have 2
online.
First up we have Kathleen
Moseley.
Chair McQueen and members of the
Committee on a retired Community
Health nurse who worked in
asthma education throughout New
Mexico for the last 15 years of
my career and saw the impacts of
high uncontrolled asthma and
disparities. 4.5 years ago after
retirement as a new grandmother,
I took my daughter and
granddaughter on her 2nd day in
the world, packed her in ice on
the hottest day on record in LA
County, where it was raining
ash.
From wildfires due to extreme
heat. I'm one of the authors of
the endorsed resolution. New
Mexico is the 2nd largest
contributor to methane,
Kinney of the Environment
Department has often repeated to
the public that there is a
statutory imbalance, creating a
backlog of 6.5 years in required
inspections. There is a
statutory timeframe
to do inspection.
permits but not for inspections.
HB 581 offers the department are
requested solution to an often
declared imbalance. Please
support HB 581. Thank you.
It will take one more online,
Oscar Simpson.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the Simpson from Mexico
representing Rio Grande.
This is a good bill to make sure
that we control pollution and
our dire threat from climate
change.
Please support 581. Thank you.
OK, thank you very much. And
that's gonna end our public
comment. I'm sorry, we, uh, in
the interest of time, we don't
get to everyone.
Um, so, uh, we'll go back to the
sponsor. Uh, do you have
anything to add before we go to
the committee?
No, Mister Chair, we'll go on.
Thank you.
Uh, members of the committee,
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, uh, Representative, and,
uh, Miss Yi.
Um
Can you walk me through um.
Who applies uh to the
environmental improvement board
for uh construction and
operating permits.
What type of, um, businesses.
I'm sorry, I, I didn't hear what
you said.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. The
question is, what type of
companies, uh, and businesses
apply for operating and
construction permits.
Mister Chair and uh
representatives, um.
This saw how Bill 581 is a
proposed as um.
amendment to the Control Act of
New Mexico and um it applies to.
Oil and gas companies.
Mr. Chair, um, and.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair and
presenters, and I'm wondering
what other companies are
included because um
I think it's
Beyond oil and gas companies
that have to apply for
construction and operating
permits. I, I might be
incorrect.
Um, but
I'm wondering how much of uh New
Mexico's businesses and
industries are going to be
affected by this.
to
Mister Chair and Representative
Dixon.
There is a, there will be a
range of companies that are
affected, uh, if uh the
legislature passes House Bill
581, but um.
The, um,
gas companies are the ones that
are are the major emitters of
these pollutants, and that is
why art.
testimony about this bill,
right that um other.
kinds of.
Toxic pollutants uh would also
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you presenters, um, does,
uh,
NMED though also uh if you're
applying for a permit, um,
What type of uh penal or what
type of infractions or um, I'm
sorry, um.
But uh
Um, I'm looking for the word.
Uh, when you're not in
compliance, uh, so, you know,
when I read the paper, um, I
see, uh,
I don't know, one day a week, a
list of all of the restaurants
that have been inspected by the
Environment department.
And
So
Those companies
Am I correct that they they
would apply to this as well, so,
um, well I know the intent is to
focus on oil and gas emissions.
I'm just concerned that this
would essentially cover every
entity that the environment
department oversees.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
If you look on page 2, beginning
with line one.
All the way through.
To, well, beginning on line one,
it identifies the um.
Already what is covered by
regulation, so it includes
starting on line for person
intending to construct or modify
any source.
And it's already in statute or
otherwise specifically provided
by regulation to obtain a
construction permit, then we go
on to number 2.
Person intending Mister Chair to
operate any source for which um
an operating permit is required
by the 1990 amendments to the
Federal Act.
And then it goes on to further.
Identify on, so this is already
in statute on Mister Tern
representativeative. But is it
in statute that if you are out
of compliance on one of your
facilities, you know, if you own
McDonald's and you have 5.
Locations.
And you're out of compliance on
one location.
Does that mean that you're not
able to get a permit if you're
building.
A 6th location.
Missy.
Mr. Chair, Representative Dixon,
um, I, I believe that.
In some ways, uh, you are, um.
Addressing an issue of scale and
so yes, if a McDonald's is uh
out of compliance, standards of
the uh air quality standards
under state and federal law,
yes, they would have to correct
it and uh perhaps Arnold's is
not as high as oil and gas or,
you know, taking something in
the metro area of Albuquerque,
um, asphalt plant or gasoline
refineries, yes, uh, the scale
of.
uh differs depending on what
type of facility we're talking
about, and I would.
Venture to say that the remedy
and the must go into correcting
those uh issues will depend on
the scale.
And so that's where the law
works.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you presenters, um, I.
Have a couple more questions. I
um am.
Concerned that this is this uh
bill perhaps is significantly
wider and broader than I think
the intent, um, but, uh.
I could be corrected.
Um
Mr. Chair and presenters uh in
the FIR there there are
questions brought up about um
the increased work.
That would be required from the
environment department, but no
accompanying appropriation or
funds to make this possible, um.
Um, the EIB could um grant uh a
fee increase. However, um, Mr.
Chair and, uh, Representative,
am I correct in thinking that
the EIB recently rejected, uh,
NMED's request to increase fees.
Mr. Chair McLean and
Representative Dixon, thank you
for that question.
In a, in a way, um, that
motivated uh the uh coalition of
grassroots, um, advocates that
um developed the spill.
To, to develop the spell because
they attended hearings, um, at
the EIB where uh those um
requests from uh NMED were and.
Our thinking and uh
representative Royval
Caballero's, uh, uh, thinking
and sponsoring this bill.
Is that if the legislature in
its wisdom were to begin that
pathway to a more robust
monitoring, and this is also
gathering data. It's, it's, it's
very good, uh, uh, project.
That
The environmental improvement
board will then have more
justification of those
permitting fees, and I, and I
would like to say that um this.
Bill
Mm
It may not appear that way
because I don't know, sometimes
change uh is uh is jarring or
something, but it, it, it is
meant to be uh incremental.
Uh, as and that is why um House
Bill 581 suggests that enemy do
make reports in 2026 and uh
2027, um, as to the progress of
the inspection program, uh, the
number of facilities inspected
and the costs of, of uh those
facilities, so there's a very
short, ultimately.
I think that we all want this
bill to have.
Wide ranging effects good
effects, and that with this
incremental approach of the
legislature in its wisdom and
enemy and its expertise and
experience and
A move the project of inspection
programs and more robust
inspection program, uh, along in
a good way.
And I, I, I would add, um.
Mr. Chenpresentative, thank you
for the line of questioning. It
is important to recognize that
the role of any MED is to
monitor, to enforce, and to um
And force compliance across the
board, so it's already part of
the charge of the department.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I would
note, however, that in the FIR,
one of the technical issues, um,
brought up, uh by the Attorney
general, um.
And I quote, uh, this bill
requires NMED to enforce the Oil
and Gas Act, however, Oil and
Gas Act grants its jurisdiction
and authority to the
conservation division.
Um, so I, I don't know that.
Um, we're actually doing this in
the, in the best possible way.
So, while I very much appreciate
the intent. I think it might uh
be beneficial, uh, for this bill
to have a bit more time, uh, in
coordination with our agencies
to make sure that we are really
targeting what we're aiming for,
um, but, uh, with that, Mr.
Chair, um, I appreciate the
time.
Thank you, Rosa Dickson Rossall.
Thank you
briefly, thank you, uh,
Representative. Um, I, uh, I, I
agree with many of the points
that were just raised also, uh,
Mr. Chair, I just wanna note and
celebrate the legislature has
significantly
Yeah, increased our investment
in the New Mexico Environment
Department.
Uh, well over 150%. It's well
deserved. There's continued work
to do, um, I think the, the vast
increase without the ability to
sort of make sure that that
amongst other issues are very
challenging. Um,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
one thing, um,
The uh
In terms of the sort of the
I, I would ask maybe that we get
clarification. I know the
secretary is here.
The, the measurement of sort of
facilities that are out of
compliance.
That was, as I understand it,
Mr. Chair and representative.
Based upon sort of enemy
inspecting sort of pre-selecting
a list of facilities that they
thought maybe were out of
compliance.
And inspecting those.
Another way to look at it, Mr.
Chair Representative, and I'd
like to ask the secretary for
clarification is sort of a
random sample where, where we
can actually draw the conclusion
that, in fact, you know, over
half of facilities are out of
compliance.
Do you have any, Mr. Chair.
And if not, that's OK, I'd like
I believe the secretary's here
for the next bill since he
wasn't part of the presentation.
I appreciate the question, but
I'd rather not.
Thank you. uh, I thank you for
that, Mr. Chair. Um, I
appreciate the bill. I won't be
able to support it, but I do
know that the legislature is
invested in enemyD the last few
years and very robust ways, and
I want to thank you.
leadership.
Thank you, chair.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy.
Mister Chair, Representative.
We had a discussion in one of
the meetings regarding expertise
and I know that you're here as
an expert, and I just wanna ask
a couple of questions. Um, with,
with respect to that subject, is
it fair for me to assume that
that you're an expert.
In
Uh, regulatory drafting, um,
Or perhaps I should ask it,
would you talk about your
expertise.
Uh
Mr. Chair McQueen and uh
Representative Murphy, thank you
for that question. Well, I've
been practicing for so in the
beginning, I became regulatory
law um by representing
individuals by uh uh regulation.
For example, in housing and um
and employment and then um uh
that was half my career. I
worked 16 years for legal aid
and public defender, and then um
the second half of my career, I
worked for the government, so I
work for the public regulation
commission and a state engineer
and I work for the city of
Albuquerque and I left uh uh
March of 2022, 3 years, um, and,
uh, the PERA system so.
I was able to to leave and
during that time, um.
I did draft ordinances more
frequently I uh wrote FIR's
proposed legislation would
affect ERC how it would affect.
I, I also work for aging and
long term services, um, you
know, the, the various agencies
I work for and um.
And then um at the city of
Albuquerque, I represented the
city of exclusively, um, on
public utilities and uh
telecommunications, so, um, I
was involved in rule making, um,
at the PRC and also in a
litigated cases about um.
uh
Proposed rates.
Renewable energy projects.
So, is that too much? I'm sorry.
No, I, Mister Chair
Representative and expert. Now,
that gives me a good sense of,
of your uh employment history
and your background. I think
it'd be fair to say, Mr.
Chairman Representative, you're
Your lawyer and and you're well
versed in drafting regulations.
So if Mr. Chair, representative
experts, if I have questions
about the words in this bill,
you can answer them.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Murphy, I hope so. Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, an expert, I
think we also then be fair to
say, your expertise is not in
the oil and gas industry per se.
That fair
Mr. Cham Representative Murphy,
I think that is fair to say,
although in the last two years,
um.
I don't know if other people
have this experience, but as a
retiree, I'm just as busy as I
used to be when I was, um,
working for a paycheck, and in
that work I have a
representative Murphy, quite
honestly, for the first time
involved in your quality. So I
have uh gained some experience
in the last 2 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative and expert, um, I
wanna go back to some of the
numbers and I believe um I want
to revisit and make sure I
understand, um, in a line of
questioning I believe
representative Small was
undertaking, and that is the
compliance or out of compliance
number chair representative.
My understanding has been is
that we've got some 66,000
wells, roughly.
And
There's got to be all the
associated facilities with that
would probably take us into the
100, 100,000 so.
My understanding of of the
compliance or out of compliance
number is that Mr. Chair,
representative and expert.
Is the department didn't go out
and inspect 100,000.
Sites.
They went out and targeted.
30 or 35 depending upon which
period you're looking at the
last couple of years.
But they suspected to be out of
compliance.
Now out of those 30 or 35 sites,
they found that 60% of those.
We're out of 60 or sometimes, I
think one year there was even
70%, probably a few years ago.
But Mr. Chair and Representative
and expert.
That doesn't say that 60% or 70%
of the industry is out or even
that 60 or 70% of our facilities
are all compliance. What it says
is out of the 30 that they
looked at they found 15 or 20
that might be out of compliance.
Mister Chairman Representative,
an expert, do you agree with
those numbers or not?
Mr. Chair McQueen and a
Representative Murphy.
I think that with the issue of
data, of course you're raising
legitimate uh questions.
I, I would like to say at the
outset that we have the data
that we have and uh we have uh
uh the steaks that we have as
communities in US legislators,
um, and that you have to measure
uh the data that you have
against uh what is at stake, but
I will also add to that that
when um our uh grassroots group,
uh, put together a resolution.
We did a lot of research. We
did.
uh, scientific articles beyond
the pilot project that I
mentioned in uh the introduction
that uh did in 2024, in addition
to that, we saw um articles and
the uh literature and the
science literature, even though
I'm not a scientist as a lawyer
in this technical areas. I am
very um used to reading
scientific articles, and what we
found is um.
One of these scientists said
that um.
This particular type of um uh.
technology that we mentioned in
um.
House Bill 581.
Sat and on meth air.
Found that.
And that's NMED pilot project of
126 or 24 facilities. This is
generally a monitoring of the
Permian Basin and other uh
basins, they found that the
emissions that they found to the
aerial surveillance.
Um
Was
Much more than the EPA
projections. In fact,
EPA projections were 40% less.
Chariot and Representative, I
might add that in the FIR it
also indicates that um the
department only has 7
inspectors.
That uh monitor.
3800 permits, which is roughly
50,000 wells, so right there it
tells you what you just gave us
in terms of the 66,000 wells and
probably up to possibly 100,000
wells through the facilities
with 7 inspectors, um, that's,
that's probably the reason why
Mr. Chair and
Although the secretaries here,
uh, but that I would venture to
say is why assembling.
Is taken because the capacity of
7 inspectors compared to what
they have to inspect is by far a
very low number of inspectors.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair and expert. My point is
this though.
It's just
Going back to opinion versus
fact.
When it stated that based upon
the.
Apartments, inspections.
That 60 or 70% of the industry
is out of compliance. That's
just fundamentally not true.
And what they're saying is of
the 30 or 35.
Sites that they were looked at
which they expected to find to
be out of compliance.
Only just over half of those
were actually out of compliance.
So I, what I'm saying, Mr. Chair
and Representative, is I think.
It's irresponsible.
For this group, you hear.
Things that that are are simply
not accurate, and that's what
I'm trying to get to, and I
won't, I won't belabor this
anymore, Mr. Chairman or
Representative. I'll move on and
so once again I hope we can all
talk from the, from the real
numbers.
Um
Mr. Chair Representative and
expert.
Um
The department recently
put out some information
regarding the
Um, industry's gas capture rate.
Um, Mr. Chairman, representative
and expert, do you know they,
they, they did this, uh, they
gave us numbers for July of 23
and July of 24.
Um, are you aware of those
numbers and, and how much
Uh
Natural gas industry is actually
capturing.
Percentage wise, probably.
Mr. Chair McLean and
Representative Murphy, I am and
um.
CD
oil conservation division rule
on Vietnam, there has been uh
some um review of progress that
has been made. Mr. Mr. Chairman,
representative an expert.
Um, in July of 23,
Um, industry captured not
according to the department's
numbers, 98.8% of the, of the
methane natural gas.
July 24, that's 99.3%.
And I would note, Mr. Chairman
and Representative that this is
almost 2 years ahead of
schedule.
Based upon the, the 98% capture
rule outlined by the government.
So with that, it sounds like
that.
Once again, we're in the 99%
range.
And I want to use that number to
sort of illustrate a point and
ask you a question, Mr. Chair
Representative.
During your presentation, you
talked about good corporate
citizens.
And
That you and so I guess what I
wanna ask is because I, I think
those in my industry are good
corporate citizens.
But if they're not, I'd like to
know who they are.
Um, cause I'm gonna call the
president.
Um, Mr.
And representative. So who are
the bad guys?
Mr. Chair on McQueen and uh Mr.
Murphy. I.
I would say that
The chairs, um.
Advisement on uh my use of
language was this kind of, well,
you know, I'm a litigator too,
so sometimes I, I, I act to uh.
To, uh, to, um.
I don't know, as if we're in
that an adverse situation and of
course we're not.
Um, of course, uh, as, uh,
members of the community
dressing you are esteemed uh
representatives in the
legislature, uh we are uh
working together, so it is not
uh our intent uh to uh litigate
in this forum who the bad guys
are.
Our intent, uh, despite my very
poor use of language, uh,
momentarily, um, is to, um.
pave represented um um Mr. Chair
McQueen and Representative
Murphy, um, I would like to say
that.
House Bill 581 is really weaving
together uh various uh strands
of regulation and trying to put
them together in a coordinated
way, so. And uh gas, I, I'm
sorry if the uh oil conservation
division has made progress
through the venting rule that
was just adopted in 2021 and
it's already made progress, very
happy about that, but we have um
the 3 581.
um, is concerned about other
things too, and about looting of
the pollutants that are
regulated.
OK, and, um, and, and also uh
the, the timeline for
permitting, so right now there
is a deadline for enMED to issue
permits, but there is no
timeline for inspections, so HB
581 is weaving um several of
these factors together and um
that uh.
Uh eneED and OCD for joint
powers agreement to carry out
these inter uh related uh
functions and and
representatives, thank you for
the question. Those that are in
noncompliance are the bad guys.
Those that are polluting the air
are the bad guys, those that
refuse um to take.
Our climate
Uh, and where we are in our
climate crisis seriously and
continue to challenge the
regulations, Mr. Chair,
Challenge, um, the compliance
and the regulatory um
regulations that are in place to
ensure that the general
population is protected.
And that we maintain the
public's health and well-being
as
First and primary, those are the
bad guys, and we're attempting
to uh place the compliance
aspects.
Um, within the jurisdictional
components and agencies that are
responsible for holding the
compliance they in compliance,
so I just wanted to be real
emphatic about that and what the
bill aims to do, um, in
accordance and collectively with
all the other regulatory
measures that we and hope to
enhance as a state to protect
our populations. Thank you,
thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Representative and
expert.
Um, and I understand that there,
there are always, uh Mr.
Chairman Representative, there's
always people in any industry,
in any profession that are
somehow out of compliance. Um,
But I don't think I would have
to agree with the governor when
she said during her stay at the
state that our industry is the
cleanest in the world.
And um we produced the cleanest
oil and gas of any country.
Um, now,
That may or may not be good
enough, but it's, it's, it's
sure pretty close.
Um, also, in terms of who the
bad guys are, there's about 450
operators in the state.
I've heard from the department,
they know who they are.
There's probably 4 or 5.
And I find it very hard to
believe, Mr. Chairman and
Representative that they don't
have the tools to go off after a
handful of bad operators.
Now, with that said,
And given our 99%.
Compliance rate
Um, I'm gonna actually go to the
bill.
Page 10
Um, lines, basically 8 through
11.
And tell me, uh, Mr. Chairman
represented an expert.
If
That, if I'm reading this
correctly, that basically
is requiring perfection.
Because beyond the 98% rule.
It goes to
100% plus rule.
On everything. Am I reading that
correctly? And is that a
standard that that.
Um
We're going to apply in our
society to all industries.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
first I want to go back, um, and
just make sure that you are
aware or have in hand the report
that um is provided by the.
Environmental department that
lists the names of those that
are in the industry that are
non-compliant, so I want to make
sure that you have access to
that report because it basically
refutes um the 99% and the uh
60% because if you take that in
relationship to what is being
cited than those figures are
probably much uh more realistic.
So I wanted to address that and
then going to page.
tend to your um.
Lines 8 through.
11
Could you just be a little bit
more specific on what your
question is, please.
Representative excuse me, Mr.
Chair Representative, yes.
The way I read this, um, is
Provided that the combination
results in the most stringent
level of performance that is the
most.
Detective of health and safety.
Mr. Chair and Representative
that that sort of implies to me
that
You know,
Every, I mean, you have to be
100% in compliance everywhere or
you're not gonna get any, any.
Any permits issued or anything
else. In other words, it raises
the performance level from 98%
or not even what we're
accomplishing now, 99% gas
capture.
Um, to 100%.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chair and um.
Representative
Before I turn that particular
question and an answer to the
expert. I just want to say that
the closer we get to the full
compliance.
The better we are in ensuring
that our air uh is clean and
healthy and our environment is
protected for future
generations, so I'd like that
that is always the goal, that is
what we always strive for, and
that is why we have the
regulations in place, so I'd
like to have uh Miss E respond
to the particular question on
um.
Related to page 10 and those
lines.
Chair and uh representative
Murphy, I just want to make a
small point that um that
language was as a restatement of
um a uh language that was um.
Put in the air quality Control
Act in a different place, um,
fairly recently, um, but it,
it's already in.
OK, um
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
The next question had to do with
the duplication between OCD and
and the environment department,
but I think
Representative Dixon covered
that one.
Um
One of the unintended
consequences of this bill. I'm,
I'm, I'm afraid, Mr. Chair and
Representative, is you're
actually gonna delay
infrastructure construction.
And I, one of the things that we
face in the industry all the
time.
His lack of pipeline, um, number
of years ago when our gas
capture wasn't as high, Mr.
Chair, and Representative is
mainly due to downstream
facilities, not having the
capacity.
And that has been a leaded
somewhat, Mister Chairry
represented in the industry, but
we're still
trying to get that takeaway.
And the types of delays that
are, are in this bill.
could actually cause more
problems than they fix.
And not only affects uh Mr.
Chair and represented an expert
pipelines, but compressor
stations, electrical grid.
Some of that electrical grid
will actually be carrying a
renewables.
And I'm afraid that that may
very well be.
The ultimate outcome of this is
is there's infrastructure that
the state needs, the industry
needs.
That this will delay and and and
confused and frustrate to the
point that it doesn't get home.
Um, I'll just frame that, uh,
Mr. Chair, as, as a question,
um, so you can respond to my
concern and unless I think of
something else, I'll be done.
Uh, Mr. Chair and uh
representative, I have heard
your comment previously, uh, and
other pieces of legislation that
have been before you and I
respectfully, obviously
disagree, I think with an
industry that is generating the
type of revenue that it is
generating.
that it has a responsibility as
part of its operations, Mister
Chair, to take.
A great portion of that revenue
to ensure compliance and in
order to ensure compliance if it
means that we have to increase
our pipeline access or improve
our pressure stations or in any
form or fashion work within, uh,
enhancing the electrical grid,
then that's what it has to do in
order to stay in business and in
order to continue to generate
the revenue that the state.
well depends on, in particular,
Missy has, um, a couple of other
statements in response to you.
Thank you, Mister Chair, McQueen
and Representative Murphy, I, I
would just, uh, point out that
I, when I worked at the PRC, I
helped to write um a whole set
of regulations, um, um,
addressing, um, pipeline safety
and underground. It was around
the time that the one dig uh uh
system was implemented and um
you know that regulatory
structure is tougher and uh
hopefully uh.
The incremental approach that I
spoke of earlier will address
any um anomalies as they come
up.
Mister chair, one last comment,
Representative.
As a company, I could have a
billion dollars.
And wanna go build a pipeline.
And I have, have all the money
in the world.
I can't build it unless I get a
permit.
That's the key. That's the
bottleneck. That's the problem
with this bill.
Is it, it, it frustrates.
People to the point
That they can't build
infrastructure because of the
time delays and the multiple
agencies and um all of the
conditions. And so, I'll just
leave it with that as, as I
respectfully disagree, um, with,
um,
With the idea that it's only
about money. It's, it's not,
it's about time. Time is tied to
permitting.
And time is money.
And so at any rate, Mr. Chair,
I'll conclude with that. Thank
you very much.
Expert
Thank you, Representative, um.
Any further questions from the
committee.
Um, before we take a motion,
representative Roel Caballero,
do you have anything to add?
Mr. Chair, yes, I would, I
would.
I like to address.
The whole point of us having a
regulatory process and oversight
responsibilities.
Uh, as they relate not just to
this industry but across the
board.
so that we may be insured
ensuring uh the overall public
health and safety of our
communities and
It oftentimes, Mister Chair.
Takes
Um
Enhancing or permitting uh
processes.
Um, are various regulatory
processes.
Um, making sure that we equip
the agencies.
with the necessary staffing, the
necessary funds in order to
ensure that our regulations are
uh followed in our ordinances
and all of the things that we
have in place with our local
partners, uh, compliment each
other because ultimately, Mister
Chair and members of the
committee, what we striving for
not just with this bill, but
with all of our environmental um
justice bills and our
environmental bills.
in general is that we want to
ensure that we continue to clean
uh keep our air clean, keep our
water clean, keep our lands
clean for our future generations
and that ultimately is what I'm
here with and I'm hoping to be
the voice and uh I think the
working group and the expert
were coming forth with this.
He said uh legislation that.
Obviously has begun a very
serious conversation about what
needs to be done, and I thank
the representative small in his
comments that it takes.
A concerted and concentrated
effort by our departments in
order to ensure compliance
across the board. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um, thank you, Representative.
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
Move the table, Mister Chair.
We've a motion the table to take
a vote on the motion.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Dixon.
Guests to table for the reasons
I've previously stated.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola? No.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya, yes, the
table.
Represented Murphy. Yes, the
table.
Representative Zenna Cortez,
yes, to table.
Represent a small.
I know.
McQueen.
Um,
so thank you for your
presentation. Your bill has been
tabled.
Mr. Chair and thank you members
of the committee. So, we're
going to take a 5-minute recess
to fix the light. Um, I would
ask you, I would ask you not to
go far, and we'll get started
back up as soon as we can.
Oh
got a headache that's gonna help
get rid of that
I just got some.
Yeah.
OK.
OK.
No.
Oh
Ex.
So
I
water.
OK.
Thank you.
back.
OK.
That's true.
That
No
Oh my gosh.
That's not.
but it's in the back. It's the
same thing, OK.
Oh yeah, oh yeah.
If everyone could take a seat,
please.
OK
OK, uh, we're gonna get, uh,
started back up, um.
I don't know if the public could
see it online, but the um
The flashing light was just
brutal, and I think we all have
like these weird things going on
because of the stroke. So, um, I
think I'm, I'm grateful that we
were able to resolve that.
Uh, before the end of the
meeting.
Um, so, um, our next bill is
House Bill 457, uh, geologic
carbon dioxides, dioxide
sequestration Act, uh,
representative Dixon and Senator
Scherer.
you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Uh, we are
here today to present House
bills 457 and 458, which are
companion bills that establish a
state-led regulatory framework
and defined key terms for
developing a geologic carbon
dioxide storage industry here in
New Mexico.
The
These bills support the
application process for the
state to seek primacy for Class
6 wells by creating the
necessary legal and regulatory
environment to fully realize the
potential for carbon storage in
the state.
I'm joined by Doctor Robert
Balch, director of the Petroleum
Recovery Research Center at New
Mexico Tech and an expert in
carbon capture and storage.
Also here are my co-sponsors,
Senator Scher.
Representative Small and
Representative Chatfield.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, before we go to
questions, um, I would like to
make some introductory comments
and um I beg your patience as I
go through these. We're at a
critical juncture, both globally
and here at home.
Based on our current greenhouse
gas emissions trajectory. We are
on track to exceed 1.5 °C of
warming.
The recognized benchmark to
mitigate the worst impacts of
climate change.
In every corner of our state, we
see these impacts firsthand.
Whether it's devastating
wildfires, long term persistent
drought or increasingly common
extreme weather events.
Global climate and energy
organizations.
Including the International
Panel on Climate Change, the
National Academy of Sciences and
the International Energy Agency.
Are unequivocal.
That carbon capture and storage
is an absolute.
Necessary strategy.
To meet emission reduction goals
by 2050.
But unfortunately, even with the
rapid deployment of renewable
energy.
The world has already exceeded.
Carbon dioxide targets put
simply, that means that even if
the global economy shuts down
tomorrow.
We would still need to remove
carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere.
Scientific analysis indicates
that we will need to sequester 6
to 7 billion tons of carbon
dioxide per year.
Just to reach Paris Accords by
2050 and even more to reach net
zero.
And the longer we wait to do
this, the less likely we are to
meet those goals.
With plentiful geologic
formations here in New Mexico,
complimented by our extensive
research efforts led by New
Mexico Tech, Los Alamos, and
Sandia National Labs are state
could be and should be a global
leader.
These bills will enable New
Mexico to lead in industrial
decarbonization and direct air
capture projects.
Today, permitting for Class 6
wells.
For carbon dioxide storage is
administered by the federal EPA.
Those the permitting process is
currently going on and is
administered by the EPA.
In addition to several other
states, both New Mexico and the
Navajo Nation are applying to
the EPA for Class 6 primacy.
Primacy.
Is it just me or
Is this going in and out, it's,
it's not just you, it's it's the
mic
you just have to muddle through.
Sounds good.
Um, primacy will allow us, the
legislature, to put in in place
stricter state-led guidelines
for operators to develop in New
Mexico. It will also allow M
nerd, our state agency, to
administer, monitor, and
regulate this process rather.
EPA in Dallas or Washington DC,
do that.
Without clear regulatory
guidance.
From the state companies that
want to invest in New Mexico are
going to go elsewhere.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, not only are these
bills critical to combating
climate change, but they will
also drive economic innovation,
diversify our economy and create
jobs for New Mexicans,
especially those who have been
displaced during this energy
transition.
According to the New Mexico
Building and Construction Trades
Council. These technologies
present new opportunities for
training and skill development,
enhancing the capabilities of
our workforce.
In addition, the school of
energy at San Juan College
stands ready to launch training
initiatives essential for the
safe and effective
implementation of carbon storage
projects around the region.
My co-sponsors and I are proud
to have spent the last 12 months
working with agencies, national
experts, environmental groups,
community organizations, and
trade associations to craft
legislation that balances a wide
range of needs.
Mr. Chair and members of the
community, as I close, I want to
share with you sentiments shared
by the interim executive
director of the Four Corners
Clean Energy Alliance, Danielle
Toucin and uh members should
have a copy of her letter in the
materials that were passed out.
For the audience, Daniel wrote,
quote,
For decades, energy workers and
tribal communities were told to
sacrifice in the name of
progress. Now, progress must
work for them.
Carbon capture will provide high
wage jobs that keep families
together, tribal nations will
lead in a new sustainable
industry.
Our energy workforce will not be
abandoned. We will transition
into new opportunities instead
of losing everything.
This legislation ensures that
our energy transition is done
the right way by investing in
the future rather than just
shutting down the past.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, we do have an
amendment and we will stand for
questions.
Um
Let's go to the public first and
then we'll deal with the
amendment.
Uh, so the committee can help me
remember to deal with the
amendment, um, just by a show of
hands.
Who's here in support?
It is here in the opposition.
OK, so we're gonna, we're gonna
do support first.
Um, we'll take 3 and um we'll do
3 in the room and then we'll do
2 more online.
Uh, and you have 2 minutes.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
My name is Travis Kellerman. I'm
the senior climate advisor for
the governor.
I stand in support of this bill.
This is setting the foundation
for large scale carbon
sequestration in New Mexico. It
unlocks new economic
opportunities or legacy oil and
gas assets and workers.
Permanent CO2 storage represents
a new purpose and revenue stream
for otherwise stranded or
abandoned assets and for the
workers who know how they work.
The sequestration Act ensures
that sequestration projects move
forward without delay.
And there's a unitization
framework in here. It's similar
to oil and gas pooling.
It doesn't require 100%
landowner agreement to move
forward.
It also clarifies poor space
ownership.
And that reduces the legal legal
ambiguity so that surface owners
can retain their rights.
We're not flying blind into this
new economy, the oil
conservation division as a
systems and hearings fund
outlined in this bill that
provides state resources for
effective regulation and
oversight.
I believe New Mexico can be a
leader in this kind of carbon
management and industry
diversification, especially
considering we're the #2 oil and
gas producer in the US.
We need to set that model and
export it.
This is a triple win for the
industry, the environment, and
the state. So I urge your
support. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. I'm
Sayuri Yamada, the registered
lobbyist for clean air task
force, a science-driven
environmental organization that
takes a pragmatic, nonpartisan
approach to advancing a more
sustainable global energy
system. Clean energy task Force
supports policy that will help
decarbonize decarbonize the
economy, while also keeping up
with growing energy demand.
House Bill 457 clarifies the
ownership of the poor space used
to store carbon dioxide.
It requires developers to gather
a high approval percentage of
poor space owners.
Incentivizing consensus as a
solution to challenges that
inevitably arise when trying to
coordinate diverse landowners'
interests.
We believe that establishing a
robust framework for CO2
sequestration is a vital step
towards reducing emissions. And
we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. We represent over
40,000 workers throughout the
state and also from 30 different
uh affiliates, uh, public and
private sector. We all stand in
a very strong solidarity with
the sponsor, um, on this, and,
uh, primarily with our building
trades as well, as was mentioned
in the presentation, and I'm
sure you'll hear much more about
Uh, through, uh,
We are always about good paying
jobs and what develops good
paying jobs. Um, we've seen
multiple, uh, versions of
various energy transitions over
the years, some of which have
done a good job in transitioning
workers to a better paying jobs
and some that have not, uh, this
is definitely an effort that
will directly affect our
members, our industries, um,
The, for all the reasons stated
as well as far as uh being uh uh
a win, win, win for the
environment, state, and economic
development. Uh, we very much
urge your support on this
measure. Thank you. OK. Um,
we'll take 2 more online is
anyone online uh want to speak
in support of this bill, please
raise your hand.
Marcher here.
Good morning.
This is uh Mark
International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers. For the
reasons of previously stated, uh
we stand in strong support.
Um, of this bill.
We appreciate uh Representative
Dixon's um bringing, bringing
this forward.
We do believe it is a uh needed
and
would be a successful uh
endeavor for our state to
Go down this road and we again
tend strong support. Thank you.
Bit.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman Brian
executive director. We stand in
strong support of this
legislation and the next bill
you are gonna hear. It is beyond
time, um, to be began what we
should have done 25 years ago.
Um, this is the key that opens
up opportunities for our
members, New Mexicans, energy,
economic development and a
number of the other.
Reasons that have been. Thank
you, we urge, uh, full for this
measure.
OK, thank you. We're gonna come
back to the room, uh, people who
would like to speak in
opposition will take 3, please
step forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Camila Feibelman
with the Sierra Clipse Rio
Grande chapter representing over
35,000 members and supporters
around the state. First, I want
to recognize the intent behind
these bills. There's a hope that
certain technologies can just
get us out of the climate
crisis, and that's a hope we can
certainly relate to.
But at this moment in the
crisis, we have to question
technology that requires us to
continue extracting and
combusting fossil fuels.
Carbon capture and sequestration
from fossil fuel projects are
not a climate solution in
Farmington and Chant Energy
induced the municipality to
spend millions in addition to
federal feasibility money on CCS
projects that aren't working
anywhere else in the country
because the technology is wildly
expensive and will be, and is
highly ineffective, not to
mention the fact that carbon
capture technology doesn't
capture other key pollutants of.
concern, and no one's willing to
buy expensive energy, even if it
did work.
Because renewables and battery
storage are so much cheaper and
proven.
And chant, tall grass, four
corners, and other projects
continue to push these projects
specifically in the Four Corners
region, which is already
overburdened by pollution caused
by fossil fuel development.
Let's turn totechnologies that
really work.
Good afternoon, ma'am. Uh.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Sharon
Argenbright.
I am a master of science in
nursing more than 45 years, a
full-time nurse practicing,
nurse educator, former president
of the hospital and healthcare
Workers Union, 1199 New Mexico.
I believe in Einstein's theory
of relativity, E equals mc2 mass
and energy are related. Stuffing
mass, CO2, down holes into the
earth has consequences.
Blowouts and earthquakes.
Blowouts and earthquakes are
hurting people, blowouts and
earthquakes are killing people.
House Bill 457 and 458 would be
like sweeping trash under the
carpet, please stop blowouts and
earthquakes and vote no on 457
and 458. Thank you.
Morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I'm Charles
Goodmacher, registered lobbyist
speaking now on behalf of
Earthworks.
So, um
CCS or carbon capture and
sequestration does have
theoretical value for reducing
climate change pollution, and we
certainly applaud the sponsor
for her good faith effort to
help us meet those goals. The
move to establish primacy is
worthwhile, and the bill has
some other positives too.
Unfortunately, the technology
needed to support CCS at
coal-fired plants has yet to be
successfully implemented in
terms of meeting stated goals by
developers themselves.
Excuse me.
These bills could be improved by
adding requirements for
emergency response plans and a
2-mile buffer zone.
But the main problem is the
bills would have the state take
over liability for any accidents
or incidents with CCS injection
immediately after OCD certifies
closure of the well, leaving
taxpayers on the hook for the
potential accidents such as
happened in Sartarshia,
Mississippi.
Which could occur years into the
future. New Mexico would be the
first state, the first state to
allow immediate liability
transfer. Most states keep
operators on the hook for any
accidents or leakage for 5 to 50
years after injection has
ceased. Thank you very much.
OK, we're gonna uh take 2,
online, uh, in opposition.
Um, Mark Pedrotti, are you in
opposition?
OK, so skip him, uh, Seneca
Johnson. No, I was.
Mark, we're, we're on to
opposition, so we're gonna
recognize a few people in
opposition, Senator Johnson.
Uh,
members of the committee. My
name is Senator Johnson, and I'm
here on behalf.
We strongly urge you to oppose
457 and 458. I really want to
emphasize the dangers of all
solutions like CCS
and New Mexico, CCS projects
would be disastrous for
communities because they extend
the life of the oil and gas
industry as it creates a market
for the creation.
The technology is
counterproductive to comments of
the climate action and I think
we look at it all plants
mitigate their emissions.
They were burning 39% more
natural gas and 43% more coal.
And it's really troubling as
stated before, a really critical
juncture Mexico in a drought
experiencing high frequency and
intensity, wildfires, it's
exacerbating already
marginalized low income
frontline youth and indigenous
communities. The perspective
infrastructure for CCSs that
injecting groundwater and air,
which can have longstanding
effects on human and ecological
health. This is not
or environment or community
health.
This technology is expensive and
energy intensive and it won't
curb gas emissions ass to make
claims on sustainability and to
emissions reduction goals while
still having to rely on.
Um, additionally, there should
be more travel consultation
discussions
because the tribal communities
will be directly affected by CS
operations, uh, as much as it
would likely occur in the
region.
Um, it's responsible to invest
our time, money and
resources into a technology with
such a high cost when there's
more options to address the
climate crisis and the economy.
Thank you for your time.457 and
458 and 538 as to the clinic.
Thank you.
OK. Alejandria Lyons Alejandria,
are you, uh, here on behalf of
Yucca as well.
Hey, um, no, I'm representing
New Mexico solutions. OK, go
ahead.
Um, hi, my name is Alejandria
Lyons, and I'm a coalition
coordinator for New Mexico
Solutions, which includes but
also includes other frontline
groups such as indigenous,
and we are strongly opposed in a
lot of these measures that deal
with CTS. It is not going to
create an electricity that is
cheaper. It could actually
increase it for our families
from 25 to 50%. I think that New
Mexico should stand pose to tech
technology that
are largely experimental the
skills for which we are
proposing them, um, this is like
many people have said, a
lifeline for the fossil fuel
industry
and this is our first supplies,
but also contaminate our water
is making it dangerous for
humans and animals in the
region. As mentioned, we were
disappointed with the amount of
tribal consultation and the
right for indigenous peoples to
have sovereignty
free and informed consent. We're
worried that this bill
It's just another incentive to
bring in an experimental
advanced technologies and just
because we have the opportunity
to do this doesn't mean that we
should do it. We're very
concerned with the liability
piece and we want you all to
protect the state of New Mexico
at a time where we have to be
weary of what is happening with
the climate crisis. We already
have a hard time managing oil
and gas right now. I think that
was very clear from the
discussions we had earlier this
morning and we want to make sure
that New Mexicans are.
that our waters are protected,
our ecosystems, and we feel that
CCS is a waste of time. This is
going to be heavily to be
incentivized for tax credits
that we don't longer have in
this administration federally
and so we just urge you all to
take a look at what was being
proposed in terms of carbon
sequestration. Thank you.
OK, thank you for that. Um, so
that's gonna end our, our public
comment, uh, Representative
Dixon, do you have anything
you'd like to add before we go
to.
Mr. Chair, um, just that we do
have the amendment, um, shall we
move that for discussion?
OK.
Um, someone would like to move
the amendment for discussion.
Um
I, I guess, uh, san Dixon, could
you go over the amendment
briefly?
Yes, Mr. Chair, um, and just to
confirm the 231 number is uh
231-366.2.
31366.2. Thank you for that.
Um, yes, Mr. Chair, uh, this
amendment, um, clarifies number
one that poor space ownership is
separate from the mineral estate
resides with the surface owner
and may be severed from the
surface estate.
Number 2 adds a community
benefits plan and engagement
process for communities who are
or will be affected by a
sequestration unit. And um
Other it
Adds another um.
Item that was inadvertently left
out regarding copies of any
permit applications and because
the initial draft used Roman
numerals instead of uh.
Numbers, um, all of those are
switched.
OK, um,
There any discussion on the
amendment.
Um, is there any objection to
the amendment?
Would someone like to move it
for adoption?
And seeing objective, no
objection, you have a
Amended bill
Um, members of the committee.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, uh
Uh, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Representative uh.
And good seeing you here.
Senator Sheer,
Is that one of your famous
grandchild ties that you worry?
Yes, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
representative every day in a
different time.
Don't have, don't have 60
grandchildren, but I have more
than 60.
Yeah, it's to share the center
has some really outstanding uh
eyes that uh involve his
grandkids. I really kind of uh
Honor him for that.
Um
You know, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, uh,
Um
I'm kind of concerned about the
technology.
Uh, regarding
Sequestration
Um
And while we were, uh, when we
were undertaking
The hydrogen hub legislation.
about 34 years ago.
I, I did some uh extensive
research.
Uh
Because I was contending.
Uh
That
The hydrogen hub concept.
Uh, was really based on
unfounded.
Uh, technologies unproven
technologies.
And uh
Uh, and in that research, uh,
Um, Mr. Chair and
Senator and Representative, um,
I came across a
Really detailed.
Um
Study
done by a former.
Uh, oil and gas.
Uh
Executive out of Texas.
Who had retired, Mister Chair.
And on her own.
In terms of her own efforts and
Her own funding initiatives.
Undertook this study in the
Texas oil fields.
Of um
Um
Carbon sequestration.
Uh, in terms of researching.
The facilities.
And uh
Uh, where
sequestration was
Was being uh applied.
And her her
Her means
Her her tools.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator and
Representative.
Or poorly developed.
Uh, research tools.
In terms of infrared technology.
Satellite imagery.
State of the art
equipment.
And what she found was that
In these facilities were
Carbon sequestration is being
utilized.
That there's actually
Alas
Of the sequestration.
That's basically
Evaporating into the
environment.
Uh, the leakage.
And she documented that fully in
her study and her report.
So that's a concern of mine.
Uh, based on
This former oil executive that
did this really extensive.
Research for a number of years.
It just wasn't a fly by night
kind of operation in terms of
the research that she did.
And uh
Uh, so that's a concern of mine.
That
Uh
That the technology hasn't been
able to refine.
Alas
Of carbon dioxide through
leakage.
In these facilities.
And um
And that Mr. Chair and senator
and Representative.
Also kind of confirmed in
My mind
That the hydrogen hub.
Concept was really not viable.
And the majority of members in
this committee bipartisan wise.
bought it down that hydrogen
legislation.
And um
Um
So one of the
Major points in the analysis
that I
That I received.
I
The lack of
Emergency response plans in the
legislation.
That deals exactly with what I
kind of shared with you in terms
of the study of this former oil
and gas executive.
You know, um,
So that's a concern of mine.
You know that
The legislation doesn't take
into consideration.
really viable studies that have
been done in regards to
addressing those emergency
response.
Responses
that originate
From a lack of
Holy
containing
Carbon dioxide
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garcia, uh, may
we respond to um the question of
technology, but um, I think more
importantly, safety.
You sure may represented.
And
Of Cham Queen.
Representative Garcia.
Appreciate the the questions.
I, I very often get questions
about.
The technology and how it's.
New
Or not well developed.
I think it's really just
something that's been in a in an
area that has not been seen by
the general public.
Until
Uh, the federal government
started to talk a lot more about
it in the last 5 years.
We've been putting CO2 into the
ground to the tune of 20 million
tons per year.
And it has to recovery project
since the late 1960s.
In the Permian Basin.
The Cortez pipeline from
Colorado carries 20 million tons
a year right now into the
Permian Basin. I'd like to see
that CO2 replaced by
I captured CO2 instead of using
mind COT.
The longest running pure storage
projects started in 1996.
Offshore Norway, uh, Slepner and
Snowvit.
They've been putting about a
million tons per year.
Ever since then
So that's going on 25 million
tons of storage.
We've had demonstration projects
in the US that have gone to 3 to
4 million tons total, including
in the Illinois Basin.
And
Research at the Mexico Tech over
the last 20.
5 years under Department of
Energy programs to do exactly
what you said.
Understand storage. Make sure we
can make it secure.
Uh, to the tune of more than
$200 million.
Has contributed to a very robust
federal regulations.
That covers all of the safety
aspects of long-term monitoring
and accounting of the CO2 that
goes into the ground because if
you get a tax credit.
And your COT comes back out, you
have to, to refund that tax
credit.
So, so very respectfully, this
is a, a mature technology.
There's already a robust
framework at the federal level.
We want to enable New Mexico to
take that federal regulation.
Tailor it to our state and make
it work here, we can add in
extra protections as we see
needed.
There'll be a rulemaking later
this year on.
On the class 6 privacy bill, um.
This, this can add to that
conversation and.
And get your concerns and other
people's concerns into that.
Rulemaking process.
Uh
Thank you for that, uh.
Representative senator and uh
An expert
Um
Another concern that I had was,
uh,
In the legislation and in the
actual.
Injection
Um
into, into the uh carbon.
Seestration facilities.
Are we containing.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh volatile organic compounds.
From being part of that.
Injection.
Chaue Representative Garcia.
When you separate CO2 from a flu
flu gas stream, there's a
standards uh that are set on the
purity of that CO2.
Most like mostly you're talking
about flu gas from.
From burning of hydrocarbons or
you're talking about direct air
capture or you're talking about
a chemical offtake like from uh
generating fertilizer, it makes
CO2 cement.
A number of other industrial
processes that make pure CO2.
So the voltiles that are.
That are most likely to be
included at a very small degree.
And injected CO2 would fall
under uh acid gas disposal in
New Mexico we do.
Uh, quite a bit of that we have
25 wells right now that are
effectively storing CO2.
From processed natural gas.
And the, the uh processor will
strip out.
Uh
Everything that they can sell
and what's left over.
Is the waste product that they
want to put into the ground.
85 to 95% of that is CO2.
Uh, they, they do a very good
job of taking out the volatiles.
The other things that you might
want to.
In junction with these streams
or other hazardous things like
HTOS.
But uh, generally speaking, this
is not.
Not a process where there's a
lot of volatiles that are
involved, uh.
And the and the gasses that
we're talking about.
Thank you for that
representative senator and an
expert, um, and I, I guess the
last concern that I had and I, I
don't know if it applies to 457,
but it does to 458.
But I'll address it now.
Um
And that basically has to do um.
Uh, Mr. Chair, with the um
Uh, the shifting of liability.
Um
Uh, it kind of including the
responsibly for long term
monitoring and remediation.
Uh, to the state.
Um
And uh
Uh, I wonder the analysis kind
of
And mentions that um.
Um
That in this uh liability
shifting provision.
That, uh
That it be in violation of the
anti-Donation clause.
Um
Mainly because
Uh
The state is not really
acquiring anything of value in
return.
Um
Can you reflect on
Uh, generally, in terms of the
violation, the anti-donation.
And secondly, in in in regards
to that last point that I made.
that the state will not be
gaining anything.
Um
A value in return.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Garcia. Um,
actually, uh, first would like
to um.
Offer an opportunity for Senator
share, um.
Just to make a remark and then
uh we'll follow.
So Mr. Chair and Representative.
been summoned to a place at the
moment because I have one of my
own bills in the Senate
committee.
Uh, but I wanted to thank you
for, for, uh, listening to us.
We wanted to show that this was
a bipartisan bicameral, and as
you heard, there are certainly
people on both sides of the
political aisle, uh, in outside
this building that support this.
Uh, I do think that this is a
very viable thing. I do think
that it, it's not just fuel.
Uh, urea is, is something that
we can do. You're not burning
anything there, but you are
separating the CO2 and urea is
fertilizer.
And fertilizer
Right now the the fertilizer
that comes here goes to Nappy
and also to California comes
from the other side of the
Mississippi River. We can do it.
In San Juan County
On nappy lamp, they want to do
it.
Right now
And that will save them $4
million a year in fertilizer
costs.
And then they get to sell it to
California and make more money.
This is a big deal.
cheaper food, it's not burning
the gas, but it is separating
the CO2 from other parts of it,
turning it into fertilizer it's
not just fuel.
other things
And with that, Mr. Chair.
Representative
One of the things Mr. Chair.
Some people think that I'm as
smart as a box of rocks, but no,
that is poor space right there.
Horse space is the space in
between the rocks.
Thousands of feet under our
thousands of feet under our
feet.
Or space.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um,
regarding.
Um, the liability and um value,
uh, one of the things there are
um carbon markets, um, and so,
um,
There is a, I mean, there is a
trading.
Of the tax credits, uh, for
offsets that one could engage
in, but the state does, um,
assume liability in other
similar uh circumstances and
that would continue.
With OCD.
The oil and conservation.
Um,
Mr. Chair Representative uh you
also.
Like to chime in on that.
Question and
Chairman McQueen represented
Garcia, I'm a geophysicist, not
a lawyer, so I probably really
shouldn't chime in on that.
I, I will say that we put water
into saltwater disposal wells.
Those wells eventually close.
I'm not sure who has the
liability at that point, but I
think it may be inherently
passed to the state.
Same thing with the orphan wells
that we that we're fixing right
now.
That kind of is inherently
passed the state.
I think that the difference here
though is that we are creating a
fund.
Or maintenance of those so they
don't become a liability.
At best there a neutral thing
they may not make money for the
state, but they're not.
Casing the state anything
either.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Carolla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for for bringing this and
for all that approach and
information that you have
shared.
Um, I have some questions to try
to understand this, uh, what are
the whales?
And I think that you mentioned
um where are the wells that are
um.
Gonna be used for this purpose.
Uh, Chairman McQueen, uh,
Representativerola.
In most cases, these wells are
going to be located in the oil
patch.
Because that's where the
formations that can take these
fluids exist. We have these deep
basins.
Uh, in between, uh, or below the
the formations that give us the
oil and gas. There's also places
where there's just.
Really bad water.
Super salty water, that's where
you want to put.
With this type of uh.
But into, into a long term
storage.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
When you say oil patches, is any
of the main tree or specifically
one of the areas.
Uh, Chairman McQueen represented
Guilla, uh, there's a lot of
interest in, in the, uh, San
Juan Basin.
The Farmington area. There's
also a lot of interest and also
100 active CO2 EOR projects in
the Permian Basin.
In the state, there are a total
of 25 acid gas disposal wells
where they take processed CO2
and H2S.
And put it into exactly the kind
of storage we're talking about.
Uh, most of those are in the
Permian Basin.
Down the southeast.
And Mr. She and I are, are those
wells in the different areas
ready for this type of
technology.
You
Chairman McQueen represented
Guilla.
The the technology of the wells
themselves.
is actually very strictly
controlled, so I mentioned
earlier that we have done
research for 25 years.
In the state, we we were part
of.
7 large uh initiatives across
the entire nation that studied
COT storage and how to best do
it.
Uh, as a part of that, we did
dozens of pilot projects where
we injected.
50,000 tons, 100,000 tons, a few
million tons of CO2 into
Into storage
The
EPA took that information from
all of that research and turned
it into uh what they call a
class 6 well standard.
That is a very vigorous
standard. It's, it's, uh, I'm
located by the uh.
Um, groundwater protection
council, and it's called the
Underground injection Control
and that program under the Clean
Water Act is designed to protect
groundwater.
So, so the wells are very
heavily designed.
To prevent any sort of a problem
and then even if there is a
problem, they're so heavily
monitored that you're going to
very quickly notice that there
is a problem.
And then you have to go in and
fix it.
So, uh, without spending many
hours on class 6.
Well designed, uh, you know, any
place where you have
groundwater, you're going to
have.
At least 3 layers of stainless
steel casing which is resistant
to corrosion. 3 layers of cement
that is resistant to corrosion.
And then uh an annular space
inside the well.
That is filled with corrosion
inhibitors and biocides to keep
bacteria and things out.
Uh, in which an injection
tubular then carries the
The CO2 into the subsurface. So
the, the technologies for these
wells is is uh far and beyond
every other injection control
program that there is including.
Class too where we put salt
water and other other things in
the subsurface today.
Thank you so mostly in one of
the areas that are prepared by
all of them. Um, you mentioned
about the water so uh what are
the sources of water for for
this type of Mr. Chair, for this
type of technology.
Of this type of use.
Chairman McQueen representing
guerrilla, uh.
This, this, these processes
don't really use water there,
they're putting the CO2 into
deep formations that are where
the pores are feed.
Less water from.
Oceans from Tenzin and hundreds
of millions of years ago.
Uh, that's stuck in the, the
subsurface.
Um, there are.
Some of the processes that take
CO2 from.
Like a flu gas or from.
Uh, directly from the atmosphere
under direct air capture some of
those use some water, other
ones.
Make water
So it's, it's generally overall
fairly neutral.
Uh, the only place where you
might see water uses in cooling
or heating, and to me that would
be a great use of produced water
that's cleaned up.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I'm sorry, you already said
this. I was late for the
presentation. Um, I, when I was
trying to understand this and
doing some research, Mr. Chair.
um, I was trying to find a
states.
Have to use this technology, um.
I think I found 3 places, most
of them have backup on this, um.
Most of them that from the place
and I don't remember the names
who try it. They did not achieve
the goals that they um did they
try so could you tell me you
have more information about
this?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So one of the
things that we have talked about
and I'll, uh, let Doctor Balch,
uh, fill in if I miss anything,
but um this technology you're
asking about, is it proven?
If it's just here in the in the
in the in the states where it
has been used, yes,
uh Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, there are 100s.
how many there are, uh, a number
of sites, um, already in.
That have been in the works in
the United States for decades,
uh, the North Sea has been um
storing carbon in underground
wells for 50 or 60 years.
Yeah, so in New Mexico.
Um, for the last 60 years or so,
and that's our recovery has been
the biggest.
Reason to put CO2 into the
ground.
Uh, those projects.
Over very long periods of time,
they've operated all of them for
30, 40, 50 years without
Uh, any major issues.
They typically end up storing.
Uh, over 98% of the CO2, and
that's in a process where you're
putting the CO2 in.
Bringing it back out, separating
it.
back in again.
So you do have an exposure of
that CO2.
The potential uh compressor
blowdown or something, uh, while
it's coming up, but.
The great majority of the CO2
that has gone into the ground
for even for enhanced soil
recovery is still there.
In New Mexico we have 25 acid
gas disposal wells. These are
for handling processed CO2 from
uh gas separator plants.
Uh, those have not had any
significant releases at all and
pure injection project, you only
put the CO2 in.
You don't ever bring it back to
the surface, and in fact,
chemically and physically, it's
hard.
Bring a lot of the CO2 back.
As the CO2 gets uh chemically
bound with water and also starts
to mineralize and turn into
rocks between the pores.
I'm not sure if that answered
your question completely.
A little bit because Mr. Chair.
Um, I don't think I, I, I don't
think it was clear for me if.
If this has been used already.
It seems like something similar
is being used but not.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
this is not new technology. It
has been in use for decades.
Thank you, um.
And, and again, my other concern
is sharing with records say here
about the liability after seaing
um.
Especially in this, in the
communities where this is going
to be used.
Uh, my other question is, where,
where are the sources of carbon,
the carbon to be captured.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Representative. Two great
questions. Let me start with
what are the sources of carbon,
uh, carbon dioxide that'll be
stored. There are two main ways
that we remove carbon dioxide.
One is through direct air
capture, which is essentially
having air go through a filter.
That removes the carbon dioxide
from the air, you can literally,
it's like a fan that you put in
the middle of a field, right? It
is taking the CO2 out of the air
directly. That's direct air
capture. The other mechanism
that is frequently used for
carbon dioxide removal is point
source carbon capture. So think
about a cement manufacturer.
industrial sources like our
cement steel, paper, aluminum,
all of those things.
They are greenhouse gas emitting
industries. One of the ways that
we can reduce greenhouse gasses
is by having a point source
carbon capture on that facility
that removes the carbon dioxide.
From
The emissions. And then you take
in both of those instances you
take the CO2, and that is what
you're sequestering and storing
underground.
In terms of the liability that
is addressed in House Bill 458,
which does set up a fund that
will provide um revenue to the
state from operators for any
long term costs. Um, and we have
spoken with uh the state agency
that would be overseeing this,
and I do have an amendment for
that bill, uh, that would, um,
allow a certificate of uh
Completion to be transferred to
the state until after 5 years.
Thank you, thank you, uh,
representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chair,
how expensive is this to be
implemented?
I mean, uh, representative
Guilla, the, the costs really
vary. It depends on where you're
capturing the CO2 and how you're
capturing it.
If you put it on a coal plant, I
think the dollar amount is
around $40 per ton.
If you put it on director
capture, it can be very
expensive. It can be $1000 per
ton.
Uh
Cement plants and other things
are are somewhere in the middle.
The, the real challenge right
now and the reason for director
capture is.
is it is hard to capture
emissions that are from
disparate sources like our cars
and our houses.
You take it from the air.
Uh, utility companies I talked
to one in Arizona, they will pay
$1000 a ton to offset burning
gas for their peaker plants, for
example, so there's a big market
for it at a pretty good dollar.
And the other thing that I would
add, Mr. Chair and
Representative, is that in terms
of fighting climate change,
these technologies are required
in order to keep us to 1.5 °C
every, um, international agency
recognizes that removing carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere is
critical. And one
the only ways that we can
actually make sure that we're
achieving that with technology
is by implementing it now.
One last question, Mr. Chair,
Reverend, but it will be
directly connected to the oil
and wells. Like, can we put it
next to like Albuquerque, where
we have a lot of carbon dioxide
like that
Mr. Chair Representative, you
can do that, but you can also
put it on, um, a food and
beverage manufacturer, you can
capture carbon from um an
aluminum manufacturer. There's a
cement manufacturer in Tejeras
right outside of my district,
and they need to invest in
carbon capture.
because cement industrial
sources are over 20% of our
greenhouse gas emissions. And
that's, those are sources of
greenhouse gas emissions that we
can't reduce other ways. You
can't use a battery right now or
renewable energy to make cement
or steel. And so,
You can, you can certainly do
direct air capture and, uh, you
know.
Point source capture in the oil
field, but it is.
Far and away, not just oil and
gas. It's, it's so much more.
Thank you, Mr. Sheer, thank you
panel. I guess my only concern
right now will be that um.
The same concerns about the
filtration and all that. Thank
you so much.
Thank you, Representative
Grilla. Any other questions in
the committee before mine.
Yeah.
Um
Representative Dixon could have
asked us when we were discussing
the amendment, um.
First off, um,
Let's talk about your jar of
rocks.
Um
Those, uh, there's a lot of poor
space in that jar.
How, how representative is that?
Chairman McQueen, that's a very
astute question, not very
representative at all.
Uh, the rocks we're talking
about in the subsurface, if you
had it in your hand, would look
more like.
A rock
Or a piece of cement, so the
pores are are microscopic.
Uh, they're very tiny.
This is blown up by by tens of
thousands of scales and uh I
think it's just there are some
people understand that it is the
voids.
between the grains and the rock
rather than.
Like a
swimming pool full of CO2
somewhere in the.
And um
Are the voids between the
grains, I, I mean, I, I, I
imagine rocket that that being
barely consolidated, uh, how
much passage?
Is there from one void to the
next.
Chary McQueen, without going
into uh.
Into rock physics 101, the
What you're talking about is
permeability, that's the ability
of fluid from mood one port to
the next pore.
And then the the volume of
storages, that's, that's the
poor space itself.
If the pores aren't connected
then then there's a challenge uh
in moving it from one place to
another, so much like an oil and
gas reservoir and oil and gas
reservoir, those poor spaces are
filled with natural gas or with
oil.
And water
Uh
Your
Instead, uh, pushing water out
of the way to replace it with
CO2 and in part you're
dissolving the CO2 into the
water that's.
Still there and is going to
remain there.
So, uh, it's one of those things
where the volumes are so large
that it doesn't matter how small
the.
The incremental amount is.
OK, and when we're talking about
poor space, um, one of the
comments I read in some of the
analysis of the bill.
Uh, does it measure, does it
matter if we're talking about
naturally occurring for space or
Um, mechanically created for
space.
Uh, Chairman Queen, the
Federal regulation for Class 6
does not allow a hydraulic
stimulation of wells and that's
how you would create po space.
For the purpose of, of uh CO2
storage.
The New Mexico bill is going to
mirror that it has to be at
least that strict.
So we're talking about natural
poor space.
And uh represents Dixon, Doctor
Balch, um.
With we had a bill earlier, um.
They want to reuse a certain
wells.
Um, for, uh, hydro, um,
Geothermal energy.
Um, or, um, the gravity system
of energy.
Um
Are we talking about
Reusing existing wells that
perhaps have had.
That, uh, mechanical
stimulation, or are we talking
about new wills.
For just this purpose.
Uh, chairman Queen in this case
is gonna be new wells for just
this purpose.
The only, the only way you could
potentially be repurposed is the
acid gas wells I discussed
earlier.
Those were all permitted to have
a very similar design to the
classic standard OCD may
eventually convert those wells,
but they will have never done
anything besides that purpose.
OK, and the um
The, the area that this um
Mm
You, you're injecting this into
a subsurface formation.
Um
In in the the bill discussed
aerial.
Extent of the.
Um
The unit, um, how big of an area
are we talking about?
A German queen, generally
speaking for projects that we've
modeled that have uh upwards of
a million tons per year going
into 2 to 3 million tons per
well sometimes.
for 30 years, typically is less
than a half mile radius of the
CO2 in the subsurface.
And then you have the buffer
area outside.
That you monitor
So, um
I, I could
I could do the math. It would
take me a minute, um, so how
much area is that a square mile,
half square mile radius.
Uh, chairman McQueen, yes, sir,
uh, the
The plume diameter typically is
between 25% and 1/3 of a mile,
so.
A quarter and a half mile, so
the diameter is going to be.
Roughly
So, so less than 1 square mile
surface area
you create the area around it
such that
All of your models and your
geologic understanding, which is
very rigorous, by the way, to
get one of these permits.
Uh
More than ensures that there is
adequate space for the CO2.
Even if it moves a little bit
away from where you predicted it
might, and it will stay within
that that area plus the buffer.
And Doctor Balch, how big is the
buffer?
Buffer is also a half mile.
So you have about a half mile
radius and a half mile buffer,
so.
Now we're talking more than a
square mile.
For the surface area of a
Of a sequestration project you
mean?
Typically we, we will be even
bigger than that.
because they're the uh operators
will take a.
An area that sat outside of the
required area.
OK. And the diction, Doctor
Balch, we certainly have uh
areas of the state where land
ownership is still measured in
sections. Um, we have other
areas where
Um, it's measured in square
feet. Um, any idea how many
owners we're talking about
surfaces owners.
Chairman McQueen, I'm, I'm not a
landman. I'm just a
geophysicist, but, uh, I think
for oil and gas projects there
can be, this is where you're
splitting up mineral rights,
there can be.
Dozens
But I think for.
Most of these projects it would,
it would not be, uh, very large
number.
You're not gonna do these
projects in downtown Farmington,
you're gonna do them out in the
countryside.
Mr. Chair, um, the other thing
is that this bill does provide
the process for unitization and
pooling and ensures equal
compensation um among all circus
owners.
Um
Let's talk about that process.
Uh, so I see on page 4.
Operator who desires to form a
unit shall attempt to acquire
option lease or conveyance.
Etc. um.
Shall tempt is pretty general.
Any, any thoughts about what,
what exactly that means.
Uh, chair McQueen
Um
When you do pooling.
The idea is to create consensus.
You actually really want to
involve everybody.
In the project
This hat, this applies for oil
and gas, and this applies for.
For carbon storage project.
Uh, every time you do a.
A project, there are going to be
a number of landowners that
cannot be reached or do not
respond.
Then there's going to be some
landowners that may not want to
be involved in the project.
In oil and gas, there's a
penalty for that.
Uh, you, you end up losing the
value of your resource.
In the case of this bill, we
remove the penalty part.
Each landowner, whether they're
in there.
Uh, because they wanted to be or
because they're part of the
bigger pool that was created is
compensated by a per acre.
Bass to have the same.
value
answer your question, Doctor,
you may have a future as a land
man after all.
Um
So what um
In order to form a unit, do you
need the consent of a
certain percentage of the
surface owners?
McQueen, that's 85%.
Which is 10% higher than for oil
and gas units.
And uh resent Dick and Doctor
Balch is at 85% of the acreage
or 85% of the individual
ownership 85% of the acres.
Um, representative Dixon, Doctor
Balch, uh, can you include a
state trust land in the unit.
State Trust lands under under
the way we've written this bill,
Chair McQueen is uh.
You would have to make a
separate service agreement with
the state land office.
Also for tribes because they
have sovereignty, you would have
to make a separate service
agreement with.
Them and nominally for the
federal government, although the
federal government has a
A blanket approval of this kind
of project.
OK, and I'm getting into the
weeds, but uh we've a lot of
checkerboard, um, uh, surface
management responsibility
including uh tribal, including
state, including allotted lands,
um, and would that all be
that all be done through the
consent of those uh particular
owners.
Uh, yes, Chairman McQueen, if
you're in a checkerboard
situation and you have a a block
that is say the state land
office.
And they don't want to be
involved in it, you're gonna not
have a project.
OK. When you Representative
Dixon, Doctor Basin, you do a
unit.
Um
Is there an inventory of other
wells, existing wells.
I know I'm, I'm gonna get uh.
Kicked in the side by
Representative Dixon.
Because I tend to explain things
in a roundabout way.
Uh
The the federal rule has uh very
strict requirements for
notification to everybody that's
in the area.
It also is a very strict
requirement to understand.
And uh
All the wells and penetrations
that are in the area, including
the status of those wells.
And, and then also to inform
anybody else that is going to
drill through your horizon,
that's a storage horizon that
there's a notification
requirement.
The the New Mexico regulation.
Uh, which this will help guide.
Uh, we'll be, will be as or more
stringent than the federal
regulation.
And and Representative Dickson,
Doctor Pulcher talking about
stringent federal regulations,
but
Do do those apply if, if we're
operating under state law.
Yes, sir, uh, Chair McQueen, the
The Federal government has
control over injection wells
under the underground injection
control program UIC.
Uh, New Mexico already has
primacy on class 1234, and 5.
To get Class 6 primacy from the
federal government, we have to
meet or exceed their.
Their regulatory requirement at
the federal level.
In order to be able to
administer the program, if we
can administer the program, then
you are left going to the
federal government to get your
permit.
So there is no, no shortcut or
no.
No way out of those stringent
requirements.
OK.
Thank you, um, thank you for all
your answers. A couple more, um,
uh, questions. Uh, can you
represent Dixon, uh, can you
explain how the community
benefits plan.
That's in the amendment, how
that works.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes. So,
uh, when an operator wants to.
Um, set up a facility, uh, they
have to go through a permitting
process with OCD and one of the
requirements that OCD, uh, can
put in and why we're putting it
in statute, um, is they can
require that uh an operator
engage in a certain amount of
prescribed community engagement
and uh in.
Have a community benefits
agreement with the community,
um, there are some excellent
examples um across the country
of different community benefit
agreements that have been done
with pipelines, for instance,
but it's an opportunity for the
uh for the operator and
community to talk about, uh,
what needs, uh, the operator,
how they can help the community
and make sure that the community
is in support of the operation.
And I and Dickson, does the
community actually receive any
benefits, or is it just the
opportunity to speak out about
the project. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair, for asking that wonderful
question in the handouts that
everyone received on the very
last page of your uh brown and
blue carbon capture and storage,
um, handout, there is an example
of community benefits agreement,
um, between tall grass and bold
alliance in, uh, I believe it's
Nebraska, uh, that was
negotiated.
uh, for a pipeline and community
benefit agreements generally
include things like job training
programs, requirements for local
hiring, uh, community services,
whether it's drug treatment, um.
Uh, school support things like
that or affordable housing. Uh,
we've seen community benefit
agreements, uh, in ad hoc ways,
uh, I know Freeport McMorran in
um southwestern New Mexico has a
lot of programs that they
operate with, uh, Grant County,
and that would be one type of
community benefit agreement, um,
but it's really, it is a um
The operator is making a
commitment to provide
Benefits to this, the community.
OK, thank you for that. Uh, I'm
gonna turn to the analysis
provided by the state Land
Office, um, I thought they
raised some, some big questions.
Uh, one thing they suggested was
providing for an emergency
response.
Plan which um I take it to be.
Um, if there was some sort of
rupture or emissions from the,
the
Sequestration unit that you had
a way to uh respond in an
emergency. Do you address that?
Chairman Queen
Um
Like I said earlier, we, we
can't do this in New Mexico
without.
Adopting at minimum the federal
framework, the federal
framework.
Includes those requirements. The
state already has practice doing
this with acid gas disposal
wells that you have to have it
on file.
And regularly reviewed.
Um
Emergency response plan for
these acid gas facilities in the
state.
Similar and same would apply to
carbon storage.
And uh
Rosen Dixon, Doctor Balch,
forgive me if I missed it. Is
that a yes? You have an
emergency response plan or no,
you don't. Yes.
Um
says you know this requirement
includes surface lessees.
There's the newest requirement
includes surface lessees.
Service owners
And not lysses Lesi would not be
able to make an agreement.
The service owner.
But let's say you may have a
Interest in what's going on
below their land.
And it may be a long term lease.
This
State land office would suggest
you revisit that. May I ask you
this then, um,
You know, we, we passed.
Um
What should be called the
brackish Water Act, but
strategic.
Uh, water supply, um.
Um
Strategy, uh.
The um
Or
You potentially impact sources
of brackish water.
Chairman King, yeah, I, I study
water quite a bit as well.
Um
I think if you differentiate
between bra brackets and
produced water.
Uh, yes, please. OK, uh, bracket
squatter, no.
Uh, absolutely not because you
have the protections from the
UIC program to keep.
The fluids that are in your well
bore from getting into.
Any protectable water.
In a in a more general sense in
the United States, anything less
than 10,000 TDS.
Even if it's below your horizon,
you, you may need to be
responsible for
Understanding that water and
understanding what impacts there
could be, but.
Everything here is designed to
keep you from.
Moving the CO2 into some place
it's not supposed to be, so
there should not be any impact
unless there is a problem.
And I'm sorry if I missed it,
but is that based on depth or
does the CO2 not
Uh, dissolved to some extent
into the water, isn't that what
you were saying?
Generally speaking, the water
that you're.
Not generally speaking,
absolutely speaking, the water
that you're putting CO2 into is
greater than 10,000 TDS, so it's
not.
Brackish
It's not, not, uh, protectable.
And that water in New Mexico it
varies by depth. You can have
drinking quality water in the in
the Farmington area at 3000 ft.
Most of these projects are going
to be below 5 or 6000 ft because
that's the depth at which the
pressure makes.
The CO2 into a dense phase
rather than a gas.
OK, and I wanna say the initial
standard in the strategic Water
Supply Act was.
Deeper than 2500 ft and 1000 TDS
is that?
Is that about right?
Uh
but
So I, I guess the point is it it
didn't have an upper.
Limit it only have a lower
limit, it had to be beyond the
lower limits.
Uh, Chairman McQueen, so.
Basically
CO2 being injected in the
subsurface is going to be
dependent upon physics and the
physics means you have to be at
a depth that's greater than 2500
ft.
For sure, and a minimum probably
about 3500 ft.
Reach the the the correct phase
for the CO2 to be in.
OK
Uh, one last question, I
believe, um, I've, I've.
I've seen a lot of mineral
reservations, uh, in my time.
Uh, I don't think I've ever seen
one that included Porspace, um,
but are there, uh, existing
agreements out there relating to
force space.
The Chairman Queen that actually
there are.
Agreements that are related to
force base.
Um, most of them were involved.
With SWD's.
It's a little bit less formal
than saying we're buying your
for space and said you're buying
the right.
by surface area to inject.
Uh, your salt water.
Uh, talk, uh, tall grass
actually in New Mexico Tech. I'm
sorry, has an agreement with the
landowner in Farmington.
for a storage site that we
developed for for uh tall
grassy. That's a private
agreement between a private
party that owns all of the land
and us.
So people are making these
agreements now, uh, service
owners just want more protection
and.
And clarity about how to go
about it.
And I think he used the term
SWD.
Saltwater disposal and um I
guess the question is,
We see horses space ownership is
separate from the mineral
estate.
Uh, resides with the surface
owner.
Um, is, are we impacting in the
existing agreements by saying
that it resides with the surface
owner.
You're creating a, a Charm Queen
you're creating a new class of
rights.
Uh, that's parallel but not
exactly the same as mineral
rights.
There's no conflict with the
surface.
Uh
If you want to have a surface
facility, you're gonna have to a
separate agreement that you
negotiate with them for that
surface land for pipeline, for
road, whatever you need.
This just clarifies that the
owner.
And it may have started out this
way for mineral.
That the owner is the person
that's at the top because it's
severable.
Like in in the mineral state you
can end up with with it being
fragmented later on.
The there's extensive uh fairly
extensive case law about what
different mineral reservations
mean, uh, because they evolved
over time, whether it's
minerals, uh, gold, uh, gold,
silver, and quick silver, and
people started talking about
hydrocarbons and things like
that, so, um,
Uh, I guess it's just continued
evolution.
So one final thought before we
uh well, uh, represents closing
thoughts, I'll go to you. Um.
My heartburn over this bill is
not.
In the carbon sequestration.
Which I think is necessary.
My heartburn is it.
I think carbon sequestration is
being used as an excuse.
To create new sources of carbon.
Rather than being applied to
existing sources, ermine.
So I'm not convinced that by
doing this, we're reducing the
Curbing emissions
You know, I just
I, I think we're, we're trying
to
Um
You know, continue as we have
been.
And uh convince ourselves that
it's gonna be OK and it's gonna
be cleaner and
Address our uh
Our CO2 emission targets and I'm
just not convinced.
Um, represent Dixon, uh, would
you like to close with anything?
Thank you.
Uh.
We, we, we adopted the
amendment, yeah.
Um, thank you, Chair McQueen and
committee members for the, the
great questions. Um,
I think 2 things that I'd like
to close up with. Um, number
one, this bill really sets the
um legal and regulatory
framework for allowing the state
to take control over Class 6
wells, which is a reminder the
EPA currently does. But by
putting this framework in place,
New Mexico can apply for
classics primacy. So we need to
do this in order to become.
In control of what we want to
happen here in New Mexico. Um,
the liability issues are
addressed in the subsequent
bill, which I realized uh.
In some ways, can be
problematic. But um those are
addressed.
Finally, I would say.
That when we look at.
Decarbonization and climate
change.
Energy generation is not the
only source of.
Carbon dioxide.
We simply cannot meet any
target.
If we don't decarbonize our
industrial sector.
And that is over 20% of our
greenhouse gas emissions. And
right now there is no other way
to do it. This is the only tool
that we have.
Right now, for the, you know,
for the foreseeable future to
start reducing that 20%.
And so, I, you know, I think
with that, um.
We're done.
On our side.
OK, what's the pleasure of the
committee, Mr. Chair, I move a
do pass on House Bill 457 as
amended.
We have a do pass in a second,
Iina if you take the vote.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Carrola? No.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya, yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Represent a small
First year oh.
Represent Murphy.
I.
J McQueen
No.
Do you do pass 54.
Um
So, uh, committee, it's 12:30.
Um, I had hoped to break by
12:30.
Um
We have several more bills on
the agenda which we
The song which we definitely
will not get to you.
My question for the committee is
whether or not we want to try to
do 458.
Um, before going down and
whether we can do that quickly.
I, I know I have.
I personally probably have more
questions on 458 than I had on
457.
Um, I'm
hung on the fence about whether
we try to do this, thoughts on
the committees that includes
you, Representative Dixon.
Mr. Chair, I'd like to move
forward with 458.
Website Dickson, thank you, Mr.
Chair, if we are not going to be
hearing house bills, uh, after
today, I would like to move
forward.
OK. So we'll, uh, we'll do.
458, um.
Uh, it's the, if the 4th
session, if if we're not done in
a half hour in the floor session
starting, we're gonna, we're
gonna stop.
Um
Uh, but let's, uh, quickly go to
458.
Um, herbs of Dixon to present
the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, 458
creates the geologic carbon
dioxide.
Dioxide stewardship fund, it
collects 10 cents per metric ton
of CO2 injected, the fees are
deposited into the fund for the
sole purpose of ensuring the
long-term storage security of
facilities. We do have an
amendment.
Someone moved the amendment for
discussion.
Oh.
Um, Representative Dixon, can
you explain the amendment?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes.
The amendment clarifies that an
operator cannot receive a
certificate of closure for not
less than 5 years after
injection has ceased. Um, it
also removes legal from the
responsibilities from
responsibility, so it's
stewardship and responsibilities
and
After facility, um.
Oops
Sorry, um, on page 7, line 11,
after the word facility, uh,
we're adding that are covered in
subsection B of section 5, of
the stewardship Act. Otherwise,
it is simply once again
replacing the Roman numerals.
Um
OK, so there, there's a bunch of
Roman numerals in here, but
there are some substantive
changes. Is there
Uh, debate on the amendment.
Um
Sorry, I'm trying to look, I'm
looking on page 5 line 6.
Yeah, sorry.
Can't find the word because I'm
on the wrong bill.
So on page 5 line 6 after the
word closure insert not less
than 5 years.
OK.
OK. Is there um
So seeing the discussion on the
amendment, is there um
Um
Would someone like to move
adoption in the moment.
Is there any objection to
adoption at the moment? OK, see
then you have the amended bill,
um, we are gonna go to the
public.
Uh, show of hands, who's here in
support?
Who is here in opposition?
OK, so in time we're gonna do 2
and 2.
I'll do one online.
Um, so let's do sport first.
You have 2 minutes?
Hello again, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
I'm Travis Kellerman, the senior
climate advisor for the
governor. I'm standing again in
support of House Bill 458, the
complement to 457, which you
just heard.
It insures once carbon is
sequestered, it remains secure
with long-term stewardship.
An important role here is
dedicating our revenue stream
for the state.
To support this stability.
Long term site stability.
And it doesn't rely on
taxpayers.
The long term storage
stewardship fund is funded by a
10 cent per metric ton fee.
And it covers post closure
monitoring and any needed well
plugging or remediation, which
is usually rare in this case.
This time 10 cent fee is
consistent with other states'
fees, including Texas.
The bill also provides a clear
process for liability transfer.
The state assumes responsibility
only after sites meet strict
long-term requirements. And
again, as the representative
mentioned, this aligns with EPA
Class 6 well oversight
standards.
And it sets us up as a state to
qualify.
To achieve primacy. So West
Virginia just did this, we're on
track.
This sets us up to get there.
It will attract bigger
investments for sequestration in
New Mexico, if we achieve Class
6.
Both the state and the Navajo
Nation are pursuing Class 6.
This bill ensures carbon
sequestration is done responsi
responsibly.
And I urge your support. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm Sayeri Yamada,
the registered lobbyist for
Clean Air Task Force, a
science-based environmental
organization expanding their
impact around the world that
takes pragmatic nonpartisan
approach to advancing more
sustainable global energy
system. House Bill 458. This
bill paired with the previous
bill heard helps move carbon
management forward in the state
responsibly. It would allow the
state to assess and collect
appropriate.
regulatory and permitting fees
to oversee long-term stewardship
of carbon storage wells and post
closure. These types of bills
are essential to attracting new
and advanced energy technologies
and investments in New Mexico,
all while helping to decarbonize
the state's economy. We stand in
support of this bill.
OK, is there anyone online who
would like to speak in support,
please raise your hand.
OK, we'll come back to the room
for opposition.
But
OK, Mark Pedroti in support.
Uh hello, um.
Mark, uh, CO2 rescue, uh, so I
am in support of this bill for
all the reasons that people have
already said. Thank you.
OK, come back to the room in
opposition.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Camilla Feibelman
with the Sierra Club's Rio
Grande chapter. I'll just read
the lengths of time following
cessation of CO2 injections,
after which state law allows for
the transferability of liability
from other states, Kansas and
Pennsylvania don't allow it.
Um
Ohio doesn't have an applicable
statute.
Louisiana, which previously had
a ten-year transfer moved to 50
years, Montana is 30 years,
Wyoming is 20 years, and West
Virginia and North Dakota are
10. So I'm just curious why the
public of New Mexico should
immediately or within 5 years if
that's what the amendment is,
should take on this liability.
You inject CO2. It's your job to
make sure it stays in. It
doesn't plume out, and it
doesn't impact.
communities or other resource
owners.
Your pollution, your job. Thank
you.
OK, does anyone online like to
speak in opposition, Morgan
O'Grady.
OK
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Morgan O'Grady. I'm with the
Western Environmental Law
Center.
We post this in addition to
reasons raised during public
comment for HD 457 principally
that these bills would
facilitate the build of new
fossil fuel products.
We this because it would shift
liability to the New Mexican
taxpayer after an exceptionally
short period of time as just
discussed in the previous
comment. We're also deeply
concerned that the stewardship
fund which this bill would
establish would be grossly
insufficient for remediation of
any migration or leakage event
that occurs. The LFC estimated
that the fees per metric ton
would generate only 2.2 million
in the long term and that would
be covering monitoring as well
as any necessary remediation or
emergencies. Moreover, the bill
as currently drafted has no
mechanism for adjusting the 10
cent fee for inflation. We
Thank you.
OK, thank you very much, um.
Back to the sponsor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, two
things that I would note. Number
one, OCD, uh, is in favor of 5
years because it reduces the
likelihood of uh stranded assets
and uh number 2, our
calculations, uh, indicate that
We, the stewardship fund would
have over $300 million within 30
years.
OK. Members of the committee.
Representative Garcia.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
I just have one question.
And, um,
On the prior bill.
Uh
I raised the issue of emergency
response plans.
As did uh the chair.
And um and representative um
Uh, the Mr. Expert.
Kind of stated that yes.
There is language regarding
emergency response.
Uh
Wherein House Bill 458.
We see that.
Spelled out
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Garcia. Um, we
actually don't have that in the
bill because it's already uh
required for the classic primacy
issued by the EPA. So this are
these bills only allow us to be
more stringent than what is
already in place. And those, uh,
The safety is already part of
the regulation.
Representative.
So in the
In in your statement that
That language is already
included in in the prior.
Peace
Of statute.
Uh, Chairman McQueen,
Representative Garcia.
The the federal government has a
rule for these kind of projects.
In that rule the requirement for
uh monitoring and for emergency
plans is already in place for
New Mexico to take over that
responsibility.
And get primacy we have to meet
or exceed.
The existing federal statute.
Right, so, so, Mr. Chair and
In that rule that Mr. He just
addressed.
Uh
Our leeks covered.
Are
Just, uh, accidents in general
over regarding to the facility.
Our water contamination issues
covered.
Are, uh
Uh, seismographic.
Activity
E
Um
Another adverse.
Events that might arise out of.
The sequestration process.
Uh, Cha McQueen represent
Garcia.
My normal answer is quite long,
but the answer is just yes. They
are covered.
Thank you
Further questions from the
committee.
Um, so I have questions.
Mm
The, uh, Representative Dixon,
did you say 300 million in the
fund?
Mr. Chair, uh, yes, indeed, over
the course of 30 years, 300
million.
And, uh, Representative Dixon
looking at the FIR.
It looks to me like they're
expecting about 2 million a
year.
So
How do we get up to 300 million?
Chairman Queen, that's my
number.
I went, I went online to uh uh
compound interest calculator.
These fees are going to be
collected from the beginning of
the injection all the way
through the last injection that
happens, so it occurs
continuously.
Right now in uh.
Performing based on their 6.75
million tons per year of
permitted acid gas disposal.
That would all qualify.
In Mexico part of it for this.
We developed a site in
Farmington that can take.
Uh, 50 million tons over the
next 30 years.
We think that conservatively
about 10 million tons a year is
where this is going to settle,
and if you run 10 million tons
per year.
Or
Uh, 35 years, which is 30 years
of a normal project duration
plus 5 years before you could
apply for closure.
You're looking at uh just over
$300 million.
So it's not an exact number.
Um
OK. Thank you. So you, you're,
you're saying you disagree with
the FIR? I mean, it won't be the
first time we've disagreed with
an FIR 100%. Thank you. OK.
Um
Represent Dickson.
Uh, I, I cringe.
At the idea of the state taking
on the liability and the
responsibility. Uh, I can
remember when, uh, the enchant
Energy folks.
We're talking about their
project, which I never thought
would work, um, they said one of
the, one of the elements of
making it work was having the
state take responsibility for
the CO2 sequestration.
Um
So
Maybe this is your chance to
To reiterate why you think it's
a good idea for the state to
accept this liability?
Char McQueen
Uh, when I
I was writing that part of it. I
was actually thinking that we're
really not talking about
liability, we're talking about
stewardship.
And a lot of conversation in the
roundhouse about Orphan wells.
We don't want to create another
orphan well problem. We don't
want to create another long term
liability where companies have
disappeared.
And you don't have anybody or
any way to pay for or to even
figure out who is who's
responsible for the problem.
If you go back 100 years.
Not very many companies in the
US are still around, but the
state of New Mexico.
was
And presumably will be in 50 or
100 years when an issue may
arise, and I think it's a better
idea for the stewardship.
to have this bond.
And the ability
To
Manage those sites in the
absence of.
A potentially vacant
Operators
But to me it's about stewardship
and not about liability.
OK, um, Representative Dixon,
uh, Doctor Balch, so I don't
know if you were in the audience
I presented the bill this
morning, uh, where we talked
about liability, and the word I
like is responsibility.
Um, and there's sort of a um
spectrum there, liability
responsibility, stewardship.
Um, I think, I think
responsibility is a good word,
but responsibility to me
includes not only management or
the stewardship.
Uh, concept of management.
But also
The financial concept of
liability if something goes
wrong.
And so we are talking about that
level of responsibility, or are
we not?
So, so if there is
A leak, a rupture, you know,
whatever.
That would then fall to the
state.
Uh, Jo McQueen, there's a list
of things that the stewardship
fund can can be spent on.
And there's also a statement
that says, uh, if you're outside
of those things, something
unforeseen.
That does not absolve the
company from liability.
Uh, it's not, that's why we
removed the word legal
responsibility.
And it's just responsibility for
that laundry list of of
predictable things that you may
want to spend.
Out of that fun I I agree
responsibility is very
important.
I live in New Mexico.
Uh, but I also understand the
physics of CO2 in the earth.
Most of it.
It's not never going to come
back out by the time we're
talking about stewardship by the
state, you're in a situation
where those sites have been
closed, all the wells have been
plugged.
And the monitoring system has
already been in place for 35
years, so we have a way to
continue to monitor that site.
It's.
Pretty
Big chance that all any money
that's in that fund is not gonna
get spent on anything besides
long term monitoring.
OK, um,
I, I, I think it's wise to, to
set aside the fund. I do, um.
We're hearing different numbers
on the amount of the fund a lot
of discussions about funds.
Their integrity in this
committee this year. I do
appreciate that. I do think a 35
year planning horizon is
Really very short.
Um, uh, you know,
Our water agencies have a
40-year planning horizon. I
think that's very short.
I mean, I think we're talking
about things that
Um, have a long-term lasting
impact and
Um
The time goes by.
Uh, much faster than than the
individuals sitting in this
room.
Um, you know, really appreciate.
I'm, I'm concerned about the
long-term consequences of this.
Um, Representative Dickson, I
think we're done with the
discussion. Do you have anything
you'd like to add before we go
to the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, we'll
go to the committee.
His representative Murphy.
OK, what's the pleasure of the
committee?
Mr. uh Mo do pass on House Bill
458 as amended.
Yeah we've a you pass as amended
in a second, you take the vote.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya, yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Seta Cortez.
Represent a small
Representative Grola.
No.
First year.
Sher McQueen.
No.
Do you have to pass 5 to 3?
Um, committee, uh, thank you. I
know it's a long day.
Um, we'll figure out uh what
we're doing coming next week.
Uh, I'll talk to the ranking
member, um, 11 question I have.
Um
There's gonna be a lot going on
next weekend. It might be easier
for us to meet on a Sunday.
No on Saturday in order to avoid
conflicts.
The
Thoughts on that from the
committee.
Mr. Chair, if we are to meet on
a Sunday, could we do it in the
afternoon for those who want to
go to church?
Uh, in the past we've done it
like around 10 or 11, is that
enough to go to church in the
morning?
Mm, starts at 10 usually.
At least for 3 of us on this
committee.
What was that representing in
the afternoon.
OK, I will take that under
advisement as someone says.
Representative Dixon, Mr. Chair,
I request that the uh referral
to hospital 538 for this
committee to be dropped so that
it could be heard in text.
I would,
I would not voluntarily do that.
OK. Can we hear the bill now?
Uh, no.
OK.
It's 12:55.
Thank you
It was perfectly reasonable to
ask though.
