Ninety one yes resources Jesse
changes there is an additional.
Read through the modern sixteen
plans of the bills that we work
on we're adding he discusses
the.
After the line I really will
here to the office.
This.
Before and I understand.
I.
It got sent back to us.
The committee.
I also hear house bill four one
two.
Yes.
Questions from the.
Mr chair what was the first
number you sent.
First you said ninety one and
something.
Two forty three which were on
the agenda.
Table.
The questions it's.
Once again I want to.
The state of Representative
Griego.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert present.
Representative Rubio.
Representative that.
Well.
Right now the.
Chairman queen here yeah.
In the Saturday in this room and
I thought we publish your tend
to but I think it changed given
that we just roll to bills we
might try to.
Then on Saturday it is thing on
Saturday shop the whole bottom.
The.
Mr.
The people as I review will be
this is
the one.
Good morning Mr chair committee
today we're just in front of you
with the committee substitute
for house bill ninety five.
These.
Thank thank you Mr chair so this
is a straightforward bill it
would formally establish again
and then offices that when you
will energy at the State Land
Office the only thing that this
substitute does.
Is from the original is to move
the office to a new section of
law as opposed to the two men.
An existing statute.
the court text is exactly the
same as of legislation heard.
In the respective committee
before.
thank you so regarding public.
The question too years and I.
Mr Chairman thank you
Representative appreciate the
time to spend with up with us
and getting to this point we
appreciate that Mr Stewart.
Looking at some of the things we
product.
Hi Mr chair on Medicaid do not
just motioned for House Bill
mind if I do that.
One thousand G. R. resources
maybe so house bill ninety five.
So.
In any questions you know I
agree I do I just want to say
happy to.
Mr Chairman.
Representative this will be the
only.
This is the previous tab which.
In section nineteen of.
In in the state in nineteen
seventy eight this is our
office.
For example a leased lands
branch management.
Or any other.
Revenue generating.
Entities with respect the state
Mr chair
Representative Scott I do not
believe so but I will leave that
of ask our expert who if you
please introduce yourself Mr
chair members the committee in
certain ways Stewart deputy land
commissioner of operations of
State Land Office
this would be the first
naming of a new office it is not
the first in terms of the
functions that are defined in
statute we have oil and gas
agriculture you know all of
those other areas do you have
sections a log pertain
specifically to leasing with
regard to to those functions.
Okay so much Mr chairman.
Representative Mr chairman.
These activities are already
underway.
State Land Office that are.
Mr chair Representative Scott
yes.
Show Mr Chairman representative
Mr Stewart we J. this is speech.
We have this bill for I don't
think there's a real change.
Usually we do a separation that
we focus on the changes.
Mr Chairman the previous version
of this bill and try and.
Into the duties.
Of the state commission this one
proposes to move it down the
particles of.
Each of.
So changes to percent.
And of course the question
becomes what you.
We came to with us.
This new piece of legislation is
opposed to where we work.
I appreciate that I think.
I appreciate you it's important
those changes I don't want to
read the division Land Office
races Revenue.
Hello how much revenue they're
making from renewables the
things we covered in the first.
Mr chairman no intention of
going there all of the listed in
this report.
Operational differences will
programs State Land Office as a
consequence of this piece of
legislation as opposed to what
we originally.
Please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Scott
as previously mentioned before
this this gives a security to
the function of of what this
office can do it is far as the
renewable energy industry and
building that renewable energy
and how it needs to flourish in
New Mexico this gives a security
to that and I if my experts
would like to add to that and us
too Mr chair representative the
that Original Bill in trying to
have the language in the duties
the land commissioner.
The substitute Act has it in a
different section of the law
it still remains a requirement
of the land commissioner to fill
the statutory obligation with
respect to that's included in
chapter nineteen creating an
office of renewable energy so I
think from an operative
standpoint they're both
accomplishing the same thing.
Okay
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr.
For the session on the basis.
The the two so the two are on
your.
Substitute to.
Two two five three seven point
one.
Representative to make it
Representative right.
Representative sorry yes I was.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Andrea.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
Right here Sarinana yes.
Chairman yes.
I am the two.
Yes.
Thank you Mr thank you
committee.
We have house bill four we to
look at the full text.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
thank you when is the just a
pleasure to be here.
With percent the first we also
hello we are here
the chairman twenty junior and
these meal came directly to what
I feel really excited about it I
just teachers you know we always
when the papers like it's for
the future and I was used to
fill the future that I work with
and the technology that we use
in the classroom needed exceeds
that when I was a kid.
So what will you be there when
the kids that we teach would be
insurance so this is one of the
things that I feel that we are
preparing for the future I not
only it technology wise but also
leaving the please when we leave
in a better condition where we
that we have right so this is
not a tax credit for electric
vehicles that it would provide a
twenty five hundred tax rebate
that created for
Yep the body pushes the
registers across the New Mexico
for up to forty top forty
hundred quid put awaiting pound
funding.
Also provides three hundred
created for a Chechen station
somebody wants to install one of
their homes they will help with
the cost and also because it was
concerns about the costs we
might could gust for cars follow
the taxes used to improve the
rules so I don't know what the
deal is PED has eighty dollars
fee to I'm willing to provide to
support that federal.
Like the gas tax will do it I
would be four eight four four at
beko elective medical I'm forty
dollars for the hybrid car.
and with me is coming that she
open filament she is the expert
here with me and Adam and she
wants to items for sale that's
something you.
You love thank you for so much
to the chair and members of the
committee and all of the
sponsors this is a bill that the
body has looked at over several
years and we've been able to
hold it into something we can we
think that can be really
important for helping New
Mexicans get into the electric
vehicle world their companies
like GM who have announced that
they will only sell electric
vehicles by twenty thirty five
and so between the federal
credit that encourages the
purchase of US made or at least
major US made vehicles and this
I can bring the cost of the B.
and very down to parity and you
combine that with the big effort
through the air a need to build
out charging stations we think
it's really important especially
for low income New Mexicans to
receive this credit and
combining that with so many
other state initiatives like
clean cars to make sure that
there are you fees on our lots
for people to purchase this is
part of making that transition
you know Kodak for got to get on
board with a digital photography
and they're out of business so
we've got to get on board to and
one of the big budget really is
air quality for our families you
know when you turn your car on
and it's cold in the morning and
you open the door for a minute
it doesn't smell too good in
there well that's because our
guests driven automobiles are
not good for our air quality and
so the benefits of the fees for
our kids for our families for
our climate and our communities
are important and we want to
share this opportunity.
We that we stand for questions.
Thank you the special.
Four million two.
That.
First one here.
Come up with a lot of the
people.
The reason.
Or just for the.
Yep there's.
Not really prepared to speak
about this but
the batteries of electric
vehicles are has our time frame
and has a two allies really they
are not recyclable.
I repeat they're not recyclable
that mind in places where child
labor is still exists and very
heavy pollution from especially
the coal mining.
they are known to be a fire
hazard to
combust while in use and while
not in use.
These aren't environmentally
friendly and high demand.
That we don't incentivize for a
public things that are not good
for people and not good for
environment and not good for any
living things we need to not do
this.
We all know this we need to not
do this we can't incentivize
this thank you very much.
My name is is about.
Thank you.
The one thousand opposition.
The last four.
K. just
right medical reform in behind.
Thank you.
Good morning regal Gonzales
without pass or electric a past
electric has a transportation
electrification plan for
vehicles in the state we have
public meetings on it we invite
all of you to be to be part of
those public meetings on make
sure to get it on to each of
your emails as we move forward
but we see this as a as a
positive towards
decarbonisation of the
transportation in in our state
and and we stand in support of
this measure thank you you can.
Good morning the chairman queen
and members of the committee I'm
Barbara Kayla speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico.
The league supports incentives
to reduce the carbon footprint
of individuals we support this
bill thank you.
Morning Mr chairman and
committee members Douglas Nico
China registered lobbyist for
conservation voters New Mexico
for the reasons outlined by the
sponsor an agency I am and we
support this bill we urge you to
give it to do S. recommendation
thank you.
Good morning chairman the queen
members of the committee Carlos
was there with the Public
Service Company Mexico.
And
yes this bill will help the
cleaner transportation will give
maybe is now will be paying
their fair share on the on the
road as well.
And as as in as help has
electric stated PNM also it has
there are own electrification
programs under way and this the
bill like this will just
complement with all our efforts
on what we're trying to to look
for electrification so that for
these reasons we support this
bill thank you.
Good morning Mr chair respite
Dever Condit registered
lobbyists for western resource
advocates and also New Mexico
voices for children action fund
we stand in strong support of
this bill we should meet our
carbon goals are carbon
emissions goals and we should
also make at find ways to to
help those who are poor make the
that transition to to who do not
have a lot of money so we should
bring incentives to to New
Mexicans thank you Mr chair.
And this year in order to.
so we want them.
First years opposition on.
Like to speak in opposition
TheStreet if you were.
Online support for your.
So I don't think I see in the.
How Senator is going to be
resentful.
If you're of those.
Okay we're going to one eight
four.
I I believe this is four percent
we have masakela.
Mr chair and under the committee
members thank you very much my
name is Abbas Akhil I would have
certainly being that in person
but I didn't want to use the
green electrons and my electric
car said speaking on line I'd
certainly support this bill I
think this is a great way to
advance our government three
goals and I urge the committee
to give it unanimous support for
all the reasons that have been
stated by the sponsors and other
supporters thank you so much.
That is that we wind.
Yes Mr chairman Brian Condit New
Mexico building construction
trades council we stand in full
support of this measure thank
you very much.
Thank you this that we boring
that are.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Laurie
is on our from Albuquerque New
Mexico I am the proud owner of
an electric vehicle thanks but
nearly two years ago
when by
our diesel car for the last
century finally died so I needed
a new car I wish that this bill
was.
In force if they're trying to
get the rebate but I'm glad that
it is up again for of votes
fortunately I was able to get a
number of.
Vehicle incentives to bring my
car down to parity with regular
cars anyway I love my electric
vehicle and
I.
I think that it's great that it
would make this rebate available
to lower income New Mexicans and
and promote the purchase of
electric vehicles hands are
clean up the air in our
environments and
I just like to say that
this is a great deal and I hope
that you pass it thank you very
much.
Thank you is that we have on
San.
Thank you Mr chairman yes my
name is Tom Solomon I
coordinated with the climate
focused environmental
organization three fifty New
Mexico and on behalf of our
nearly seven thousand members we
strongly support this bill the
rapid adoption of electric
vehicles is a key aspect of the
clean energy transition the tax
credit to this bill will let
customers especially lower
income customers to more easily
four these electric vehicles
which are cleaner are cheaper to
fuel and to maintain and will
reduce fossil fuel air pollution
which is a major source of many
diseases such as asthma
emphysema and heart disease they
will also cut the carbon
emissions which are driving the
climate crisis and I should note
for the person who claimed that
you the batteries are not
recyclable the there's a company
called redwood materials that
has announced a three and a half
billion dollar electric vehicle
battery recycling plant to go
into South Carolina that will
recycle actually ninety five
percent of all critical
materials in Evey batteries so
that claim is not true
and I support this bill and ask
the committee for a to Pasco
thank you so much.
Thank you guys that we trusted
partner.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for this opportunity to speak on
behalf electric vehicle tax
credit want to thank the
sponsors to I am speaking on
behalf and natural resources
defense council action fund and
we urge your strong support for
this bill we are especially
pleased with the provisions that
make the election vehicles much
more accessible for lowincome
New Mexicans thank you very
much.
Next up is working for.
Morning Mr chairman and
committee members this word
McCartney
my wife and I have always Chevy
bolt.
sense two thousand eighteen so
we've got over fifty thousand
miles on it
my wife basically drives that I
have a Toyota pickup which I put
over two hundred dollars a month
to gas and and plugging the
Boltons graced our electric
utility rates about fifty
dollars a month
and she tries to say mileage I
do and there's been no oil
changes or the four years so we
haven't had to sit there jiffy
lube where you get the oil
changed pay the money for and
our once we've taken information
instead was twenty nine dollars
and fifty seven cents at Larry
Miller Chevrolet.
So the cost of the only electric
car is
Much diminished so I strongly
support this bill so that other
people can.
Have the money or the resources
to by the EDD a call and then
I'll have more money to spend on
other things in our lives thank
you very much.
Thank you letters that we the
infringer.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name is Daniel
Pritchard I live in Taos I'm on
the executive board of renewable
talents of not for profit
organization promoting economic
development and renewable energy
in north central New Mexico I'm
also on the board of the Tesla
owners club of New Mexico and
both organizations stand in full
support of this legislation
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you that's that we have on
the water.
Chairman McLean and committee
at Consumer Reports found ATVs
because sixty percent less to
run in fifty percent less on
repairs and maintenance make any
up front costs more like gas
cards will allow all New
Mexicans to access these cost
saving benefits moving our
economy to zero emissions will
according to the American lung
association save New Mexicans
more than three billion dollars
in health costs in the next.
This is a critical step if we
are to make real progress in
meeting the target scientists
say are necessary to protect our
children from that catastrophic
impacts of climate change thank
you.
Thank you.
And that's it for this.
Thanks for doing that before.
Thank you Mr chairman we stand
for questions.
Members of the committee.
Yes I.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative explore these.
Which.
Lowers the issue.
Tax.
Mr chair representative yes it
would be in addition.
Can you tell me what change.
Tax on.
Mr chair Representative right
now it's seventy five hundred.
For accounts maybe US or
maybe talk to and you know you
just.
Hello Mr chairman.
To.
Total credit.
Ten thousand dollars.
Fifty five thousand.
The staff and Mr chair
representative I will depend
that we need to be on the cards
the model and everything but at
that correct.
How the requirements for the
federal credit yes it would be
around ten to get us the.
It depends on the model
is real credit Mr Chairman.
Actually transformed.
Mr chair representative
Experts here.
Check.
Mr chair and and Representative
that's something on the to check
with our with our material
experts and we look at right
back to.
Yes it is true of all Mr
Chairman representative what.
Eligible for the screen.
To.
Four thousand all.
The eligible to hunt.
All yes and also looking at
about
fifty two thousand.
Is that.
Mr chair representative the
defense of the I mean the size
but around
adults and two and two children
of middle class will be around
fifty fifty tested income I can
depends on on that.
And institutions.
Or Mr Chairman representative in
the state of New Mexico.
Fifty thousand dollars Gretchen
Koether chair.
A lot of tax liability so
please.
It's one to track each for page
two
well as regions.
Is.
What's changed one Mr chair
representative that those
inclusion of these babies to
make it more accessible to
middle class and working class
families.
Mr Chairman representative the
credit would be both relatable
and transferable so if you're
tax liability we're less than
the credit that amount could be
returned to you in cash however
at the point of sale you could
transfer the credit to the
dealer as an on site discount on
the cost of the car.
Shows the state Mr chairman and
Mexico right to the chat that is
correct.
For.
Mr chair that's correct and you
know just listening to some of
the tax committee hearings and a
billion dollars set aside
deferred tax opportunities that
would be some of that tax bring
to the New Mexico.
Mr Chairman.
She has to.
Madam
chair to.
A lot of.
Issues.
That are generated each.
These.
She.
The.
Situation the support.
And the.
To restart.
True.
Mr chair representative
Yes Mr chair and representative
I think the first thing to know
about batteries is they're close
to one hundred percent
recyclable there's a new
facility being built in Nevada
that would be able to really
deal with recruiting any of the
minerals that are extracted
there's also lots of work going
on to ensure responsible mining
practices and responsible
sourcing however I think it's
worth remembering that the life
cycle environmental and social
impact of vehicles versus gas
powered vehicles is quite a bit
lower when it comes to fossil
fueled cars we have to have a
constant state of extraction
instead of a one time twenty two
extractions
we're seeing a real increase in
the renewable presence on the
electric grid where really
gasoline can't be significantly
do carbonized without simply
going electric thank you
Representative.
Mr chairman and here to work to
Representative this committee.
This proposal will have.
To.
Here Representative.
Part of the XPS I think in a
couple of ways first of all
every jurisdiction has to be
taking every possible action on
curbing global climate change.
And without you know a
centralized approach to that
we've got to take action at
every level the electric vehicle
movement is happening with or
without us and so making that
more affordable for low income
New Mexicans is key some total
it for New Mexico country wide
and nationwide
we alleged vehicles will make
impact in reducing emissions and
electric vehicles are one of the
main sources of planet.
Driving.
Guests.
So Mr chairman.
Well are you representing.
H..
To.
Yes Mr chair representative yes.
Yes it will have a material
effect because it is part of a
concerted movement across the
country to critical climate
change through addressing our
transportation issues and I do I
understand where you're coming
from you're saying this is our
drop in the bucket it alone
won't stop the effects of global
climate change but if all of
those drops in the bucket don't
make it to the bucket where any
keep the trouble as evidenced by
the size of the summer and the
consequent let.
Mr chair.
Which.
It is just hard to.
Water.
She.
Representative that person once
we.
Thank you Mr chairman do.
I also want to ever since it's
insured me that.
If you would like to be replaced
anyway yeah so what we.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I just a.
With the rest of the first half
Mr Chairman.
Representative Lara.
To.
First
of the.
Right.
You
Mexico.
Not just that Mr Chairman
I just it's it's just
interesting to me that we're
throwing in a.
The
of registration fees I mean
compared to what the.
Tax credit is.
Really that's also really just
drop in the bucket really.
What we're going to subsidize
through this legislation
someone's ability to register
their vehicle that we just help
them.
I just it doesn't make sense
that we have in.
but Mr speaker in general Mr
chairman.
Representative
We passed
legislation before.
What this be in conjunction with
those are with this replace
current.
So you could take advantage of
the other.
Mr chairman you could take
advantage of every other.
Instead of that we passed in
this would be additional on top
of that is that correct Mr
chairman.
At.
Representative the thank you
thank you for that and we're so
so welcoming
I believe that we have not at
this bill has presented before
but he has not been passed
specifically for these.
I came debate amendment or just
plug ins.
Mr chairman I.
Once again it.
I would just submit that act I
believe this isn't necessary.
Just as was stated in testimony
that you present at the
beginning.
That was present at the
beginning of of
bill.
That already one part for
dealership car manufacturer is
stating that there are only go
to be able to the future.
To some degree there should be
no choice.
there are two ways to to cause
people to go to electric
vehicles wants to pay them to do
it.
The other is to take away of
other options it appears as if
as options are decreasing.
This.
We have no choice but to
purchase electric vehicles I'm
not exactly sure why you would
ask.
Other people to help.
Someone by their vehicle.
Really just this also in this
there's not me no other option
future.
Thank you Mr chair to chair
representative this bill is not
going to go up whatever is right
now for the prices have creating
a difficult to access for some
middle class income I mean he's
but it has happened to me too
and and we hope that in the
future it would be like that it
would be yes available to
everybody that prices aren't
dropping your rate the right no
steel very high compatible with
the gas cars.
Mr Chairman I I'm I'm not gonna
be able to but I do have a.
The idea of making the tax
credit transferable to problem.
Because the the argument has
been.
that.
Additional benefits.
The well here Tax base that we
have all all these bills.
And this is just a waste.
That they were.
Transferable tax.
I I appreciate that you're here
so I'm not going to.
I just can't.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative.
Yeah.
Thank.
Thank you Representative.
What happens.
Stated here that the.
We think the total remains at
this stage.
Can we get thirty thousand
dollars.
How many people in the Mexico.
Qualified for this.
If I if I have the information
correct.
We around a fifty two percent of
the population New Mexico is
middle class Mr chair
representative.
so fifty to percent would
qualify as middle class
So of that million people.
The property would be thank you.
So that the.
Mr chair representative
the salesman just remind me
that is a cop here.
So this is like a big I mean it
would be great that everybody
will go about that at eight
forty there is a copy.
So and that cat.
Everyone Representative.
That is what
Mr chair representative at the
cap for the BBC tax credit is
happen Thompson
can we also reach out for that
Chechen station system million
thank you.
Hello.
Chairman representative ten
million people.
Ten million dollars.
All.
Ten thousand dollars.
People in New Mexico are we
really.
That Mr chair representative.
They states that the people
protesting qualifying the first
year like that in the least on
that critics is this over it
would be for single use for the
following.
This point is.
Any vehicles.
Would we be able to help
subsidize into our system in New
Mexico with this ten million
dollars.
Mr chair representative I guess
he will depends also on the case
of the apply so people would
qualify for the twenty five
hundred and some people would
qualify for the forty hundred
and we can make some numbers to
divide among the people but
We have more information Mr
chair and representative if you
average between the twenty five
hundred credit and four thousand
to about three thousand and
divide that by the ten million
annual cap it would be about
three thousand three hundred
people are families.
Here.
Thank you.
Representative.
That.
To our environment certainly
not.
That.
Mr chair representative I think
is a commitment by the governor
to go
To at go back to solar panels
green energy and is growing
currently have I think if I'm
not mistaking that we are one of
the line one difficult to the
last coal produced energy from
this ticket so all those things
are going to be alright like.
Maybe Mr failing which part of
that the whole picture.
Sure Mr chair and representative
thank you for that question and
I think when it comes to global
climate change I mean there are
many many sources of of the
missions however the killer and
missions are one of the most
significant points of emissions
in the country and so the moving
towards an electric fleet is
she.
The tax credit sunsets in five
years at just about the period
of time when we think that the
cost of vehicles will be or on
fire with electric vehicles
although there's a whole range
of vehicles currently on the
market that are quite accessible
and even more so with the tax
credit so the argument that one
single action by a state or
jurisdiction won't solve climate
change on its own while it's
true respectfully Mrs the fact
that if we don't as a society
take concerted action yes does
it change it will be my ten year
old and then my **** and my six
year old.
Follow through there are no have
to deal with the consequences
and we're already seeing.
So if every jurisdiction every
driver every family and every
state government does not take
action the cost will be so
serious to our society that we
will look back on this day and
really regret that we.
I.
Certainly respect your.
I would.
My concern is that one million
dollars capital.
Thanks.
You want to make a difference.
Might be able the.
Areas that.
The monitor to.
I need.
Of the gentleman and lady how
many electric vehicles on the
road Mexico today.
Mr chair representative.
And yet let me just very quickly
pull it up in the and Mr chair
and representative hi in
addition to being the
Representative first time I'm
also the first time that we
spent witness.
I.
I thank you so much for that and
let me just double check how
many vehicles are on the road
and about seventy four hundred
today.
So if we're adding you know
close to three to four thousand
vehicles per year through this
credit in addition to purchases
of the V. as where you know the
buyer doesn't pursue the tax
credit to whatever so at the end
of this we stand to more than
double the amount of.
Wrote just at the time where
they become quite you thank you.
The gentle lady appreciate that
Through the computation.
And your P. and L. that brings
the two.
Our.
Thirty eight on on I was a
freshman Mexico.
Mr chair representative is
different.
Yes Mr chair representative
thankfully Consumer Reports did
a very.
Study of all states what their
current gas taxes what their
current borders suggested road
fee was for electric vehicles
and they calculated what would
be a fair fee for electric
vehicles that calculation as of
two years ago was fifty three
dollars for electric vehicles
that's about how much they would
have paid and gas tax but
through conversation and
discussion of this we landed
together with the Senate sponsor
and the House Sanchez on an
eighty dollar fee which is
significantly higher than the
average recommended by Consumer
Reports.
for the pure.
And then forty dollars for plug
in electric vehicles because
they do purchase gas when
they're doing live longer
driving ranges.
So late.
Representative what do you.
Yeah.
Then.
This product but was it due to
the actual product.
Representative
European to questions presented.
Sure.
Related.
But you believe increasing the
mail.
On the product more buying more
cars.
That dollars would be to give
you the pricing.
This year Representative.
Yes well I think I hope where
you're going is economics one on
one which is that it'll help
bring the price down and
actually there is just some very
interesting innovations you can
read about it in a recent New
York times article that
basically explains that electric
vehicles when they get there
will be cheaper to produce than
gas vehicles some of the
companies have built modular
batteries that can be built one
on top of each other if you're
doing a small passenger vehicle
you use one if you're doing a
heavy pickup truck you can use
for and one of the coolest
things is the Ford pickup truck
it has such a powerful battery
that it is the equivalent of an
electric generators you can take
it camping and not have to bring
a generator with you if you're a
contractor you can power your
tools with this car if the
electricity goes out you can use
it as a generator in your home
for several days so and because
of that the modular nature
nature of batteries we think
that the manufacturing process
will actually be easier
and and and easier to shift
between models at a given
factory they'll produce all the
the battery mods and then deploy
those to where the vehicles are
being built.
Do that.
That's only trip we go camper
trailer and the working very
hard or you certainly will very
far and I appreciate drafters
hi.
I'm trying to.
I think if you're.
For.
I don't think.
In five years.
I don't think.
And when you look at the number
of cars on the New Mexico roads.
The needs of these are thank.
the tax dollars that they would
be consuming.
Yeah it is I make a difference
yeah.
Right.
probably will pause.
somebody someplace else more
more.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you after the presentation
just two questions do you know
what the average.
Percent of income.
New Mexicans spend on gasoline
for their vehicles.
Mr chair representative
We know that the consumers are
correct like we mentioned at.
Got an operation say the fifty
three fifty park owners would be
what issues from the tax to help
with the rules now how much do
we spend on gas an average.
Mr chair and representative I'm
just pulling up our our grass
so the average gasoline spending
for a for.
Vehicle that uses gas is a
little over a thousand dollars a
year and electric vehicles
obviously quite a bit less if
it's a plug in hybrid there's
some cost you know if you're
plugging into the electric plug
you do have to pay and you know
that utility bill unless you're
pairing it.
With solar panels the percent of
income I don't have for you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
The and.
That said.
At the end of information a
thousand dollars you know for
family is and about how much
they're spending on gasoline
right now to get to and from
work take kids to daycare things
like that and so what I am
interested in is the expected
savings that that family is
going to have by shifting you
know is that if the family has
to buy a new car.
They're going to be saving and
they're going to.
Recoup their money sooner rather
than later I have an electric
vehicle so thank you that was
not a question I appreciate the
information.
Thank you Mr chair
representative and I'm really
delighted to see my neighbor
presenting her first bill I
think it's great
I do have a couple questions and
I do believe that in time.
Yeah electric vehicles will
definitely be a thing of the
future I think that there's
going to be a transition period
so having served as city
councillor and
Serving on the Mr Khan by chair
of the transportation board I
have a question about the
estimated revenue and I see that
it's sort of you guys are
transitioning this.
Over several years what is the
transportation projects I never
heard of that and we dealt with
federal transportation funds and
I just maybe it's a state thing
that I don't know about but I
just don't know what it is.
Mr chair representative I.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
representative there we may have
to defer to some of the
representatives and the
committee but there's different
sources of funds that are used
to repair roads in New Mexico
and in fact because of the
inflation reduction act we've
got tens of millions of dollars
coming into the state for the
express purpose through formula
grants to the department of
transportation so this is a year
we're probably even our own gas
tax income in transportation
funding come will be just a very
small percent of the money that
we spend on roads but both funds
contribute to maintaining New
Mexico's transportation
infrastructure and suicide so
it's a state funds what you're
saying I guess because I not I
know it's not a federal fund yes
we dealt with the federal funds
and so I just wanted to clarify
what that was exactly
so I think the other thing that
I wanted to mention Mr chair and
representative and madam
people people people it's the I
will then I think people.
Yeah so Mr chair and members
when we were when I was on the
city council we did in fact put
charging stations in Albuquerque
downtown and I guess my question
and maybe maybe nobody has the
answer to this but is there a
native to.
You know within the state
because I know that there's only
certain places where these
electric of cards.
Charging stations are located
and I know that people that I
know people who have a lecture
course Mr.
Chair and representative.
They have to plan their routes
you know because.
They have to decide where
they're going to charge their
car so is there a move about to
incentivized municipalities or
counties to put in these
charging stations.
Representative
Yes Mr chair representative
there is a massive effort to
build out these charging states
with federal monies the W.
settle money the settlement
money and it is on the move it's
happening in that part of this
tax credit is three hundred
dollars so that people can build
charging stations in their homes
and Mr chair and representative
I think it would be
You other people who are
involved in this moved to meet
with the middle Rio Grande
council of governments
transportation board
to.
Because I do not recall that I
was on their last year of any
Proposed incentives or any plan
strategy to
You know incentivize electric
car charging stations so I think
it might be a good idea to
contact that group in
Albuquerque and maybe have a
presentation to them Mr chair
and representative.
The.
You know encourages us strategy
for the future and I know that
a lot of the
The issues that they deal with
our regional transportation
issues Mr chair representative
that and.
federal money is received it
different forms and that's why I
asked about this electric about
this transportation project Fund
because there are other
funds that are program.
Mr chair representatives that
need to be you know this needs
to come to the forefront
because the plan out for years
in advance so thank you Mr
chairman representatives for
that and up to shake your
responses.
Representative radios and never.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
Is there anyone want to the
number of cars what can purchase
and take advantage of that's
affirmative.
Mr chair representative I'm.
Thank you Mr.
Your reserve.
Thank you Mr chair
we get many that are present
thank I just had a comment
because it hasn't really been
said but I feel that
we've been introducing versions
of this legislation since twenty
seventeen since I first doing
the legislature and since then
I've served on that's chair of
transportation and I've seen the
costs that it takes to maintain
the roads.
And in addition to that.
We are just a very car centric
society and to me that is very
problematic I think it's a dirt
that's that's a very direct
result to our planet Crisis and
so what I would like to I what I
wanted to say on the record is
that while I support this idea
of electric vehicles and and and
credits and things like that
I would like to be able to do
escalate from our from us
centering so much on vehicles
and actually focusing on transit
equity because there are a lot
of people in our community who
can not afford a car just in
general it's that there are
people who are disabled or
people who are I'm I'm able to
drive and get around they need
they need buses and and the
ability to get around better
infrastructure for people who
commute by bike which I do when
I'm at home and so I think these
are really important
conversations that need to be
had in addition to this issue
but I just felt like it was
necessary to save that I.
I I just feel that right
providing more tax credits for
electric vehicles we're not
actually moving in the direction
that we should be moving which
is the escalating from becoming
from what we've already become
which is a very car centered
society so that's all I wanted
to say something thank you.
Thank you
those are the session.
The.
That thank you.
Presentations are second.
Can you just watching the second
stage of the.
Representative Braco.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
By Sarah Sarinana yes.
Chairman of the in yes.
Part of.
That doesn't for today
that the the.
Have a.
Your lawyers and.
