Chair de la Cruz.
Here.
Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. Let's
get started. Right, get right
into it. We have HB.
577 towing services, oversight
and advisory Board.
Representative Brown.
morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, um,
this is a, a bill being
sponsored by Representative
Jennifer Jones, who is uh ill
today, so she's asked me to sit
in for her, so I'm, it's half
Bill 577.
Uh, what it does is, um, propose
to create oversight and advisory
board. So I'm gonna um ask my
expert witness, Amy Barrella,
who's to give you a little
history on why the bill and uh
good morning chair, good morning
representatives. Thank you for
having me here today.
I am the president of the newly
formed New Mexico toy.
Um, I'm gonna give you a little
bit of history.
The towing industry has been
regulated since the state
corporation commission.
The state corporation commission
then evolved into the public
regulation commission, and now
we are regulated under the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation.
Under each of those divisions,
the towing service has never had
any real represent what builds
or what rules we're gonna be
following.
So when the New Mexico DOT had
its rulemaking process. We met
in Santa Fe at the DOT building,
and a bunch of towing services
showed up, and we presented what
we thought would be really good
changes to represent our
industry increase the safety of
the roads, help with law
enforcement, and uh and
including rate changes and all
that, um, none of our
suggestions were accepted in the
proposals and the rules.
just
The
Steering officer at the
rules-making meeting, um,
suggested that we form the
association, and that's how.
We're working very hard to make
sure that we repair
relationships to
Make the standards of our
industry better.
That is our goal.
We just want our voice heard,
and this is not a new concept of
having an advisory council.
The state of New Mexico, I'm
just googling how many advisory
councils there are, as over 400
advisory councils.
There is a clean transportation
fuels, medical imaging, there's
radiation advisory boards,
conservation advisory Board,
sports advisory Boards.
Medical advisory boards, human
rights commissions, law
enforcement advisory boards,
massage therapy boards.
I can go on and on with the UNM
boards and all of that with how
many advisory. So this is not a,
this is not a a.
An attempt to take over the the
administration of the DOT. This
is an attempt to have our voices
heard.
And um I know that there's some
things in the bill that um we
need to go over a little bit.
I want to make sure that we
understand that we are not going
to, uh, I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Um, representatives.
Weird
do not want to be part of the
inspection process. We don't
want to be part of the the
regulation and finding process.
What we want is to be part of
the mediation process, because
we understand that some of the
people, Mr. Chairman, are um may
not have the knowledge.
That our industry has, and we
want to make sure that our voice
is heard, and uh so that is the
reason why I sent you our bylaws
so that you understood why this
association was made to again
represent our industry.
Improve our standards, safety of
the highways, and
I hope that was.
Um, a good summary, um, detailed
enough questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Do we
have anyone in the audience in
favor?
Of the bill, if you do raise
your hand, please.
If you would like to speak,
please line up behind the
presenters.
Jean Paul Breo with uh North 54
salvage just here to ask you all
to please let us have a voice
for our industry.
Thank you.
It's time. My name is Sergeant
David Taylor. I'm with
Albuquerque Police Department
and I oversee all the record
companies that are on call from
the city of Albuquerque, which
it's 30 companies at this time.
They provide a great service to
us, uh, other than the
regulations already set forth by
the Department of
Transportation. We also have
rules set forth. They do need
some representation and better
communication, so I support the
bill.
My name is Armando Beltran. I'm
with Santa Fe To. Um, I'm in
support of the bill, so
hopefully we get better, uh,
communication with the
Department of Transportation. I
think this will help us a lot.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online in favor.
Angela Roper Barnett.
Can you hear me?
Please proceed.
Yes, my name is Angela Roper,
and I am a towing consultant for
the towing industry. I have
spent 29 years in the towing
industry owning 2 towing
companies and now my job mainly
is um I consult for state towing
associations, uh, in doing that,
um,
I, you know, I'm very familiar
with all the different state
states and um there was a big
push and a lot of things that
happened at the end of last year
that forced the federal
government to take a look at
towing and some of you may be
familiar with that, but um it
carried over into 2025 into the
legislation and many states have
legislation that address this
very thing, and many states are
also introduced.
cing these towing and advisory
boards to solve many issues, um,
Dealing in the towing industry,
whether it's with the towing
industry or the towing industry
has, um,
These bills can take care of
this.
Anyway.
Uh
Do we have anyone else? iPhone.
If you're there, please proceed.
We have you listed as iPhone.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition to the bill in the
audience, if so, raise your
hand.
Do we have anybody in opposition
online.
No, Mister Chairman
Thank you.
We'll go to question committee,
committee questions
Representative Harman B Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative. Um, I
love this spell. I, um, in my
day job I'm an attorney. I
specialize in transportation
issues, mostly aviation, but
I've worked for a lot of towing
companies over the years and um
I think that this is exactly
what we need. I've seen a lot of
times regulations change with
the new changeover from the PRC
over the DOT, um, there were a
lot of changes there. We have a
lot of towing companies, some
who don't.
even, you know, use email and
there's constant regulations
changing and no one's getting
notification. I've had a lot of
clients that ended up, um, you
know, getting investigations
opened up against them because
they simply just never got
notified that something changed.
I think it was last year, um,
DOT did an audit of annual
reporting submissions and the
rules weren't quite clear as to
how people were supposed to
submit the annual reports and,
and, you know, like over 100
people received letters that
were.
sort of a uh uh part of that
investigation and went in front
of the PRC and nobody really
knew what was happening and so I
think that this is just the
thing to balance giving the
industry a voice, helping people
figure out from a regulatory
perspective, what's going on,
what the rules are at this
moment in time and also act as
someone to mediate, you know,
not everybody has the money to
hire an attorney to go and talk
to the PRC and.
Just work out which a lot of
times, um, end up being, end up
being basic misunderstandings
or, you know, miscommunications,
right hand, left hand, so, um,
I'm really glad to see this. I
think that this would um really
help the industry. The one
question I do have though, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, we,
you know, we have a lot of
boards throughout New Mexico and
a lot of them are empty and the
governor has a lot of trouble
kind of feeling appointments, so
is there a plan?
to make sure that this board
doesn't sit empty and that it's
active and that, um, you know,
we, you kind of
get off the ground running, so
to speak.
Uh,
with that.
Um, and Mr. Chairman, I, I think
part of the reason the bill will
help resolve any districts, and
I think that plugs us into.
People who have knowledge let
Miss Vella, uh, amplify a little
bit on that. I think she has a
good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, yes, I think
by having each district
represented by somebody from the
towing industry for one, we will
definitely have a seat at the
table. Also, um, I know that
budgetary requirements and all
of that have been addressed in
some of the questions I've been
asked, you know, um, as the, the
part of the advisory board, we
can conduct these meetings on
Zoom, and, and we don't have to
have any per diem, any traveling
expenses and and all of that and
and and.
Um, so we can also cut that part
of it, and um the towing
association can also help push
to make sure that they attend.
Thank you very much, um, Mr.
Chairman, Representative and an
expert, um, I think that's
especially important for our
rural areas. There are a lot of
great rules as they apply to um
towing companies that serve some
of our less populated counties
and the rules and regulations
that are that they are expected
to meet, um, I've seen.
That's where, um, you know,
people have seen enforcement
actions just because they're
being sent out to work in
counties where they don't have a
a direct disc district office
and but yet they're the only one
on rotation and this we need a
lot of clean up.
And these rules and regulations
in the state, so I'm really glad
to see this. Hopefully that'll
be a big part of it. I'm happy
to support the bill. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Blundstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
prepared to make a motion for a
due pass when you're ready for
it.
Thank you for bringing the bill,
ranking member Brown.
Uh, will of the
Committee's ready to go, so we
have.
Oh
I didn't see you.
Go ahead.
Mr. Chair, thank you, um,
representative Brown and your
witness, um,
So
Just understanding the makeup of
the board. I was reading about
it, and I just wondered about
the staffing.
And it alludes to the staffing
and the report, but how is that
administrative staffing going to
assist in this, or is there
somebody that's gonna be hired,
um, uh, you know, that will
oversee the board or is there
just an administrator or how
does that work?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative, um, the
investigators are already hired
on staff, and I think that we
can definitely work with them in
the world. So there's only one,
there's, there's an
administrator of the board.
Because right now we go through
the investigators of the the
transportation division, I think
they have adequate
representation. OK, I just wanna
make sure that that piece is
covered.
Mr. Chair and representative
because I think it's important
to have
Someone that is responsible to
this board, that would help the
board, you know, whatever
duties um or
You know, reporting or anything
like that that needs to happen.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
I would even like the OK.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you so much before we take
this vote, I gotta recognize my
wife who joined the audience,
and that waved everybody.
Representative Lindstrom, you
wanna make that motion?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would
move I do pass on House bill.
577.
We have a motion from
Representative Lindstrom a
seconded by Representative Dow.
Take the roll, please.
Representative Rego.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dell.
Yes.
Representative F Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Hopkin.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero de la
Cruz.
Oh, I,
yes, de la Cruz, yes, you do
that?
Thank you.
Next we'll be moving on to.
SB 115.
Representative Lustrom, please
proceed when you're ready.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee. I'm here today to
present Senate Bill 115. This is
the public project.
Revolving fund, um, projects
list. It is a Senate Finance
Committee subtly, this is the
annual authorization bill.
For the New Mexico finance
Authority program.
It is a, what my understanding
it is because
You can add projects during the
legislative session that want to
be part of this program and in
the Senate, they, they added 45
projects, and there was one
technique with it's down for
questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience in favor of this
bill.
If so, raise your hand.
Do we have anybody online in
favor of this bill.
No, Mister Chairman.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition to the bill in the
audience and so raise your hand.
Is there anyone online in
opposition.
No, Mister Cheer.
Questions from
The board committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
We,
we have a Dupa uh motion to pass
from representative Romero and
he second from Representative.
Hi.
I'm, I'm tripping up, sorry,
sorry, whip.
Take the roll, please.
Representative.
Representative Armstrong.
Sorry.
What.
Representative Barrego.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative Dow? Yes.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Hochman B Hill.
Yes.
Representative
Jones, Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero, yes.
a lot.
Yes, de la Cruz.
Yes.
Was that a unanimous or was
there a dissent in that?
Unanimous. Thank you.
You do pass.
Senator Padilla, you're, you're
always welcome, even if just to
say hello.
we're in front of you.
All right.
We're gonna move on to HB 97
representative Anna Norton.
Please proceed when you're
ready.
This was a rolled bill everybody
recalls.
Representative, do we need to
talk about the
committee? Yes, please, we never
got that far the first time, so
I do have a committee set that
you should have before you.
The 22 number is, let me make
sure I've got it here, 0.23.
Mr. Chairman, I will move the
committee for discussion.
We have a motion that we have.
We have motion in a second.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members Committee, so we're back
to the 2nd time. Nice to have,
oh, just about everybody here.
Um, I bring with me this time, I
bring Jeff Romero again, and I
also bring um Alice Kane,
director of the OSI, and her,
um, actuary Christian I'm Myers,
thank you very much. So,
I don't know how you'd like to
proceed from here, Mr. Chair, as
we've done, um, the intro and
the essentially did the
discussion on the committee said
last time, so however you'd like
to.
I, I think we can go to
questions on this someone wasn't
here and would like further
explanation, but if there's
questions at this time in
committee, please let us know.
And we also have a statement
from Ms. King as well.
Thank you. Let, let's go ahead
and go with the statement for
the questions. Representative
Doll will be a first on
questions.
Right.
I'm so bad at this. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and Representatives.
We just, um, uh, you asked if
OSI supported this bill, I think
at the other, uh, the last
meeting we were in the back and
late, so apologies, uh, but we
do support the bill. I think we
want to put in context a little
bit more about the rate increase
that people were very concerned
about. The way, uh, and
Chief actuary Christian Myers
can answer more questions if you
have them in depth, but uh if
the if the bill passes right
now, 90% of New Mexico
policyholders have the uninsured
and underinsured motorist
coverage. It costs about $200 a
year per my actuary, uh, the
remaining 10% would see premium
increases. 7% of the
policyholders who have multiple
coverages today would see that
16% increase that we discussed.
And 3% of the policyholders who
had the minimum state-mandated
coverage, which we think are the
most exposed, they would see an
average price increase of 43%.
So we wanted to put that in
context for you, um.
Uh, we do support it. We do
think uh with so many uninsured
motorists. Unfortunately, in New
Mexico that the likelihood of
someone getting into an accident
without this coverage is, is
higher than in other places and
uh we feel our, we think that it
would be helpful to have it
mandated, so we don't have
probably some terrible
situations, bodily injuries and
uh.
Don't, won't have coverage.
So that's Thank you
Representative.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, can you tell me
this?
There are in the substitute,
there's new language underlying
and there's different language
struck. Can you please go just
start online.
Line by line and explain exactly
what you've done and what the
change results in.
Mr. Chair Representative doubt,
the changes to House Bill 97
were simply to make it match
Senate Bill 39. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative. Does this still
require
At all, uh, people who do have
insurance to now carry uninsured
motorists. Mr. Chair
Representative, yes. Mr. Chair
and Representative, what's the
status of that Senate bill that
you just referred to, Mr. Chair
Representative, that bill is
currently on the Senate and so
Mr. Chair and Representative is
this still um
I wonder if we have that. So, so
this still.
Rather than
Addressing the uninsured motor
issue, the motorist issue, which
is the issue. This still
requires the people who are
lawfully insured to now carry
mandatory.
Under her motor vehicle and all
vehicles.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
I'm, I'm
Please tell me if this doesn't
quite answer your question, but
the issue of uninsured motorists
not being insured, they are
already in violation of the law.
Yeah, that's already law.
So what we want to do is protect
New Mexico's insured drivers,
and right now, since there still
are uninsured drivers in
violation of the law. We want to
make sure that all New Mexico
motorists are protected and
right now they are not.
So, Mr. Speaker, I mean, Mr.
Chair and, and Representative.
When uh we asked you to go back
and work on it because we had
concerns. This, you didn't
change and you didn't, what is,
what concerns that were
addressed by this?
This committee, did you change?
Mr. Chair Representative, when
we rolled the bill, that was
because we, we did not have the
input of the OSI.
And we have that here. Those
were really the only changes is
to put those numbers in context
for the committee that we did
not have last time.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
that's your opinion because I
had other concerns. So you
address the concerns.
And brought the OII, the
superintendent of insurance to
support your bill. That's the
changes made. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you um for bringing the bill.
I am
So we're, we're creating a law.
We have uninsured motorists. The
laws already in place where
you're supposed to have
insurance if you drive a
vehicle. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair Representative, if you
are a driver in New Mexico, the
current law is that you are
required to carry at least
liability insurance at a
minimum.
OK, and thank you for that. Um.
So now we're creating another
law to say
An owner of a motor vehicle
shall not.
Permit the operation of the
owner's motor vehicle upon the
streets of highways in New
Mexico. It's a goal does not
carry uninsured motorist
coverage pursuant to this. So
we're adding another law on top
of another law.
That
We're holding law-abiding
citizens accountable at a higher
standard.
Making them purchase more
insurance.
Mandating more insurance.
When it's already the law.
It's already a law that we have
to have insurance, Mr. Chairman.
And so
I, what does this do, Mr.
Chairman and uh Madam
Representative for
Say business owners.
They have a fleet of vehicles.
Madam Chair, sorry, Mr. Chair,
Madam Leader.
Um, again,
We are just expanding the
existing law to make sure that
insured drivers in New Mexico
are covered, cause right now
they're not, and that includes
New Mexico drivers who carry
full insurance coverage, they
buy full coverage policy
thinking that they are
Protected from every scenario
and they are not because
uninsured motorists does not
always covered.
Buy full coverage, um, to your
point about the fleet vehicles,
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
we are working on a potential
amendment to make some fleet
vehicle exceptions, but as that
amendment is not ready, we have
not.
Settled on agreed language that
amendment is not ready today,
madam, Mr. Chair, Madam Leader.
Thank you for that. Um, I
appreciate the, the.
thought of that
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative, I, I still
cannot support your bill.
Um, mandating and raising costs
to all of it, all people across
New Mexico that actually already
followed the law.
And, and have a choice whether
they want to carry uninsured
motorist insurance or not. I um
I
I'm lost for words, Mr.
Chairman. That's it. Thank you.
Representative, is that a first
actually, Mr. Chairman, it's not
a first. It's, it's a daily
right now, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We have
Representative Houckman V Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative. Um, I
was so sorry. I was not able to
be here the first time we
brought on this bill, so Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, um, before I had my
specialization, um, and aviation
and space law. I did a lot of.
insurance,
uh, tort liability, automobile
accident, law, um, on both the
defense and the plaintiff side,
and I think what's missing, Mr.
Chairman, um, representative
members of the committee is some
context as to why this exact law
is needed. Um, if you wanna look
at this generally, are we
mandating people to carry more
insurance and that insurance is
gonna cost more money. Yes, but
Mr. Chairman, uh, members of the
committee, there is a
Very good reason for this. First
of all, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, any New Mexico
has one of the highest number of
uninsured or underinsured
motorists in the country. What
does that mean, Mr. Chairman?
That means that if you are
driving your vehicle and doing
absolutely nothing wrong, and
you get hit by someone who, uh,
let's say they're drunk, let's
say they're distracted on their
phone and they I grievously
injure you and that person is
uninsured
or they carry the minimum limits
policy of $25,000 per person,
$50,000 per accident, and you
have over $300,000 of medical
damages, that means that you're
on your own.
And this happens daily, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I can't tell you how
many cases I last case I just
had was a woman who was hit by a
drunk driver, lost her leg and
the only um insurance that was
available to her. Thank goodness
she had um what's called stacked
coverage on her underinsured
motors coverage, which means
that she had more than one
vehicle on her policy so she
could stack the coverage that
was allowed to each vehicle, but
if she had just had one vehicle
on her
The way the law is now, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, is because her
underinsured coverage did not
give her additional coverage
from what was from what the
driver had to hit her. She
didn't get any extra insurance
at all.
And the situation that is
created, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, is that we
have a number of New Mexicans
who are already paying for
minimum limits covered,
coverage, including minimum
limit limits under insurance
coverage. Who, uh, it's they're
paying for it already, but if
they don't have more insurance
than what the person who is at
fault and liable for the the
accident has, they pay for
nothing.
And that's what this bill is
fixing.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. So are we forcing
people to get more insurance? I
mean,
It's unfortunate that so many
people in the state of New
Mexico choose to drive without
insurance.
There's nothing we can do about
that, Mr. Chairman. That's
already against the law.
But what this bill would do is
it would ensure that those
people who are responsible and
who do purchase insurance,
including underinsured motives
coverage are protected that they
are getting something for the
coverage that they're already
paying for. So I don't look it
as an, I don't look at it as an
increase in cost, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee also, I
think we see uh insurance is
getting more expensive in all
facets daily because of what's
happening both.
In the state of New Mexico and
around the country, but what
this bill does, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, is it
just ensures people are getting
something that they're already
paying for.
And that's really, really
important to remember, um, you
have, you don't understand it.
You don't now know how unfair it
is until you've actually been in
that situation.
So, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, that's why I
support this bill because this
is ensuring that although
insurance companies are giving
you the option of having minimum
limits under insurance policy.
If someone else doesn't have it,
if someone has the same amount
of coverage as you do, you get
nothing.
And what this bill does is
ensure that you will get
something.
Something you're already paying
for.
Thank you, Representative
Lunstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a
question for the
Uh, insurance superintendent.
Um, and trying to get my head
around this bill. It is a little
more complicated if you don't
live and breathe this stuff
every day.
But it sounds like the current
uninsured policy does not go far
enough.
For the purchase of an
underinsured policy is
necessary.
My question to you is, is what
happens if the definition of
uninsured is expanded to cover
underinsured.
And that you do that through
administrative rule.
Because you control that.
So my question to you is, is.
One policy.
For
Uninsured and underinsured.
It's because I'm gonna tell you.
There's many folks that believe
that this stuff is a major rip
off anyway.
I mean you're paying, paying,
pay and pay and you never see
anything.
Um, I'm one of those people that
I'm the oldest vehicle I have is
fully covered, I think, until
listening to this presentation.
So who dictates this? Your
office or the company's?
Mr. Chair Representative, can I
have my chief actuary respond to
this, uh, Mr. Chair, the way, so
several states do it differently
the way that it works in New
Mexico is it is one coverage. So
you purchase coverage and you
are protected by both uninsured
motorists, which includes being.
hit by someone at fault that
does not have insurance or a hit
and run, and underinsured
motorists, which would mean you
have, uh, yeah, not enough
coverage, or they, they have
minimum limits and, and you just
need more. Um, but those two are
sold together. It's not possible
to buy one or the other. It's,
it's, it's really.
It's just you underinsured under
uninsured motors,
this would cover both.
both uninsured and underinsured
as an option.
That's what we're talking about,
the increase in cost would be
for that um Mr. Romero can
expand on the definitions, but
they are just.
You, Mister Chair
Representative. I appreciate
your comment and unless you live
and breathe this stuff daily.
It's complicated. I have lived
and breathed this stuff since
1989, it's what I do. The
definitional changes that you're
noting in the statute makes an
important change in the way the
coverage is provided to the
people who are paying for it
right now with the old
definition, that statute allows
an offset.
Of whatever an insured.
longer has a liability coverage
that gets deducted from your
uninsured motors coverage. So
anybody who has minimum limits
uninsured motors coverage, it
looks like you have minimum
limits underinsured motors
coverage, but you really have
nothing if you get hit by an
insured driver.
It gets wiped out. Whatever they
have, it wipes out your
coverage. It's an offset and our
courts have struggled with it.
Uh, because the insurance
companies can bill for it and
then provide nothing.
They've allowed that this
definitional change takes away
that offset so that when you
look at your policy and it looks
like you have 25 or 50 or
$100,000 in underinsured motors
coverage, you really have it. It
kicks in if that other driver
who has insurance doesn't have
enough to fully compensate your
damages. So it protects.
All New Mexicans who have this
coverage, if the insured driver
doesn't have enough, and I
understand majority white Huckin
B Hill has been concerned about
drivers with 25, 50 and
liability limits not having
enough coverage.
This provides that other layer
of protection to the the person
having an underinsured motors
coverage. So Mr. Chairman,
presenters.
How does this work in other
states? Do others have other
states got the same legislation
in place.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, yes, um, there
are 20 other states including um
DC Washington D that motorists
carry under.
This is where I'm getting
confused because I had
understood that when you buy the
policy you get both.
And now we're saying that we're
gonna have to.
Pay it for underinsured. In
addition to, even though we've
already paid for, paid for both.
Uh, no, ma'am, or sorry, Mr.
Chair, Madam Representative, so,
um, I know it was a while ago,
so because Tuesday in the
roundhouse was a long time ago.
So underinsured, uninsured
motorist is always covered under
the same policy. It's not, there
are always a bundle. You don't
pay for one and not the other.
They always come to us. So what
we're trying to do then is we're
trying to pay for under,
underinsured that will not be
available if we get into a wreck
with somebody else who's got
equal amount of insurance.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
I believe we are saying the same
thing at this point, yes.
Yeah, I think it, it, you know,
I and as I say, I don't live and
breathe this every day, Mr.
Chairman, but it is concerning
that we would be paying for
under, under.
Insurance, I guess.
Um, and not being able to use
it, it does that. Yes, Mr.
Chair, if I can make a quick
response to that, um, for the
non-lawyers in the room cause
I'm certainly also not one, and
when I was learning about the
details of how this bill would
work.
It was quite it was quite
confusing. So essentially the
minimum coverage of underinsured
motorists.
which would be 25, 150 is lusory
coverage because that is offset
by the minimum coverage of
liability insurance, which is
also 2550. So, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, an insurance
company can sell you an
underinsured, uninsured motorist
policy for 2550 and if you get
into an accident with someone
who has um liability insurance.
You get nothing of your own
underinsured motorist coverage.
It is completely illusory
coverage, and this bill would
fix that.
On that point of actually on to
clarify representative
Lundstrom's, um, question. I
think Representative, um, the,
the most important thing that
we're talking about here is the
offset.
So, what the problem here is, is
if you get into an accident. If
you have.
the, the minimum limits of
underinsured, uninsured motors
coverage, which is, let's just
say $25,000 per person.
And you get in an accident with
another person.
Who has minimum limits, 25,000,
50,000, and a total accident
occurrence of um uh uh bodily
injury coverage, let's say,
liability insurance because of
that required offset in the law,
they're 25 and you're 25 and
underinsured coverage cancel
each other out.
So even though you have been
paying for that $25,000 in
underinsured coverage this
entire time on your policy, you
get nothing. And the reason why
this is so important in New
Mexico, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative is because so
many drivers in this state
either drive with no insurance
at all, or they drive with
minimum limit policy. I'd, I, I,
it's an astounding percentage of
drivers in New Mexico that have
these minimum.
limits policy. So what, the
reason why the coverage is so
called illusory is because
chances are if you get in an
accident with someone with those
minimum limits and you are
required to access or utilize
your underinsured or your
uninsured coverage at $25,000.
Your, your insurance company is
gonna come back to you and say,
sorry, you get nothing, even
though you've been paying for
this coverage, there's an
offset. What can we tell you? So
again, Mister Chairman, and to,
to, um,
Armstrong's question, um, Mr.
Chairman, for fleet insurance
and for those people that choose
to carry higher liability limits
and what is the minimum,
especially those people that
choose umbrella coverage, like
usually in a fleet perspective,
higher limits and underinsured
and uninsured coverage are
usually included in those
packages. So a, a fleet package
would probably have 50 to
$100,000 in underinsured or
underinsured coverage. So even
if you are hit by someone with a
minimum limits policy.
of the 25, yes, you will have
that deduction, but you'll still
have the extra added of whatever
is included in your umbrella
policy. So, again, the way I
look at this, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, is
this isn't mandating more. This
isn't causing people to to pay
more for requiring them to have
insurance or more insurance.
It's getting them to finally get
something for what they're
already paying for.
Thank you, mister Chairman.
Thank you, members. I appreciate
the passion on any number of
bills, but please go through the
chair for recognition.
Next we have Representative
Hernandez.
Represent Lester, I apologize,
you still have the floor.
Just, I'll be quick, Mister
Chairman, I
I am very interested, uh, Mr.
Chairman in the 20 states that
have implemented this when you,
this bill passes and gets to the
floor. I ain't gonna strongly
suggest that you have some kind
of flow chart.
And that you have something that
actually depicts what you're,
what you're talking about here,
and I would like to see a copy
of the 20 states that have
already implemented this. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
um representative, and thank
you, uh, representative Lunson
that's actually my, my, uh,
question is, was, I'm a visual
learner. So if I could see it,
if I could understand what
everybody's discussing, it makes
me understand it better, Mr.
Chairman. So, um, I, I would
really appreciate that as well.
Um, Mr. Chairman, um, I made a
comment last time when this got
brought up about a uh about my
own experience.
of, of a uh accident with the
uninsured motorist, and, and
just, Mr. Chairman, for the
record, I just want to let
people know that it's safe to
come on the Navajo Nation. I, I
don't want to scare anybody. by
uh telling my story. It was just
an experience of what the police
officer letting me know of what.
He's experience with
underinsured motorists, but Mr.
Chairman, uh, uh, Madam
Representative, uh,
If, if people don't know this,
uh, we're probably the most
lawful citizens. Uh, we have
tribal law, Mr. Chairman. We
got, uh, when we leave, we have
federal law, we have to abide by
tribal law that we, when we
leave the reservation, we have
to go, we have to abide by our
accounting ordinates. We, then
we have state law. So we have 4
levels of jurisdiction that we
have to go through every single
day to get anything possible,
so, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
we're for, you know, and
Um, and what I'm doing, Mr.
Chairman, is I'm reaching out to
those experts, and I'm glad, uh,
representative you brought more
experts with you because uh one
of my experts is actually uh uh
uh uh an agent who, who actually
is more of a community, uh,
whenever somebody was chairman
needs something in the
community, this, this insurance
agent is there to help the
community and when, when I asked
him about this, this scenario,
this, uh, legislation, he was a
excited because Mr. Chairman, my
representative, he wasn't in it
to sell more policies. He was in
it to to make sure that we as
community members have a peace
of mind driving. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and uh representative
for bringing this legislation
forward.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we have Representative Morego.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair, I
appreciate the time. Thank you,
Representative, um, so in the
last, in the, in your first
presentation, um, I did have
some concerns. One was OSI and
I'm glad to see that they're
here today. The 2nd uh concern
that I had was with regard to
New Mexico's poverty rate and,
you know, the increase, and I'm
starting to kind of see the
light on this bill a little bit,
um, Mr. Chair, Mr.
chair and representative um what
I'm thinking about and I, I'm
think, and, and I have a
question because I, I think you
said in the beginning of your
presentation that it would be
about a 3% increase. Is that
what you said earlier, or did
you give us a, a, maybe I
misheard that.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
Do we have any idea what in
what percentage Alice from
um Alice King is here. I will
definitely let her answer that
so like if I had a
Let's just say, for example, I
had a and I like to look at real
life, um, if I had a 3, if I had
a $300
insurance rate.
Um
What increase might that be?
Just, I'm just hypothetical.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, the 3
representatives, the 3%
referenced earlier was the
percent of the total New Mexican
insured population that does not
carry U M U I uninsured motors
coverage today and also only
carries.
Minimum liability limits. So by
requiring to buy them to buy
this coverage, they would see
the largest increase. So 3% of
the population would add this
coverage and would see a 43%
increase would be 43% of the
population, yes, and then 7%
would see a smaller increase and
then 90% already have the
coverage and would not see any
increase clarifies that for me
then. Um, so I'm
I'm just thinking about what
Madam Whip was talking about in
her um experience with regard to
the legal um
The legal um situation if you're
in a severe car accident and you
have your insurance and you
think you have an insured
motorist protection, but then
you don't. Um, the cost of that
severe injury, um, really, this
would offset that, actually,
because then you would be
covered.
What I'm thinking, Mr. Chair,
and, and representative is that
You know, as I know, insurance
companies and I know a little
bit about them. My mom rents to
a couple of insurance companies
up north, um, there's also a
competition for um uh clients
and so, you know, by adding that
and approving this, uh, at some
point in time, those insurance
companies are gonna be competing
with each other to reduce the
cost of their insurance in order
for people to leverage
You know
Being able to have an insured
motorist, that's kind of what
I'm thinking in my mind now, and
that's why I said I've kind of
seen the light on this a little
bit is that at some point in
time, because as we know
business, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, um, you know,
businesses are gonna start
competing to to get.
To provide those services, and
um,
Which is a good thing.
Actually for the consumer, um,
and so I, I just raised that
issue because I think that those
are important issues is if we do
approve this, that, um, you
know, at some point there is a
uh assurance, I guess, that
You know, if you're in a severe
car accident,
Your medical costs are gonna be
um offset by that.
Percentage of increase at some
point. So I just wanted to
Mention that as I was thinking
through all of this discussion
is that it's starting to make
some sense to me. Oh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
honestly still struggling with
this representative, um, part of
my concern is I
I vote favor of the bill, um,
The headline will be
Representative Brown votes to
increase insurance costs.
bill coverage.
And I'd have to spend probably
20 minutes, 30 minutes
explaining all the details that
we've just heard about. So, uh,
for that reason, just on the
surface level, but um I'm just
wondering, um, so we've talked
about the offset.
And I initial thought was, why
don't we just remove the offset
feature with that solve
anything. Now, I do have
something on page 2 of the bill.
Um, so it's page 2 of the
committee so starting at line
14.
And here it says, point blank
language, no offset of
underinsured motors coverage.
shall be taken based on wonder
insured tortfeasor.
So, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, could you just
talk about that a little bit,
help me understand, please.
Absolutely. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Brown for that question. Um,
yes, this bill will fix that
offset issue that we discussed,
um, so to put it in clearer
terms, if I could have Mr. Berto
expand on that, please. Thank
you, chairs representative that
that fix is one of the important
features of this bill, and it
does fix that problem. It
removes the offset features of
people who think.
They bought underinsured motors
coverage actually get it. So
that's one of the things that
this bill does accomplish. It's
fixed.
Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna award
brownie points for that. I think
that that was one of the
concerns that I had.
And I'm wondering, Mr. Chairman,
what incentive do I have if this
bill passes and is signed into
law, what incentive do I have to
maintain automobile coverage
where I do right now, which is
um
Substantial, I would say. Um,
what would make me not want to
go down to the lowest level
possible if I'm in an accident
somehow it's all gonna take care
of itself. So that's one of the
question and maybe I'm not
articulating that very well, but
what incentive does any insured
motorist have.
They have a high level of
coverage.
Mr. Chair Representative, and
please let me know if I'm not
answering your question because
I'm not positive that I get what
you're asking me, but um what
this bill would do is if every
motorist who carries insurance
and uninsured underinsured motor
driver's protection ex
percentage of high under the
state of New Mexico. So if
everybody's running around with
just liability insurance, which
is currently the case, they
still have a 1 in 4 chance of
having with an uninsured.
motorist, and I believe those
numbers were, I don't remember
the exact number that I gave
you. It was like 13,000.
500 something accidents a year
and or fatality. That's how many
uninsured $20.2 million that the
New Mexico tax.
And so this would reduce that
number for New Mexico taxpayers
significantly and make sure that
all insured drivers in New
Mexico are covered by uninsured
for their uninsured.
Mr. Chairman representative, I,
I, I think we're at.
A cross purpose is just a little
bit, maybe I, I, like I said, I
didn't express it well, but I
don't know why I'd wanna, I
mean, I could save money for any
insured person can by just
reducing coverage altogether,
saying, oh, this law is, if
something happens.
This will, this will kick in,
and meanwhile I can go down to
the
Lowest levels. You see what I'm
saying? Maybe the superintendent
would like to
answer that question, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
yes, I'm sorry, Ms. Kane, um, I
know that Jeffrey and Alice both
probably want to answer that
question.
Hope I remember it, Mr. Chair,
Representative, uh.
You can't, now you, once this
bill goes into place, you can't
go down to the lowest coverage,
you have to take that, you'll
have standard plus this benefit
to protect you for uninsured or
underinsured, uh.
Motorists that are at fault.
Right now, if you have minimum,
you don't have to take this
benefit with this mandated
coverage, you will have this
benefit and this protection, and
there will be no offset, which
usually is in the under Mister
chair. I
I still think I have a valid
question there somewhere, um,
and so maybe Mr. Romero would
like to take a stand.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represented, I can't answer your
question. People don't recognize
that uninsured underinsured
motors coverage is the most
important coverage you can have
for your family in a vehicle
because it protects you and your
family if you get hurt or
someone gets killed because of
an uninsured or underinsured
motorists. The incentive to you
to not go to the lowest limit is
because of the potential
consequences to your family.
$25,000. That's little for a
family when dad or mom has been
killed and it is not.
there to provide that lost
income housing for the children,
so you always have an incentive
to buy as much as you can afford
it particularly.
Let me switch gears so um, let's
say I have 1 or 2 vehicles,
they're both very old vehicles,
and I only have collision. I
choose not, does that.
change anything about the
discussion.
Chair, representative, uh, you
can't right now purchase only
collision coverage you would
have to buy liability coverage,
um, on any vehicle you operate
on the roadway that's
registered, so you'd have
liability, and here you would
have now uninsured motors
coverage. What you're able to do
though with the the way this
bill is featured. Say for
example, you carry $100,000 in
liability coverage. You don't
have.
1000 uninsured motors coverage
on that vehicle, you can pick
the lower limit, and uh I think
an important thing that the
superintendent indicated is for
all.
Insured New Mexican drivers, 90%
won't see any rate increase. The
rate increases are 10%.
7% of those are small increase,
3% will have larger increase.
Um, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
um.
Representative, you, you've
jogged my memory is.
It's been a while since I've
looked at our auto insurance
policy, we are required to have
liability, as you said.
It's collision that we can
decide not to carry.
Mr. Chair representative, that
is correct. That's an optional
coverage unless you're financing
your vehicle to lender won't
give you the option.
Oh my, um.
Mr. Chair, I guess the, the
Hard part from where I, I've
heard everything that's been
spoken, and um I don't disagree
with a lot of it. I just don't
know.
how to explain this to my
constituents.
Um, I think it was a helpful
suggestion to have some kind of
a
Chart or one pager or something,
it is a proof.
This is a beneficial bill for um
for everyone.
And um
So I, I would really encourage
someone to create that and
disseminate it.
And um I, you know, this passes
here and then heads to uh.
Emerson economic development,
um, I think at least at that
stop, it would be good to have
this as an explanation, just
make it easier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you ranking member for a
2nd time, Representative D.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you Representative. I actually
have more questions based on um
Hoffman B. Hill's comments. So,
and also I'm just wondering, is
the, is OSI here supporting this
bill? or are you here as an
expert witness?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
both.
Mr. Representative, OK. So, um,
our FIR said that the cost of
the insured.
people who are the good citizens
who are following the Mexico
law.
That they will see a 27%
increase in their insurance
policies.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
and I believe that was the same
in the bill that you've
referenced that you've now
adopted.
That the insurance costs will go
up. Have
Jeffrey have the costs of
insurance gone up in the 20
states that have adopted this.
Representative, uh, please turn
your mic off each time.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Yeah, I think there are two
separate pieces of this bill
which are confusing a lot of
people. There's the offset
provision, uh, and then in
addition to that, we are
mandating the purchase of UM UIM
coverage. So yes, if you are an
insured and you do not purchase
you I am covered today and we're
requiring you to purchase it.
Your premium will increase
because you are now buying an
additional coverage.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
costs for the people who are
insured will go up, and the
estimate, that's thank you,
Jeffrey. So,
The next question is,
My option as someone who's
deciding between feeding my
family, paying my utility
increases, all those sorts of
things, is to carry this new
mandated insurance or become a
lawbreaker and drop my insurance
altogether. Is that Mr. Chair
Representative. So I'm wondering
if you think that increasing
costs of insurance by 27% will
encourage the 25% of uninsured
people to go get coverage or
will more people that are living
paycheck to paycheck, dropped
their insurance, and I, I, I.
like to hear what you guys think
about that and what happened in
the other states.
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you very much for those
questions. I think we need to
kind of reset a little bit and
remind people that it is a crime
already not to carry insurance,
it is tracked by a database.
That if you are caught in an
accident or just pulled over for
any traffic violation and you
don't have insurance, um, you'll
be pulled over sided in some
instances, they will just tow
your vehicle right on the spot,
so this whole.
Focusing the issue on the
uninsured driver, that is still
very much illegal. Second, I
believe we, we have articulated
a number of times that we don't
believe that that 27% increase
in like in
premium rate is entirely
accurate, because right now,
uninsured motorist is priced to
be unappealing, the insurance
companies do not want people
purchasing uninsured motorist
coverage because it is most
expensive to the insurance
companies, because what we are
talking about, we are talking
about more people having more
insurance and yet for some
reason we had at least 2
representatives for insurance
companies come here and say that
that is a bad thing, which
is counterintuitive, if nothing
else.
Why insurance companies would be
against people buying more
insurance, I would have to look
into that. Like, why wouldn't
they like that apart from the
fact that it would be more
expensive for the insurance
companies. So what we are
talking about as reprego
mentioned earlier, Mr. Chair.
Is that insurance companies
would then have to compete with
each other.
To make uninsured motorists as
appealing, so they get the most
clients and the most coverage
and Jeffrey, if you wanna.
Expand on that, you, Mister
Chair, representative, that's
the truth of it, being companies
hate uninsured motors coverage,
and so they price it to get
people to reject it.
And they set up schemes where
they can.
charge on every car and get you
to check a box to reject
stacking, so you pay for every
vehicle, get wiped out if you're
hit by an uninsured motorist,
and so important in the numbers
that we're discussing, I think
that the early numbers were
wrong. And I said as much the
first time that I testified,
Superintendent Kane is here
today indicating they, they did
a mathematical error and they
fixed the numbers 90% by their
numbers will not see an
increase, 7% will, and the 3%.
that looks high, the 45% or 43%
increase. My, my belief is it
won't be that because those are
folks who buy
lawyer products, for example,
lawyer competes for the lowest
price insurance lawyer wants
those insured, the lawyer will
still have to compete. If this
is a mandated project, you're
gonna have to compete and the
prices will reflect that
competition.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Superintendent.
Jeffrey. Give me one example of
mandated insurance that reduced
that resulted in a reduced cost
for, for cost. When we mandate
an insurance, give me an example
of insurance that went down.
Mr. Chair Representative.
I don't know that there is one,
but the fact of the matter is,
is that if we mandate uninsured
motorists, the cost for the
state does go down because the
state is paying every single
time there's an uninsured
motorist accident, we have to
pay all those medical bills. And
like I said, in 2023, that was
$20.2 million that the state had
to pay.
And this would spread the cost.
And reduce the state's time.
Representative just to
interject, are you talking about
a national uh level that, that
it's reduced nationally. Is that
what you were asking, correct?
Just for clarification.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
I've only known of studies when
something's mandated.
That costs go up. I don't know
of an example of mandated.
Anything.
Where costs go down. So just in
general, but I mean, so, so I'm
trying to understand. So we're
shifting the cost from the state
to the consumer. Mr. Chair.
And representative.
When I, let's say that I have
one of these accidents, and I've
got the proper coverage cause
you mandated me to have it. I
didn't want it, but you
protected me. So will then my
insurance costs go up because I
had a claim.
Uh, with an, I had to cover the
uninsured motorists. Well, my
insurance costs then go up, will
my premiums rise?
Mr. uh Mr. Chair Representative,
no, cause that's not allowed.
And second, since we are talking
about insurance in the broad
national scheme, which I didn't
understand when you asked it the
first time. Oh, you weren't. OK,
well, cause I was gonna point
out that Obamacare brought
medical costs down, and that was
mandated insurance, but if
that's not what you're
referencing, then never mind.
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
could argue that too, because I
would say that if you look at
the cost of.
Yeah.
Point of order, Representative.
Having any kind of flow chart,
it's very hard. I, I just feel
that we, I don't know how we can
take action on something we
don't understand.
And that's just me. I, I don't
live and breathe this stuff
every day, but I would like to
see something that explains what
we're voting on.
And, and when we're talking
about things like Obamacare and
this other stuff, I mean, I
don't know how we're getting
there.
I don't know that it's germane
either, um.
Representative
Are you willing to roll this
bill again and bring some visual
aids. I know that at least a
couple of representatives asked
for, I wouldn't mind it myself,
just like.
Um, Mr. Chair representative,
yes, or sorry, I guess just your
question, Mr. Jar, if you would
like, um, some visual aids
because I too am a very visual
person. I could um come up with
a slide.
Presentation, so we can really
illustrate what we're talking
about, but
Um
So
I think that's a good idea to do
that, and we'll, we'll have you
back as quickly as possible.
Um
Now we have a, we have to uh
move the
The
The committee sum, correct?
We
I thought we already adopted.
I thought we did discussion.
I'll move the committee we have
a motion from
second from representative
Homaneel.
Anybody in opposition.
OK, we're good. Rep, I think
it's worth it we had uh
secretary Cerna do that with a
board, he literally gives a
former school teacher did a
wonderful job, not that you have
to do that per se, but I think
it would really help.
Uh, the members of the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, and we
can have a discussion about what
specificd um I'm also a very
visual learner, so I understand
that. Thank you very much. Thank
you. So we'll, we'll bring you
back.
see no further business, we
adjourn.
