Which is part.
Representative is.
Representative Harper is here
Representative.
Representative Madrid
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Romero here
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
We have.
Yes Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so how school one
fifty eight basically is a bill
that deals with what when I
called the Burchfield fix
I have back in two thousand
communicated from the two
thousand sixteen or so
Burchfield came out and what it
did was take the officers to
draw blood when there was a
suspect in this
drugs is assistant in less it
was challenging for us as well
as a D. W. why the vault
accident that caused great
bodily harm for thanks and
support.
With that some place that one
set two and three were all yes
yes yes and so part of this bill
deals with he was authorized to
draw blood and there was a case
it came out that allows
emergency technicians at the
legislative agency to to allow
that they were considered people
that were at the statute clearly
allows you
to be able to operate the
Roberts drop as flat and so that
part of that is that may need
that language but the more
crucial part of it is the
problem we're having with D. W.
wise now that cannabis is legal
and so what happens is like a
typical stopped for DWI an
officer will video or whether
it's a technical violation
whether it's driving that they
feel and this somebody might be
impaired and so madam chair
representative of the committee
what what happens and is your
normal D. W. why stop and it is
alcohol related based nonprofit
called pay start you're going to
their field sobriety tests and
making a determination in their
opinion if they feel this person
is for us the tax effect
intoxicating liquor judge our
our drives in this what
leveraging specifically talk
about alcohol this point and I
can show you the difference and
in that situation lady to field
sobriety tests and then they
make their determination that
time whether that person under
the influence based on
everything they're seen
retailers I consent they can
take a process that you refuse
which of course can give that
more time in jail they refuse or
they can go down and take a
breath test but when we
Also this care this regulation
and obviously now we have an
issue with the repair drivers
under the influence of marijuana
and other controlled substances
and some of those individuals
get pulled over and they say the
first second or third offense
misdemeanor level they they
don't have the opportunity madam
chair for members of the
committee for this blood tests
so what happens in this
situation unless you have what's
called the drive recognition
expert and I'll explain those
are experts that are basically
training and its extensive
training on how to detect drugs
in the system and they go
through lots of lots of training
is extremely expensive and when
they get it they tend to move on
to other departments or leave us
there are very few of those in
the state at that question rural
communities where if you suspect
somebody's other influence of
marijuana let's say you can't
really call Dr recognition
outside expert at the times and
that would be would perform your
field sobriety tests and then
make a determination that
persons under the influence or
not in the.
What this law does is it gives
the officer the ability with
everything that they're seeing
whether it's bad driving the
smell of marijuana use these
rare ones that'll see more one
in the car
just the the field sobriety
tests in general or the drug
recognition field sobriety tests
to then apply for search
warrants so the search warrant
would be applied for it would be
taken to a judge and the judge
will determine if that person's
blood is going to be drawn and
then we would use those in first
second and third offenses that
make an officer believe there's
probable cause of search
warrants should be sought after
Madam chair representative media
it also point out that you
judges could have session on
this search warrants a lot of
people have an issue with
somebody drawing their blood
safety I don't I don't like that
you know we do we do do our
families we do no accidents for
alcohol all the time but I would
stress that there have to be a
search warrant for that and then
the next argument always as well
okay so you have a search
warrant and you get a test and
it actually is positive for
cannabis how do you know because
I know this question will be
asked chair members of the
committee how DO they smoked
marijuana J. at night you know
where's your levels going to be
and I guess that's something
we're still going to need to
work through but trying cases to
jury as long as I have it they
don't see a drug test you're way
more likely to just get into
quite often because they want to
see I think what it does is it
cooperates what that officer see
ensured me cross examined on
when they use it maybe inTaos
could say higher levels are at
an idea it's not going to be a
person like a point oh eight or
above to tell you somebody's
under the influence of you know
alcohol like for state alcohol
that it will cooperate to jury
that what that officer seed
maybe that.
Driving a smell of marijuana
marijuana in the car but shot
watery eyes all the different
things looked at slurred speech
different different things
falling around with what's of
our state can get things
together and then they fail
those field sobriety tests and
without officer determines okay
this isn't alcohol this is
tribes it allows a search want
to the process and then just
search for it to happen
I will say that I talked with
state police dept on this and
their actions experts I found
out thirty minutes ago this bill
is up to replace
state police was their full
support of this is also one of
the governor's agenda bills she
would like to see this move
forward so that we can deal with
accidents said NDW wise with the
new cannabis passing and so it
it I don't think it affects it's
it's same with voting I believe
is added in here
and I know there will be some
questions about whether this
will costs analysts to have to
go testify all the time but as
you see my next bill it was a
bill that deals with testimonial
for misdemeanor analysts to
testify in these cases so that
they can basically be in the lab
where they need to be and I've
I've talked to just from this
justices from the Supreme Court
really looked at that too and
they seem to think there's going
to be a confrontation issue so
that could be addressed in the
next bill but that is
essentially what this bill does
it gives officers a tool gives
prosecution of pool to actually.
Get this in front of a jury so
the jury elections tried a lot
of cases in front of a jury to
just say there's no blood test
they want to know if they want
to know is there is there honor
cannabis in there and and then
yeah we'll have to go to the
next level of what does that
really need but you take that
and use that yes to collaborate
everything else is seen and then
the jury to decide that's enough
to leave the person was under
the influence to the slightest
of three and possibly convict on
a DWI I believe this is at a
bill that provides safety if
people believe that D. W. eyes
are happy mother under the
influence of cannabis they're
happening all the time in every
jurisdiction and people are
dying from and I am state police
associated and and they support
this the governor supports this
is one of the prime bills she
wants to see move forward so
with that madam chair and.
Being thank you want to add a
list Liz Liz Johnson chief no I
am so read.
A last minute notice on this but
they were supposed to be here is
experts but I guess the online
calendar was down last night so
I it was in my you see to thirty
minutes ago so here I am but at
with that band share I would
stand for questions.
Representative let's go to the
audience is there anybody here
in favor of.
Say that a post.
Okay seeing of one of what was
going on soon okay can we hear
from that person please.
My name is Sheila Parker I think
this bill is like totally insane
at.
How are you going to there's no
actual limit for what you do
when you're testing person for
cannabis and obviously as you
said cannabis stays in your
system for awhile so how it just
seems completely arbitrary in
your it seems like you're just
making it easier for people for
the police to prosecute people
who are smoking marijuana or who
the assume are under the
influence of marijuana so I
don't know I just don't think
that imposing further
regulations that is a good idea
When there's no actual like good
yes is there a good yes or there
is some sort of like.
Yes if there is a good has or
some sort of like reliable
empirical evidence could prove
that a person is under the
influence in the state.
They were not driving and I
think I would I would support it
right now I just can't thank you
thank you very much.
Members of the committee.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair read good
morning to you.
So I I this is not an area of
the law that I do practices so I
appreciated your your remarks to
start us off this morning and
madam chair I I don't really
have any issues with the
substance of the bill but I do
somewhat with the choices of the
drafting of the bill said just
like to go through.
Also I noticed in section one of
the bill madam chair
representative that there's only
really one word change in level
part of statute and that is on.
Page three of the bill.
One seven it's adding the words
graph.
So it reads are refusing to
submit to chemical breath
testing.
Am I missing anything in terms
of other changes in section one.
Madam.
Okay okay so
I would like to go on to the
next section of the building in
that store on page eleven.
At the bottom of the page and
then over to the next page.
So there are some
inconsistencies and how things
are worded in the bill for
example it lying to page twelve.
This is section sixty six dash
dash one three of the code it
says
and this is stuff that the title
basically the section chemical
blood tests persons qualified to
test relief from liability but
if we go over to another section
of the.
During the.
Page eighteen.
One seven their their references
to persons qualified to perform
yes.
It will saliva madam.
We need to yeah it's at nine
starting at one seven and then
really the the.
Work performed is online eight
but the work performed is to yes
or to perform tests and I just
think as a matter of.
Rafting it ought to be the water
the other system that would be
more is it it's not a
substantive issue but to me it
should be the state however we
decided on that share so I'm not
going to propose an amendment on
that there's sort of a
divergence of opinion if
some people say it was just like
Judiciary fixes yes and
Judiciary doesn't like that so
it's better that we fix things
in in whatever committee at the
time and then a couple other
things on the wording madam
chair on fact page twelve.
Of the drafter did some changes
in the articles and looking for
me just go ahead and read a
story like three only of
physicians licensed professional
or practical nurse.
emergency medical technician or
certified phlebotomist for and
there were eight or technology
employed by a hospital or
physician children draw blood
from the strip.
Representative the word any put
in a person.
in the performance of a chemical
blood tests and then however
only tend to go back to the word
in the when I I guess it could
be a person instead of any
person there and then down on
line twelve the strike in the
go with the article
a judicial probation officer so
it's just this is the drafting
thing more than anything there
so madam chair the just going
next to
Page thirteen and this is
section four of the bill and
this is more in receive a
citation sixty six dash eight
dash one eleven this is refusal
to submit to chemical tests
everywhere else.
Talk about simple blood tests so
my question managers other other
tests.
Do we need that we're going in
there to be consistent are there
other tests that might be an
few here care Madam chair
representative I'll defer to.
A lot of requests.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Brown I think
what's going on in this draft is
a confusion with.
Our kids because person sets out
to categories and rules for each
category and says for
breathalyzers hello is this for
chemical blood tests to rule as
this I'm not sure that at the
time this is track those
distinctions workers stood so
I'm in agreements that it might
could take a second look to
ensure the terms are appropriate
But but generally the chemicals
just referred to as a blood test
okay thank you thank you madam
chair and I'm just going to turn
this copy over to Mr marked up
and I think she's actually
finish here C. madam chair I
have one more.
Question perhaps.
let's see I think I hope that
that Senate chairman of which
that office to this over to the
thank you thank you the effects
of the.
Thank you madam chair just just
one quick comment thank you for
for for the bill I know it's
been a lot of discussion about
cannabis
And might be able to just for
why this move for this year but
I'll just mention there are lots
this is the first time we've
seen this bill there are lots of
other substances that it's very
hard to detect I think in fact
no seeking.
Pain and other things that you
know there's not a breathalyzer
test for and it just makes sense
to me you know I I spent twenty
years developing biological
Lassies they're very accurate.
It makes sense to.
If someone is driving impaired.
We should be able to tell what
was causing.
I was.
Riding up five twenty eight just
last week and on the night of
what was the street it goes dark
and this pick up truck.
also although traffic stops you
know it was in an accident this
pickup truck decides to
turnaround over the media you
know also I twenty age and as I
screaming and sparks.
And you know.
If someone is driving like that
we should all.
Were they just making some bad
choices for the under the
influence.
So with that Madam appreciate
the opportunity thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Wasn't clear how powerful the
level to be determined.
After.
Madam chair representative so so
what will happen is the blood
drive will be Terry the search
for will be sought after if the
judge approves at the level of
the job that will go to a lapse
like it used to for alcohol and
Dr what would happen in those
cases if it came back zero for
alcohol than they would test for
controlled substances at that
point it would take up you know
as Representative Harper said
and madam chair Representative
like methamphetamine cocaine you
know that federal anything
that's in the system and for
marijuana it would also pick a
Candace and then it picks it up
and different levels
and and you can tell whether
it's you can't tell us exactly
what somebody.
Yes there's ofpercent limit
exactly and so but it will show
you the the levels how high it
is and how low it is and I for
one can't state I I believe an
expert that in my experience to
it at least testifies at the
levels let's say a cannabis in
there is consistent with the
fact but they tend to look at
that this person was driving all
over the road that they smelled
marijuana that they failed to
field sobriety tests because
there still has to be you know
reasonable suspicion to pull
somebody over and they just
gives law enforcement pool and
prosecutors a tool and juries
chance to see that okay this
officer isn't just making this
up okay there actually is
cannabis in the system and then
you know there will be defense
cross examination on it I'm sure
to with the analyst and what
that actually means that you
would be surprised what analysts
can actually tell you based on
levels of different substances
and they'll tell you and that's
is pretty low that activists you
know to date seconded yesterday
two days ago they do that on
regular patrol substance to but
what they can say what I'm
seeing in the slightest is
consistent with what this
officers documenting in the
search warrant and what he sees
on the road and so it doesn't it
anagrams and
if you want to add lab right on
all
just one thing chair
representative
that is where in this will try
to Representative Reese next
bill dust where the expertise of
the experts that are actual.
It is proven to be very valuable
because they can find testing
process cations of drones
testimony will classifications
of drugs are things together and
ultimately that's kind of.
Trial to determine.
Thank you madam chair one more
question so our field officers
certified officer and field.
What what are their options now.
Well Representative Madam chair
representative so what happens
now of as a they signed all
those those signs they believe
someone is under the influence
and let's say it's for tracks
and I think it's always keep ask
for consent to take a test if
they refuse you can do about it
you just want to have a.
Thank you sickos twelve cherry
Stewart during their money is
going to be wondering why don't
we have a yes here and that's
the problem Adam in this stage
they want to see factual
evidence.
Yes we cross examined however it
is going to be cross examined
this is a step in the right
direction it is for safety is
for all of us on the road and
we just can't just add one into
place madam chair Representative
I think everybody there was a
lot of people to take into
account that are going to be
side issues to this we have
brought this up for at
committees I think we've been
trying to pass a bill like this
for a couple years now
and this is first because
cannabis is legal we're seeing
the effects of it and the
governor scene the effects of it
and state police barracks but so
I know law forces backing this
type of self and love to give
law enforcement the tools and
our criminal justice system the
tools to present a case and K.
to juries thank you that
decision thank you for thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much for the US.
Thank you I like to the public
comments so I agree with
Representative Brown I think
there there are some drafting
issues that.
The only way to make sure that
all the terms are for
consistently throughout the bill
I also have some little comply
have practice I do think that
virtual standard gets can use
within this context I think that
very marijuana is different in
that and recreational marijuana
is legal in New Mexico so we
need to very clear as to whether
or not a warrant can be issued
in that particular instance
right so probably because
obviously needs to be there but
what constitutes probable causes
someone you know it's today have
red eyes of the that you know
because my allergies are these
are the words are I just feel
like the Burchfield standard
here is is really being
stretched and I'd like to see
more a delineation between what
would constitute that behavior
that is probably because that's
just this dating warrant.
Within the purview Burchfield
and what what may not get there
so what I would like to suggest
if you're open to a
representative because
we.
And much of the other committees
for sending bills on to their
second committee without fixing
some of the issues that we see
is I would I'm happy to offer to
work with you I'm sure
Representative Brown maybe you
are getting some of these
There is taking care in the bill
once we feel a little bit better
about the language we can bring
it back in here a second time if
you're open to that.
Thank you madam chairman
definitely that the additional
support and I think these are
major changes are as manager
just COVID I also think that the
what you're talking about
specifically the problem will
cost language we really have to
be laid out a search warrant and
legally sufficient and I so I I
understand your point but I also
feel that because we are getting
a search warrant and it is
probably because it is based on
the entirety of what happened
that I would hope that would not
be an issue with the judge
because that's their job is to
review it for probable cause.
Interest on that point madam
chair the other thing about
specifying each instance were
probable costs found forward
exception exists is you would
probably have a bill this week
because it's all in case law
sure your member the bar exam.
But so but I I think that would
be good discussion to have what
constitutes an effort to
something that's appropriate
versus not maybe not each
individual thing from each case
but I'm sure there's something
we can agree on that.
Process and doesn't have to you
don't have to do right now every
every action that the constant
probable cause but I think we're
in this strange times stated
Mexico that we have recreational
marijuana and we're trying to
figure out what is what is not
impaired driving so it's kind of
as a state legislators to figure
out what exactly that looks like
so we again can't be right
everything but we have to come
up with some standard and I
think that this bill is going to
be a big part of that so I
appreciate the bill thank you
for bringing it happy to work
with you on it and vaccines we
can.
Thank you madam chair real space
and get right back to you hope
that you would get thank you so
much.
And you're staying in the same
place for one.
Right okay.
Thank you and this is also one
fifty nine related to traffic
offenses and what it does is
provide for testimony I
interactive video providing for
laboratory analysis to appear by
video on misdemeanor offenses
this is a bill that.
We felt was important to bring
forward.
So what happens is invested in
magistrate court and had a lot
of cases where lab analysts do
need to testify on other
substances and I just need to be
in the lack of.
That they're traveling all over
the state testifying and I think
that's why things are backed up
in different counties like CSK
County intending to that nature
so this is a video on
misdemeanors that allows.
This is a bill on the speakers
which allow these individuals to
actually testified via video
and will give them a chance
after fleeing cross examined and
Save time and money of course
I'd get pieces for faster that's
one of the concerns from the
previous bill that if
we are requiring blood tests and
lab analysts need to see that
their they're they're running
all over you can give me a call
back at five percent.
and they're not in the lab tests
which is backing everything up I
talks with them some of the
justices on this report talk
about how this whole the
computation which is now a big
issue and with COVID have seen
as you all see what we can do a
video I was in question would
speak with them that they can
not feel the speed confrontation
issue that we could actually
especially in the building or
laboratory and analysts that is
basically pretty basic stuff and
sometimes are interchanged with
other lab analysts that this
would be a bill that would be a
great time to introduce with
with what we see through the
pandemic what we can do through
the pandemic for video testimony
and so it's really all this will
is and I think it's simple and
I've I've talked to district
attorneys and I think this would
save a lot of cost any money
four point and for prosecutors
and defense attorneys and so
that's basically the gist of the
bill so with that I stand for
questions.
Andrea have anybody in the
audience for this film.
Anybody opposing this bill.
Anybody on.
We'll go to the committee
committee members.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative read I'll just
say I think
In the era of zoom where we
spent two years doing you know a
lot of this over video and and
we have the opportunity still
confront your accuser ask
questions.
I see this is a no brainer it's
pry fastest time so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much Representative Harper
Representative from thank you
madam chair
Representative Representative
reef I I have a couple of
questions first of all.
So this is all new with material
that would appear in the implied
consent act.
And I think the the first of the
paragraph is really important of
the bill if it does talk about
what we expect to be there terms
of which is six and things like
that.
The question I have is if the
party is safe there they're
they're in the process of this.
Testimony and something about
the video feed goes on the Fritz
or something is there a process
for saying stop we're not going
to do this and if I do I assume
it's logical that manager yes
Representative running of
something like this happens the
court can continue the matter
until the video states it does
happen you know we do it of
course and what technology does
I haven't seen it that often but
sure there's always the ability
for the parties to the state
okay this isn't working and we
need to you to reset this one it
does or wait until they get it
up and running.
Madam chair and the sense is
that it's not in the in the
proposed
A bill that is is there a
procedure rule of.
That we're what.
Yes I'm chair of the brother
there are of course rules judge
discretion and all these
different areas to continuing to
you know can commence a
continuing series which time is
not you know you don't run out
of time it's if you started your
hearing already so yes there's
there's plenty of opportunities
and and if I do that sometimes
you do want as a prosecutor
there there in person because
it's more effective obviously to
have somebody there percent if I
was going to do at the very
least a case that I felt had a
lot of you know or want to that
person in person because lab
analysts are impressive in
person is not something I
generally steer towards any of
testimony but.
Our problem is is that these
lab analysis are available and
if we could do something like
this at least for misdemeanors
and traffic offenses that would
really really save time money.
And madam chair representative
so that is is just misdemeanors
not felonies so that that gives
me some level of coverage that
I I did read the analyses or at
least they've pinions from we
heard from the administrative
office of the courts you Elsie's
this is an assistant editor for
DTS the administrative office of
the district attorney's law
offices of the public defender
and then the The New Mexico
Attorney General so.
As an attorney I share some of
the concerns they have about
concussion of witnesses and
there's reference to a case
Merioles versus Craig.
It's it's a very interesting
reading but yeah at the end of
it I think we come down is I
think this is reasonable
legislation that that isn't
necessarily going to do any kind
of constitutional
but the problem with the bill is
the very last sentence.
Is that so this is a page to.
Whatever Tory Evans to subpoena
to testify and cheer the court
proceeding about chemical
testing that the analyst for
pursuant to this section the
defendant shall be deemed to
have given consent to the
analysts.
Our music interactive video.
I don't see one following the
other madam chair
it's it's a legal fiction is at
the end I consent I we do that
already and chair representative
if this this just seems to set
up.
Of a person who's you know the
question here you know.
If if you could just explain to
me how do you.
Make peace with this last
sentence Madam.
Madam chair representative brown
I think that
This is the way I look at it is
and and I understand what you're
saying that may need a little
bit of revision I think
originally math tried cases
where
One of the situations where
defense once the witness to be
there
we have video
the judge will say okay that's
fine and if it's like let's say
it's an expert and the experts
could be very costly to come
from California to New Mexico I
had my I had to just say well
we're going to you can actively
this felony a disability right
K. like your you basically have
to I'm gonna allow them to
testify by video but as state
when I asked to do the same
thing I was held under a
different standard I basically
had to have the witness there so
they can be cross examined in
person because defense wouldn't
agree with that
and I'm thinking that this may
be kind of the way it's going to
basically once that this happens
that the defendant will have a
say in whether they your by
video it will just be allowed
but I think you're right this
languages it's kinda redundant
and could be cleaned up a little
for sure.
Representative groups that I
yeah I I would feel better if
that were to introduce a little
bit so finalization I'd like to
make madam chair is yes
Representative per person we.
With John soon for the last
couple years
Dr Torrez wanted to
But if there was a
constitutional issue if there is
one here.
We did this for two years on
soon.
If if if there's a
constitutional problem it should
be applied during that period as
well.
Hello we we said it's okay and
so that tells me there's
precedent here for this type of
method and I think Madam chair
representative you're right this
will really help with cases a
long got highly trained people
who were spending time on the
road going to to hearings to
really less you said the N. Y.
that's there that's where
there is greatest thank you
madam chair tech hunter for
you just described in the
there were you know some
challenges throughout the
comment period and and nothing
that the pandemic out legally
that that this was a right at
that you know the issue with the
right to confrontation so I
agree with you I don't see any
issues legally with this anymore
since COVID and I mean Madam one
other I think we're still under
the governor's emergency health
orders.
So until that gets lifted it's
almost like this this question
really isn't the main office and
madam chair is.
Of the I think the civil courts
are still totally almost
telephonic so it's not totally
telephonic and my number is a
civil court judge and he still
isn't doing in person hearings
criminal is a little different
but absolutely still there's
still a lot of testimony and
when you're even a civil judge
and you can see why at the end
of this finance orders people
testifying everything is spent
developing video for him there's
been no issues but I miss lots
of different.
Thank you for thank you
representative Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the bill.
Want to produce different
perspective.
West there will be put on to
House Appropriations this year
and once the listen Madam chair.
To all the different
presentations all the budgets
from all state parks.
We have
consistently
People with the the committee
concerns over the concerts.
And well we've we've we've got a
we need more money because with
the takes more of the state.
The business owner about it
that's not actually true but I
watched it for.
Thank you for that so.
With that.
We do have a high vacancy rate
and several of our areas.
And that is a concern for me.
Madam chair representative when
you talk about.
Our lab people different
forensics whatever it is.
Yesterday we heard testimony on
that from from one organization
on the handsets we need to add
for more forensic scientists.
And.
we need this and this came from
from.
Secretary foodie.
News the executive or the LFC
recognize their requests.
But yet they're still held to
make sure that they can do the
job they need to do I think this
bill like this something like
this that and we've already
proven that we can do this
sometimes ineffectively
sometimes affected Lee over the
last two years this only makes
sense that that we put this in
the law and and and continue to
use up that that everybody's.
Either free to have a look to I
appreciate the bills I think
we've proven the.
Like I said once again the need
it and with presentation center
HSC with with law enforcement
courts in the dust.
Of all us for additional head
count.
In the majority of them didn't
get the money that they ask for.
For the head count.
I think this all makes sense
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative Mike
is dismissing also with the cost
of the technology is already in
place and because we've been
doing it for years so I think
that and and that's all the levy
is low on analysts and and there
did these rural areas it takes
forever to get to and so they go
Clovis they're not gonna make it
back for another you know till
the end of the day and the whole
day as well.
Madam chair representative
Europe I live in a county that
the only reason users can you
and yes.
Thank you much anybody else.
I do have a couple of questions
and comments and so I think that
this was a very interesting
scenario for us I I think I see
a couple other built in terms of
presenting testimony for
Children sexual assault victims
right and whether or not to the
right confrontation still
applies and in that factual
scenario.
I see some similarities here I
have some analysis here and in
in the our house announces that
says that technically this still
would violate the Craig standard
for confrontation which
obviously credit was from twenty
sixteen a little bit different
world back then
and if we are still under the
governor's public health order
whether or not those set that
standard was suspended I'm not
sure I'm I'm not a legal expert
on that
couple things I would like to
know though however for voting
on this bill is what what's the
phrase standards specifically
put on hold because of the
public health crisis was there
some sort of direction that we
receive from the point that the
Supreme Court put out of.
The memo or something the talked
about spending try as we have
all of these in in the face to
face procuring support launches
and and whether or not we can
expect for this confrontation or
the or the standard to return I
and.
Very hesitant to codify into
staff to something that may not
be technically constitutional
right now I would love to get
that information I see where
everybody's coming from the live
in a different world now it
makes complete sense why we
should be able to do this
morning be a video I just want
to make sure we're not setting
up the state of New Mexico
to to you know for more risk
management issues so I don't
know I am interested that there
aren't any there's there's no
opposition your bills are
usually those to the ones that
have that information let us
know thank you take note that
none of them are here today
but if someone has information
is helpful to me and helping
make my decision but but
otherwise I definitely see the
reason for the bill and I thank
you for bringing chair thank you
and I will say yes in the
everything was kind of hold it
didn't specifically mention the
case but I mean they were cases
were up held with the
confrontation issue and I
specifically did you know I
approach just as they can on
this and I said is this going to
be in a looking ahead is this a
bill that is going to violent
confrontation down the road and
when I spoke with her she
thought it was a perfect time to
introduce it that she did not
feel it was a valid violation as
confrontation and that this is a
perfect time to start with the
misdemeanor lab analysts and see
you know how this plays out and
then it maybe maybe go on to
bigger cases it may not but at
this time
When I had a discussion with her
she thought this was a great
deal to to to do so that is me
some hope that our courts fields
this is something that is
important and save money and
that helps so I I can give you
that information but I I do
understand what you're saying
your concern for sure and thank
you Representative and and just
like everything else legal
system act we need to start
somewhere so that we can get
these.
Our to get some sort of
direction from the court so if
this is the statute that
supports.
Fine it may be but you know we
do we need we just need more
direction thank you for answers
thank thank you very much
anything for anyone else.
Madam I moved to pass.
Second second.
Thanks yes Representative Cadena
no.
Representative Saylor Kris yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Senator gems.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative yes
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil no
sign of a.
The.
Thank you for reading the bill
everything that we said today I
think stands true I'm just every
every.
So in my lawyer building is
selling that passing something
that could be unconstitutional
as it goes against the create
that I took to protect the
constitution United States city
Mexico but I'm god speaks to you
I I wish you well we'll see what
happens thank you for being
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you city manager Community
Health.
Two seven.
And.
Seven two thank you appreciate.
Okay.
This includes the bills in the
committee and from here on out
we're going to be doing to
presentation we're going to
begin with the department of
transportation is going to
talking about section nine.
The two.
What you know about section.
And that was the one.
The presentation.
The committee but we're just
kind of jumped in.
Either lives.
Both through
that many people are are are
very aware of section funding we
wanted to.
What I think.
The pharmacy people projects in.
Construction phase from little
design phase or simply from
holding them off the shelf we'll
do an overview of four hundred
fifty Revenue Service are what
we know the department
transportation cited section and
is a deceiving appropriations
so reasons we wanted to provide
an overview of what section nine
of the for us last year in terms
of funding with the LFC
recreation and technical through
how we modified our request to
what might be best for some type
of situation so in just a.
On the phone through a few
slides homestead state
transportation improvement plan.
All right well chair members of
the thank you all appreciate
your your time today and
allowing us to write a few with
little referred step in section
nine of a house bill two so just
on a little bit of education of
state is a state which are
statewide transportation
improvement program it is a six
year continually also it's your
program it contains all
federally funded and regionally
significant projects in your
project is what we Fund as long
as it's rituals committees we
programs and staff.
Right that members were going to
be getting a presentation on the
whole steps next week.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that will be pre-filled yeah
we're our state manager jewel
that overlook the presentations
use up that sort of so just a
really would be the first four
years of our of our state of the
fiscally constrained
and the two hundred years of for
planning purposes the first two
years of that are reasonably
reasonably available committed
funding excuse me for the first
two years of the step and your
three and four recently
available funding of with
project costs and fees in phases
programs.
CFR of steps need to be updated
at least every four years we
amend our step every to Europe
to your cycle currently actually
working with the fixed we would
consider going to a four year
cycle right now our biggest just
to talk a little four year cycle
and we also have quarter
resubmit equipment as of and we
have to meet a tour of excuse me
amendments in between if needed
so we have that we have a all
the opportunity of move projects
within the state as we need to
just funding changes and as of
project schedules change of our
amendments are posted for thirty
days or public comment on and on
our website so we allow public
comments and then the of of
eventually get legislative
efforts to the partners step
also includes our MPO
transportation improvement
project program so we have for
tribal peoples in the in the
state as we all know Farmington
area Santa Fe of Mr cargo areas
of medicine apostle and twenty
unaccounted time Dona Ana plus
two system so full of five years
the biggest of which is Mr
Corbyn they actually help
programming forty two they get
direct funds from of that so
they have of direct programs
already the other appeals rely
on their respective districts
and are planning organization to
get the product for these roll
up into our state.
So federal funds right now we're
working under the infrastructure
investment jobs act legislation
signed reference invited number
fifteen the twenty twenty one
of six year funding bill which
increases our program funding
formula funding by two percent
per year so the longest in
history well as the first time
we've seen gradual increases of
there's some new funding
programs that are available with
legislation of bridge
maintenance programs this is the
first year ever our first
legislation ever than is allowed
G. O. T. to spend federal
dollars local governments that
federal dollars on projects or
bridges excuse me better off the
NHS so before the only
privileges that were available
for federal funding they have to
be there on your state or U. S.
routes or any other and he just
of the silly now with that we
were able to help our local
partners and some of our locally
owned bridges that are you just
you can get those taken care of
federal funds Mexico wrinkle to
that we are taking care of an
off system bridge for locally
owned bridges whether the tribal
county city of that one hundred
percent of federal box there's
no match required for those so
that's good news we also got
Department reduction protected
now B. or nephews really to help
roll out the yes the structure
of carbon reduction protect our
let's see here is of of what
currently or for previous
legislation that was a
congestion mitigation air
quality programs the mac of
basically just carbon reduction
in any project of components
that can assist with our
production sidewalks transit the
city's slide please Senator
those are all the little for
those tax forms
so right now we have a broken
down to sixty percent of our of
federal legislation is
identified for of formula
funding which gets directly
distribute to the DOT's of that
forty percent is a compact
competitive nationwide.
Discretionary grants so you all
have heard the raise in from
mega all those requests that
we've been playing for him some
of our local entities with a
plan for that sixty percent of
the total transportation
programs that was passed his
nuclear contract members just
simple perspective and we sure
this is a presentation that two
percent increase for example
going last year to this year is
about twelve and a half million
dollars and so what we point out
with at two percent annual
increase going back a year ago
was seeing cost escalations
upwards of twenty three percent
for some projects so when we see
that steady increase in formula
funding during the time of the
cost of supplies materials fuel
included
we really see it as barely you
know chipping away at those
escalations and covering you
know the new bottom line for us.
Thanks
so our our our funds reconnect
in ninety four programs of their
questions states to formula for
the funds and then we further
break them down by population
other categories there's a total
of thirty six funding pots that
make up the half billion dollars
we get on very from sets of all
federal funds with the with some
very few exceptions I mentioned
one earlier
Sure it is right now and and
some of the limitations that
that has posed on us with regard
to getting distributing these
the year of redistribution funds
so we're working with our
federal partners hopes we can
raise that limitation a little
bit free also additional
spending authority for us to
take advantage of the
redistribution campus at the end
of this fiscal year.
let's see so this.
Next one of.
C..
The.
Symphoniker for your fiscal
constraints step is for school
year twenty twenty to twenty
twenty five we have possibly set
six hundred twenty nine projects
programs for four year totaling
about three billion dollars of
our fighting heroes twenty six
and twenty seven hundred twenty
six projects you know
significantly less that those
total two point three billion
dollars so typically are funding
is what we'll do is we'll
identified for our regular
school AT Mexico or you just
want to US three eighty you know
to slow structure of like twenty
five hundred and that as we get
into our fiscally constrained
yours will portion of the flight
size mobile projects so you
often see full quarters program
for those two years that
represents the large price tag
compared to our first four years
or of the double oh there is
orders are still two of those
are the two that you step up for
public to go ahead and review
any projects to local I County I
route my district by county and
municipalities of there's a lot
of ways to to a look of our
projects that we
leave that with the insurance.
Over and over the we can bill
for any questions on madam chair
members of the committee on the
slide your state revenue
sources again of the department
transportation generate this
revenue offered so in dollars
from multiple sources the
primary ones being gasoline we
distance Tax special fuel and
vehicle registration fees in
this table kind of shows you a
snapshot of our we're we are the
the the slide and with our
projections are twenty twenty
seven see here twenty two some
small insulating creases over
the past year or so but are
holding steady with positive
projections.
On the from the next slide to
just to kind of give you a sense
of of those distributions call
and and their impact on the U.
T. C. O. C. up at the top the
distributions are by percentage
with the O. T. stable funding
the largest on the gasoline tax
generating about a hundred
sixteen million the special fuel
weight distance is the fourth
one down and then of course
vehicle registration fees just a
kind of queue you into a couple
of things that are pertaining to
this life we are looking at
introducing I think now it's
been in red is bill two seventy
five is a a change to statutory
language that increases vehicle
registration fees by about
twenty five percent across the
board and that's a measure of
course to responsibly make
changes to that cost for drivers
so that at some point that
increases in you know
extraordinary and it's it's
basically been in place since
two thousand for the vehicle
registration fee seven increase
it's going to be about twenty
years and so we're making that
change to steadily increase our
revenue from one of our major
revenue sources for the motor
vehicle excise tax which is near
the middle of the page this
legislation out that we're
supportive of us Senate bill
twenty four which would increase
distributions of the motor
vehicle excise tax to the state
transportation fund by five
hundred eighty million in the
first year but it would
essentially out of you know
limiting the distributions to
the state general fund this
right now is about a hundred and
seventy three million right so
it would kind of swap the
distribution from the general
fund to the state transportation
fund and specifically to the TPS
program so that that would help
us to support more local
projects so this is kind of the
some of the revenue that we
generate for the department of
transportation on which is
general.
On the next page just to give
you a sense of comparisons in
I think this is important for a
couple reasons one because we
look at what our initial interim
asked was very we don't want to
hear the reason for on the left
side here you'll see what
section nine appropriations were
at the end of last session
the the the fault of which went
to construction projects but two
hundred fifty million there with
some support for
airports of special projects for
planning on a number of funds
and I forty twenty five another
five million going to essential
air service
By the state we did receive
twenty million for rest area
improvements with this sixty
million number six sixty million
to transportation project fund
that brought our total to five
hundred five million that we
were able to support local
projects with the nine million
for equipment was key especially
with the increased cost of
equipment and then of course
this two million for support
while I forward on the right
hand side we the LFC rack came
into five hundred ninety seven
million including a hundred
seven million for construction
projects so just gonna time this
number into what David was
saying earlier right we will get
projects on the front years
those first two years we have to
be fiscally constrained right to
pull off the shelf and getting
ready so with a hundred seven
million but we have to do is
find the projects that you can
fully funded with that money and
and so the logic of taking a
hundred seven million divided
among six six districts in the
state we each district you know
about eighteen million box
meaning that they have to find a
project probably with overrides
perhaps some maintenance if the
language in in section nine
allow for that or you know us of
those smaller eighty million
dollar project this construct
and then below that of course
are the the projects contained
in the LFC recommendation from
supply need issues retrieval he
will support some of the
measures from last year like the
I. forty five forty eight twenty
I think about twenty million for
airports in essential service
the increased wallet quarters
very helpful now that we have a
study done on where we can
target those corridors and then
of course the transportation
project fund that forty five
million what about double what
we're getting from tax
distributions so we'd be able to
support locals to the tune of
about ninety
without money.
On the very last page during the
rules of those doing LFC or or
captured our presentations are
regional request which was about
three hundred eighty nine
million we identified through
our district engineers who
essentially went to their stamp
identified those projects in the
other years means that you know
I larger projects essential
projects that had been fiscally
constrained it needs are
identified two a critical areas
are two critical projects that
we are essentially used as the
parts of the whole for the six
hundred and fifty nine million
on construction we we asked for
eighty million to transportation
projects fund which would bring
local support to about a hundred
twenty five million.
And then of course for meetings
improvements The presentation
but there for a hundred forty
two million and then
additionally for equipment in
our conversations are thus far
with chair LESC and others we've
taken a deeper dive into that
original request and need some
modifications cutting that
number in half for for you all
identifying began the the the
important projects within the
districts
insuring that what we would get
would would put us in a position
to be fiscally constrained from
those projects and that total is
about four hundred sixty seven
million right now
so those would be our
construction priorities of
course and we would be
supportive of the other LFC
measures as well including
transportation project of all of
course secretary so that that's
just kind of the back from and
you know how we rate the number
were mindful that section nine
is a generosity measure from the
legislature the department of
transportation right so by no
means are we trying to kind of
manage indicate what that looks
like those from the from our
perspective and and more for the
district engineers or those
critical priorities this process
so and that's it chairman of
course will answer any questions
that you.
Thank you very much
presentation.
What do you have any comments
from members.
Representative thank you madam
chair of first of all secretary.
Roads bridges are so
foundational to just about
anything and everything that
happens in the state and even
national.
Our.
I do need a little help.
Not today but the one of the
things that M. D. O. T. most to
do just for these numbers for
rules out there I'm totally are
some of those are so I would
like to she she second horrible
rolled Arthur all.
Tremendously us but.
Representative Romero like
something that I just want to
more about.
Are you to there is an original
request and I'm not sure what
patients.
Here's regional request
forty two million for real
problem which which is a
district that we share a
Representative role on then on
the to the right of that there's
nothing there to do something
what's happening.
Yup sure of madam chair
representative so essentially
what we have to kind of little
down of our us to work with
manageable bites of the bite
size us well we will do some
projects that are a little bit
more a little bit earlier in the
development process still have
some time to go to construction
just happen to be one of over
also planned for one of these
grants for Rio Bravo we're
hoping that it'll be successful
so we still have some
flexibility as far as time and
funding through over also I just
recently see thank you madam
chair so it's it's still a
player just to wait a little bit
Madam chair representative still
still number two priority for
district three absolutely
housing changes far as primary
school but yes definitely it's
it's a little bit more flexible
as far as the
and lastly madam chair of how is
the assessments the.
Sure it's actually you assessed
the conditions of roadways
bridges.
how does a testament to need
undertake New Hope first let me
back up how do you undertake
that assessment.
Help me understand how you
decide this bridge needs to be
replaced next year five years to
Madam chair representative
governments requested we have
our transportation assets.
And in that we look at two two
things that were required to
look at bridges bridge
conditions and conditions and we
checked those conditions on our
major facilities interstates U.
S. routes annually and some of
our state routes and and
secondary routes by and we also
expect locally owned bridges so
the vote that data informs our
decision making process as we as
we go to projects much so.
That's basically how what's the
thank you and how did madam
chair how does coincide with it.
On the afternoon.
Could be one second
transportation source on profit
the program was.
They put out.
What madam chair representative
so a lot of the data that they
get together for months on end
really what they're looking at
as well as saying tax conditions
payment ridge of the looking at
the nationwide as well as as as
stable as a state and the
looking all facilities not just
on the US routes or the NHS
Robson specific with the federal
requirements those of us that we
have to focus on for federally
dollars so there might be some
discrepancy in those because
they're looking they're looking
at the entire system of we do
are we we do our due diligence
for secondary system up to all
of us factor safety and state
could repair of but that that's
hello kind of coincides a lot of
that data that we generate.
Gets into that trip report this
for those little conferences for
you thank you for presentation
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
thank you very much for being
here for the presentation for
the update I think we would all
love to give you the original
nearly a billion dollars for
roads that.
I mean we understand that you
know there's lots of assets for
the revenue we have secretions
you work into total that down.
so I guess the Representative a
dollar tree was provided me of
no target all contacts the scope
of misleading you know ten years
ago when I started here I asked
just just like I understand
roughly how much it costs to
pay.
You know a single lane one mile
of road.
And the answer I got ten years
ago was a million dollars.
Now I've been hearing that was
inflation and with the increased
cost materials instruction one
that's no longer the case.
What what's the answer now how
much does it cost to pay.
One mile of singling hi.
You madam chair representative
are for they can get you the
exact amount but you're probably
talking about two or three
million dollars million miles of
considering existing
construction costs.
Yeah chair representative I mean
right now we need to look at
some of what paths stretching
close to a million mile a
million miles so it's just
getting restive right now we're
looking with the financial
implications of by American
presentation.
That will be a combination of
cost escalations and and you
know the late in recent years
about.
Awesome and then maybe just one
follow up that super helpful and
madam chair of gel and I
understand that that is like a
mile of
highways that doesn't require
you know.
A lot of
Adjustments for grain or four
three G..
Kind of you maybe speak to what
the the high level might be you
know if it's not just flat good
soil if you've.
Got some support you have to do
with the higher range for the
for a while.
So madam chair observe Arbor
really the the the the figure
that you were given and I just
it was really for construction
so that's going to be for great
changing as a result so created
to prevent some and things of
that nature of the with
preservation type project and
right Health Service
Representative Harper from a
maintenance perspective we're
looking right out of a hundred
or twenty five thousand a
multitude Services affirmations
basically jury.
Okay.
That both questions for for pre
approved thank you I appreciate
you helping me understand how to
the scope that work thank you
madam chair and members of the
proposed things in perspective
you if you take a hundred seven
million construction of the LFC
rectified that by two point five
you're looking at forty five
eight months.
I believe that the
representative from.
Thank you madam chair thank
presentation thank you for
clarifying that Representative
Parker yeah there's a big
difference.
The recommendation the ladies
don't rely and the last year is
fifty eight.
madam chair I do have a few
questions with respect to.
The presentation
Three page three one year.
The federal government for a
reduction act congestion
mitigation.
Am I correct the City of
Albuquerque is the only
metropolitan areas and states
that have the phone.
Rules nothing the legislature
impact of the field correct.
Madam chair representative ought
to double check of another of
the only states to that's the
concern on a team with so they
have some of the factors that
they're taking in consideration
with those types of color blue
use is distributed.
Thank you for that answer thank
you madam chair the yeah that
and over the last two years of
being here.
One of my biggest concerns is
that we.
Rules on the rest of the state
Albuquerque N. have to comply
with the rules most often rules
outside of Albuquerque or more
stringent.
Clarke said just curious about
that special we look at new
funding programs to run rules
far from concerned madam chair
that federal money but.
As as we continue on and I go to
the state revenue madam chair
looking at here
This chart for weight distance
can can spend a little bit of
time to talk about the.
Twenty degree slope on that
continuing to go up what's the
justification on your on your
thought process on.
Fees on the way this.
Chair representative I'm sorry
would you repeat the question
the.
The.
This chart Madam chairman for
signing off for.
Our way doesn't doesn't chart
shows to we're gonna continue up
with that of twenty percent.
Grief
I just like to hear what you see
if we continue to move forward
of over the next seven or five
years that that tells us we're
gonna hit hard the manager is
yes we understand English I
apologize but our our Congress
to touch on that and previously
and yes so what we're seeing
right now with with distances
that it's a positive impact of
the increase for you callers
still writing so right now we
expect that the growth will be
of continue to go up and right
now also there it's part of
entries in California and in the
east coast have no switched so
California was the dominant one
and now we're in the east coast
is a doctor is switched over so
the body was higher in the
schools but we do see that we're
going to continue seeing growth
with the latest.
Okay madam chair
I think I'd like to see some
some.
Presentation I actually goes in
committee on public awful in the
this is going on so Sir I can go
back to that not
sure how the cell number want to
see those numbers
on here spreadsheet distribution
of favor of user Revenue.
The first question I have with
respect to that as gasoline
taxes way that that and in my
opinion that.
We received a revenues to pay
for the the impact of vehicles
on the road.
Where we what's what's so
perspective
with respect to as they can
there seems to be a continual
movements towards electric
vehicles how are you going to
receive that
in house I'm gonna be offset
phones that and.
In this chart you are Mr chair
representative it's a great
question so right now I believe
that we have less than one
percent of total registered
vehicles of the and so I think
we're the state is in the
administration certainly is
right now is how we really build
right demand for electric
vehicles and we're certainly
working on building the
infrastructure for that with
electric vehicle charging
stations across the the state of
New Mexico from there the
opposite point capital support
so so we're we're happy to do
that the what we're looking for
at this point is a way to
monitor as we increase steadily
the number of vehicles that
register as electric what the
inverse impact on gasoline taxes
in the so that we can look at
models from other states to
determine if that's going to be
recouped through a strict
registration fee for them some
states will actually tax
directly on the miles they drive
in a year somewhat that tax to
the charge depending on how
frequently they use them on the
roads verses at homes for
example so we have a number
models to look at if we start to
see that city increase and we
provide health correlates with
the reduction in fuel tax will
go identified for New Mexico
which makes most sense to recoup
understanding that not only are
we trying to kind of level set
here but I understand that the
vehicles have here and and it
may have a greater impact on the
growth understanding that we
need to make long term
investments in charging
infrastructure maintenance and
upkeep so we've got to take
those things into consideration.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that answers just my concern
that as as I understand right
now we're not could be you.
And and so and on top of that as
as the duty and even for state
police and clean up
the.
When there's a substantial crash
with electric vehicle cleanup
process is completely different
and as the training for the
people that point the this
completely different and one
opportunity of those costs the
at madam chair we're we're we're
experiencing those trees fences
now and I think we should I
don't care if we should be doing
something now
Now the last presentation the
last bill that we just heard him
talk about you know.
The concern about whether of
course should clean stuff up
over the last two years I've
watched several bills go through
the legislative processing and
be signed by on the fourth floor
that yeah we're just gonna eight
point figure this up.
We're not worried about it here
we're just running legislation
we just left for figure this out
I think we're at this point
right now where we need to
figure this out the star closing
those fees if we need to back
off of state so that stuff we
need that more more but at some
point I madam chair
and I think now is the time we
would be doing that and if we're
looking madam chair.
Raising our registration fees by
twenty five percent.
That's a great spot for me as
far as I'm concerned what's
raised registration fees on
electric vehicles and efforts to
hire from back often not and we.
Returning money to we've we've
proven well over the last
two years especially those last
year twenty twenty to the return
money back to the taxpayers is a
new issue.
We know how to do that.
So
That.
Sure I have one last question if
you don't mind the.
Your appropriation from twenty
twenty three madam chair item
number one.
Two forty seven I how much of
that is for the public gauges
verses on on this right now.
Number two.
What if we.
Yeah Madam chair representative
of I can get you the exact
number we have a vast majority
of the funding already off of
the streets seventy five percent
loss probably better laptop
issued September.
Don't need the exact number of
flights last year thank you very
much thank you for your
presentation thank you madam.
What type of the two forty seven
we've also dedicated a hundred
point two million
for this well for construction
and we have those projects.
And then when I moved to know if
I may madam chair on the
electric vehicle registration
fees we work with us is the sole
purpose and he's introduced
legislation on on two measures
one to incentivize the increased
electric vehicle uses the rebate
and secondly the establishment
of that specific registration
fees well Tom Coleman my
apologies Representative so that
we do that madam chair that does
bring up the file size
Incentivizing something that's
more of a directive
is counterintuitive
That.
Makes no sense whatsoever.
Thank.
Thank you very much and
secretary.
Senator mostly mentioned here
did have a couple questions on
your on your section nine FY
twenty four requests.
Thank and I think this is some
of the best of luck to make
statements for the committee is
that I believe that once the
motor vehicle excise tax moves
into the DOT budget we will see
a section on more no section
line is something that I started
in LFC in in the appropriations
process
during the time that I was the
chair.
But I think now that are going
to be moving this general fund
source in your budget I don't
see section nine and and we
might I mean there might be and
I believe there's a great need
for.
But it's going to be harder and
harder to advocate for in the
budget process because that's I
think it was a hundred seventy
three million that would be
coming from that source you
don't get now I think everybody
should kind of keep the time and
that will probably go away.
the other question I had madam
chairs is that what we're
looking at this updated request
from DOT.
Is this are any of these
projects currently cooperating
with federal support in other
words the inside to stand.
Is there are for money is there
federal support for each one of
these because the important for
the committee to see that right
down to our important.
This just take the one District
one New Mexico to thirteen I
live Representative dem Cruz I'm
not sure that is I just know
what part of the state I'm
familiar with those districts
are for thirty six million
dollars but I would anticipate
because they have been working
on these projects and
recommending them under fist
fiscal constraints there should
be a chart of those with the.
What projects are and where is
it in reading schedule.
So I I would like to ask the
next time they come from the
committee madam chair that is
actually target so we can state
how much is already assigned to
the what is supposed to be lab
and is it currently under funded
based on leading schedule
because we only have.
Call for the LFC framework
hundred ninety seven million now
for section nine.
I don't know if they change that
or not but it was a hundred
ninety seven million you can see
the told here is is the half
billion so we we need to
understand what dig a little
deeper into that
The other issue that I would
like to raise madam chair is is
the whole thing about the.
Obligations limitations on here
every we need a little bit more
on that.
So the committee understands
that.
And I would suspect.
Regarding the project if you
have raised Representative
they're spending tied to it
already I'm sure it's in the.
Mr cog disruption I graduated I
would assume that I just ask for
chart like that they would help
us because we may want to
rearrange some of that but once
you see the leading schedule to
see what the projects are how
much money is already there I
know for myself just listening
to the.
rural aviation people here the
other day it's clear to me that
when we first when we initially
put this budget together that
would put here for world there
are more services and now.
I know your bill I believe we
should bill had increased some
of that.
Gosh we seen a big explosion in
that area so anyway that's my
request thank you madam chair
and madam chair of the
presentation again during the
first week we'll have that
schedule also the refuse of
scribbles over this I can leave
it but we are actually corrected
will demonstrate where there's
been obligations either
federally or marks for example
if you take the Comanche project
on district three we have thirty
nine million invested in bonds
in your hearts and some other H.
B. two hundred but we can show
that distribution of the
projects we have in the original
last name for you Representative
Cruz we also have that breakdown
for the are geographically and
for the project.
Thank you very much I really
appreciate that I'm sure lots of
Solon one hundred
of it looks like we're on the
ground.
Yes okay thank you so much.
So
Mr secretary and Mr right I have
this I had the same reaction
Representative Cruz did when I
saw the original request
box in an effort to blank
basically and I'm looking
particularly at the district to
project U. S. H. E. us thirty
million four and a half of chart
from a previous presentation.
Looks like it says that
First construction phase will be
ready FY twenty twenty three and
yet I see one here so could you
for my benefit just run down we
are answer wax Fund the other
project is so here is yes thank
you madam chair.
Because of the and madam madam
I'm sorry your specific to talk
about US three have so madam
chair representative of with
with that there is of their the
first phase is going to be in
the first place still because I
we do have some other of funding
pots that we could we could put
to that so there's some
flexibility with regard to
funding and a little bit in the
schedule sort of the overall but
not quite as flexible schedule
side of that is a little bit
sooner but there some
flexibility as far as other
funding avenues to get that out
to work so specifically
redistribution funding again at
some additional additional that
we prevention fund preventive
maintenance when we have we've
put that we can get to it so
really was trying to
Get to a place where we could
will this does a manageable size
but these other project projects
are still the priorities of the
beauty of those districts so
other other avenues for funding
sources is being looked at and
often up in the fall but we say
these.
Thank you for that.
Chair Mister.
so your honor look at the for
example the transportation
project fund eighty million and
again this is zero in the
updated request that is just so
critical to our local
governments and it that one
hurts a lot because that helps a
lot of communities we have that
and it looks like we're not
gonna see much there so is there
a way to.
Fill that void madam chair.
Other funds.
Madam chair representative the
first thing is is again thanks
to madam chair here of uncertain
for establishing procreation
it's forty five million but it's
it's there we also we also are
working with their high wages to
understand how we can work
collaboratively unities that are
now eligible for direct grant
recipient opportunities through
U. S. U. T. we got Civil War
notifications vectors reasons
yesterday we already are working
with Albuquerque city of
Carlsbad on their on their
respective awards so we want to
leverage the the opportunity of
the competitive grant process to
to attack some of the local
projects and and support then be
getting those grant proposal
submitted drop are worked on
submitted and then of course to
help them to the projects so
again thinking of all the pieces
floating around here how do we
essentially leverages one of
them so that you know we're not
just putting all our eggs in the
General Fund basket a section.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you very much the gentleman at
this time I'm gonna call up to
resign from the LFC he's going
to give us the policy once of
section nine proposed budget.
See this information and if you
please secretary we just went
for a new remembers what section
nine yes from yes good morning
madam chair members the
committee I think as
Representative Lundstrom pointed
out this was not something
that's typically happen prior to
when she created this process
and it was a response
specifically to the Department
identifying more needs than was
available in their operating
budget which traditionally
where.
Funding for road projects come
from.
You identifying in needs and
responding to those needs with
more than one point three
billion dollars over the last
several years so
again madam chair I'll just say
this real quick you have the LFC
recommendations in in front of
from here on this is you know
sort of the LFC recommendation
really.
You know takes us that you know
the amount of money that fits
into the overall framework of a
you know billion dollar
nonrecurring framework for all
of the state agencies and you
know put some money aside to go
through the legislative process
for you all to decide on
how you how you move forward on
those projects and so you know I
think Secretary certain kind of
went over the whole thing so I
need to hear a lot more for me
but I just stand for any any
questions you have.
Representative.
I like to learn a little bit
more about section five at some
point does not beauty but what's
happening that this is somehow
or as a potential disappear.
So I'm.
Madam chair and representative I
think you know the
the point of that comedy was.
Because that I didn't need was
identified as not being in the
agencies operating budget
through a recurring revenue
source that's why this was
created right and so if you all
consider legislation to provide
the department with additional
recurring revenue and you may
not see that fast again that's
your decision
as well as the Legislature
whether nine what when how you
want to fund those needs but I
think that that point was when
you find significant increases
into the agencies recurring
budget you may see less
nonrecurring funding.
shall we leave question but I I
do need calling all for that
for.
Thank you Representative Harper
thank you madam chair just one
quick question distributors in
the way of the land right now
so.
If I understanding this
correctly the department started
with a.
Almost billion dollar section
under quest.
The last two to let you know the
kind of half.
But now I'm seeing here two
hundred million this does that
mean.
Thank what what's happened here
thank you for to the naturally.
But what we did thank you very
much I don't need to jump in joy
that
a few years ago we had set up in
the back of the general
appropriations act section nine
and that was for a it was based
on non reoccurring revenues
that we recognized could go
right into capital.
Photo projects for bridges and
airports whatever.
So each year that that section
of the bill is at the discretion
of the appropriations process.
But I've been stalwart on that
and with the help of DOTA
because now they've been able to
provide matching dollars to keep
those projects going.
Problem is is that if that isn't
brought up every year now as
part of the LFC process it could
easily be
it could easily go way into
something else right
And and I'd be very concerned
about that that's why I
mentioned once we move motor
vehicle excise tax into the
budget which is reoccurring into
their operations budget I could
see some folks that don't
support infrastructure like I
have in the past state well we
need it someplace else
nonrecurring one time and I can
help you with understanding
where that where that is and why
that it has been a great
opportunity to DOT and for the
local governments but we have
the centers so to speak on the
committee that I've had to make
sure they understand the
importance of infrastructure
development but it needs to come
to me and everybody has a
different point if you were one
time money should go.
And with that fight pretty hard
for this.
as LFC staff no as we're
building the front pages.
So now they brought forth what
was in the regional framework
which is about two hundred
million I don't know what that
framework looks like now but I
sure hope it doesn't go below
two hundred because it fits and
then what the DOT and what
they're talking about once a
show you the chart of all the
other sources as well as the LFC
it is a marriage once we get the
as we get the full full chart
but I'm I'm concerned I'm gonna
put that out there.
The not everybody cares about it
as much as I.
That thank you madam chair
chairs and that helps me
understand I I up first of all
at the request of the chair
women I do have a bill it's
prepped not be going to members
on the floor today to get your
signatures to take a motor
vehicle excise tax put it
towards roads.
But I was thinking you know with
this three point six billion
dollars of new money much of
which is not to reoccurring.
Sure hoping we're gonna build
more than two hundred million to
roads.
But there's other pieces that go
into the I mean this is for
specific projects that doesn't
talk about the other things that
the deal is working on so now
there's other there's other
things happening but for very
specific projects like the one
Catherine just mentioned that
was a very specific project that
was brought forward and without
exception line is the best way
to fund.
But I hope that.
States.
Close.
Thank you and and that was
actually one reason I wanted to
have this presentation to the
committee today is just talk
about the importance section
nine what it is why we can
identify specific road
structure property construction
projects can be funded in this
way and also so the office could
fight for it
because it is not guaranteed and
so I think it's important for
all of this committee to first
learn about what these positions
are were there being made that
we are part of and then I have a
a good strategy going forward so
that we can maintain this
commitment to infrastructure
growth that we've seen in this
committee and the Appropriations
committee in the past.
