Members, please come into the
chambers, roll call is now open.
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
Offered by the gentle lady from
Bern Leo Representative
Barrajon.
God Almighty, we come to you
today with humility.
To engage in debate
To learn from each other.
To be able to make the best
decisions possible for our
constituents in New Mexico.
To serve the people of New
Mexico.
And to make our state.
Be able to honor the people in
our state.
In your holy name we pray. Amen.
The gentlemen from Valencia
Representative Baca leads in the
Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
And the gentle lady from Berlio
representative Torres Velazquez
with the pledge to the New
Mexico label.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker.
Good afternoon, lady.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to the
first order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
Good afternoon members.
Happy Valentine's Day. Hope it
was a good one.
Represent Montoya, did you go to
dinner last night?
Um, Mr. Speaker, I, if you look
at me, I go to dinner every
night.
Wow.
gentleman from Otero said yes he
does.
Announcements, members we're
gonna, uh, gentle lady from
Valencia Caine Sierra and
Socorro, Senator Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to wish my grandson
Kenyon Kern, a happy 14th
birthday.
He is uh calling coyotes with
his grandpa today, and he is in
hog heaven, so, uh, as they say,
um, hopefully they give a few of
them a dirt nap.
ladies are singing.
Happy birthday to you. Happy
birthday.
Happy birthday, dear.
Happy birthday to you. Happy
14th birthday.
Announcements, members, we are
going to do some, uh, a little
bit of Bill intro, some
committee reports, and then
we're gonna go into 3rd reading.
Uh, you all know the, I believe
we have 3 bills, uh, that we're
gonna do today.
And, um, and then we'll be on
our merry way after that.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
k.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
human Services Committee, to
whom has been referred House
Bill 7 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, move
adoption adoption of a favorable
community reporting House Bill
7. All those in favor C say ah.
Oppose
the I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee, to
whom has been referred House
Bill 95 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that House Health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 95 do
pass and this refers to the
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair. Move adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report in
hospital 95, but a favorable
committee report on house health
and human services Committee
substitute for House Bill 95.
All those in favor are signified
by saying aye.
Oppose na.
The ISA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee, to
whom has been referred House
Bill 196 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair. Move
adoption. We're an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 196. All those in
favor 5 but say 9.
Opposesna, the ISA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 207 has
had it under consideration
report same recommendation that
it do pass and he referred to
the taxation and revenue
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair. Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
207 and all those in favor
signify by saying I.
Oppose nay.
I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 230 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, move adoption. We're on
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
230. All those in favorse
probably say aye.
Oppose nay, the ISR committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 233
has had it under consideration
report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. And he referred to
the commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
233. All those in favor,
babainna.
Boney, the SA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 242
has had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair, move
adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 242. All those in
favor in in a.
I suppose
the IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred to House Bill
243 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair,
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
243.
All those in favor say 9.
Opposed name. Yeah, committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee too has
been referred House Bill 263,
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and that's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair,
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
263. All those in favor of C5
and say aye.
Oppose nay
I have the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 172 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wanda
Johnson chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable report now Bill 172.
All those in favor signified by
saying it's hot.
I suppose, nay.
that chance.
It's hot. Habit committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 203 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson
chair?
Move adoption report in House
Bill 203. All those in favor,
Senior say 9.
I suppose nay.
ISI committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 205 has had it under
consideration part in
recommendation that it do pass
and then it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. D. Wanda Johnson,
chair.
Move adoption.
For an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
205, all those in favor 5 I.
I suppose,
the I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 252 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair? Move adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 252. All those in
favor, senior Pape say I.
All the supposed need. Yeah, a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 308 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and he referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair?
We're adoption of a favorable
reporting house with 308. All
those in favor say aye.
I suppose
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
261 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, and he referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted, Doreen Y Gallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption of a favorable report
in House Bill 261. All those in
favor, say 9.
Well suppose me.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 323 has had it under
consideration in report same's
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Doreen Y Gallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, of adoption
of a favorable reporting House
Bill 323. All those in favor
signified by CI.
Although suppose me.
Yeah, it's a committee report
adopted. Mr. Speaker, your
judiciary Committee team has
been referred House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 140 has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption report on
how energy environment and
natural resources company
substitute for AB 140. All those
in favor of saying I.
I was supposed to name.
The IS have committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 160 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption. We are adoption.
Of a federal committee report in
House Bill 160, all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
All the supposed name.
The ISR that community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Joint Resolution 1 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended. Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
a favorable committee report.
And how's Joint Resolution one?
All those in favor of signified
by saying I.
I suppose nay.
The ISR that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee, to whom has been
referred House Joint resolution
2 has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a community and
how's your, how was your
resolution one.
Yes, you guys keep making me
laugh and I can't control it
now.
I'm gonna need a recess subject
to the call of the chair here
pretty soon.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report of House Joint
Resolution 2. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
All the suppose nay.
Yeah, I have it we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 291 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
he referred to the government
elections at Union Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen, chair.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
291. All those in favor
signified by saying aye.
I suppose name, the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 295 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the taxation revenue
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen, chair, adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
295. All those in favor, I say
I.
Bosna
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Berna Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I go to, I move we
go to that order of business
messages.
Crk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 1 as amended.
Senate Finance Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 2
with the emergency clause.
Senate Finance Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 3
with the emergency clause and
requests the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan's Senate chief
clerk.
And lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move to go to the
next order of business,
introduction of legislation.
Clerk Reed.
Senate Bill 1 as amended,
introduced by Senator Munoz and
others, an act relating to
public funds, creating the
behavioral Health Trust Fund and
the Behavioral Health Program
Fund, making a transfer from the
general fund to the behavioral
Health Trust Fund, Senate Bill 1
as amended.
Senate Bill 1 as amended is
referred to the House
reparations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 2, an
act making appropriations for
public health and safety
initiatives, declaring an
emergency. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 2. Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 2.
Is
It's already been printed, so
we're not gonna print it again.
It is referred to the House of
Recreations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3, an
act relating to health, enacting
the behavioral health reform and
Investment Act, repealing a
section of the NMSA 1978,
declaring an emergency. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 3 substitute for
Senate Bill 3 is referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee.
Gently from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business. Third
reading of legislation.
members, we are going to start
with.
Item number 12 on your floor
calendar.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on that item?
The gentle lady from Los Alamos
is.
Santa Fe Los Alamos and
Sandoval. Are you ready on that
item, Mr. Speaker, I am ready.
Let the record reflect that
election is safe for placing
House House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate,
amendment or substitution that
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you members, um, I think
it might be helpful to talk a
little bit about how we got to
the place we have arrived, um,
and let's start with criminal
competency.
During the summer,
We were able, we were presented
with the idea that we needed to
address um criminal competency
by members of law enforcement
and others, um, and it was
brought to us that there were
concerns that there are many
people who are being, uh, um,
brought into our criminal
justice system where competency
right was being raised and they
were not receiving the treatment
and dispositions that were most
appropriate.
appropriate to them.
And how did that come to pass?
Well, under current law, under
our current competency law,
there are 2 tracks that are
individual who's been charged
with a crime can follow. Those
who've been charged with
felonies that are dangerous or
inherently dangerous and whether
there's a question of that
person's competency when it's
raised, they're down a track
where there's an evaluation and
if that person is considered not
competent or deemed not
competent by a professional that
person will be.
Um, committed
And
And held until they are either
brought to competency or there's
a determination that if they're
not likely to be what we call
restored.
If restoration is deemed not
likely then that person goes
through a process. It's a due
process sort of thing, and that
person may then be criminally
committed. And while they're
criminally committed, they will
receive treatment.
There had been some
dissatisfaction with that
process because members of law
enforcement and others felt that
there were not enough predicate
crimes that would qualify those
individuals for criminal
commitment, so we expanded on
that in our current bill.
The other path is um one that I
think people were also extremely
frustrated with Mr. Speaker.
And that involved individuals
who are charged with relatively
low level crimes, misdemeanors,
low level felonies, they're
brought into the system they may
and when competency is raised,
they um are evaluated if they're
deemed not competent by a
professional, the charges are
dismissed. That's our current
process.
If obviously if they're deemed
competent, they go through the
usual trial process, Mr.
Speaker.
So we were presented with that
and we recognized that
That was a very old law it
needed work and throughout the
summer, Mr. Speaker, CCJ held
many meetings on these issues.
And I personally as chair of CCJ
met with stakeholders offline to
get guidance on how we might be
able to approach the system
differently and I would include
amongst those folks, the um
members of the Supreme Court
Commission on Mental Health and
competency. They had done a lot
of predicate work for us over
the last couple of years and
they were a wealth of knowledge.
I met with forensic
psychologists from the
university to get insights from
them as to how we might proceed.
Um, we met as a committee and I
individually, Mr. Speaker, met
with, um, members of, um, the
lost.
Crus's community who in Donana
County community who've
implemented a pretty strong,
what we call assisted outpatient
treatment program that is far
advanced from what many other
districts have implemented, Mr.
Speaker.
I personally met Mr. Speaker
with, um, members of the public
defender's office.
Psychologists, uh, judges who
have had experience in this
arena to attempt to understand
their perspective.
And I met with colleagues um on
CCJ both um um on in the
majority and the minority to get
insights from them as well.
And the culmination of that
work, Mr. Speaker resulted in
House Bill 4.
Which is the first bill that has
been incorporated into this
package.
Recognizing that we had made a
commitment, Mr. Speaker, to the
people of New Mexico to.
Focus significantly early on in
the session on public safety.
We then worked with members of
our house to identify bills that
we felt would be appropriate
for, um, some.
Submit all to the package and
that include consultations with
the majority and the minority.
And having done that we came up
with a package that includes a
number of bills that um I would
characterize as bipartisan.
And how do I define bipartisan?
Well,
There are both Democrat and
Republican sponsors and let me
review those for you, Mr.
Speaker.
House Bill 4.
Was sponsored by Representative
NAYA, Representative Reeb,
Senator Cervantes and Senator
Brantley.
We have, we then um included um
House Bill 438.
That's a bill that um creates a
crime in the state when one is
in possession of a weapon
conversion device.
That bill was sponsored by
Representative Cates.
And, and then we went on and we
looked at, OK, what else are uh
are people in the state and law
enforcement concerned about car
theft is a significant issue in
the state. We have been hearing
about that for some time, Mr.
Speaker, and it also is
considered to be a predicate
crime um leading to other, um.
Criminal activity that bill is
House Bill 50.
penalties for vehicle thefts and
that bill is sponsored by
representatives Barrago,
Representative Sanchez and
Representative De la Cruz.
We also added um to the package,
Mr. Speaker. House Bill 31, and
that bill was um.
Sponsored by Representative
Garrett, Representative Baca,
and Representative Reeb and in
and it involves, um, increasing
from a misdemeanor to a 4th
degree felony of a shooting
threat.
Sentinel trafficking and
fentanyl use is a significant
and troubling and heartbreaking
issue in the state.
We, we recognize that people
want us to address it and we
added to the package House Bill
16, which is sponsored by
Representative little and
representative Brago.
Lastly, as part of our package,
working in a bipartisan way. We
included House Bill 106 and what
it does is allows uh police
officers to seek a blood draw
through warrant process for
misdemeanor DWI cases, which
currently is not the case.
I feel um very good about the
process we use, Mr. Speaker,
and, um, preparing this package,
I felt and feel continue to feel
it was done on the basis of
collaboration with members of
this chamber as well as, of
course, members of the public,
law enforcement and other
stakeholders.
It represents a well vetted, um.
Group of bills, Mr. Speaker, and
that all of them.
have gone through our normal
committee process.
They were amended through the
committee process in multiple
times in some cases, certainly
the competency bill was worked
carefully with my colleague, um,
And ranking member on on my
committee House Judiciary
Committee. We took many
suggestions from colleagues on
the committee, the governor's
office, we consulted with the
general counsel there and took
input from the governor's office
as well as agency input and we
made sure that it worked well.
And I'm very proud of the work
that all of us did and of
collaborative and constructive
way.
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I
would like to yield.
To the first, um.
co-sponsor on the bill,
representative Cas.
Gent lady from Berlio in
Sandoval representative kids.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does my
friend and gentle lady from
Sandoval, Santa Fe, and Los
Alamos field. I gladly yield.
Thank you very much, um, so the
on section 10 of House Bill 8 is
formerly known as House Bill 38.
It is a bill that was brought to
me by uh our DA in Berlio
County, Sam Bergman, but we've
also had testimony from our
police chief story in Las
Cruces, um, as well as support
from uh the sheriff of Burnleyo
County, John Allen as well.
This section 10 of the, the bill
is uh taking what is already
illegal in the federal law, so
we already currently since 2018
have outlawed uh conversion
device that is commonly slang
term is a Glock switch and it
converts a semi-automatic Glock
to an automatic with the cap
ability of firing 30 rounds and
only 2.5 seconds, so we as a
nation have decided that this is
no longer appropriate. This
device is made out of plastic.
It could be made with a 3D
printer. They're very cheap and
they are very attractive to uh
uh juvenile criminals um because
of this, there is an epidemic of
them on the street currently and
um our law
f or ce ment in our DA's office
have asked us as a legislature
to please make this a state.
Law, a state crime as our
federal authorities are so
overwhelmed with the devices
that many times they do not have
the resources to make that
charge, um, and so this our DAs
and our police force are our law
enforcement officers are asking
us that if we created a state,
we could actually, they would be
able to make that decision of
being able to charge on this.
Um, today, I do have my expert
witness, Benjamin Baker. He's
the
senior policy provider, uh,
senior policy advisor on public
safety in the governor's office,
um, I, uh, thank you, um, gentle
lady, uh, that this is such an
important bill and that we
provide the tools in which law
enforcement and the DA's across
the state have asked this
consistently to provide. So
thank you for this opportunity.
The lady from Los Alamos,
Sandoval and Santa Fe back to
you. Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and I would also like to
emphasize that that portion of
the bill, Mr. Speaker, will save
lives.
Because what it does is it um
outlaws these devices that turn
a semi-automatic into an assault
get into an automatic, which is
essentially a machine gun and
law enforcement officers are
exposed every day to threats of
gunfire, and this is the most
lethal gunfire one can imagine
on the streets, and we need to
be very mindful of how important
that is to public safety.
All right, Mr. Speaker, the 2nd
bill that we included in our
package is House Bill 50 and now
part of House Bill 8.
Penalties for vehicle theft and
representative Barrego I'd like
to yield the floor to you to
explain that portion of our bill
from Bern Leo Presentative
Borego, thank you, Madam Chair,
and Speaker, representatives,
uh, thank you for, uh, the
opportunity to speak in front of
you today and to the public, um,
the bill, House Bill 50, the
bill that we're bringing as part
of this package and I'm very
happy that this is part of the
package because I presented this
bill, um.
2 years ago and, and um I'm glad
to see that it's part of this,
this uh sessions, uh,
importance. Mr. Speaker and, and
Representatives, House Bill 50
along with my um fellow
representatives, uh,
Representative Joseph Sanchez
and Representative Art de la
Cruz, um, is relating to crime,
providing that multiple
violations of unlawful taking of
embezzlement of fraud
fraudulently obtaining a
seeing or transporting stolen
vehicles or motor vehicles
applied to sentencing regardless
of which section of the law was
violated and just to further
explain that, Mr. Speaker and
representatives, um, I'm just
gonna
Briefly give you a synopsis of
what this would mean if you were
to steal embezzle or obtain a
vehicle unlawfully, you would
receive a 4th degree felony for
the first offense, a 3rd degree
felony for the 2nd offense and
the 2nd degree felony for the
3rd or subsequent events, you
would be be guilty of these
charges no matter which offense
was committed, Mr. Speaker, and
so basically what that, what
that does is it um aggregates.
The
The charges and helps to build a
better case. I would just
mention that I have um been
supported in this bill, Mr.
Speaker, and, and chairwoman,
um.
Chairwoman uh
Oh gosh,
and like general lady from Los
Alamos Santa Fe and Sandoval and
all those counties,
I'm sorry, um.
I just wanted to mention that we
have Bernao County Sheriff, John
Allen, supporting this bill,
Harold Medina, chief of police
for Albuquerque Police
Department. We have a district
attorney Sam Brigman supporting
this bill. We have um a number
of individuals that have
testified, including the
automobile dealers Alliance, um,
this bill was heard in consumer
and public affairs Committee.
There were some minor, uh,
technical changes that were made
at that point, and I went to the
House Judiciary Committee where
um there was much discussion
about this, um, and Mr. Speaker
and representatives, I just
mentioned to you that there are
Instances where we've lost some
of our own, and I, and I raised
this issue because it's a very
important issue, Mr. Speaker,
and, and Representatives, um,
one of our very own state police
officers who was murdered in um
uh situation where a stolen car
from another state was brought
to New Mexico or transported to
New Mexico with this gentleman
that was the perpetrator, stole
another vehicle in New Mexico
and then went on
to murder one of our very own
state police Justin here, the
second instance which I mention
was an 83 year old Santa Fe man,
Gordon Wilson, who was a victim
of uh his car being stolen at
one of our local um Target
stores. I mentioned these
situations in these instances
because car theft is um a
situation in a crime that often
leads to more heinous crimes.
And I think that's important to
note, Mr. Speaker, and, and
chairwoman and representatives
is that um these, these
individuals fell victim.
Um, 2.
Situations that led to um their
lives being taken and so Mr.
Speaker, uh, with that, I
um
Uh, ask that we support House
Bill 50. Thank you so much.
Sandoval in Santa Fe.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
obviously a very important
component to House Bill 8 is um.
Providing enhanced penalties for
individuals who steal cars.
That's the bottom line we've
been hearing from our
constituents, very important
public safety effort next, um,
Mr. Speaker, included in the
bill was.
House Bill 31, 4th degree felony
for shooting threat and again I
would mention this bill was
co-sponsored by Representative
Garrett, Representative Baca,
and Representative Reeb and with
that I'd like to yield to um one
of the lead sponsors,
Representative Garrett lady from
Bert Presentative Garrett.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler and, and thank you Mr.
Speaker, this bill is House Bill
31 as amended and that's
important to realize it was
first presented in uh consumer
and public affairs where we got
some really solid feedback from
all the members of that
committee and so we're doing the
uh the amended version of House
Bill 31 4th degree felony for
shooting threat, um, is the
bill.
bill was originally brought
brought to me by a 10 year old
girl in my district, uh,
although, and then after that,
the attorney general and his
office brought to me that this
little girl came up to me when I
was in a neighborhood and she
ran out from her door and she
said, Miss Joy, please do
something about school shootings
and guns at school. We're scared
to go to school and that tugged
at my heart because no child, no
adult, no child should be scared
to go to school, to
institutions.
In public places, um, so House
Bill 31 and then uh the attorney
general who gets the reports
from around the state and
recognize this along with law
enforcement throughout the state
that this was a serious issue
brought the bill started with a
10 year old girl.
So House Bill 31 is amended
elevate school shooting threats,
uh, from a misdemeanor to a 4th
degree felony.
And also this applies to, you
know, public places, not just
schools.
It'll assist law enforcement in
protecting schools and our
school children and our
neighbors in public places
throughout our communities and
state, uh, from someone making a
shooting threat.
When a shooting threat places a
person or a group of people in
fear.
Of great bodily harm.
Or interrupts their occupation
of their school or their
institution or their public
place when a threat causes a
response by Lauren law
enforcement, then that person
instead of being guilty of a
misdemeanor will be guilty of a
force to be felony. Our kids
need to feel safe.
At school we need, we need to be
safe when we go to sporting
events.
We're not talking about casual
comments made by angry student
we're talking about a serious
threat and that's what the
amendments added to it.
I want you to realize that in
2024 alone schools throughout
our state receive shooting
threats and that included
schools in Albuquerque, Clovis,
Santa Fe Raton Paake Valley,
Real Rancho, and Eagle Nest, and
I want to really thank, uh, the
school officials and the police
department of Rio Rancho have
been extremely strong supporters
So, um, come to testify on many
occasions because of the
personal experience they've had.
In September of 2024 alone, uh,
the Albuquerque Police
Department investigated 28
incidents.
The strange law enforcement.
But more vitally
It affects our students'
well-being. We're trying to
raise our student outcomes, but
you forget what it feels like to
be a student in a classroom
where you're having to deal with
these threats. You can't focus
on learning your multiple
multiplication tables. You can't
focus on your language ability
because at the back of your mind
is what if something happens
today, and that's what happens
has happened in schools that
kids in all the schools I
mentioned.
That sense of well-being and
safety as we all know, is vital
to learning.
Um, if you're a teacher or an
educator, you have to train your
kids in response to potential
school shootings as an
instructional coach at a large
elementary school. I had to
train kindergartners. Um, it
wasn't, it wasn't the greatest
experience for them or me.
Even when no actual violence
occurs, school shooting threats
disrupt learning. Parents keep
their kids at home. Um, we heard
in Puake Valley that there was
50% attendance for the week
after their shooting threat and
that's happened throughout our
state.
So it really negatively impacts
the student climate.
Our kids deserve to be kids.
They deserve to feel safe at
their schools. Um, I wanna add
sometimes people say, well, if
it's a juvenile and this and it
becomes a 4th degree felony,
it's gonna destroy their life.
That's not true. Uh, many people
in this body are much more
familiar with me.
With juvenile laws, but I just
want to make a couple points
that I've learned in the course
of doing this spill in the
juvenile system, juvenile
probation and parole officers
have an incredible amount of
discretion of how they deal with
misdemeanor charges, and they
can informally dispose of up to
3 misdemeanor charges brought
against the child within 2
years.
That informal disposition can
have various levels of
supervision.
Uh, but there's no teeth if the
juvenile probation officer, uh,
doesn't comply with everything.
Um, when you, if this bell when
this part of House Bill 8
passes, uh, the juvenile
probation officer would have to
send the matter would end up in
children's court where there's
much more um accountability by
the judge, uh, and they can
advise mental health treatment,
uh, counseling, um, drug
treatment and other resources to
address.
the root cause of why that
juvenile was led to make such a
threat. So it actually addresses
the health and welfare of a
juvenile far more powerfully and
effectively.
So
I'm
Pleased to present this spill. I
think it'll make a difference, a
huge difference in how we relate
to these threats of disrupted so
many of our schools and our
students' lives, um, and I look
forward to sharing more with you
over the course of this, uh, and
with this Mr. Speaker, I'll turn
it back to uh representative uh
Chandlers back to you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and
I think we can all agree, um,
the world has a place now where
children should not have to be a
dealing with shooting threats in
schools. It's um I can't imagine
what it's like to be a parent
sending their child off every
day wondering if there's gonna
be a a school threat, a shooting
threat at their local elementary
school.
And what it's like to be a child
in a school wondering and being
trained, trained on what to do
if there actually is such as the
shooting event at their school.
It's a, it's a mind boggling
place that we're at, and
obviously we need to address it
in is in a way that's um
serious, and I think the three
sponsors of the bill for
bringing it forward.
Um, fentanyl use.
is pervasive.
Um, many, we, I bet every one of
us in this room knows someone
who has passed because of an
overdose I do.
And I just wanna, um, remind
people we need to address it and
I wanna thank Representative
Little, the gentle lady from
Bernalillo for bringing such a
bill and with that, Mr. Speaker,
um, I'll ask her to explain her
fentanyl trafficking bill and
lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There's
a gentle lady from Los Alamos
Sandoval in Santa Fe Yield. I
gladly yield to you, gentle
lady.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and members of this
body.
I bring forward the fentanyl
trafficking sentences bill
formerly House Bill 16, and I
would like to thank my
co-sponsor Representative
Barrigo for joining me on this.
Section 17 targets the dangerous
and and and deadly epidemic of
fentanyl trafficking. It creates
new sentencing enhancements for
the crime of trafficking
fentanyl.
Up to 3 years if the person is
in possession of between 100 and
500 pills.
Or between 10 and 50 g of
powder.
5 years if the person is in
possession of more than 500
pills or 50 g of powder.
5 years if the person has
recruited and coordinated
organized, manage, or financed
another to commit fentanyl
trafficking.
Fentanyl is devastating. It was
originally developed in 1959. It
was pharmaceutical fentanyl is
an analgesic synthetic opioid
which was used primarily after
surgery for severe pain or
advanced stage cancer.
However, as we know it is also
made.
And used illegally.
In New Mexico overdose deaths
increased by 60% between 2019
and 2021.
And fentanyl is the driver of
this increase.
It is a uniquely deadly drug.
It is up to 50 times stronger
than heroin and 100 times
stronger than morphine.
We have watched.
We have watched the devastation.
From Farmington to Roswell,
Ratton to Demming galloped
toucan carry Albuquerque to
Socorro.
And all the towns in between who
have been hit so hard by the
fentanyl crisis.
For countless families across
our state every day is marked by
the memory of a loved one lost
to fentanyl overdose.
Mr. Speaker,
And colleagues, we must take a
wide ranging approach to dealing
with this crisis and its root
causes.
And it must include increase, we
must increase the availability
of addiction services and
prevention programs and we are
making progress on that this
session.
But it cannot answer the
fentanyl epidemic alone.
This is an and solution this is
part of it and behavioral health
services and other services that
are needed to prevent this
addiction.
Again, House Bill 8 or this bill
is a part of the answer.
And it does not go after those
who are simply trapped in
addiction.
It's designed to hold a large
scale fentanyl traffickers who
are spreading this deadly drug
among those we know and love.
It gives judges options.
And keep some cases out of the
federal system.
The bill does not impose
mandatory minimums. It gives
judges the option of pursuing
enhanced sentencing for large
scale dealers.
A drug.
part of me, a judge is able to
take into account.
Whether an offender is actually
per perpetrating this.
Today
There is real pressure to move
our fentanyl charges into
federal court.
Where they do have mandatory
minimums and no flexibility.
I have heard concerns that this
might be a disproportionately
affecting people of color and
our indigenous communities.
And to that I will say I have
worked a lifetime, my entire
lifetime to ensure health care
and behavioral services as well
as other services are available
for our people.
But I will say by strengthening
our state law with House Bill 8
we can really relieve that
pressure and keep cases here
avoiding federal mandatory
minimums and give Judge judges
the ability to charge crimes
appropriately case by case.
Mr. Speaker, members.
Every community in the state is
asking for action.
House Bill 8 expands the tools
our state judges have letting
them try cases and a balanced
and nuanced manner.
Mr. Speaker,
I would like to introduce Mark
Baker, an attorney from
Albuquerque who will serve as my
expert witness.
I yield back to represent it to
the representative from Los
Alamos Sandoval and Santa Fe
County. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, gentle lady from
Bernal Leo back to the.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker, and,
and thank you gentle lady from
Berna Leo, very important piece,
um, for our public safety
package lastly, uh, Mr. Speaker,
I would like to talk about a
bill that was included in the
package House Bill 106 it was
sponsored by Representative Reeb
and and what the the bill does,
Mr. Speaker, is it provides the
ability of law enforcement to
seek a war.
in the case of when an
individual is is um.
Suspected of misdemeanor DWI
right now under our current law,
if a person is charged or will
be charged with a felony DWI
that persons there is the
ability for the law enforcement
officer to seek a warrant and
obtain a blood draw, but under
our current system that is not
available for misdemeanor DWIs
and that derives from certain
case law that I won't go into a
lot of detail.
This is a legislative fix that
has been long sought by law
enforcement and um this year we.
We, we looked at it, we vetted
it through the committee process
as we did with all of these
bills and we deemed it
appropriate for inclusion into
our package. So now law
enforcement will have the
ability to seek blood draws in
cases of misdemeanor DWI
assuming of course the packages
passes this chamber and makes it
through the other chamber and
assigned by the governor this
bill, um, as I said, was has
been long sought by um law
enforcement.
Mr. Speaker, and I think it will
make a huge impact on public
safety in the state without Mr.
Speaker, I'm open for questions.
Thank you for that.
There is debate. Let's go first
to the gentle lady from Burnley
of Anaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from uh Los Alamos
Sandoval and Sandove County's
yield, um, Mr. Speaker, I gladly
yield to the gentle lady from
Bernardo County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um.
You know, I really wanna thank,
um, I really wanna thank the
sponsor of this bill for
allowing me to work alongside
her along the way, um, so one of
the points that I'd like to make
as we're going through this
process is to really um help
folks understand who the
collaborators were and how the
bill came to be, um, I felt
really great going into this
process, um, because I knew that
the sponsor and myself had the
same goal in mind and that goal,
Mr. Speaker, was to get the
greatest.
amount of people, the greatest
amount of treatment possible.
And so Mr. Speaker, um, what
I'll do today is focus my
questions on the competency
portion of this bill.
Um
All right, so we'll start at the
beginning. How's this, Mr.
Speaker, um, so I would really
like, uh, to ask the sponsor of
this bill to describe the
process of putting this bill
together, um, I know that
they're, it started many, many
months ago, um, but one of the
things that I think is really
critical to understand is the
interim process and how many
people came together to make
sure that this bill was a
possibility and so Mr. Speaker,
um, gentle lady would.
Do you mind, uh, describing the
process and how this legislation
came together over the interim.
Um, Mr. Speaker, generally I'm
happy to do that so uh you'll
recall that we, um, were asked
to go into a special session in
July.
But prior to that special
session we um recognize that an
issue that was very important to
certain members of law
enforcement was how do we
address criminal competency in
state there is frustration as I
noted earlier, Mr. Speaker,
with, um, the fact that.
The approach that we have taken,
I think is dated and has not
really kept with how we need to
work with individuals who've
been charged with lower level
crimes and how we can support
them through the processes and
what we did throughout the
summer was invited um um subject
matter experts to CCJ to present
their various perspectives, and
I would note that included the
Supreme Court's commission on
mental health.
and competency or um.
District attorneys.
Law enforcement we heard from
individuals from Donana County
who have had who've had some
success in implementing programs
that would get individuals into
treatment.
And we um actually brought in
some national experts as well to
brief the committee on what
trends were happening, Mr.
Speaker, across the country.
This is not an issue that is
unique to New Mexico. The issue
of criminal competency, the
intersection of mental health
and the criminal justice system
is a topic that's being
discussed across the country and
it is it in in some cases
prolific and there.
individuals studying it and
trying to find solutions that
are not directed at just locking
individuals up but actually
getting them access to
treatment, so that is what I
think is most rewarding about
the, the, the process that we
went through we look to anyone
who had a good idea. We looked
to all sorts of subject matter
experts, and we discussed it in
CCJ and eventually towards the
end, I worked closely with
my expert who I should introduce
um Megan Dorsey, many of you
know she works for us on the
majority side, a criminal law
expert and we developed an
approach that we then Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um.
Began vetting with our
colleagues and the governor's
office and talking about where
we were going and I was very
pleased once the bill sort of
came to pass that there seemed
to be a great deal of consensus
and general support for the
approach that we were taking and
um I have to confess, Mr.
Speaker, I wasn't sure we were
gonna get there in the
beginning. It's a very um
difficult topic because you
know, let's face it.
We're dealing with people who
have um difficult problems,
mental illness is a very
difficult thing to address and
it's even more difficult when
it's overlaid with the criminal
justice system.
Um, so I'm proud that we have
now come up with an approach
that I think um is gonna.
Provide opportunities for
treatment for people? Is it
perfect? It's absolutely not
perfect, but it's, I think a
great step forward in trying to
address the issue, Mr. Speaker,
in general Laing.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I too
was a bit timid in approaching
this, um, just because of its
history and the fact that this
statute is incredibly
complicated, um, so thank you
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
can you explain some of the
suggestions that we incorporated
to this bill after our
consultation with these
stakeholders. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, Mr. Speaker,
um, gentle lady from Burly Happy
to, I think that uh as I said,
one suggestion on uh.
Criminal competency piece where
a person um is dangerous.
There was concern there were not
enough, there, there, there
wasn't a broad enough list of
predicate crimes that involve
violence and that's very
important to note because for
someone to be deemed appropriate
for criminal commitment there
has to be a finding of
dangerousness and obviously Mr.
Speaker, um, we do not want
individuals with mental illness
regardless of how much
compassion we feel for them to
be on the streets threatening
our.
Citizens, so we expanded on the
ability of a judge and a
prosecutor to address that
through the commitment process,
but I think maybe even more
importantly, Mr. Speaker, we
gave additional pathways for
individuals with a serious
mental illness, um, but our
charged with lower level crimes
to receive treatment or
potentially restoration. So
maybe I should talk a little bit
about what restoration involves,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
that's OK.
Mr. Speaker, that's fine. OK, so
restoration, um, is the process
where a person who is deemed not
competent may be restored to
competency and if they can be
restored to competency, then
they can participate in their
own trial that's what it means
to be competent to be able to
talk to your defense attorney
and understand the charges that
are brought against you
understand the process that you.
we're gonna be going through
understand what it means to be
sentenced, you know, all of the
things that those of us in this
room would understand so that
you can fully participate in
your own defense. Otherwise, you
know, justice is about fairness,
I think, and it obviously isn't
fair to try someone who is
unable to participate in their
own defense, so we have allowed
in this bill and it never before
has been in our criminal justice
system the ability for.
outpatient community-based
restoration, so a judge would
have the option in the case of
of relatively low level crimes
to um compel that person um to
be potentially restored.
Uh, if that person, so that's
one possibility.
It also allows a prosecutor.
To seek assisted outpatient
treatment for someone um who
may um have a serious mental
illness does and the prosecutor
in his prosecutorial discretion
doesn't think it's appropriate
to seek additional criminal um
process but and then he may go
into a civil process in and
attempt to to get that person
treatment through it's, it's not
a voluntary process, but it is a
civil process and it doesn't
involve incarceration.
or commitment.
That's another option and we
kept in law the ability of a
prosecutor to seek what we call
civil commitment and that is not
a criminal process but a way to
get the person help through
commitment where the, the
seriousness is such that they
need, they may be a threat to
themselves or others and they
we've continued that, so that
continues to be an option. So
now there are 3 pathways for an
individual to be um who.
has a low level crime to be
addressed through our system.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I really
appreciate that. I appreciate
you, um, talking about the
different.
Tracks or avenues if you will,
um, because there are many in
this bill and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would like to,
uh, ask you a few questions
about diversion as well. I know,
um, Mr. Speer and gentle lady,
this is something going into the
process. I was really, really
holding on to because in my
core, I truly believe in
diversion, um, and that would
mean a way out of this system.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
one of the things that we found
as we were talking to folks who
actually represent those who are
have been deemed uh not
competent.
Um, was that diversion may not
actually work for those folks
all the time, um, and this was
something Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady that actually gave me
pause, um, because I didn't
realize that we could be setting
them up for something that was
not a success for them. And so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, would
you mind expanding on that for
just a moment?
Um, yes, Mr. Speaker.
Diversion through our criminal
justice system is usually.
The point of contact is usually
pre-prosecution, as I understand
it, and we do have in law now
the ability for a prosecutor to.
Working with the defense to work
out an arrangement for
pre-prosecution diversion where
there are certain requirements
that are imposed on that person
for treatment and other, um.
I don't know, imposition of
obligations I guess on the
person and that's available now,
um, frankly, I don't feel it's
used enough and maybe going
forward, you know, this bill
isn't the end, um, in terms of
trying to improve on our
processes, I think going
forward, maybe next year or the
following year, we will have an
opportunity to try to find
additional ways to expand on
pretrial diversion. I know
there's an interest amongst many
of
Our stakeholders to try to find
ways to do that. I think it is,
um, a possi an important
component, just not for criminal
competency.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, and
gentle lady.
Um, another just a follow up
question on that, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
this bill does not prohibit
diversion programs, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, Mr.
Speaker and general I absolutely
it does not, and I know there is
interest in um some of the local
district courts to be looking
for ways for, um, advancing
pretrial diversion programs and
the like, and I expect they will
be working continually on that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, moving on here, um, can you
walk me through some of the
conversations that we had with
some of the judges in particular
those who are running the
current diversion programs, um,
just so, uh, I, Mr. Speaker, and
the body can get an update of
where are we at when it comes to
uh diversion programs, uh, that
are based in competency, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
yes, I, the one that we had the
most conversation with, I would
say, and I also presented to CCJ
um during the summer time was I
think his name was Judge Romero,
um, from the Las Cruces Donana
area and you know I what I find
really, um.
I think encouraging is there
seems to be across the state in
very in pockets, especially, um.
Judges who are very interested
in trying to promote uh other
avenues for these individuals,
you know, obviously the ones who
are more who have been charged
with lower level crimes they're
used to seeing them in their
court a lot and they're
frustrated for them and
concerned for their well-being,
and I think the judge that we
met from the Las Cruces Donana
area was one of those judges.
He, uh, I think if I remember
correctly, was a former
prosecutor and but he, he.
recognize that our system hadn't
isn't adequately addressing
individuals with serious mental
illnesses, and he has been
participating actively in the
assisted outpatient treatment
program and working with local
officials to make that program a
success and so we look to them
almost as a model and Mr.
Speaker, if you'll remember we
also consulted with the Supreme
Court justice, um, Chief Justice
Thompson and.
some of his staff, they actually
have staff assigned to
behavioral health, you know,
they have dedicated staff that's
how much mental health,
behavioral health has made its
way into the criminal justice
system where the courts
themselves are engaging
behavioral health specialists to
assist in how they address the
issue. They have formed
committees to try to inform them
themselves and now us and best.
practices and we worked with
them to to be better informed
and all of us in this body will
remember that during the special
session we allocated we budgeted
$3 million for pilot projects
for assisted outpatient
treatment, and I expect that
we'll be expanding on those
across the board, but we worked,
um, a lot with members of the
judiciary and their staff to get
their specific insights in the
types of individuals they're
seeing.
the types of problems they're
trying to address and they work
very hard and collaboratively
was to help us make better
decisions and policy on this
particular topic, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Delay,
um, as you know, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I shared my story
in committee, uh, but criminal
competency and this bill in
particular affects my family
directly, um, before I decided
to work with uh Representative
Chandler. I called my aunt.
Um, and without context, uh,
without any sort of
politicizing anything. I asked
her.
Yeah, if you had what you needed
for Paul, which is my cousin,
what would it be?
And what would it look like? And
there were a couple of things
that were.
Pretty obvious in her response,
and it was that one.
Um, he had been deemed
incompetent many, many times.
He's been in and out of the
system many, many times, and she
said when he goes to jail, he's
worse. He comes out worse than
he was before, and he's more
dangerous than he was before.
However, when he gets the
treatment he needs.
He's back to being my baby boy.
And that, Mr. Speaker and Chair
Chandler is why I chose to work
on this because I really do
believe that we can move the
needle in a way that.
Balances due process and make
sure that families like mine can
get this treatment that they're
really desperately seeking and
unfortunately in our current
system right now.
It's
Nearly impossible to get unless
you're intersecting with the
justice system.
And that's awful and I'm so so
proud of this body that we're
investing so much money in the
second part of this because this
bill is not the end. The second
part is the treatment portion.
It's putting money where we need
in order to make bills like this
work, um, and so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I wanted to touch
on that because there are a few
different portions in this bill,
um, that I would like to hit on
before I, I end my comments here
and one is that we have um
added.
An evaluation and expansion and
expansive evaluation that would
allow families like mine to be
able to use that evaluation if
they're seeking assisted
outpatient treatment on the
civil side, not the criminal
side, the civil side.
Um
Uh, in order to get their loved
one help.
Uh, the second piece that Mr.
Speaker and, uh, Madam Chair, I
would like to commend you on,
um, is the ability to move folks
from the criminal side to the
civil side in order to get them
some help.
Mr. Speaker to Chandler, these
are two, big components of this
bill, um, that I'm really
grateful for the work that went
into them, the thoughtfulness
that went into them to help
families like mine, so thank you
with that, um, I'm finished, Mr.
Speaker, and Madam Chair.
Thank you gentle lady. There is
further debate, the gentleman
from Bern Leo, Representative de
la Cruz, but before we go to De
la Cruz, there's been a request
to remove your coats, uh,
permission granted.
Mr. Speaker, may I proceed?
Yes. Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
Sandoval in Santa Fe yield, Mr.
Speaker, I gladly yield to my
colleague from Bernal Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Chairwoman representative.
This package of bills of what I
will call successes first, Mr.
Speaker.
is predicated by a need that has
been outlined both in the media
as well as from our constituents
as well as from our own
experiences.
And I also want to commend the
chairwoman and all the members
that have been involved, Mr.
Speaker, from both sides of the
aisle to try to bring this to
fruition.
Now, some might say that.
It's a little bit tardy.
However, Mr. Speaker,
We also have to remember because
every year is a new year and we
almost forget everything that we
did in the past, but the reality
is.
That we have done much
Chairwoman Mr. Speaker.
Let us not forget.
That we were able to
Give rebates to the citizens of
New Mexico, the taxpayers of New
Mexico's chairman. We were also
able to have free college
tuition for 2 year and 4 year
educational institutions of
higher end.
So this body, Mr. Speaker.
Has not been lax in producing
results for New Mexico and now
Mr. Speaker and Chairwoman,
we're going to do just that for
New Mexicans with this
particular bill.
So some of, some of what I may
ask may seem a little.
Rhetorical because I'm a
co-sponsor, Mr. Speaker, on some
of these bills that I'm very
proud to have been part of.
So let me just start with some
accents for
Reminders, refreshers, further
explanation, Mr. Speaker.
Chairwoman
Let us start with
HB
I would like to hear.
A little detail, a little more
detail on how this bill will
crack down on repeat auto
thieves and the illicit market
for stolen cars.
Mr. Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen
from Bernna Leo, it allows um
charges that are similar but not
identical to be aggregated when
one is considering prior
offenses.
And I hope I got that right
because it's a little confusing.
So there are multiple ways a
person can be charged for a
crime that involves an auto-type
theft and those are delineated
in the law and what it, it
hasn't what we did was and what
representative, um.
Parago bill does it allows those
various bills to be counted when
one is counting priors to get to
a higher felony, so you know
there's a, you know, the first
one would be a lower felony, and
then if you had a second, um,
charge, you know, but it was
slightly different from the
first kind of auto theft that
could still be aggregated for
the next higher level type
crime, etc. etc. so what it does
is it puts people on notice that
technical changes in the law.
are not going to be an excuse
not to charge through an
enhancement and this is a tool
that I think will be beneficial.
It will definitely be a
deterrent and it will give the
courts the option
to aggregate crimes, not the
obligation to aggregate crime.
So it's not a mandatory
sentencing scheme or any of that
sort of thing, which I know some
people have concerns about, but
yet again we're giving
opportunities for the courts to
make decisions based on.
crimes that are very similar. So
in terms of sentencing and
enhancements and increasing
penalties, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady.
I want to commend
Representative, the gentle lady
from Bernalillo represented
Morero for having the
determination.
For bringing this bill for its
3rd go round and it's, it it
really warms my heart to see
that it's, it's here and we're
gonna get to vote on on this
package that includes that
aspect of it.
I know that Mr. Speaker, I know
that we addressed.
The mechanism that can turn a
semi-automatic pistol into an
automatic pistol, and Mr.
Speaker, it's not lost on me an
avid newspaper reader.
Journal newspaper reader.
That crimes are being committed
by youth with these weapons.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
have to do something about it
and it looks to me like that's
happening, but again, please
reiterate for the body.
How this came about? Was it
because you read it in the
paper? How did that happen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
actually, it was brought to us
largely by law enforcement as
the gentle lady from Sandoval
mentioned when she was talking
about her portion of this um
bill and um law enforcement is
very concerned because they're
seeing, seeing large quantities
of these conversion devices um
notably we got some very
compelling, um, testimony, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentlemen from
the police chief in the Las
Cruces area, you know, the
southern.
part of the state where there's,
he said, I think the word he
used was massive amounts of
these um.
Enhancements or these uh devices
so, uh, as a result of that, you
know, I want to commend the
representative from Sandoval.
She was hearing this, I think
too from the
Attorney General, the local law
enforcement officials and a
result we brought forward this
bill and we think it will have a
significant impact. It
criminalizes the possession on a
state law basis and I think it
was mentioned earlier, Mr.
Speaker, it's criminal under
federal law now, but um most law
enforcement in the state cannot
charge under the federal law,
and they need, they, they were
asking for a state crime so they
could utilize it as part of
their charging process, Mr.
Speaker.
gentlemen, when these devices
are found.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, General
Lady.
It is frightening to me that
these mechanisms are.
Readily available that they can
be printed on a 3D printer.
And find their way into the
hands of, of sometimes children.
And
Mr. Speaker, everybody in this
chamber knows that I'm a gun
guy.
However
I don't need that mechanism.
Kids don't need that mechanism,
and I'm glad that this is being
addressed in this bill.
Now, Mr. Speaker, my last
question.
General Lady
How, how can you explain to this
body that the voices of New
Mexicans average New Mexicans.
are being heard.
Can you expand on what were the
mechanisms? What were the venues
that brought the attention to
these particular items and this
package from New Mexicans, Mr.
Speaker.
Well, I think um if I understand
you correctly, how is it we came
upon these as uh as a serious
issues that we needed to
address, is that what you're
asking, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen? Speaker.
No
What I'm trying to get to.
Is how did the voices of New
Mexicans.
Add to the weight.
Of what is entailed in these
bills.
Was it just you and a few cops?
Mr. Speaker, or how did that
happen? Mr. Speaker, um, and
gentlemen, I, I get where you're
going with this. The public
wants this. I mean this is
people want us to be addressing
public safety. These are items
that have brought to our
attention, you know, obviously
the fentanyl trafficking bill is
an incredibly significant, um,
thing that we need to be
addressing. We have our, our
residents, our citizens have
been clamoring for us to address
it.
They have been clamoring for
address us to address some of
the gun violence that's in the
state and obviously us in
enhancing our ability to address
the devices that are so deadly
and being used by youth and
older offenders, we are doing in
this bill. No one will disagree,
Mr. Speaker, that DWI is a
serious crime. No one will
disagree in every part of the
state we are affected by DWI.
Desks and disabilities and, you
know, all the horrible things
can happen when a family is
affected by a DUI and we have
enhanced the ability of law
enforcement to address that
competency, although you know
I'll I'll be the first to admit
it affects a narrow.
Part of our criminals who are
charged, it's a part that draws
a lot of resources in the
criminal justice system and we
were hearing it from family
members of individuals who are
affected as well as law
enforcement so across the state
and individuals who are impacted
by the crimes that are being um
perpetrated by these folks in
part because they are affected
with mental health issue so I
feel this is a very.
strong public safety package,
mister, and it's Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen and it's responsive to
requests that we've been hearing
for some time now from our
citizens.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. General
lady, I will close with two last
things and it's, it's, it's
again where I started.
This body has not been sitting
on its thumbs in my short time
here, this is my 4th session.
Some amazing things have
happened, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady that have
benefited the lives of New
Mexicans.
And you know
While crime and the effects of
crime on families and New
Mexicans takes its toll.
At the same time, it is our
responsibility to make the lives
of New Mexicans, Mr. Speaker,
better, and we've done that at
least in my short time here and
I feel good about that and I
feel good about this bill and
Generally
Mr. Speaker, you are the chair
of the judiciary Committee.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that's correct. And it's my
expectation and my understanding
that there are further bills
working their way through the
system, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General Le? Um, Mr.
Speaker, um, gentlemen, I'm
aware that there are many bills
that have been assigned to our
committee that involve the
criminal justice system.
So Mr. Speaker, I gather that
there's more to come. Thank you,
sir.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Chavez, Curry,
and Roosevelt, Representative
Reeb. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady from Los
Alamos Sandoval and Santa Fe,
please shield.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
from Chavez Curry and my friend,
I'm happy to yield to you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, Madam Chair, I
first would like to begin by
saying how much I do appreciate
the work we've been able to do
together on on some of these
bills, um, and the input you've
taken from um myself uh
especially on competency and the
DWI bill, so, um, I would say,
Mr. Speaker, and um.
General lady that I do sincerely
appreciate that and are working
together, um.
My concern is I've mentioned
previously, Mr. Speaker, is
is even following up on the
gentleman's last question, you
know, and how we came about this
public safety or public, I guess
we call it the crime package
bill.
What
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker,
but, uh, Mr. Speaker, and, um,
gentle lady you stated as the
public wanted this.
And what I'm hearing,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady is
that the public wants more and
so, um, at this point, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I do want to move a
substitute, um, or like a house
for substitute 230942.1 for HB
8,
Basically house for substitute
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 to
be distributed, and I would like
a roll call vote.
gentle lady, can you repeat the
number, please? Yes, it is a
0.230942.1. We'll get that
distributed and we'll get that
online, and then we will proceed
As the floors substitute being
passed down.
OK, we're waiting for it to get,
uh, put online, so that should
happen here shortly.
Just for the sake of the new
folks, um, I probably should
have explained this at the very
beginning. Um, this is a floor
substitute, same thing if we
were a floor amendment, uh,
we'll go to the gentle lady, uh,
to explain it.
And then we'll go to the
original bill sponsored to deem
it either friendly or not
friendly.
If it's friendly, then generally
we'll just adopt it if it's
unfriendly, we'll have a debate
on the amendment, um, to be
recognized to speak for debate
on the uh on the floor
substitute.
Please, uh, stand and and wave
your mic, um, and what I'll try
to do is, is alternate back and
forth to the extent that I can,
um, assuming there's a lot of
debate, uh, maybe there won't be
any debate. I don't know.
Uh, but that's generally how
we'll do it.
So in other words, don't press
the button to be recognized to
speak on the floor amendment.
on the floors up.
Raise your mic, wave it.
Wave it, wave it real high,
Representative Mirabel Moya.
If if anyone's on their computer
down there, can you check? The
link is up, but it's showing up
broken on my screen. If anyone's
on the website, down on the
Mr. Speaker, it's, it's up on
mine.
I have been informed that the
2nd link is up.
For those watching at home, the
first link will be removed so
that you're not confused. The
second link, if you click on it,
will take you to the house floor
substitute.
Uh, in front of us. Let's go to
the gentle lady from Chavez
Curry and Roosevelt,
Representative Reeb, to explain
the floor substitute.
That
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
before I do, since I believe
this is one gonna be one of the
most important things that we
discuss, um, in this session. I
would, um, ask the speaker to do
a call of the house at this
time.
All right, we'll give it a
second while we gather.
Members, um, and while our
sergeants do their.
If anyone he needs to use the
bathroom, now's the time.
members, if you are in the
chambers, please sit in your
Members, I am informed by our
sergeant at arms at the call is
complete.
Let's go back to the gentle lady
from Chavez Curry and Roosevelt,
Representative Reeb, to explain.
The floor substitute. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. So House floor
substitute 230942.1, um, does a
few extra things it leaves the
competency in sections 1 through
9 as is currently in there, um,
in the original substitute, um,
section 10 adds unlawful
possession of firearms, which
increases the penalty for an
individual who unlawfully
possesses a firearm to a second
degree felony or.
Requires a minimum term of
imprisonment of 9 years while
increasing the penalty to 12
years if a person is convicted
as a serious violent felon.
Section 10 also eliminates the
potential for notorious
deductions, meaning earning good
time, um, prohibited persons
which are not charged by the
bill include a felon, a person
subject to an order of
protection and anyone convicted
of battery against a household
member criminal damage to
property of household member
stocking or.
an enumerated crime in 18 USC
921.
Sections 11 through 13 lead the
auto theft statutes um that have
originally been discussed.
Section 16, um, trafficking
controlled substance, um.
It, it does is establishes a
minimum term of imprisonment of
3 years for anyone convicted of
trafficking a controlled
substance and creates a new
first degree felony for
trafficking a controlled
substance that results in death.
Um, currently trafficking is
limited to Schedule 1 or 2 drugs
that that is a narcotic which
includes cocaine, heroin, opium,
opioid, and other opiates
including fentanyl and
methamphetamine.
Section 17 adds a distribution
to a minor, establishes a new
first degree felony for an adult
who distributes, distributes a
schedule 1 or 2 drug that is a
narcotic or methamphetamine to a
minor. Section 18 adds a
delinquency act and it changes
the definitions of serious
youthful offender and youthful
offender in the delinquency Act
to generally include more crimes
in which a child will be
sentenced as an adult if
convicted or can be sentenced.
As an adult, if the child isn't
amenable to rehabilitation.
Serious youthful offender
changes child charged is a
serious youthful offenders are
prosecuted in district court and
if convicted, are subject to
adult sanctions. The sub
decreases the age of serious
youthful offender from 15 to 14
in line with the age limitations
currently in lawful use for
offenders and includes 4
additional crimes that will
result in an adult prosecution
if committed by a child.
From the ages of 14 and 18,
which is second degree murder,
voluntary manslaughter, armed
robbery, and shooting at an
occupied building that results
in great bodily harm or shooting
at her from a motor vehicle that
causes great bodily harm.
The youthful offender changes
the sub includes 3 additional
crimes which if committed by a
child between 14 and 18 years of
age may result in adult
sanctions, vehicular homicide,
and voluntary manslaughter and
failing to stop a vehicle that
is involved in an accident that
results in injury or death.
Sections 19 through 25, um, have
not changed, which deals with
the um chemical blood draws for
DWIs.
Um, and Mr. Chair, those the
basis of what has been changed
in the substitute.
Thank you gentle lady. Let's go
back to the gentle lady from Los
Alamo Sandoval Santa Fe,
Representative Chandler, is this
a friendly floor substitute.
Mister Speaker, um, it isn't,
but I'd like to ask some
questions. That is fine.
Um, will the gentle lady from
Chavez, etc. yield yes generally
I will yield.
So, um, could you um tell me,
gentle lady, you, you mentioned
there's a new section 10.
Unlawful possession of a
firearm, etc. um, what committee
did that, um, what bill does
that represent and what
committee did that um provision
go through.
Uh, oh, Madam Chair, um,
Mr. Speaker, sorry, I'm, I'll
get used to it by Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, the felon in
possession of a firearm bill was
a bill requested by the
governor's office.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I
appreciate that, but could you
tell me um what the bill number
is if there is one and um if it
went through committee, what
committee it went through, Madam
Chair, there's a bill number
that I'm aware of right now. It
did not go through committee,
but it was definitely uh
discussed um extremely
extensively in CCJ where we were
both present in the interim, Mr.
Speaker. OK. Thank you. Um.
On section 1311 through 13, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you, I think I interpreted what
you said, Mr. Speaker, generally
as changing the um provisions
that were in the original bill
presented by Representative
Brago. Is that correct?
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, general
lady, I, I, I'm confused. What
page are we looking at? I'm
looking at what you referred to
as sections 11 through 13.
Um, OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That has not been
changed. OK, thank you very much
for that clarification, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
trafficking of a controlled
substance, I think you indicate
that was a new section 16, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is correct. OK. And
does that represent a bill that
has been presently filed, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
was a bill that I presented in
CPAC and was killed.
OK, so it was a bill that you
filed this session and did not
make it through the committee
process. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady actually,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, a
portion of this bill I actually
presented in CPAC, we took out
um some of the counterfeit
substance sections of it, but
the part about distribution to a
minor and the trafficking part
of it did go through CPAC and
I'm not sure if it was rolled or
tabled, but that's what happened
there. Mr. Speaker, so Mr.
Speaker generally and make sure
I understood um what you said
is.
You filed there.
The bill, the, the provisions
are that are in this proposed
substitute, Mr. Speaker, General
Lei have provisions that were
not prevent presented to uh
CPAC, is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, generally, I did
present this in CPAC and got
feedback that it was they did
not want those um some of those
issues in there and so it was
either roll or tabled, I can't
tell you exactly. I had 7 bills
that day, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um, section 17 um involves
distribution to a minor, is
that, um.
provision that is in a current
bill that's been filed, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Madam, uh, Mr. Speaker and
general lady, it is similar to a
bill I filed, I believe I
included that in that fentanyl
bill.
That was that I just described,
um, uh, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
So um just to clarify, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it is not
identical to any bill that's
been filed. Is that what I'm
understanding you to say, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
section 17 wasn't a standalone
bill, but that was in the bill
that I filed in CPAC and that
was rolled or tabled
Mr. Speaker Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you. I think I
understand now, um, section 18,
uh delinquency Act is that, um,
Mr. Speaker, um, House Bill
3134, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
yes, it is House Bill 134 with
um many many changes.
Um, the feedback from the
committee, um, was that there
were if you were, well, you, you
weren't in there, Mr. Speaker,
um, gentle lady, but there was a
lot of concerns with different,
uh, people and players in in
that um that committee hearing
and so we worked with um
different people in the jubil of
justice advisory with Jay Jack
obviously Mr. Bregman's office
and the DA's and made a couple
changes to the one section, the
two sections dealing with, it's
one section.
but deals with serious youthful
offender changes and youthful
offender changes otherwise we
took out everything else from
that juvenile bill after a
consultation with all the
different um people so uh.
Parts of the other bills are
really not relevant to the floor
sub and that because we just did
two things.
OK, uh, Mr. Speaker, generally
just took for my own
clarification when you, you, you
referred to a hearing.
Um, when discussing the section
18 delinquency Act what hearing,
Mr. Speaker, are you referring
to, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, once again, I was in CPAC
where this was tabled or rolled
um to work on the bill.
OK, I I think I understand
general last Saturday.
OK, very good, um, appreciate
that, um, clarification, gentle
lady. Did you remove um anything
from uh House Bill 8 in that was
originally in House Bill 8 but
is not in your substitute. I
mean, could you share with that
if you did, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, we removed, um, the
increasing the uh the hold on
let me find my original there it
is creating the crime of
unlawful possession of a weapon
conversion device and
prescribing penalties, which
would be the Glock switch part
and we also removed the um
Increasing the penalty for the
crime of making a shooting
threat.
And, and the fentanyl, our
fentanyl is different than
obviously the fentanyl part um
in your bill, Mr. Speaker, and,
uh, gentle lady. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, um, general lady,
and what's the rationale for
removing the Glock switch um
Bill that so many in law
enforcement were asking us to
enact, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, as
I stated, I believe in House
Judiciary had concerns about
that bill. First of all, I
understand it is a federal
crime.
Um, and I, I believe gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, you would
agree with me that it is already
a federal crime.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
agree it's a federal crime, but
not a state crime that can be um
charged by most state law
enforcement.
And Mr. Speaker, General lady,
my concerns that I had about the
way the bill was worded, um, as
I expressed in judiciary was
that I felt um we were going to
possibly be punishing people for
having one Glock switch on the
floorboard of a vehicle
possibly, um, Mr. Speaker,
generally I suggested maybe we
should do a possession with
intent to distribute Glock
switches or um in the situation
we described and I actually
believe it was uh the gentleman.
Um, uh, our, our minority whip
who suggested that he was
concerned also that what if you
did not have a firearm in that
vehicle and you just had a
plastic switch on the floor that
you could be charged with the
4th degree felony and so that
was one concern we had, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I also
suggested that I thought it
would be more appropriate to put
in there, um, if you possess a
Glock switch in the attempt or
commission to attempt a crime,
uh, which would cover your
felonies and
also somebody who had a Glock
switch on a let's say a
negligent use of a deadly
weapon, a misdemeanor offense,
and they were running around
town shooting that off, um, so I
thought the language needed to
be tighter, um, it needed to
mirror federal law more and it
has not. The amendments that I
saw or that were suggested, I
believe by our side of the aisle
would have tightened that up
more to mirror federal law and
that's why we took that out, Mr.
Speaker, um, and gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, you had the option of
amending the Glock switch bill
and putting it into your
substitute, for example,
addressing some of the current
concerns that you just raised
and you chose Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady not to do it, but
eliminate the prospect for um
law enforcement to charge.
Um, individuals who are found
with large quantity of these
switches, um, to be charged at
all by any uh state law
enforcement. Is that right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, in the
substitute, but we're um
definitely wanting if this moves
forward to make amendments on
that and try to get that
something that's a little more
palatable for, for everybody to
make sure that we tighten up
that language, so my
understanding, and you can
correct me if I'm wrong, if any
of the bills in, in, um, your
package.
do not pass, they're still a
judiciary can be rolled back and
heard separately, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, is that true?
Um
Mr. uh,
the gentle lady will be asking
you guys a que you the question
as the sponsor of the substitute
so you can choose to answer that
in your response, but you don't
have to
I prefer not to and um I would
say that the question goes to
the point of we haven't stopped
um um talking about um public
safety, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I think what you query
was, um, do we have additional
opportunities?
To consider other public safety
bills and do we have additional
opportunity to consider other
public safety bills. I think
that's the point of what you
were trying to inquire of me of,
so maybe you could answer that
question for me, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I hope we have the
additional ability to look at
other safety bills and I also
hope we have the ability that if
this crime package that um you
are presenting does not pass
that we can look at each of
these.
bills individually and have an
individual discussion on each of
them.
Mr. Speaker
Um, Mr. Speaker, generally,
thank you for that.
And is there anything else that
you take out, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, House Bill 31,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
which is, can you just tell me
which one House Bill 31 is that
the um shooting threat uh
matter, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, um, yes, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, House Bill 31, I
think you were a co-sponsor of
that bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
generally, we did take that out.
I, I, I believe that.
Um
That is something that uh I'm
still interested in possibly
pursuing, um, I wanna look at
that closely, talk to, uh,
members about um the fact that
we we can actually still
prosecute those um as a a crime
under the delinquency Act, um,
if something like this were to
happen, and so I believe that's
something that under the current
law could still be addressed
even without it in this bill,
Mr. Speaker, generally.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
given, uh, the fact that.
Either the bill um was went
through the initial phase, the
proposed amendment includes a
bill or some portion of a bill
that went through a committee
process and failed or is a
completely added bill, for
example, I believe.
Well, some of the bills, Mr.
Speaker, that you referred to
are the items that you referred
to, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um,
did not make it through the
committee process or bypassing
that, Mr. Speaker, and putting
it in a substitute and to the
extent there are bills in here
that have not been through the
committee process at all, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I find
that objectionable so on both of
those bases, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I do not consider this to
be a friendly substitute.
All right, there is debate on
the floor substitute. We'll go
first to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does
the gentle lady yield the, yes,
uh, Mr. Speaker, I will yield to
the gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Um, I'm
would also just like to get
clarity on, um, the form of this
process, um, I think we were
very clear, you and I both sit
in house judiciary about how the
package, how the package gets
put together and um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you familiar with blasting a
bill and this might be a good
refresher for how, um, new folks
in the gallery here in the
gallery and here on the floor,
um, understand that process to
take place. Are you familiar
with that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
from what I understand, in my
first session, I tried to blast
Bill didn't go the best as I had
expected it to, um, but my
understanding is that would be
when um we're asking the
to basically pull something out
of committee, um, and get it
hurt on the floor. I might be
wrong, but, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that that's my
understanding.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's, that's pretty clearly my
understanding as well where the
committee process deliberates
upon bills and allows us to cast
votes for each uh piece of
legislation that ultimately
makes it to the floor and when
we put bills um on the floor
that haven't been through that
deliberative process, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we, if we
blast it to the floor, it means
we didn't, we weren't able to
cast the votes, um, on those
different pieces, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
Would you agree that multiple
pieces of this legislation has
not gone through the full
committee process, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
just state that this is a
substitute. I do somewhat
disagree with you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because, um, I do
believe in the interim, for one,
the juvenile the discussions
were, were very much um brought
to the table and discussed um in
detail. I know there may be some
disagreement on that.
The other bills were sent
through CPAC and rolled um and
so I guess I wouldn't consider
this blasting a bill out that
hasn't been vetted, um, because
we did go through CCJ with a lot
of these different things, uh,
Mr. Speaker, and, uh, gentle
lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Um, I
think it was referred the
section 16, section 17, and
section 18, um, while it may
have gone through the interim
process and may have been
discussed the process for which
when we are in session, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
requires in in large part for
all of us to be subject to the
same rules that these
deliberative parts of, of any
section of a bill gets its due
process, um, and vetting within
the uh committee process.
for us to be able to review, uh,
what's presented today, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is a
compilation of bills that are
still in that process, number
one, and number 2, something
that many folks in this in this
on the floor today, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady have never seen
before. Um, we're not part of
the interim process because they
were just recently elected and
sworn in, uh, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, and, um, are
seeing many of these, uh,
components of this bill.
Section 1617, 18, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, for
the very first time, would you
agree that it's fair to say that
many folks in here have not been
part of that conversation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
think, um, we should be able to
bring a substitute. I see, and
I, I haven't been here very
long, but I've seen substitutes
brought on the floor with things
that have not gone through full
committee. I do know, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that
you were present when all this
was occurring in CPAC.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thanks uh for that. I think part
of every single year that we get
to come and um represent our
communities is that we are
deliberative about that process
and understand that there is a
process and, and hopefully
respect it um when it comes to
being deliberative about what
the contents of a bill are while
yes we may bring committee
substitutes to the floor, um, I
would note that it's, it's
pretty uncommon, um, in my years
of being.
here, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, when it comes to being able
to to understand what's the
contents inside and that's why
the, the debate process within
the committee process is so
critical, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um so as I hate to
interrupt, but I would ask if
she could stick to questions on
the substitute instead of the
process, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. That's fine, Mr. Speaker.
I'm happy to move on into the
contents of the bill. If we
could start on, um, section.
Uh, 10, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um.
Can we talk about the felon in
possession, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, as to why we are doing
mandatory minimums and not
trusting our judicial system to
decide upon not only meritorious
deductions, but of course what a
term of imprisonment should be
for a felon in possession of a
firearm, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I think we've we heard a lot
about this in our um interim
session, um, especially
testimony from, I think Mr.
Baker, who's actually
sitting back there as an expert
on the other side, um, had great
detail um conversations of why
this it would be important to
have a minimum mandatory time
for these uh violent offenders
that they're seeing and the
reason that they believe that
they should not be allowed to
have the good time, um, and so,
um, after listening to the
presentations by the governor's
office and that we heard in in
committee, um, and actually uh
uh all the discussions we had.
That's why that's included in
this bill, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
the question was directly to why
we would not trust the judiciary
of our in separate branches of
government to determine what the
minimum sentence would be um for
a felon in possession of a
firearm, raising this to a
second degree felony and not
giving them judicial discretion
to understand meritorious
deductions, um, for what they're
um serving time for Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Well, Mr.
Speaker, generally, I think the
felon in possession already has
minimum mandatory, if I'm not
mistaken.
Passed by this body um and so
we've already dealt with that
issue of why, um, and I, I
believe it's been passed by
this, this house that um there
are minimum mandatories already
on felon in possessions in a
fire of a firearm, um, as far as
the meritorious deductions go,
um, I think that sometimes, uh,
Mr. Speaker, Madam Chair, we
have our gentle lady, we have
issues where we have a, a, a
serious problem here in
Albuquerque with felons and
firearms and shootings.
and all the crime that was
described over the interim and I
believe this is is similar to a
situation where a first degree
murder, they don't get a chance
to determine, uh, the Department
of Corrections, whether they get
good time or don't get good
time.
Madam, uh, or Mr. Speaker and,
uh, gentle lady. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, even where there is
judicial discretion here, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm
hearing you, you want to just
take that away with section 10.
Is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, we do do that
all the time. I mean, 2nd, 2nd
degree trafficking is an 18
mandatory sentence. I don't
think it actually changes the
fact, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the judge would still have
the ability to mitigate that
down.
So there's still some judicial
discretion there, but we have
many crimes with many minimums
that there is no judicial
discretion on but to mitigate,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, will you remind me, is
there any data, information to
uh supplement raising penalties
in this context that it will
have any impact on crime and
what we can expect to see as far
as, um,
What the result of criminalizing
this further and doubling and
tripling the um time served.
What, what is the expectation
for that?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I don't have data in front of
me, but what I can tell you is
what I do know about felon in
possession of a firearm. It's,
it's not your typical crime.
When you are adjudicated a
felon, I cannot tell the body
how many times you were told by
your attorney in the plea
agreement by the judge, um,
while on probation that you
shall not possess a firearm and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I feel
this crime is different because
when you actually go
a firearm purchase a firearm,
you're actually doing something
extra to where you know what you
are doing and you know that this
is gonna be something uh that
you're not allowed to do, so I,
I, I view this crime very
different than, uh, raising
penalties to deter crime than I
do other crimes because to me
this involves an extra step and
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's how I would answer that,
but I don't have data in front
of me to answer your question,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, um.
Look forward to deliberating
upon this bill separately again
through the committee process so
that I can see the data, so that
I can understand what that
impact would be so that when
we're raising penalties as a
cost to our state, to taxpayers,
and to the process that we would
propose that the deterrent
effect is number one, hopefully
the primary, uh, reason why we
are trying to punish for a crime
and to ensure that that doesn't
happen on the
front end and then secondly, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, if we are
doing that, that the punishment
does fit the crime and, and
furthermore, prevents that from,
from happening. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would, I'd really
like to see that data, um, and
understand that further, um, I'd
like to move on back to Glock
switches and the removal of that
from the bill, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, that is
currently a federal crime, is it
not, Mr. Speaker, General lady,
since, as my understanding goes,
since the 80s, is that correct?
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, I
again, I would ask that we could
stick to the, the sub where it's
not in my sub and so I would
just ask for some clarification
on it, so you clarification here
on that great question. So, uh,
that particular part of the of
the original bill was taken out
in your sub, and I think it's
fair to ask why it's not in
here.
Um, I don't think it's
completely at all out of line.
Uh, we'll just say, Mr. Speaker,
that question was asked and I
think I did give a couple like 3
reasons why, um, it's not
included in this bill. The
reason that um I suggested some
amendments for it and it wasn't
a mering federal law, um, the
fact that I thought it should be
possession with intent to
distribute the fact that I
thought it should be in the
commission of a crime or attempt
to commission for crime, so Mr.
Speaker, I do feel I did address
that question.
OK, well, uh, very well, and so,
uh, is that, is that your
response at this point I
wouldn't have anything else to
respond than what I previously
said, Mr. Speaker. Would you
mind, uh, and this is actually
for me because I wasn't quite
following the prior debate. I
was reading the bill. If you
wouldn't mind repeating why for
my purpose, please. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, no problem, um, I do
understand and that it is
federally against the law, and I
do understand the intent is that
the DA's office wants to.
be able to where the AG's office
pick up those extra crimes. My
concern is I don't want to see
somebody charged who has one
plastic switch on their floor
when there may not be a firearm
even in the vehicle. Um, I did,
uh, at the judiciary Committee
and I, I believe in other
conversations with key players,
Mr. Speegle, Speaker Asim that
those would be prosecuted
aggressively where I was told
yes if you had a one glock
switch in your vehicle.
It would be, you would be a
prosecuted if if control and
possession was shown, obviously,
um, and you could become a
convicted felon that concerned
me. We suggested some amendments
to align that up more with the
federal law and make that
exactly the same, um, those
amendments haven't happened in
addition, I suggested an
amendment that it would be
better to say that if you're
using a Glock switch in the
attempt or commission of a crime
that at least we could.
show that um it was attached to
a firearm and being used in that
manner and so I'm not saying,
Mr. Speaker, that it's not
something I cannot get behind,
but I feel it needs a little
more work and that's why it's
not in this bill, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you for expanding and
clarifying that for me. Back to
you, gentle lady. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
With the way that you've lined
this up in the sense that you've
removed it in the committee
substitute, the idea is to
redress and allow for those who
may have a plastic glock switch,
something that is federally
prohibited already, um, to not
be, um, chosen to be a crime in
New Mexico as a state crime. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um.
Not so much. I just think it
needs to be worked on, and I'm
hoping that if this bill if this
package doesn't pass, if that's
something we can try to get
together on the other part of
that bill, I had a problem with
it. It also talked about a part
of a Glock switch, and if you
have a broken Glock switch, Mr.
Speaker, and general lady on
let's say the floor of your
vehicle, I want to make sure
that somebody like my daughter
who might get in a car with 4
people and there'd be a broken
glock switch on the floor isn't
getting charged with a felony.
event.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, would you agree that since
1986, Glock switches whatever
component, um, has been a
federally prohibited practice
since they came into the market
understanding that our federal
government um has tried to
ensure that with an unregistered
machine gun, which is what they
they're commonly known as Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, requires a
federal fine of $250,000 and a
prison sentence of up to 10
years.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
when we're looking at.
What the, what is removed from
the uh committee sub that was
was originally in the intended,
um, piece that representative,
uh, from Los Alamos as has
brought today, uh, what I'm
hearing is that we don't want to
get in line with that federal
law rather we're, we're going to
do a deliberative process
separate in another bill. Is
that what I'm hearing, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Well, Mr.
Speaker Giannaletti, I, I, I
really would like to see it as a
standalone bill, but I also
kind of look at it, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady is marijuana, it's
illegal federally, but this body
chose to to go ahead and allow
it to be legal in the state, so
we see this happen all the time,
um, and I just, I would like to
see some more work on that bill
and I guess that's how I'd
answer that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I think, um, at
least from our community, uh,
many, many law enforcement
officers had requested that
because they find these, um, to
be more often, um.
In, in the commission of crimes
or as they're engaging with
folks that have these devices,
um, it's, it's certainly more
common and is, I think, why the
urgency of why it was involved
in this package, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I think to
eliminate it, um, negates the
many conversations that we've
had, the deliberation that we've
had and why it was included in
the package. Um, I'll move to
marijuana since that was the
topic just brought up, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can we
move to the uh portion.
the bill that gets into section
16 trafficking controlled
substances, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, do you know what
cannabis is scheduled as right
now federally.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I'm not sure why we're talking
about marijuana in section 16
because it's not included, um,
in these, these types of
substance, not a narcotic, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in
fact, it is a Schedule One
narcotic federally. Um, we have
attempted to um.
Legalize that in New Mexico. Is
there a reason why, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and the new section
that you've provided in section
16, it wasn't exempted, uh, from
your bill um as uh trafficked
substance.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, generally
it's not included in our
Schedule 1 Schedule 2 in our
state statute.
Yeah, it's not, it's not a
narcotic, and if you look, we,
we're talking about narcotics,
which includes cocaine, heroin,
opium, and other opioids
including fentanyl,
methamphetamine, marijuana is
not included in that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, again,
because I wasn't able to see
this in committee, my analysis
reads the, the federal
government and has still um
labeled cannabis as a Schedule
one narcotic, um, it is still
considered federally prohibited,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I know in communities, um,
such as, uh, Portalis or, um,
in, uh, different areas along
the Texas border, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, there are a number
of
Cannabis shops that are
operating legally that may be
subject to this new penalties of
trafficking substance controlled
substances without an exemption
when we're putting it in law,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady here as
a mandatory minimum for this
offense subject to the
controlled substance, um,
enumerated in Schedule 1 or 2
without that exemption, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
concerned again because I didn't
get to see this in committee
that we may be criminalizing
further.
Uh, legal activities in the
state of New Mexico, um, would
you agree, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
no, I would not agree. This is
not federal law. This is state
law, we're defining it very
clearly in here, um, this has
nothing to do with cannabis, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, I hope that's correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm trying
to play catch up here, forgive
me, um, since it's the first
time I've seen some of these
sections, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
other part that was missing that
I think we both um saw in
committee multiple times, um,
was on the shooting threat bill
that I understand, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you were also
co-sponsored on is there, can
you clarify for me again why
that was removed from this bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, well, I do support that
bill. I still believe that we
can deal with that in the
juvenile system and prosecute
people for those under the
current laws, Mr. Speaker,
gently.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that wasn't just dealing with
juveniles. I think it was
dealing with shooting threats
more broadly, um, when we heard
about it, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and again, I appreciate
that you're supportive of it.
I'm just, can you expand upon
why when we see increased
shooting threats across, um,
schools or public venues when
we're seeing that folks are
taking liberties in our courts
and um community spaces, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady,
understanding the
emergency for some of these
threats to be, um, allayed.
Why that was removed from this
if you are in support of that
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I if
anybody understands coming from
Clovis, New Mexico. What happens
when there's a mass shooting and
what happens when there's
threats of shootings and bomb
threats that follow those
shootings. Again, I want that to
is a standalone bill when I
looked at what to include in
this crime. I, I mean crime
package we looked at the the
crimes that we felt would have
the most
most impact on public safety and
well that is a great standalone
bill, Mr. Speaker, um, gentle
lady, that in and of itself is
not going to strike anything in
New Mexico that's gonna change
crime at this point, and that's
just my opinion on that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and while I
appreciate one person's opinion,
and we do hear that quite a bit,
um, I think again going back to
the process, and I won't belabor
it because there are other parts
of this bill that again are
brand new to me that I'm trying
to play catch up on, uh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady is the
We need to see what is in this
bill um through a committee
process so that we can actually
ensure that it's not just one
person's opinion, but the
purpose of uh deliberating on
this as a body and and having
the opportunity to cast votes on
each piece of legislation, uh,
Mr. Speaker, there are other
parts of this bill that I am
still trying to read through,
um, and understand, um, but I'm
certainly concerned about what's
missing, what folks have already
voted yes on to be here today,
Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady, um, and, um, I
would encourage the body to vote
this bill down and, and, um,
continue to deliberate on what
was in front of us prior. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate, the
gentleman from Sandoval,
Representative Martinez. Thank
you Mr. Speaker, will the
Kind lady from Chavez Curry
Roosevelt yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, yes, I will
yield to the gentleman.
From Sandoval County.
Thank you, kind lady, um, we
spent hours and hours and hours
during the interim going over
some of these, in fact, um, we
spent, I believe 2 different
sessions with.
Um, the district attorney of
Berlio County.
Mostly talking about juvenile
justice.
What in this bill
Covers the juvenile justice
part.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
Well, if you recall when we did
discuss this for 2 days, there
were probably 30 changes that um
DA Bregman was recommending that
he needed in order to get a hold
of the vast amount of homicides
and things that he was dealing
with with juvenile juveniles,
the only thing that we um change
and and actually before I go
into that, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if you recall when we
and I, we have the facts right
here. He talked about the uh
juvenile crime in Bernalillo.
County and the case is referred
were 1,448 murder 24 cases
involving a handgun 386 armed
robbery 49 criminal sexual
penetration 44 and shooting at
her from a motor vehicle 69
cases, um, and then since 2019,
Mr. Speaker, there have been
over 890 cases referred to their
offices involving kids with
guns. The majority of these
occurred from 2022 to 20.
23 where they experienced a 57%
increase in these cases and 2024
their office had been referred
119 felony juvenile cases
involving a firearm indicating a
continued increase in juvenile
cases involving firearms, and I
believe if I'm not mistaken, he
said there are 33 people sitting
in jail, juveniles for murder at
this time. We went into detail
on that and in this bill.
After all the suggestions that
um DA Bregman wanted changed um
in this bill we we just changed
the section of what a serious
youthful offender is and it a
youthful offender is where we
added, we lowered the age by one
year and then we added crimes to
those two categories to give
DA's offices and especially
Bernalillo County, Mr. Speaker,
the ability to get these kids
prosecuted for the.
these violent crimes that they
are committing.
Thank you, Mister Speaker, kind
lady, um, thank you for that
very clear and detailed
explanation, uh, because I think
the majority of the people in
this body.
Have not had the chance to
Uh, be on CCJ during the interim
or on judiciary during the, uh,
Session
Um
Another question that I have is
um
Or law enforcement
officers across the state, not
just.
Um, Albuquerque or Santa Fe, but
across the state are they
calling for these types of
changes, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I will tell you that law
enforcement across the state
rule to metro believe this is
one of the biggest, if not
biggest problems right now and
crime that we are facing, um, it
is the most important in my
opinion, law that we can pass in
this session to protect New
Mexicans and so yes I've
received feedback and, and as
you've heard DA Bregman say
many, many times, um, I believe
the same thing, um, and so we
took
a part of what he wanted done, a
very small part to help him deal
with what he's dealing with
here, could tell you in my
hometown, Mr. Speaker, uh, which
is only 40,000 people. We have
had 150% increase in juvenile
homicide and crime, and so it
spreads from Metro to rural all
across the state and if we want
to protect New Mexicans and if
we want to take the protect the
people of New Mexico fixing
juvenile crime is the most
important thing in my
my opinion that we can do and it
seems like the opinions of many
law enforcement officers and the
DA in the 2nd district judicial
district that we can do, uh, to,
to help protect New Mexicans. My
feeling is, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen that if we do not
address this issue, we will be
back here next year and the next
year trying to fix this, trying
to get this done, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um,
I think you with the changes
that you've made, you've taken a
good bill.
And made it even better, adding
a lot more substance that we are
seeing across the state, uh, so.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, thank
you for the substitute. I'm
going to stand in full support
of this.
Right. There is further debate.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Chavez carry
and Roosevelt please yield. I
will yield yield to the gentle
lady. Thank you. Um, I had some
questions because there there
were some questions that were
brought up about HB 38, which is
the gun conversion taking from a
semi-auto to full auto.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
was there anything in HB 38 that
addresses fully automatic
firearms because I'm sorry, I
didn't realize I actually called
on general lady from Bern Le
representative Chavez, and I
just turned around and saw you
debating, I apologize for that.
I called on Representative
Chavez from Bernalillo.
I got a little confused too, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady or not
anymore?
Yes, OK, go ahead.
Sorry.
Mr. Speaker, with the gentle
lady yield from Chavez Curry.
And all those other counties Mr.
Speaker, I will yield to the
gentle lady from Bernal Leo.
So
Mr. Speaker, um,
And a lady from all those
counties, as you know, I've
lived the devastating reality of
violent crime in our state.
And looking at this bill and
looking at section 18, I see
that this bill gives an
opportunity to create.
A real balance of reform one
that priorities public safety,
one that prioritizes victim
rights while ensuring that young
offenders face meaningful
consequences. When you built in
those sections of section 18 in
this bill, um, I think you're
really
Not refusing.
To take juvenile crime
seriously, um, when we leave out
juvenile crime out of this crime
package we send a dangerous
message that accountability has
an age limit.
And that is not true.
Um, every day.
Families across our state are
shattered.
By young offenders taking lives
such as my sons.
And I know that this has not
been rushed. I know that I have
been here now for 10 years.
Asking to address juvenile crime
and really look at this juvenile
children's code and when we
craft provisions of crime and
laws.
The ACLU never supports our
advocacy. We have victim groups
that are here constantly
fighting because day and day we
are losing our loved ones to
violent juvenile crime.
Um
I don't quite remember the
number that you said gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, but did you say
right now in Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County, there's 24 or
25 juveniles.
that are currently facing
charges of homicide.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and um gentle
lady.
At first I would, I, I commend
you for your constant advocacy
for juvenile crime reform for 10
years and so I agree with you it
has not been rushed, um, I agree
with DA uh Bregman who said that
this is not something, this is
something we've been working on
and doing the interim, the
number I was told was 33.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, 33 homicides in Bernalillo
County.
Currently, juveniles are facing.
That is even more than the last
number I thought and
unfortunately, I think that
number grows more and more every
day. I believe we have victims
here this week.
Um, when we did present um our
thoughts on the crime package
and last week when I had the
victims of homicide Memorial,
there were several family
members here um in the gallery
and on the floor that have lost
their loved ones, and you know,
Being that it's 10 years and
this is the first year that I
can personally address crime.
I made a promise to my family
and to the people of New Mexico
that we will fully address crime
and we are not going to kick the
can down the road. We are not
gonna use smoke and mirrors
anymore, and we are gonna
address crime from a to Z.
And I fully am very thankful for
all of the representatives in
this room for putting competency
in.
From putting all of the many
important bills in this crime
package, but when we don't
address juvenile crime.
The thing that is most killing
our young ones and old ones in
this state, then we are not
prioritizing crime and we are
not representing the people that
put us here in this place, and I
just want to thank you,
representative Reed, um, Mr.
Speaker, for adding in section
18 to our crime package.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I I just think that this
would be a great addition to the
crime package so that we can
address our most, our most
volatile, most important issue
on crime. Thank you, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker. The gentleman
from the% of small thank you Mr.
Speaker. Would the gentle lady
from Chavez, Curry, and
Roosevelt yield will yield to
the gentleman from Donna County.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, since
I don't
on the Judiciary Committee or
the other committees where
these, some of these bills have
been heard. Uh, I, I may ask a
few sort of foundational
questions. Is that all right,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, yes, sir, gentlemen.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. And um,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
this is obviously, uh, this
isn't all of the public safety
package, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, for anyone in this body, I
think we can agree on that. But
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, seems
like these are, uh, of the
bills.
that have maybe been filed,
discussed, some have gone
through committees, some
haven't. These are the most
important public safety bills
from your perspective in this
floor substitute. Is that fair,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, they
are in for me, the juvenile one
is the most important, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady or
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, I apologize Mr.
Speaker.
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, uh, no apology needed
and thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and it
sounds like one of the big
reasons that you're emphasizing
that juvenile component, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is because
of some of the gun crimes
committed by juveniles. Is that
accurate, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
yes, that would be one of the
reasons, yes. Great, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I, um,
frankly don't necessarily.
disagree. I think it is a truly
a worrying trend that, that uh
we see, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I read the same headlines,
the community that I come from,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
have similar concerns. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
The I can't help though in this
juvenile sense which uh or
looking in the juvenile sphere
maybe, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
most of the time, juveniles
spend during the day, during a
week, during the sort of the
work day. It's gonna be spent at
school, right, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, generally, we, we
sure hope so. I gentlemen, gosh,
why do I keep doing that?
We sure hope they're at school,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
agree we're working on those
attendance measures to make sure
they're at school. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would you
not agree that one of the most
terrifying things that any
parent, any community member
faces, reads about, thinks about
our school shootings, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, sure, I,
I, as I stated, I
has experienced the library
shooting. I've um had a
You know, threats of shootings
at schools that my children have
attended, so I believe, yes,
that is a serious issue, um.
In New Mexico, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, but I guess one that
I guess I would say that one
that I don't believe is what we
cannot do as a standalone bill
and it's not the most important
thing to deal with in this crime
package because we can't address
it other ways, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I certainly respect and
appreciate that, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if we're
looking at juvenile crime in one
hand and we're uh saying
that school shootings and school
threats by those juveniles or
maybe not juveniles doesn't fall
into the same piece. Can you
understand why maybe that seems
like it's only half done to me,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, um, and, and gentlemen,
I can, I can respect what you're
saying, um.
But what I would comment on is
we're seeing this violent
juvenile crime every single day
in our state and what we're
discussing with uh a threat of a
school shooting or a bomb
threat. We're not seeing that
every day in New Mexico so I
don't feel it is not that it's
not important, Mr. Speaker, or
not something we need to address
on a standalone bill, which I
would obviously happily support.
I just don't feel if we're gonna
put a crime package together.
as is being called that this is
the crime that needs to be in
there that's going to really
address crime in New Mexico, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. OK, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, thank you
for that. uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, returning to the
issue of shootings, uh, which I
think we all very much agree is,
is a very big problem. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my sense
is that many of those shootings,
perhaps most, in many different
forms, that those are
semi-automatic handguns.
and not always a glock but often
a Glock. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I guess the
The bill that's in or the, the,
the Glock, or not the Glock, the
shoot the shooting statute or
bill that's in here deals is
actually just a threat of a
shooting. Somebody calls in a
false threat, like a false bomb
threat just moving it from a
misdemeanor to a 4th degree
felony. It's not dealing with an
actual person that comes in and
shoots somebody, which in that
case, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
would be homicide,
Mr. Speaker, generally, sorry, I
was actually moving on to uh
sort of setting.
aside in respectfully
disagreeing, although
appreciating the conversation,
uh, or I guess drawing a
different conclusion, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, about, um,
the importance of the uh school
safety and the, the school
threat provision. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I certainly know
from my community, uh, actually,
I think in ways that uh drove
home to me, uh, I would visit
with families, and these are
families whether it's
grandparents or whether it
was, uh, parents, uh, whether it
was kiddos, the number one thing
when I wanted to talk about the
funding that this legislature is
bringing for schools, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what they
wanted to talk about is they
didn't, they weren't sure that
their kiddo was safe at school
because of school shooting
threats. So, but moving on from
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, you know, when we think
about in this case at least,
juvenile crimes and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, some horrendous and
horrific and I mean you just
that is horrendous, horrific
with uh incredible, um,
catastrophic consequences, those
shootings, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, the ability to carry
out a shooting like that and to
essentially make a weapon, uh,
Automatic
Into utilize, you know, a 1020,
in some cases, 18+ round clip to
to shoot that in a few seconds,
Mr. Speaker, Jane and lady, um,
is that a concern? Have we, let
me ask this, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, have we seen some of those
horrific shootings, uh, that
Uh, shoot a, a lot of rounds and
a very quick space, uh, whether
in state or in other, in other
areas around the country, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, again,
that's the reason I wanted it as
a standalone bill because um
that bill is dealing with just
possessing uh a switch that's
why I want to talk more about in
the use of, so yes, I do agree
with you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that when you put a
Glock switch on a firearm,
That's not a good thing, um, and
I'm not in favor of that. The
issue I have is that I think we
should talk about that as a
standalone bill with the
possession of Glock switches and
the situations I explained where
you could have a broken piece of
plastic on your floor and then
all of a sudden be charged with
a felony offense when you're
not, um, even having a firearm
in proximity to that, if that
answers your question, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Speaker.
I certainly appreciate the
information and the, the
detailed context, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if we're
looking at this as the most
important package of public
safety bills were identifying
shootings as one of the most
serious, uh, public safety
threats. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, which is why I think we,
we agree.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
ability for those shootings to
be um carried out with
essentially a, an automatic
weapon. I, I don't, I, I really
struggle to understand why we
wouldn't include that, why that
was excluded from the most
important public safety, uh,
package from this uh package of
very important public safety
bills.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
well, I do understand your
question. I, I think I've
answered that like 2 or 3 times
at this point, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I,
I certainly, as I said at the
beginning, and I appreciate
that, uh, having not served on
the committees, I've, you know,
I wanna ask a few of these
questions, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I guess I'll
conclude by saying, um,
from the community that I come
from, I see a great deal of
progress in the bipartisan
components of this bill. But Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I know
that parents, kiddos, uh,
families, teachers are very
worried about mass uh school
threats, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, they think that those
threats have gone on for too
long with, with escalating
consequences and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I believe they do
want
want us to take those threats on
as one of the top public safety
issues. Secondly, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, when it comes
to the horrendous gun crimes
that we see in our state, uh,
leaving out something that keeps
those gun crimes from being an
automatic weapon, emptying, you
know, dozens, if not more
bullets in a few seconds in a
short span, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I also think that that
seems to rise to the level of,
of the most important public
safety.
safety steps we can take so
appreciate very much the
conversation. Those are two of
the main reasons why, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I can't
support your floor substitute,
Mr. Speaker, I respond quickly,
uh, Mr. Spiegel, gentlemen, um,
well I appreciate your comments
and the concerns that people
have about threats of school
shootings. I think we're hearing
way more concerns about the
actual things that are happening
with school shootings and
violence and things that are
happening with juvenile
offenders, so that's why I pray.
Prioritize that in the package
that we're presenting, but thank
you, I appreciate the
discussion, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you. Thank you.
There is for the debate, gentle
lady from Brinley and Torrens
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
thought you forgot about me
standing over here for hours on
end. Thank you.
Well, the gentle lady now yield
again, yes, I'll yield to the
gentle lady, OK, so this seems
to be a very hot topic, and this
is why the gun issue should have
been separate in the first
place, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, because there's
such a hot topic these bills
should have been brought through
as standalone as it had been
thrown into crime, uh, Crime Act
because they require a lot of
due diligence of asking
questions because on the
conversion which people keep
seeing it's a Glock which it's
not a glock switch, it's a
conversion from semi to full
auto.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I noticed there was nothing in
that bill that prevented someone
from owning or having a
possessing a fully automatic
firearm, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe you are correct.
Which I find that interesting
because if we're going to go
ahead and make it a felony here
like it is on the federal level
that that should have been
included. That's one of the
things should be included. I
know there's a lot of discussion
even from the firearm industry
that it should have matched the
federal and it didn't, um, and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
are you aware that the
sentencing for owing in owning
owning a fully automatic or a
conversion switch is 10 years
and $250,000 fine.
But yet this bill is only a 3rd
degree felony, um, with 3 years
in prison and $5000 fine. Do you
have any idea why they would go
so low compared with the federal
level is, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, no, except that
I could say federal punishments
are generally a lot higher than
state crimes, but definitely my
question was why aren't the
federal authorities handling
this if this is such a huge
problem, which I'm not saying
it's not, um, where children are
putting these switches on again.
Concern, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady was the possession of them,
and, and not, and the possession
of it being a felony where the
use was was not what was
targeted in that bill, but um.
Yeah, if it's such a big deal,
which it is, why aren't we
prosecuting this federally?
Exactly, Mr. Speaker, that's one
of my thoughts exactly is this
is a big deal and, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, are you
aware that these, any of these
things, including firearms by
prohibited people can be
purchased anywhere on the
street, and they can buy on the
app of Telegram. Are you aware
about that, including children
can buy those. Um, Mr. Speaker
Januleti, um, if you tell me
that, and then I know how
familiar you are.
with firearms, I will definitely
believe you on that. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, generally, I got
that from a lot of uh research
and even uh it's been in the
newspaper numerous times in
Albuquerque that children can
buy just about anything on that
app, so even if we do make this
illegal, the other uh the other
thing is we never get to address
the issue. Why are these kids
going after these things and
doing those things in the first
place, um, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, there's a
couple things we haven't
addressed it to match with the
federal level.
The penalties are much lower.
The feds are not handling it,
and the other issue that has
been brought up numerous times
in school shootings and I have
studied those quite a bit. A
person that actually does a
shooting in a building to any of
us in here or does it to anybody
workplace or anybody who doesn't
school has mental issues and Mr.
Speaker John lady, it seems to
me that what we're doing now is
we're taking somebody who's in a
mental crisis and we're
punishing them with a felony. I
get it they did that numerous.
times and we need to take it
seriously with shootings, but
don't we have, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally, don't we have a red
flag bill that addresses that
whole issue that we just go in
and take the firearms.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, we, we do have a red flag,
um, law on the books that could
address that, Mr. Speaker. OK,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
since this is a mental health
crisis issue. I don't see why we
want to make it a pipeline to
prison issue because I'm looking
at this person that has a has a
mental issue, uh, we should be
doing the red flag because we
already have that, uh, we have a
mental health hold, isn't that
correct, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, where we can hold
them for a period of time so
they can get a psych eval.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, yes, I believe they can do
an emergency commitment.
Mr. Speaker.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker I got,
I got.
There was a little bird that
came over and talked to me.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Is there anything in this
provision because look, let's
just get this all out in the
air. We all want to stop school
shootings, correct? We do. All
of us. There's nobody here that
wants that, right, Mr. Speaker
Daley? Absolutely we do.
So knowing that and knowing that
this person has got mental
issues. To me it seems like we
should take that person and give
them in the cycle, get them
adjudicated, so then they cannot
be in possession of a firearm
because when you're adjudicated
with the mental health, you
cannot have a firearm. Is that
correct?
Uh
Mr. Speaker, generally it
depends what you mean by
adjudicated, adjudicated to me
as a juvenile, uh, convicted as
an adult.
OK, so Mr. Speaker Deli,
normally if a judge comes in and
says, you should not have a
firearm, then they can no longer
own a firearm. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker Ganetti, yes, if
they follow that.
So here lies the issue.
If we say, OK, if you call in a
school shooting.
You definitely have something
wrong with you, no matter where
that is, or you say to someone
where I'm gonna go do a school
shooting, which there's been
numerous and the people have
broadcasted that numerous times
and Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you know what happens is most of
those people fall through the
cracks and that is the issue. It
doesn't matter even if you
charge them with a felony.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, if they were arrested on a
felony that day.
Could they technically be
released shortly and still have
the ability to go out and
purchase a firearm.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
on, on a school shooting threat,
I guess it would depend if it's
a juvenile, they would be um
detained possibly or released
depending on whether the
juvenile probation office
decides that they are a threat
and are going to release them if
they're an adult, they would be
arrested and it would depend on
whether the judge was going to
hold them or not.
And Mr. Speaker.
And Mr. Speaker, Jenna lady, one
of the issues that we have has
been pretrial detention and that
we have, do have a revolving
door, and we've decided that,
uh, a lot of our criminals do
get released without any bail,
let down in the OR so if let's
say someone was picked up that
morning.
And we passed this bill and they
were picked up and charged, not.
You know, they haven't gone to
court yet. Is there anything
that would stop them from.
Taking a firearm and still going
committing a crime or getting a
knife or a car and running
people over.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, to
answer your question, I mean
they are on conditions of
release that that if they're
out, if they're out, um, that do
say you're not allowed to
possess a firearm or or anything
like that, um, in the adult
court in reference to the
revolving door kind of issue you
mentioned, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, it's a judge finds
that there are no conditions of
release that can hold them to
protect the safety of the
community they could hold them
without.
and then they would not be able
to, I guess, carry out that
school shooting or whatever that
threat if if that's what the
judge believes is gonna happen.
And see, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady I look at it, we could pass
a gazillion laws and it still
doesn't change the heart of
somebody or somebody has a
mental illness, the only thing
that's going to address the
issue is because that person
could still go get a knife and
start stabbing people, that
person could find, you know, if
they're older, not a child to
get a car. We've seen that. It's
horrifying.
We just had that happen down in
Louisiana where somebody drove
through, uh, was it New Year's
Eve? It's horrifying thing.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Even if we say.
That if you do a school, if you
make a threat.
Which I, I still have trouble
with the threat. There's nothing
that really stops a person from
going and doing it no matter
what a judge says, because
either criminal or mental, uh,
abilities will allow a person to
still go out and do what they
want to do to harm others. Isn't
that correct, Mr. Speaker, young
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentleletti,
um, I guess it kind of depends.
I mean, if, if the judge, if red
flag is used, you know, and
they, their guns are taken away
and they're, you know, or if
they're put in detention because
this is a valid threat. I think
that the issue
with what that statute is doing,
um, and why they are proponents
of it is it disrupts the
educational process when someone
calls in a a threat like that or
a bomb threat and it scares kids
and it scares teachers, it
disrupts the everyday process.
So I think the intent of that,
um, bill is to make sure that
the process is, you, you're not
scaring kids and, you know, yes,
a lot of these are false
threats, um, and that is what
the statute deals with Mr.
Speaker, and
gentle lady, but um it's just
there's so many different
scenarios you could go down on
that path. It's, it's really
hard for me to comment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and that goes back to I
know with the bomb threat those
hardly ever happened because all
the bombings that have ever
happened in the United States.
Nobody called it in as a threat,
right? They just went and did
it. So I look at it as.
With this school shooting.
That there could be somebody who
says something. I know they said
there has to be an intent and
all this stuff, but there could
be something who said something
that gets twisted into that
wasn't something they
necessarily were going to do,
and it could be a person who.
As having a mental crisis who
says something. So I guess what
I'm trying to get at, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
don't see a mental health
component in that, that was one
of my biggest problems in the
first place was that there was
no mental health component into
this person who is calling in
should be taken in for
evaluation. That may differ than
what some people feel, but I
think a felony thrown on it is a
very hard thing to do in the
very beginning, uh, of that, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when I'm trying to address is
that no matter
What you, what we do, especially
if it's a kid, I hate to
villainize a kid because if they
say, I'm gonna go in and I'm
gonna stab everybody in my
classroom.
This does not apply. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
If I recall, um, and I'd have to
go look, go back at the bill's
shooting right.
I believe Mr. Speaker it's just
a threat of a shooting and not
just a school but other
buildings too, uh, gentle lady,
right, and that was my other
problem with this is that it
just addresses a firearm yet
again, which is serious. I'm not
trying to minimize this at all,
but I'm just saying that again
it's vilifying that firearm and
it's not saying, hey, if you
make a threat to kill people?
Like in a mass, like I'm gonna
go in and I'm gonna throw some
sort of chemical in here that
would kill everybody or gas or
something. To me, that's just as
serious as the firearm. And
again, there's nothing in there
for mental health evaluation.
There's nothing in there to
actually stop anybody from doing
it because if they want to do
that, they're going to do that.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
The
The addressing the school
shooting to a felony to me seems
excessive, especially on a
firsthand account. There should
be some mental illness. We have
the red flag. There are psych
holds that we can do and
there's, and if somebody wants
to do something that horrific,
they're going to do that. And
then we have the gun conversion,
which then does not include a
fully automatic farm, which I
thought was strange in the first
place on that bell, um, and it
doesn't match with the federal
level has to say it all.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
And now going back to the bill.
So Mr. Speaker, De lady, uh, the
portion we all agreed on, the
one that we really, everybody
here, I don't think there was
anybody that was against it was
the incompetency because that
came to my committee that came
through CPAC it was properly
vetted and it was.
Let me see if I got it right.
Somebody who is competent and
dangerous is already handled,
but it's somebody who's
incompetent and not dangerous.
Is that still the same and the
changes that you have made in
that section, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I can tell you that the
substitute doesn't change
anything that uh the gentle
lady, um, who's sponsoring the
bill, um.
talked about, um, I agree. I
think this is a good start for
where we need to be. I, I don't
necessarily call it a crime bill
because only 44% of incompetent
people actually are the ones
that are committing crimes, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
why it it's in a crime package
it's definitely something that
needs to be addressed, but I, I,
I've always kind of wondered why
it's in the crime package, but a
good bill. I support this bill,
right, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so did, did I understand
you correctly that that's only
4%.
4% as the numbers were been
given Mr. Speaker.
Uh, a defendants, um, are the
ones that are committing crimes
that are incompetent.
Mr. Speaker Gentleti. So again,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it,
it addresses some of the issue,
but not all of them. And, and
that's the problem. It's like
everything's got little pieces
and what I heard from people
that read the original bill, it
didn't go far enough. So was
that your intent, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, to take this
further, um, so that we can
address some of the, of the
crime issues that are plaguing
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I think that um a couple things
we wanted to have alternatives
for.
um people who are incompetent
and need treatment and their
misdemeanor offenses and we can
possibly get them treatment and
maybe treating the competency,
the big part I like Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady about the spills
that expands the scope of crimes
in which we have dangerous
people that need to go through
the process of possibly be
committed to Las Vegas, um, so
that they're not able to injure
anyone, and we're very limited,
Mr. Speaker, General lady
previously under this code by
just a certain handful of
crimes that we could use, um,
and this expands that and so
that's why I signed off onto
this bill and I do support the
competency part of this, uh,
fully, OK, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I just have a few
more questions maybe might lead
to more questions. So it's all
the years that we've been, I
remember when when I've been on
the floor, um, matter of fact,
we had there was one time we had
an amendment that we brought up
on our side that was accepted on
the other side that had never
been properly vetted, so that
does happen at times where a
substitute would come along or
amendment will come.
They actually changed the bill
that has not gone through a
House committee. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I, I've only, this is my 3rd
year I I felt I saw that in the
first, uh, couple sessions.
I think I've been here too long
because I do remember that
happening to where we have had
numerous times where an
amendment will come on the
floor. It's accepted and it does
change the meaning and change
the wording, and then that bill
was not vetted in a committee
beforehand so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I understand
what you're trying to do here. I
want to address some of the
things that were removed and why
they're removed. We already have
the red flag bill, um, and if
they're not going to do a bill
that matches the federal level,
which we had brought up
numerous times and numerous
people have reached out, uh,
those need to be separated,
pulled out and addressed, vetted
and handled in such a way that
it goes through, um.
Our channel so that we have the
ability to make the amendments
to try to come up with something
that we can agree with. So, uh,
Mr. Speaker, generally, is there
anything else that you wanted to
add? Um, Mr. Speaker, generally,
not on this, on the amendment
thank you Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House for substitute number one
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8.
Right? We have a motion to table
House floors substitute for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8,
there is a roll call vote.
Um, the, a vote of yes and
listen to the, to the new
members.
It would be
And we would have tabled the
floor substitute.
He would have known and we're
back on the substitute.
It would have yes
And we would have tabled the
floor substitute, he would've
known and we're back on the
substitute the vote.
is now open.
Mr. Speaker, my button, Mr.
Speaker, we got you.
How do you wish to vote? Yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 42 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative. House floor
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 has been tabled.
Generally, you still have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
Generally, do you wish to keep
the call of the house?
Gentle lady, you said you had an
amendment. Is it up here?
Um, yes, um, I think he's
bringing it. Do you want me to,
no, hold on, I don't even have
it yet. Just stand by.
Um, gentle lady, this is a
amendment to House Bill 49.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I think he
gave me the wrong one. I've got,
I apologize.
You want to just keep this one
out since we're gonna go to that
bill at some point. No, sir.
I have the right one here, but.
The amendment been passed out.
Yes.
Almost OK.
Wait waiting for it to go on the
website.
OK, thanks, Mr. Speaker.
And Mr. Speaker, I'm gonna ask
for a roll call vote to just.
Got it.
Gentle lady, uh, the amendment
has been passed out and it is
online.
Will you kindly read the 230
number. Yes, uh, Mr. Speaker,
230840.1.
OK, the amendment has been
passed out, uh, the gentle lady
to explain the amendment. I do
have the roll call vote. OK,
thank you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. So House floor
amendment 1 to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 all this amendment does
is it keeps the original bill,
um.
That uh was presented everything
is the same except it's adding
the um
part of the, the juvenile, let
me find it on here just some
very clear section 18 that I
discussed the delinquency Act
which changes the definitions of
serious youthful offender and
youthful offender in the
delinquency, um, to in general
include more crimes in which a
child will be sentenced to an
adult if convicted or can be
sentenced as an adult if the
child is in amenable to
rehabilitation, um, I won't go
through it all again, but that's
what it's basically adding, so
it keeps the crime.
package that's been presented
with the addition of this. I've
listened, um, Mr. Speaker, to
the body and the concerns of
wanting to keep those different
crimes in there, um, also trying
to express how important it is
that we deal with juvenile crime
and even if it's just this first
little section that we can help
and deal with. I think it'll
make a big impact on juvenile
crime in um
In New Mexico and so that's what
I'm trying to add to this
package, Mr. Speaker. Gentle
lady from Los Alamos Santa Fe
and Sando Valley is a friendly
amendment. Mr. Speaker, may I
ask a few questions of the
gentle lady from Chavez please.
Yes, you may. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is this,
um, essentially House Bill 134,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it was
House Bill 134, but it was all
amended so just it's section 2.
Only section 2 is what has been
changed. Not all those 30 some
changes and then we just added
the definitions to change the
serious youthful offender and
the the youthful offender to
catch those additional crimes
and decrease that age a little
bit, otherwise it changes
nothing else in the code.
Mr. Speaker.
It, it, um, Mr. Speaker,
generally, what I, I'm
interpreting you to say is it
does not incorporate all of your
bill 134. Is that correct?
Correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, after listening in CPAC
and then listening to concerns
with the other stakeholders that
I've been meeting with this is
the main thing everyone feels
will address crime and and then
takes out all these additional
arguments of different things
and so yes, that Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is all
is there are changing that
section too.
And Mr. Seeger, gentle lady,
this was, um, tabled in CPAC,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it was
rolled to work with the
stakeholders and, uh, Mr.
Speaker, generally, I, I did do
that um with all the
stakeholders that were involved
in this and um my impression
after speaking with them and
working with them that they
would be very happy if we could
just change this one part and
think it would be a, a
Great, um, part to change that
we could address this juvenile
crime. It's a start. We can come
back later and fix things and,
you know, down the road if
needed, but um it would be a
great addition to this crime
package, a great bipartisan, uh,
bill that would address what we
feel is the most serious issue.
So basically, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and, um, gentle lady, that is
all this is adding and it keeps
your crime package totally
intact. Mr. Speaker, General.
When you're referring to
stakeholders who, who are you
referring to, Mr. Speaker
district attorneys obviously Mr.
Bregman, um, the, what's his
name?
Nick Casales, um, who chief
story um law enforcement, um, so
people in JPO, um, those
individuals.
No child advocates, no public
defenders, no, none of those in
the type um stakeholders, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Not public defenders because um
they did express their concerns
at the committee meeting and
actually, um, Mr. Speaker, um,
and gentle lady, uh, Jay Jack
is, is the ones that work with
all the juveniles, um, CYFD he's
involved with CYFT if I'm not
mistaken, yeah, because he falls
under CYFD, um, also taking the
concerns of what the committee
members said when I was in that
committee, not one person, at
least in that committee
addressed having any issues with
changing.
in the ages or the crimes in
those two sections, all the
comment I got back from the
committee, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady was the rest of the
bill and we changed and took, we
just left it the same and this
seemed to be a agreement
especially talking with the DA
Bregman that everybody thought
this would be a, a nice
resolution to working together
on this, Mr. Speaker. OK, Mr.
Speaker, so understand um there
was House Bill 134, you took
out, I understand based on what
you
believe the feedback from CPAC
was and boiled it down to this
proposed amendment, Mr. Speaker,
is that right? Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, just changing
section 2, that's it. I'm sorry
and then Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the expectation was you
were going to go back to
committee and present this so
that committee could um
interpret whether or not you
interpreted their feedback
correctly, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is that right?
Well, well, Mr. Speaker,
generally, this is just an
amendment to this bill. Yes, we,
we hadn't been able to get a
hearing in CPAC, but now I
believe we may have a hearing
coming up in a week or so on
CPAC, um, that now this bill has
been placed on, but this is just
an amendment to this bill,
oh yes, um, representing
something that was heard in
committee and rolled, OK, Mr.
Speaker, I, I understand what
you're saying there, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, given the
fact that um we.
circumventing the committee
process and understanding that
it's been heard once once and
see back and they're open to
hearing a revised version of the
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I, um, do not view this as a
friendly amendment, Mr. Speaker.
All right, there is debate, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative Romero.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, um,
Does the gentle lady yield. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, I do yield to the
gentleity.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can,
just to refresh my memory, um,
we did have debate on this. I'm,
it may have been in the first,
um, couple of weeks of us being
in committee. Can you talk
about, um, what compromise you
came to within this bill from
what was debated upon.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it was last Saturday, um,
I believe we had probably 30.
30. How many amendments or
changes?
originally the bill I presented
had like 30 sections with
changes in it. Then there were
there were concerns about
transferring juveniles to adult
detention centers, um, taking
away the tools of assessment,
um.
unsealing of records, and there
was, like I said, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady probably
30 different things. The one,
the one issue that never came up
that I recall during the CPAC
was any questions involving the
issue and I and I know I've got
people who were here with me,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
concerning lowering serious
violent offense, serious violent
offense, youthful offenders by
one year.
You know, we have a 13 year olds
who are committing homicides now
and the youthful offender by one
year in age and then expanding
the list of crimes to go into
those categories so that it
would help law enforcement
capture the most violent
offenders in the community and
help deal with that, but
everything else that the
committee and any of the
opponents uh brought forward,
um, in, in comments, I believe
we took all of that out, uh, Mr.
Speaker gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, can you discuss how
this engages with the um
The Children's code and so what
it may, uh, alter or change, as
it relates to the function of
both the Children's code and the
delinquency, um, act that you've
created here, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I'm sorry, so, um, can you, I'm
sorry, Mr. Speaker, can you
repeat your question, gentle
lady? Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think you'll recall
that, um, when it came to
competency, we were really clear
about how the children's code,
um, may preempt or engage or uh
With the competency provisions
that we are considering in the
bill and in your um in your
committee sub, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, how does the
children's code engage with the
changes to the delinquency Act.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and um gentle
lady, if I'm understanding your
question right, you want to know
if this is gonna affect how this
will affect competency with with
children is that what I'm
understanding? Maybe I'm not
understanding your question, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, to to just
recollect because many in this
body did not get to see the
presentation of the briefing,
um, that we saw in House
Judiciary regarding the
Children's code and how it
related to competency, um,
The um
Sponsor of the original bill and
House Bill 8 took the time to
help inform um our committee
about how the children's code
engaged with competency, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, how does
your bill changes, um, with
amending it, mending the
definitions and the delinquency
Act engage with the Children's
code.
I think I understand your
question, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, the competency code
isn't going to affect the
juvenile code at all. It will
still, I mean, if a child's
filed on for competency.
Um, the same process follows,
but it's, it's under the
juvenile code so they get
evaluated and um are then
determined if they're competent
or not to stand trial. I think
if that's what you're asking,
uh, let me be a little, uh, let
me ask it in a different way,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. How
does amending definitions in the
delinquency Act engaged with the
Children's code. And Mr.
Speaker, are you, uh, general
later, you asking me what is the
impact of changing the
definitions in the Children's
code.
on competency.
Does he act as part of the
Speaker,
gentle lady, the delinquency Act
is part of the Children's Code.
How does this alter the
Children's code now that we're
pulling these changes into this
bill, um, which alters the
Children's code. How does it
affect the Children's code?
Uh, I think now I, I was, I
don't know why I kept thinking
you're asking about competency,
uh, Mr. Speaker, all it does is
take serious youthful offenders
and youthful offenders, it takes
a serious youthful offender, and
it lowers the age, um, from if
convicted, so children charged
is a serious youthful offender
or prosecuted in district court
and if convicted, are subject to
adult sanctions, the sub
decreases, well, there'd be
amendment would decrease the
age.
of a serious youthful offender
from 15 to 14 in line with the
age of limitations currently in
law for youthful offenders and
includes 4 additional crimes
that will result in adult
prosecution if committed by a
child between the ages of 14 and
18, which are second degree
murder, voluntary manslaughter,
armed robbery, and shooting at
an occupied building, uh, that
results in great bodily harm or
shooting from a vehicle that
causes great bodily harm
murders.
included in that. The youthful
offender charges actually was
wrong. It didn't lower the age
like I stated, but the sub
includes 3 additional crimes
which if committed by a child
between 14 and 18, which is the
same age it currently is in the
statute may result in adult
sanctions and uh vehicular
homicide and voluntary
manslaughter and failing to stop
a vehicle that is involved in an
accident that results in injury
and death, youthful offender
charges the difference between
that, Mr. Speaker.
And um general lady is that
those cases you file notice to
seek adult sanctions and you go
through a grand jury process and
a grand jury is found that goes
through kind of the adult system
until the very end when the
court holds an amenability
hearing and then looks at a
bunch of factors which is also
part of the things we're trying
to change, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but we did not
change the way it currently is,
um, and then an expert and a
judge looks at that, has a
hearing.
and decides if they're amenable
to treatment. If they are, then
they go through the juvenile
code and they're basically
handled as a juvenile. That's
different than the serious ones
who commit murder, first degree
murder and the other additional
crimes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that, that's a lot to take
in. Um, so I'm gonna have to try
to figure out each of these
components since it is such a
sweeping change, and when we're
dealing with, um, children, and
we're talking about minors and
their special status within the
law, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I'm gonna try to understand
bit by bit here, um, what we
were looking at and I do recall,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
we were looking at House Bill
134 in committee.
And the compromises that we had
discussed and the challenges
that we were seeing in the bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady was, as
we were seeking to understand
the criminal component of
certain juvenile acts, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
we wanted to be really careful
about what we were targeting
with violent crime, um, and the,
and the, the, the harm that we
are seeing in communities and
how we wanted to treat each of
those acts understanding that
these are children, they're
under the age of 18, and what I
recall is that
When we were looking at some of
the language, that it could be
conflicting. We were looking at
the fact that, um, it was going
to have a lot of potential
collateral consequences if we
did not get it right to the
letter of the law, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So can you please
speak to what the consequences
are now that we're changing for
those that may be accused, and I
would really appreciate you
going down the line of what are
we targeting here as to what it
pertains to this happening in
community and what are the
consequences of those acts now
that we're penalizing children,
hence what happens after they
turn 18, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Gentleti, so
again we didn't do the up to 25
years of age, we are still in
the situation where you can be
incarcerated up to the age of
21, um, if you're found amenable
to treatment or if you're put in
a juvenile facility doesn't
change if you're convicted of
first degree murder, um, again,
all the issues that were brought
up and the concerns that you
had, we did not put that in
this.
Amendment, the only thing this
does is it addresses the
problems we're having in our
state by expanding those crimes
and as you can see these are
violent crimes. They're not,
they're not crimes that most
likely these children are, are
gonna, especially in the serious
youthful offender that they're
gonna be most likely handled as
a juvenile anyway, um, the, they
don't, they don't have the same
thing as a youthful offender,
which gets the immunability
treatment and they balance all
those facts.
and that's why those crimes are
a little less serious, but it is
giving prosecutors the ability
to actually take the most
serious crimes that are
happening in New Mexico, the
most, the crimes that we're
seeing every day on TV, the
crimes that DA Breman was
talking about and giving him the
ability to actually get these
people where they need to be,
which some of them need to be in
prison. They are killing people
and so that is all that that is
doing there is nothing.
Like complicated about it.
There's nothing really in my
opinion, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady that you need to take in it
because it's really just
expanding it with a few crimes.
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I, I think we
agreed that when we, when it
came to making sure we were
deliberative about that process
that we wanted to ensure that
whatever we were upping the ante
on a, on a criminal offense that
we wanted to understand what
would happen, um, as a result of
that, um, for instance, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, where
is, um, a child convicted as a
serious, um, youthful offender
detained. What happens?
to them, um, in the context of
what's happening here is we're
raising, um, the bar.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, it, um, gentle
lady, I don't believe anything's
really changed and how it's
currently being handled, um, if
you are somebody who is a
serious youthful offender
charged pending you're in a
juvenile detention center, um,
if you're sentenced as an adult,
um, you go, I believe, at the
age of 18 and two adults.
Yeah, you're an adult at that
point and you have been
convicted of an adult crime. You
go serve your sentence in an
adult facility, um, so you're
sitting pending your disposition
or conviction, whatever it might
be, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
with the juveniles, um, and
possibly if you reach the age of
18, I believe you're segregated,
um, until, you know, you're
convicted or dispositioned and
then if you're dispositioned to
go to, let's say children is a
juvenile to.
children, youth and families,
you'll be housed with the in the
juvenile facility um at YDDC.
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I'm still very unclear
about how that may change in the
sense of we know that certain
children that are subject to
different circumstances with how
they can be held, um, that we're
clear about where that is when
sometimes Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and we know in the system
that children are victimized in
custody when they are simply
accused and not yet convicted.
It's unclear in this amendment,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
we know that.
Um,
all that to say, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think there's um
Great potential harm if we do
not, again, deliberate this in
multiple committees. We still
haven't seen a revised version
come to Consumer and Public
Affairs, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, and I would appreciate
to see this in House Judiciary
as well so that way we get some
eyes on again as we're changing
the violations for children that
we know exactly what happens to
them through a process as we're
trying to protect, um, not only
the folks that are accused of
these crimes, but certainly.
those that um are in these
specific situations where we
need to understand how they're
processed, um, with that, Mr.
Speaker, I would encourage, uh,
the body to, uh, vote against
this amendment.
Right? Did you lady from Santa
Fe, Mr. Speaker, this matter
having been under consideration
for 3 hours, I moved to close
debate.
All those in favor signify by
saying I.
Paul's name.
Yeah, it's habit. The debate is
now closed.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe to
House floor amendment number 1
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8.
OK, we have a motion to table
House amendment number 1 to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8, a
vote of yes and the amendment is
tabled a vote of no, and we're
back on the amendment, but we're
also out of time, so we will be
in the twilight zone.
A vote of yes and the amendments
tabled a vote of no. We're back
on the amendment.
The vote is now open.
The vote will be open again very
soon.
The vote is now open.
We're gonna try again. The vote
is now open.
All right, we're gonna do a
voice uh voice vote.
roll call vote, Mr. Speaker. OK.
Thank you.
and we can all say yes or no.
It's gonna take longer, but.
A vote of yes and the amendments
tabled the vote of no, and we're
back in the amendment.
Representative of Beta, yes.
Representative of Beta votes
yes.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Anaya votes yes.
Representative Anya Nornu, yes,
Representative Anya Nornu.
Votes yes
Representative Armstrong, no to
table Represent Armstrong votes
no. Representative Baca. No.
Representative Baca votes no.
Representative block, no to
table. Represent a block votes
no. Representative Borego.
Yes. Representative Borego votes
yes. Representative Brown.
No to table. Representative
Brown votes no. Representative
Cadena is excused.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative Kate's votes yes.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler votes
yes.
Representative Chatfield.
No, did they.
Representative Chatfield votes.
No, Representative Eleanor
Chavez, yes.
Representative Eleanor Chavez
votes yes. Representative Nicole
Chavez, not a table.
Representative Nicole Chavez
votes no. Representative Cullen
noted table. Representative
Colin votes no. Representative
de la Cruz.
Yes.
Represent de la Cruz votes yes,
Representative Dixon.
Yes to table. Representative
Dixon votes yes. Representative
Dow.
No to table Representative Dow
boats a little bit of Dow votes
no represent Duncan.
Or a table. Representative
Duncan votes no. Representative
Ferrari.
guests to table Representative
Ferrari votes yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Yes to table Representative
Gallego's votes yes.
Representative Niel Garcia. Yes.
Representative Garcia votes yes.
Representative Garrett, yes to
table Representative Garrett
votes yes. Represent Gonzalez.
Yes. Representative Gonzalez
votes yes.
Representative Gurola
Representative Corola votes yes.
Representative Hall.
No, it's Representative Hall
votes no. Representative Henry.
No or table. Representative
Henry votes no. Representative.
Uh, Joseph Hernandez.
Because I believe in due process
for juveniles I vote yes it's a
yes or no vote. Sorry.
Yes.
Representative
Joseph Hernandez votes.
Yes, representative.
Joshua Hernandez. No.
Representative Joshua Hernandez
votes.
No.
Sorry guys, I'm writing this
stuff down. Represent Herndon,
Represent Herndon votes yes.
Representative Verera, yes to
table Representative Herrera
votes yes.
Representative Hoffman V Hill
the table. Representative
Hoffman v. Hill votes.
spell.
But yes.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson votes
yes. Representative Jones.
No to table. Representative
Jones votes no. Representative
Lara
represent a lot of votes.
I'm sorry, you said yes, I
apologize. Represent a lot of
votes yes represent Lente
Representativeente votes yes.
Representative Little.
No.
Representative Little votes no.
Representative Lord, no to
table.
Representative Lord votes no.
Represent Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Lujan votes yes.
Representative Lungstrom.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom votes
yes.
Representative Alan Martinez.
the table.
Representative Alan Martinez
votes.
No, Representative.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker votes
yes.
Represented Mason.
No the table
Representative Mason votes no.
Representative Matthews, yes.
Representative Matthews votes
yes. Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen votes
yes. Represent Mejia.
Not a table represented Mejia
votes no representative Mirabal
Moya.
No a table.
Representative Mirabal Moya.
Votes no.
Representative Montoya.
No a table representative
Montoya.
But no, Represented Murphy
Representative Murphy votes no.
Representative Ortiz, yes to
table.
Representative Ortez votes yes.
Represent Parajun
representative Parejon votes
yes. Representative Pettigrew.
No the table.
Representative Pettigrew.
Votes no. Representative Reeb.
No the table Representative Reed
votes no. Representative Andrea
Romero
Representative Andrea Romero
votes.
Yes
Representative G Andres Romero
Yes. Representative G Andres
Romero votes yes.
Representative Roel Caballero
yes to table Representative
Royval Caballero votes yes.
Representative Rubio
Representative Rubio votes yes.
Representative Sanchez.
Represented Sanchez votes yes.
Represents Sarnana
represents Sarana votes yes.
Representative Senator Cortez,
not a table. Representative
Senator Cortez votes no.
Representative Serrato, he has
the table Representative Sarato
votes yes. Representative Silva,
yes to table Representative
Silva votes yes represents small
represent a small votes, yes.
Representative Sapansy, yes,
Representative Sapansy.
Votes yes. Representative
Terazas.
Representative Terasas votes no.
Represent Thompson, yes,
Representative Thompson votes
yes.
Representative Torres Velasquez
to table.
Representative Torres Velasquez
votes yes. Representative
Vincent,
noted table. Representative
Vincent votes no Representative.
Zamora
Now the table.
Representative Zamora.
votes no.
By a vote of 41 in the
affirmative, 27 in the negative.
By a vote of 41 in the
affirmative, 27 in the negative.
House floor amendment number one
has judiciary Committee
substitute House Bill 8 has been
tabled.
Gentle lady to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I move that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 do now pass.
All right, we're on final
passage. Now, we are going to
try the board again.
And hopefully it works. If it
doesn't work, we will go back to
a voice vote and uh our board
operator will reflect the votes
as they come in on the board so
we can all see them, OK?
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8, the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed.
Apologies, go ahead.
Representative Silva.
I, I vote, uh, do pass.
Representative Silva votes yes.
Right, by a vote of 48 in the
affirmative, 20 in the negative.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8 has
duly passed this House.
Gentlemen from Ri Riba Sandoval
and San Juan, Representative
Lente, are you ready on item
number 3.
Yes, Mr. Speaker,
asking do you wanna keep the
the the call. The call is
released. You can use the
bathroom, gentlemen. I was
hoping to keep it.
Just as important, Bill.
Mr. Speaker, asking as
of the house that the rules be
suspended and then all the
records show that all action for
placing House Bill 218 on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
We don't have to spend the rules
because we are on 3rd reading.
And the gentleman has already
gotten us to that point, so the
gentlemen to explain the bill.
Every 60 days, the tax and
revenue Department brings
forward a tax code clean up
proposal identified by staff.
Tax practitioners and other
stakeholders, uh, House Bill 218
is a tax and revenue department
agency bill that contains
significant housekeeping in the
tax code and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I stand for any
questions.
There is to be gentleman from
Montero, Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentleman from all those
beautiful counties yield.
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I apologize for
having so many questions in
advance because this bill is 500
pages and I like to thoroughly
vet legislation, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Speaker, so.
Yeah
If this takes a while, I
apologize in advance, I guess,
uh, go, go take a nap or
something, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I
I do have some
Very big questions about this
bill because I like to make sure
I know what I'm voting on. So,
all right, Mr. Speaker, I guess
I'm just gonna dive right in
here.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
gonna go to my first highlighted
or my first marked page here.
It's on page 37, I believe, Mr.
Speaker.
So, Mr. Speaker, I'll just wait
till you get to that page 37,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we're
here.
Awesome. OK, page 37 says any
distribution, this is starting
on line 10. Any distribution to
the state treasure on behalf of
a political subdivision of oil
and gas at Valorum production
taxes pursuant to the sections.
I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, how does this change
this, this portion of the tax
code regarding ad valorum.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, does
not make any changes. OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. Are
we just, uh,
Cutting and pasting that from
some other section, is that what
I understand or what, what does
that mean?
Got you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. It allows the
department to uh make
corrections when any of those,
uh.
Returns are amended in any way.
OK. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
All right. And then Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, on that same
page, line 20 to 22 it says
before making a distribution or
transfer certified in subsection
A of this section, and it says
to a municipality or county. Why
did we strike those words, Mr.
Speaker?
Because now, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, excuse me, there are
now distributions to the uh to
the state treasury.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
so the counties, they don't
collect that at all. It just
goes directly to the treasure,
so they
They're pretty much not included
in that and will they get that
funding back, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
doesn't change any money that
goes to the county or to the
local governments. OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. OK,
I'll go to my next question,
just on the bill. I also have
questions on the analysis too,
which I haven't even started on.
So, on the bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, I'm gonna go to
page 49.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it says,
Or striking out some of these,
this numb this uh verbiage here
and then we're putting it on
page 50 regarding the veteran
state cemetery, I believe. Could
you just go over what those
changes are from page 49 at the
starting at line 11 to the end
of page.
Or the beginning of page 51.
What do those do regarding
veterans, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
regarding page 49, this
consolidates a number of
Voluntary personal income tax
contributions.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And where does it?
Simplify that. I mean, we,
we're, I mean, because I see
here, Mr. Speaker, for example,
it says on I to the veteran
services department for the
operational maintenance and
improvement of the veterans
memorial.
An angel fire, so Mister
Speaker, gentlemen, how, how is
this consolidating these and
what what is the process of
consolidation in those specific
veteran.
Um, topic.
Amendments to this statute.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
you look at the repealed section
of this bill, it, it outlines
all of those in, uh.
7-2-24 through 31.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
give me a page on that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, stand
by there at the end of the bill
and we'll find the page number.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we're
looking at page number in the
bill, uh, 424 to 425.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I'm getting there right
now.
Page 424.
almost at the end of the bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so,
all right, so it's mentioning
those sections that it's
changing.
My goodness, this reminds me of
that part in the Bible where it
says this person begat that
person, begat that person. So,
Mr. Speaker, I'm, I'm just
trying to find it. I apologize.
One moment.
OK, sounds good. I found it, Mr.
Speaker. It looks like it's on
page 424. Got it. All right, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm gonna
continue on this other portion
of the bill here.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, on
page 54, line 24 to 25.
It says regarding the
distribution for municipal
roads, says the distribution
pursuant to Section 7-1-6.1 NMSA
which I'm sure is on one of
those pages we just mentioned,
it says that
Something about the aggregate
amount of this and it says
subject to any increase or
decrease made pursuant to
Section 7-1-6.15 NMSA, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, can you tell
me what that section in law does
and why it would warrant an
increase or a decrease. Speaker
and gentlemen, I'd for you back
to your first questions under
amended returns to answer
exactly that question you're
posing.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
you're, we're saying it kind of
consolidates it in some way.
Is that what I understand?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you,
you could say that, but I think
there's a, a better way to
phrase it.
Yeah, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
for lack of a better word, it
allows the department to amend
and and process those amendments
in in a.
timely manner.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
That helps me on that one, Mr.
Speaker.
And then I'm gonna go over to
page 62.
Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen, starting on line 14
to 23. We're talking about
striking language. It says
outside the boundaries of a
municipality on land owned by
the municipality and on Indian
reservation or Pueblo grant in
an area that is contiguous to
the municipality, Mr. Speaker,
can you tell me a little bit
about why we're striking that
language and what that does in
practice.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
this does on page 62 lines, uh,
well, section B is to, uh,
Clean up their destination
sourcing language within the
within the tax code.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and this destination
sourcing, does this encompass
any and all municipality when it
comes to that kind of sourcing
or can you just give me a little
more, a little more information
about how many pueblos and
tribes this might affect.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
answer would be yes. It applies
to any and all destination
taxing sources. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
appreciate that. I just have a
few more on this section.
Uh
Mr. Speaker, uh,
I'm gonna skip that one.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Uh, so compromise of
taxes on page 77.
We're cleaning up some language,
it looks like and above that we
change the amount says the
secretary may on starting on
line one on page 77, pursuant to
rule.
We're taking out regulation
allow taxpayers with an
anticipated tax liability.
Of less than $500 is what we're
changing it to from $200. Can
you just tell me why we did
that?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's simply enough, an
inflation adjustment to the tax
code.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
this, this portion of the tax
code, what was the last date
that it was modified?
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's a great question. Stand
by.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, 1991.
Got it. OK, so well over 30
years. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, appreciate that.
And then just a general
question, not specifically
toward a section in this bill.
Can you tell me what this does
regarding oil and gas revenues,
uh, I know we talked a little
bit about Adveorum. Could you
give me just a little synopsis
of what it will do pertaining to
those oil and gas revenues in
the state, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, all
it does is clarify the taxation
from
Skim oil from produced water.
Related to your, your question
about oil and gas.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Can you tell me how
it modifies it? I just want to
be clear what what we're
modifying when it comes to that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
clarifies that skim oil is
taxed, uh, once and, and only
once.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
then, uh, energy wise, do we
have a section about geothermal
on this, and can you just give
me a little more information on
that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, there
are no substitute changes
related to geothermal.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you tell me a
little bit more about biomass. I
think I did see biomass was
changed somewhere in this, and
I'm just wondering what, what
changes were made to that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no
substantive changes other than
they just clarified a couple of
the provisions that within that
section.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. And then I
had a couple other questions
that I wrote down here.
Maybe we won't be here all
night, Mr. Speaker. Um, so.
Penalties for late GRT payments.
I wasn't able to dig around and
find that in here. Can you, can
you tell me where that might be
and if we're changing those at
all, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
not in this bill. It's in
another bill that I have coming
up which is House Bill 198.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. All right, and then
another question I had quickly
was on page 8, I believe,
regarding TIS.
I think there's a men's, the
current tax incremental
development district status,
which is a TI under the current
TI statute. Can you tell me what
changes those make?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
clarifies for destination
sourcing and also clarifies for.
To provide 12 months of data
collection to help, uh, clarify
some of the, the matters in the
tax code.
OK, thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So if the amendment
we were making about that 12
months were passed and a
developer implemented a TI
somewhere the developer would
likely not allow any activity to
occur in the district for the
first year after the TI's
approval.
In order to make sure that the
base year was as low as
possible. Is that, is that kind
of what I'm understanding
regarding how that could work.
OK, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, because of
destination and sourcing what
the department says is that it's
hard for them to to.
To set baseline without any kind
of real data to help them make
those decisions.
OK, and so what I'm hearing from
stakeholders, at least the ones
who reached out to me, Mr.
Speaker, they claim, or they say
that this kind of.
Alters in a way that would
actually oppose the purpose of
the intent of the Tid statute to
add this verbiage, could you
comment on that, Mr. Speaker?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, that, that type of language
and those discussions have
happened, uh, prior to this,
and, uh, we'll continue to have
those discussions when it
reaches the Senate.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I, I would
certainly appreciate that. I
just want to make sure that
those kids, nothing is, nothing
is ruining whatever the
processes are that we do have.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can
you tell me as well regarding
green energy, uh, are we
changing in any way the tax
credit for solar on rooftops,
for example, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
not in any substantive way.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and then anything
regarding um
Let me see, I had a question
here on.
this one.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
saw something about annual
reports not being needed to be
completed from certain
departments and I forget the
departments because it was in
one of these pages of the 40924
pages bill, uh, Mr. Speaker, can
you tell me a little bit about
that?
Not having to have a report, I
think on page 102 is one
instance where it speaks about a
certain department not having to
have an annual report. Why are
we taking away that reporting
guideline, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
those departments will still
have to annually uh report and
and make those reports annually.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I appreciate all the
answers and I'm gonna turn it
over to other folks so they have
a chance, but I, I do want to
reiterate, Mr. Speaker, I
Really care about vetting
legislation, and I like to read
really long bills. I mean, I
don't necessarily like it
sometimes at 4 in the morning
last night, but I think it's
very important that we do that.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen for the answers
and I'm sure that other folks
might have some more clarifying
answers that I didn't get to. So
thanks, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. This is for the
debate, gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from uh Sandoval
and San Juan Yil.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We heard
this in committee, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and would you, would
you kind of briefly go over how
many, uh, sections of this, uh,
this bill works on?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, pause
while we count them all. There's
100 and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, there's 156 sections
and 81 repeals.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and, and that was the
reason I asked the question.
There was a lot of these things
that just needed to be cleaned
up, uh, probably for a long time
and so I, I think, I think it's
important that every 60 day
session that we, uh, we do that
and try to take away some old
stuff that's not there. Can you
also tell me what, what is the
tax implication of the state
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
I'm told that, uh, one of the
provisions here related to skim
oil would raise about $6 million
per year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, I, I think, uh,
one of the other representatives
just talked about that a little
bit, um, you and I had had an
earlier discussion on this. Did
we find out if uh
representatives from oil and gas
said that they had talked with
TRD and there was gonna be some
things changed or some things
changed in that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, there
were some discussions had and
there were some things that were
agreed upon by the department
and those and those folks, uh,
however, because of timing
issues, what we're gonna do is
we'll, we'll make those changes
in the Senate and then we'll
come back for concurrence.
The plan is to do that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, as you know,
uh, that's where my part of the
country is in the southeast, and
that's what funds this entire
body and so um if there are
things that we can do there, I
also understand I didn't know
what the definition of skim oil
and.
Um, sediment and whatever that
was either and so if those folks
aren't uh paying uh a little bit
of tax on that, then they
probably want to pay tax for us,
so thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, those, that's
all the questions I had you know
for the debate, gentlemen to
close.
Thank you.
I now move that House Bill 218
do not pass.
We are on final passage.
Oh, House Bill 218.
The vote
is now
Open
Well it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a
vote.
Of 49 in the affirmative, 11 in
the negative. House Bill 218 as
amended,
has
um, button.
How do you wish to vote, sir?
Yes.
By a vote of 50 in the
affirmative, 11 in the negative.
House Bill 218 is amended as Ui
pass this House.
Gentlemen from Berlio of de la
Cruz, are you ready on item 2,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, point of personal
privilege, please.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, House
Bill 47 is up next for a vote
and I feel I have an ethical
duty to disclose that my husband
is a veteran and um passage of
this bill and I know the voters
have mandated that we do this,
but that would directly,
financially, uh, benefit my
family and so I would like to be
excused from that vote if I may.
Thank you, lady, you will be
The lady from Sandoval.
Point of privilege, um,
Mr. Speaker, my husband already
receives the exemption because
he is a 100% disabled and I need
a clarification if I need to
exempt myself in the vote.
Accuse myself in the vote, Mr.
Speaker. OK,
I'll just request through
Hughes. OK, we will excuse you
as well, gentle lady.
It's a gentleman from Berne Leo
Represent de la Cruz ready on
item number 2. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Can you get me to that
point that all action is
necessary for replacing house
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee's substitute for House
of 47 with an emergency class
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, it is Majority Whip
Alan Martinez and myself honor
to bring this bill to the House
on behalf of New Mexico citizens
to better the lives of veterans
across New Mexico. Mr. Speaker,
with your permission, I would
like to yield to the minority
whip.
Representative Martinez from
Sandoval,
you have the floor.
Mr. Speaker, thank you very
much. Thank you to my co-sponsor
on this.
Uh, this basically makes the
changes that were on the ballot
two years ago.
Um, and I would, uh,
Encourage the body to
Vote yes on this bill and let's
move it over to the Senate and
get this done for the veterans
of the state of New Mexico.
So no further debate, gentlemen,
close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
I move that House Bill 47 do now
pass.
We are on a motion.
We are on final passage of how
taxation Revenue Committee
substitute for House Government
Elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 47 with an emergency
clause.
The vote is now open.
Mr. Speaker.
I vote yes.
Yes.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House of 47 with
an emergency clause has duly
passed his house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. It is so ordered.
Announcements generated from
Berlio. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
House Health and Human Services
and I'm sorry we'll meet at 8 on
Monday morning in 307.
I know members take note.
Announcements.
Committees
Announcements, uh, members, we
will start doing 3rd reading,
uh, more third reading this,
this coming week, probably
Monday, uh, we'll, um, we'll let
both uh caucus leaders know so
that you all can uh properly
plan, but the idea is to start
doing more 3rd reading this
week.
Uh, over the course of the next
several days for sure and, and
if we can catch a break here and
there, we'll, we'll try to do
that. I know people still have
committee dinners and and other
types of things to to take care
of but do plan for 3rd reading
on the floor, um, continuing
this coming Monday. Any other
announcements generally from
Katherine Sierra Corto Valencia.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a
question. I, uh, noticed that
it's a 32nd voting clock and
normally it's a minute and so is
it going to be a 32nd voting
clock the whole.
session and also if you could
clarify if you want to debate on
an amendment or the committee
substitute if you need to be
standing with your microphone in
your hand. That's those are two
great questions, so we'll be
doing a 32nd, um.
Volt clock on the board. Uh,
now, I'm pretty flexible if the
button doesn't work or you were
running toward your chair and
missed the button we we can
accommodate that. I've, I've
accommodated, accommodated that
every, every session I've been
speaker, uh, with regard to
debating amendments or
substitutes.
You should get my attention with
your mic, and you should stand
up. It's, it's hard sometimes to
know, um, if, if indeed you want
to be recognized or not. So if
you can send up and wave the
mic, um, with regard to debate,
I try to keep it one and one if
I can obviously sometimes
there's more members of one
caucus wanting to debate than
than the others, so that makes
it hard, but I try to go back
and forth as best as I can.
Thank you for the clarification,
Mr. Speaker.
You're welcome. Any other
announcements?
OK.
Uh, thank you for, uh, very
productive day members. I hope
you have a great rest of your
Saturday, gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. Monday morning.
The house will send in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
I'm sorry, Monday morning.
