Members
Hi, roll call is closed. We have
a quorum.
Gentle lady for Bernna Leo
Representative Borego.
For the invitation. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.
It's my honor to do the
invocation today.
Dear Lord, our great Creator,
today I come to you with an open
heart.
When life feels overwhelming,
remind me that in you I am more
than a human in your spirit when
I feel weak, remind me that in
your strength I am made whole.
In my weakness.
When fear grips my heart, I will
stand firm, knowing that in your
father, in your father, I have
victory over every challenge.
You call me your child, and in
you I find my strength.
An identity
My purpose and my hope.
In you Creator, I can overcome
every obstacle, every doubt and
every storm in your presence I
find my strength, my courage,
and my joy.
Thank you for reminding me that
I am never alone and that your
love surrounds me.
Give me the strength to do your
work.
I surrender this day to you, O
Lord, trusting that your plans
for me are good and that I can
help others.
Through you I face today with
confidence in your name, I pray.
Amen.
gentle lady from Donana Otero
County Representative Silva with
the Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
Gentleman from Donna with the.
Play ball as they say.
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Good
morning, Madam Speaker.
Good morning, gentle lady and
body.
Good afternoon.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
There's no objection. It is so
ordered.
All right.
We're on announcements, gen lady
from Santa Fe.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Madam
Speaker, um, I am so pleased to
uh present uh certificate today
to honor Steve Trujillo who uh
was our chief of security at the
Capitol for 21 years, um, and
Steve could not be here today,
but his family is here, um, and
Madam Speaker, uh, Steve
Trujillo retired on January
31st, 2025, just in the middle
of the session.
Um, and he had been, uh, on our
capital security team for 21
years and 8 months. He retired
as a highly regarded supervisor
of a staff of 9 security guards
and uh before he worked at the
Roundhouse, Steve was a security
guard at the Santa Fe Community
College, um.
Madam Speaker and members Steve,
uh, had been married, has been
married to Mary for 21 years,
um, and Madam Speaker, I'm not
sure if they actually met at the
Roundhouse, um, but I think, I
think it's possible that they
did because Mary also uh did
work for the legislature around
that time and he is the proud
parent of 6 children and 9
grandchildren, um, he's he was
trained in Muay Thai kickboxing,
uh, and he said.
Unfortunately, he never had to
use it as a security guard here
in the Capitol, but he chose to
use verbal judo in instead.
Um, one of the reasons that I
wanted to honor Steve Trujillo
today is because he was such a
warm and welcoming person. He
was very engaging. He always
took a personal interest in
everyone he met, um, and he was
such an example of
professionalism, experience,
loyalty, um, and he was a
wonderful asset to the capital
and keeping all of us safe, each
and every one of us who are
here, um, and Madam Speaker, I
found out today that Steve's
father was also
a member of this body, uh, from
1977 to 1979, uh, Representative
Benny G. Trujillo.
Um, and so I'd like to welcome,
um, the guests and family
members today to thank them for
coming to honor Steve and his
retirement, so we have his son
here, Esteban Riel.
Um, and his daughter-in-law
Genevie Rael.
And his big sister is with us,
Sylvia Smith Berger.
And Madam Speaker, um, I have
certificates and um I did wanna
let the body know that Steve is
hard at work taking care of two
family members, um, and so that
is why he wasn't here today, but
I'm hoping that he's able to
watch the webcast, uh, and know
how much we all care for him and
what a what a fantastic job he
did in over 20 years at the
state capitol, um, making sure
that we were all safe and that
every person who entered this
building.
was safe um and I know many of
the sergeants also uh regard him
fondly and appreciated all of
his, uh, all of his
collaboration with them in that
endeavor.
Thank you. Welcome to the House
Trujo family and big round of
applause for Steve Trujillo.
OK, gentlemen.
Gentleman from Donana,
Representative Lara.
OK, folks, we're just bringing
in the next, uh, group of
guests.
Hold on a second.
Looking at you.
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
County.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have
the honor and the pleasure today
of
Honoring an icon from southern
New Mexico who uh.
Passed away this past January
and I think uh.
You know, uh
Be here today and and thinking
of her and honoring her memory
is is very important to me, not
only myself but to many of us in
in in Donana County and
especially I know for her family
so today I stand in in memory of
uh Mrs. Deliasing.
Mrs. Sing was an icon, as I had
mentioned.
Uh, she was a strong advocate.
For young people, for children,
for children with disabilities
with uh with for education but
she was also an advocate of very
strong advocate for agriculture
and the Western way of life.
She, um,
She was a very hard worker.
She was someone who was very
well respected in our community.
She was someone who was very,
uh, instrumental.
In putting the small community
of La Mesa, New Mexico on the
map and today I would like to
recognize her for that, uh, so
with that said, Madam Madam
Speaker, I do have uh members of
her family on the rostrum, and
I'm gonna introduce him if you
could please stand when I call
your name, uh, and first we
have, um, Missrishna Sing
Martinez.
Miss Kamala Singh cotton.
Miss Cathy Lopez.
Dr. Kariem Singh.
And this Remmy Wilson.
We have also crystal Crystal
Wilson, the granddaughter.
Chloe Cotton, granddaughter.
Roxanne Contreras's
granddaughter.
And Madam Speaker, uh, Chloe
Cotton made this beautiful big
pin for me with uh with Mrs.
Singh's image on it, and I'm
truly honored and humbled that
you did that and you know, thank
you. I appreciate that one other
thing, uh, madam speaker, I
would like to do is recognize uh
three others who I had on my
list who aren't here with us
today because they couldn't be
here, uh, Mr. Vincent Singh, uh,
Mrs. Singh's son, uh, Troy
Martinez Senior and Troy
Martinez Junior. I would also
like to acknowledge him as well.
Ladies, thank you for being
here. It is my honor to
recognize your mom and your
grandma.
It, it is my um.
Hope
That her legacy will continue.
As it is now because, you know,
to this day as we were
mentioning earlier, we still
feel her hand guiding us.
Thank you. And Madam Speaker, I
do have someone in the rostrum
that we'd like to acknowledge as
well.
Uh, thank you, gentlemen in the
gallery, my apologies.
Uh, gentlemen, I believe that is
Doctor, uh, Cindy Nava, our
former state senator, is that
correct? That is correct, yes.
Welcome, Senator.
Thank you and, and thank you all
of you. Welcome to the house.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Hey
Gentlemen from Lincoln on Otero,
Representative Vincent, thank
you, Madam Speaker. Madam
Speaker, today I am joined with
some folks that I'd like to
introduce on the rostrum, and
they, they come to us from
Lincoln County and I, I think
they came because I'm getting a
little homesick and we still
have, I think it's 8 days to go,
is that correct?
OK, well, that didn't help me at
all.
Um, Madam Speaker,
I am very pleased to welcome to
the house this morning Hayden
Hill, Miss, Miss, uh, Ridoso
2025, who will be competing for
Miss New Mexico this summer.
Madam Speaker,
Hayden has dedicated 4 years to
developing her community service
initiative called Helping those
who Help others.
She is an advocate for first
responders, veterans, and
everyday people who take heroic
actions.
Hayden honored more than 50
individuals after the fires and
floods in red also in Lincoln
County last summer at a
Community hero ceremony.
She held to recognize those who
went above and beyond and where
our local heroes and Madam
Speaker, I attended that
ceremony. I wasn't one of the
recipients, but I was able to
honor the, the people that, that
did go above and beyond.
Hayden lives in the village of
Hedoso in my district.
She is a full-time student at
New Mexico State University.
And Madam Speaker, embody,
you're gonna like this one.
She's majoring in elementary
education, exactly what we need,
and she is employed by the
Ridosa Municipal School District
and works at the Boys and Girls
Club during the summer.
Hayden is joined today by her
father, Dyron Hill. I call him
Chief. He's the chief of police
in Carrizozo.
And her mother Holly Hill, and
she retired with 25 years of
service in law as a law
enforcement supervisor and her
grandmother, Carrie Prebble, who
is Hayden's biggest supporter
other than me.
Madam Speaker, and body, would
you help me join, would you help
me joining and welcoming Miss
Ridoso 2025 and her family,
Hayden Hill to the house today.
Welcome to the house, Hayden and
the Hill family. Best of luck.
Gentlemen, I think that crown
would look excellent on you.
All right, uh, rep.
Hold on a second.
Sorry, gentle lady, I had to
look for the cheat sheet. The
gentle lady from Katherine
Sierra Socorro and Valencia
representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you so
much. Uh, I'm here today to
celebrate Pi Day. Today is Pi R
Square day. One of the sergeant
at arms told me he used to fight
with his teacher that say, he
would say no.
Pies are around. So anyway, that
being said, you have a pie on
your desk brought to you from
all the way from Pie Town, New
Mexico in my district. I've
wanted to do this for several
years, Madam Speaker, and I just
could never get it organized.
Well, thanks to my daughter who
picked him up in Pi Town and
brought them to Magdalena from
Magdalena, they traveled to
Albuquerque. From Albuquerque,
they traveled to here. So it was
quite the journey, these pies
have had today.
Uh, Madam Speaker, um, but I,
I've always wanted to do it, so
I thought as leader, I'm gonna
do it this year and so I wanna
thank Marco Gonzalez, JD
Bullington, Joel Davis, Pilar
Faulkner, and Jason Thompson,
who helped me in that endeavor
and I want to read a little bit
about your pies. They, they do
have on there what kind of pie
it is. It's in red, it's a
little bit hard to see. So
there's all different kinds, uh,
but your pies are brought to you
today from the gathering place
too in Pie Town, New Mexico.
Um, if no one knows where Pi
Town, New Mexico is a shame on
you. You need to find out
because we have a pie festival
and we are known for our pies.
We are a full service restaurant
and bakery located in historic
Pie Town on Highway 60 in
between Dale, New Mexico and
Camaro, New Mexico. So in the
middle of somewhere, uh, as I
like to say, the owners are
Cheryl Bentley and her son Paul
Raider purchased the restaurant
in the fall of 2023 and named it
the gathering place.
2, it was the gathering place.
Now it's the gathering place
too, uh, to continue the
tradition of the original
restaurant started by Jamie
McMurdy in 2015. Cheryl worked
for Jeannie and continues to
offer the amazing pies
originated by her. Paul has
worked in the restaurant
industry for over 25 years and
brings with him an experience of
cooking talents acquired from
the best chefs and restaurants
in Tucson and Idaho.
All of our foods are made fresh,
uh, from scratch daily uh with a
desire to support local, we
offer beef.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady from
uh JNS Cattle Company located in
Pike Town, New Mexico are
friendly and talented staff.
Make sure your dining experience
is fun, stop in and experience
for yourself with a 4.9 star
rating on food review website.
They are open Tuesday through
Sunday, uh, well, they have
different hours, but Tuesday
through Sunday basically from 9
to
Uh, 2-ish on Sunday and 5 every
other day, so enjoy your pies,
uh, I'm really excited to bring
you pies from Pie Town, New
Mexico. Thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. I think
people have already started on
the final journey, destination
of the pies to their stomachs.
Thank you for that. OK, uh,
gentlemen from Chavez,
Representative Murphy, are you
in your seat there?
Um, ma'am, if, if you're calling
on me, um, my guest has not
arrived yet and he's coming from
Denver and I think there's been
some flight delays back we'll
get back to you. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.
All right, uh, general lady from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan,
Madam Speaker, as we're waiting
for the, the guest to um from uh
Representative Murphy, uh, I'd
just like to be a little nerdy
and, and say that two things can
exist at the same time as, as in
relevance to uh pie and uh the
circle and
I'd say, and so according to um
Google, the unit circle
represents a complete angle of 2
times pi radiance, and the unit
circle is divided into 4
quadrants at angles of pi
divided by 23 times pi divided
by 2 and 2 times pi,
respectively, and I just wanted
to add that as two things can
exist with.
circle, uh, the shape of a
circle and a pie and that we
like to eat and enjoy and pie,
the um equation we know and
love. Thank you, madam. I think
that Matt says you can eat that
entire piece of pie, that whole
circle it is for you to consume
all of it right now.
I would agree thank you ma'am.
Any other announcements.
Hey, seeing no.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
we we moved I moved that we go
to that order of messages we're
gonna do that we're on messages
see no objection.
Messages.
to read the messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Joint resolution
resolution 2 as amended and
returned same herewith,
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Lujan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Bill 5 as amended by the
Senate and further amended by
the House, respectfully
submitted Sherry de Mohan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and engrossed copy of Senate
Bill 163 as amended with the
emergency clause has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate in open
session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house, respectfully
submitted Sherry de Mohan,
Senate chief clerk will be
entered.
Generally from Santa Fe, Madam
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business. 3rd reading
of legislation.
Uh, saying no objections, so
ordered.
OK, folks.
We're getting ready now.
Let's get started.
Gentle lady from Berna Leo.
The Representative Matthews, are
you ready?
On item number one on the
supplemental calendar item
number 4.
Oh
Uh, yes, Madam Speaker, uh, will
you get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for replacing
House Bill 242 on final passage
has been taken that is now
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Madam Speaker, um, as,
uh, HB 242 is uh in psychology,
uh, compact and is another part
of our effort to increase the
access to health care providers
by the state of New Mexico and
with that I stand for questions
to close.
Um, Madam Chair, I knew that HB
242 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 242. The vote is now open.
Ha
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed, uh, by a
vote of 63 in the affirmative
and 0 in the negative. House
Bill 242 as amended has duly
passed this house.
Gentle lady from Bernna Leo.
Are you ready on supplemental
calendar item number 2 I am,
Madam Speaker, please take me to
that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 195 as twice amended
on final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. House
Bill 195 is a school nurse
salary, tiers, and minimums. We
know how important nurses are
increasingly in our schools this
brings clarity to school nursing
licensure levels, putting them
on the tiers 123 salary levels
reduces turnover and it gives a
pathway uh for our nurses and
that I stand for questions lady
to close.
Madam Speaker, I now move a due
pass for House Bill 195 on final
passage of House Bill 195 as
twice amended.
The vote is now open.
Well it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 195 is
twice amended has duly passed
the House.
OK, gentle lady from Dona Anna,
are you ready on supplemental
calendar item number one.
Yes, Madam Speaker.
I will get you to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for replacing
House Bill 124 as amended on
final passage has been taken,
then it's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, um, HB
124 seeks to protect our most
vulnerable New Mexicans by
filling gaps in statutory
procedures mandated upon the
death of an incapacitated or
protected person or the
incapacitated person's guardian
or conservator.
With that, I will stand for
questions gentle, but lady to
close.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker, I
move that House Bill 124 is
amended due now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 124 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Boat's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 2 in
the negative. House Bill 124, as
amended has duly passed this
House.
OK.
Gentlemen
From Katrin.
Grants and Hidalgo.
Are you ready on item number 19.
Yes, Madam Speaker, would you
give me that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 372 as amended on
final passage has been taken,
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill.
Madam Speaker, HB 372 aims to
correct and update four main
issues in the current OHV Act.
It updates the language for the
New Mexico HV Act to account for
new larger uh engine sizes and.
Duplication of SB 96, it also
number 2 it clarifies how adults
are allowed to supervise younger
operators, uh, that established
the OHB operators under 18 that
may carry passengers if.
And the third thing is it, it
helps with the registration
registration rocity. I'm sorry.
And uh
Broadens the types of impact
studies that are managed by the
agency of the OHP.
There is debate, gentlemen from
Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, will
lead gentlemen yield.
I yield to Madam Chair, I yield
to the gentleman.
Thank you, madam, Madam Speaker,
um, all these vehicles are they
required to be licensed by motor
vehicle?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, they
are, they are, uh, if you're
gonna be on the highway, yes,
they are licensed. Yes, sir, and
they have to have insurance and
so forth if you're gonna put
them on the on the highway, um,
but this is so that you can get
them registered properly, sir?
Is all it does is update the
language.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernna Leo,
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentleman yield?
I yield, uh, Madam Speaker, I
yield to a gentle lady.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. I actually was
just curious, um, I recall a few
years ago, you and I had some
conversations about, um, off
highway vehicles and I was just
wondering,
Who oversees, who, who will
monitor these changes and
enforce them.
Madam Speaker, uh.
Gentle lady, I believe it's the
uh um.
Department of Gaming Fish looks
at some of those and I believe
that uh when you go register
it's gonna be the DMV man.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, and will
this also improve, um, some of
the training, uh, for, uh,
off-road vehicles.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
ma'am. What, what it does is one
of the main things is it allows
right now currently uh uh uh
driver of a of one of these oy
fees if they're under the age of
18 even if they have a driver's
license, can't have a passenger
in the front with them, which I
think is dangerous and so if
you're training your, your child
that's under 18 on how to
operate one of these vehicles,
it's important to have someone
sitting right there in the
front. That's what this
clarifies.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I really
appreciate that you have brought
this bill forward, uh, and I
look forward to supporting it.
There is debate further debate,
gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, a
gentleman yield great yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you gentlemen for bringing
this forward. I believe I signed
on to this. 11 of the questions
that I had for you is
You mentioned, um, CCs. You
mentioned how, how big the
motors were.
Can these vehicles be driven on
US highways or is it just gonna
be county roads and, and in town
use.
Um
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill isn't the one that that
you're referring to, but uh
currently they can be driven on
paved highways that are allowed
by your county already, but this
doesn't address this is more,
more registration language and
that kind of stuff, clean up
work.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
On a US highway, can you ride,
can you drive it on the shoulder
of the road.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, no
you're not supposed to do that.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Seeing no further debate, the
gentlemen to close.
Oh
Madam Speaker, I now move that
HB 372 as amended do not pass.
We are on final passage of House
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 372 as
amended, has duly passed this
House.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports.
Seeing no objections, so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your tax and
revenue, tax and revenue
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 14 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house taxation
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 14 do pass,
respectfully submitted. Derek J.
Lind the chair.
Madam Speaker, please move
adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house tax and rev Committee
substitute for revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill.
OK guys, sorry about this. We
are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House Bill 14. Any a favorable
committee report for house tax
and revenue Committee substitute
for House Bill 14. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
All those opposed, nay.
eyes have it. Commit report
adopted.
a lady from Santa Fe.
General lady from Bernal Leo.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
the next order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
so ordered.
All right.
Gentle lady from Dona Anna, are
you ready?
Or supplemental calendar number
3.
Yes, Madam Speaker, will you get
me to that point?
I will get you there.
I promise I will get you there.
It's going to take a second
though.
OK, let the record reflect that
all action necessary for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for housing
energy and environment and
natural Resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 212.
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or a
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Um,
House Bill 212 phases out and
prohibits toxic POs chemicals in
the products we use daily. It
also provides over a dozen broad
exemptions to allow PFOS and
products where their function is
essential to our economy and it
strikes the right balance
between businesses and our
environment, which is why we
have support from both sides of
the aisle and a wide range of
stakeholders.
There is debate that generally
from Catrin, Sierra, Socorro,
and Valencia, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Donana
Yield.
Uh, yes, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady and leader.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, um, can you provide intent
and examples of such products
that will be regulated.
Yes, Madam Speaker, and gentle
lady.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, they're, they are things
like um stain resistant products
and um products like this that
is a fabric protectant and um.
Uh, this is something that is um
very toxic and um there's retail
goods that um their products on
the shelves today that contain
these toxic chemicals with no
warning to consumers, and this
little bottle um contains uh
chemicals that were last
manufactured in the United
States 25 years ago, and you can
buy it for about $10 across the
state and products like these
enter our home.
causing health issues for
families, and then they pollute
um our water treatment plants
and septic systems.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker
and, and gentle lady, um, on the
bill on page 10.
Line 16. Can you please, um,
explain and provide some
examples. Uh, yes, um, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
gentle leader, um, uh, things
like cookware, food packaging,
dental floss, juvenile products,
and firefighting foam.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, um, and how
does NMED plan to coordinate
with the EPA with respect to
standards.
And ranges
And make in the rulemaking
process.
Madam, uh, Madam Speaker and
general leader, um, EPA doesn't
regulate.
These consumer products.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speak, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
isn't PFOS regulated by the EPA
and then we're doing our own.
Also regulation, or is that, am
I, do I have it backwards?
Um, Madam Speaker and general
leader, um, they uh regulate in
the environment, but not in
products. OK, thank you, Mr. uh,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um.
I believe that's all my
questions for now. Thank you,
Madam, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, the gentle lady to close.
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker,
um,
I move that
commute committee substitute.
For committee substitute.
For, um,
Uh
ATNR, um, and judiciary for
House Bill 212.
Do now move.
We are on final pass. I'm sorry.
You are on final passes of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Energy and
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
It's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative and 1
in the negative.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for how shejudiciary
Committee substitute for House
Energy, Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212 has duly
passed this house.
The
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on supplemental
calendar item number 5.
Yes, Madam speaker, will you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 361 on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution lady to explain the
bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
House Bill 361 will help us work
with, um, orphan wells in the
oil field to convert to energy
storage and geothermal with
that, I stand for questions.
debate the gentle lady to close.
Ah, I
now move that House Bill 361 do
now pass. We are in final
passage of House Bill 361. The
vote is now open.
Vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative and 0
in the negative. House Bill 361
has duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo, are
you ready on item?
Number 5. Yes, Madam Speaker,
would you please get me to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 17 as submitted with
an emergency clause on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. House
Bill 17 will develop a new
commission to study and make
recommendations on how New
Mexico can reduce grocery prices
and improve local supply chains.
This would focus on the prices
of a central household foods
like tortillas, beans, bread,
eggs, meat, and milk. The
purpose of the commission is to
review policies and develop
policy proposals and uh for uh
for reducing the cost of
groceries for New Mexico's.
consumers and uh support food
businesses that produce locally
grown foods and an express
expand access in retail grocery
settings.
And uh uh expanding those access
to those products and retail
grocery stores, uh, the
commission would also evaluate
supply chain infrastructure,
including transportation,
storage price manipulation
practices and other policies
that may impact the prices of
groceries.
I am joined by my co-sponsor,
uh, Madam Fleurli to Rena
Sapanski andresentative Silva.
Uh, with, with that, Madam
Chair, we stand for questions.
There is debate. The gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady yield? I yield
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. Can you, uh, tell
me how you envision this
working, if you would please.
Yes, I do with the experts that
are going to be assembled it
they will examine the supply
chain at the supply of food from
beginning to end the entire
system, so it's not just
examining the prices that are
within the grocery store that
surprised many of us, uh, who
are shopping, but also to to
like take a look at what is
affecting those what plays into.
the pricing, the dynamic pricing
that we might see in our um.
When we purchase these foods.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I think that's a
great idea. I've got a friendly
amendment here for you.
Gentlemen, how friendly is it?
Super friendly.
We're going to get that passed
out.
Can I have a roll call, Madam
Chair a roll call.
Thank you.
Please read the number at the
bottom.
Go ahead and read the number.
Yes, Madam Speaker, 231-572.1.
Can you repeat that again?
Actually, I wasn't really
looking. We're listening.
231-572.1. That's what I have,
gentlemen.
Hey, it's all, it's been passed
out, gentlemen to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Madam Chair. Madam
Chair and uh Representative, all
this does, I'd like you to read
on page 3 line 21 strike and on
page 3 line 24 before the period
insert semicolon and and then uh
review on number 8, review the
federal government's policies
from January 2021 through
January 2024 that resulted in
dramatic price increases of
groceries and impose financial
hardships on the people within
the state of New Mexico. It's
very.
ly
Gentle lady
Is this a friendly amendment?
Thank you Madam Speaker and
thank you gentlemen.
For offering this amendment, um.
I'm so sorry, but this is not a
friendly amendment.
Is there a debate on the
amendment, gentle lady from
Donana Notero Representative
Silva.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and uh
gentlemen, do you yield?
Yes madish speaker and gentle
lady, I do.
Uh, can you, um, tell me what
the, uh, intent is of the
amendment please again. Yes,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
the last administration we saw
prices go out the roof and all
I'm asking is that we actually
look at what those policies were
in the federal government that
caused that to happen.
Excellent, thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, can,
uh, we also look at previous
years and then future years as
part of the um the study as well
as that commission the work of
the commission, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
you can, but we wanted to look
backwards as well. The bill
indicates that it does look
forward, but it doesn't look
backward.
And, uh, thank you, Mr. um.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, and then so why not
say we look back.
8 years or 10 years or 20 as we
look at the trends of
agriculture, um, the shifting
climate or um other economic
indicators for food prices and
other consumer index, uh,
measures, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
because it was during the last 4
years that prices went up over
23%, but you know, in the bill,
if, if she wanted to say that
then then perhaps that could be
in there. I mean that might be a
friendly amendment. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
do you know what, uh, food
prices were in 2020, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
I couldn't tell you what the
price of groceries is today.
Thank you Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I, I asked that
question and I, I couldn't pull
that off the top of my head
either, but I know that um both
rents was increasing and food
prices and other um paper goods
were increasing at the time that
uh the pandemic started, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, do you
also know, uh, what prices were
like into um as we were
approaching the financial
crisis, uh, in, uh, 2007 2
8, 2010.
Madam Speaker, and generally, I
don't know what that has to do
with this amendment, but no, I
don't.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, prices
were also going up then and so
there are different um I would
say different factors as we look
even beyond um 2021 if we look,
you know, before that, that
there are a number of uh global
um impacts that impact prices
all across the world and I think
looking ahead, uh, we're also
gonna look at different um
Uh, factors around immigration
and um I think other uh impacts
on the economic shifts that our
federal government is looking at
so, um, I think for that reason
I am not gonna support this
amendment because it doesn't uh
go broad enough but thank you,
uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
We'll go to the next one, but
there has been a request, uh,
for the gentlemen to remove
their coats, see no objection,
go ahead and do that.
Gentlemen from uh uh.
Catrin Grantton Hidalgo.
Thank you Madam Speaker with the
gentlemen, please, I'm
struggling to talk to you, Madam
Speaker. We all are gentlemen. I
ate too much Tabasco, my
speaker, that in the lounge now
speaker with the gentleman,
please yield.
Madam Speaker, yes.
You know, Madam Speaker, I, we
had a nice talk actually in the
lounge and I bring that up
because you know overall the the
bill in in in studying, you
know, the cost of food.
Um, I live in an area where that
means a lot, you know, um, we
have Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
we have people that are that
are.
23% of the people are living
under the poverty rate in
southwestern New Mexico in
certain parts and that being
said, you know, uh, these issues
like like what we're talking
about now mean a lot.
And, and so, um, and, and I'm
gonna ask you this question
because I think you have the
answer, but why is it that you
wanted to expand this the your,
why did you want your amendment
to expand before is there and
I'll let you answer that, Mr.
Speaker, General Madam Speaker,
generally, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. The reason I wanted
to was because prices went up
23% and I just want to get a um
kind of a ballpark of what
caused those prices to go up.
And if you go back and do the
study, which there is money in
this or maybe there isn't, um,
but if we do that study, then we
might find some bars that we can
look at and say, OK, we probably
need to do some things here. So
I don't think if you start
studying it today or next month,
whenever we do, you're going to
get the real picture and so
that's why I'd like to go back,
uh, 4 years and study.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think for, for me, I mean when
I'm doing something if I was
doing something like this, I
think it's important to know
there was some big factors uh.
Uh no, you know that the
administration, you know, good
or bad, had to deal with during
that time it was COVID and and
Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen,
I think it's important to see
the whole trend to say, hey, you
know what? OK, is it, was it
their policies?
Or was it the the matter of cir
circumstances of COVID was that
the people stayed home and
didn't go back to work.
Is it the people um uh.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen were.
You know, I think about that
sometimes and I told my wife,
you know.
It was a hard time.
There was a time that people,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, we're
told that you can't go to work
even if you wanted to go to
work.
And I, and I, and I tell my
wife, you know, even if they
give him those those stimulus
checks and all that.
Imagine if you were in the food
industry in the restaurant
industry.
And during that time that you're
in the industry.
You're told you can't serve
food, right? You can't be a
server.
But you have a car payment and a
house payment.
And I wonder, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, if this really,
really is some of the cause of
people not going back to work.
Is that they they felt.
Defeated
Let me explain what I mean by
that.
You're told you can't go to
work, but you still have to
support your kids and your
family, your wife, still have a,
uh, with your husband or
whatever you have your house,
you have your car, you might
have one or two car payments.
You might have kids in college.
There's a lot of mites, right?
You might have credit cards.
And you, you've got this
streamline of cash that's coming
in through work uh working in
the in the restaurant industry.
And you're told not to work and
those are that's a whole other
discussion.
But I mean in the in the matter
of why I think we're seeing some
of some of the people not coming
back to work, which in my.
Uh, from my perspective, I think
that is the reason why we're
seeing.
Some of the increasing cost is
because the lack of labor. We
don't have enough labor, but
back to my point, you have
people, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that.
Probably had.
We're behind on their payments.
And so forth and.
It might have gotten a report or
whatever it was that happened to
them during that time, the
credit, the credit got really
bad and after a while they they
feel defeated they feel like
they weren't able to to sustain
that their lifestyle not because
they didn't want to because they
were forced not to.
And maybe they lost the car,
maybe lost the the access to
their credit card or whatever.
Do you think that's something
like that is, is possible that
we should look at, like I said,
it's not to me it's not always
sometimes circumstance causes
policy sometimes policy causes
circumstance. So
To me it's important. I like
your amendment only because it
gives us a full.
View of what was going on and it
would, it would honestly um both
sides of the political spectrum,
say, hey, you know what?
This policy.
Had to be done for these reasons
or should have been done or on a
circumstance of no uh for for no
other reason but through COVID
we had this happen.
And that's really why I want to
see that. I think to get a good
picture of where where we're
going, um.
Do you have any thoughts about
that, uh, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I do one of the
things that um you know this
body's really good about his
pointing fingers at the past
administration or this
administration if we point our
finger at this administration
only, we're not going to get a
very big picture.
But if you look back 4 years,
we're going to get a really good
picture of what occurred and as
you said, there are things are
out of control of anybody
doesn't matter who's in office
and, and, you know, we probably
need to take a look at those as
well, um, but we can't get a
picture unless we go back.
Um, and so just to lay the blame
the current administration, I, I
don't think uh good uh use of
tax dollars.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, you
know I have, but now I'm gonna
finish up with my point is
that's why you want to see a big
window, right? You wanna see
this would be I don't know when
the original bill and I know
we're not supposed to talk about
that, but it does it expire in 4
years or what is it?
OK, well, anyway, my point is
we'd see about an 8.
You know, a, a window from
before and seeing what's
happening here in the future.
They're gonna do the study, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, it's
gonna be in the next within the
next 12 months, so we're only
gonna see a little point, a
little, a little small sliver
and I'd like to see because I'm
really, really, and I mean this,
um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
I'm really.
Encouraged to find out if those
people through COVID.
Where they feel did they feel
defeated?
And, and this is a chain
reaction. Did they, why didn't
they go back?
I don't care where you're at
anymore. My, I used to take my
wife to eat dinner late. I
always work late and I remember
on a Friday or Saturday we go
out late. It's hard to find a
place to open it after 9 o'clock
anymore, even in Vegas, it's
different.
And so it's different across the
country.
So the point that I'm making,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, is I
think we didn't get that the
full workforce I think it's
starting to ease back in.
But we don't have it it's
stifled and when.
When you don't have enough
people to work, you and you have
a business and you've got,
you've got fixed fixed cost.
Whether that's your, you know,
your mortgage or your, you know,
or whatever that is it's fixed,
right, your fixed cost that you
have and then you have your
variable cost to run that
business, there's a breaking
point where you've got to make
10 number of dollars to keep
your doors open.
The cash flow has to be there.
If it's not there,
Then you have to cut costs.
That's your next because I tell
my son, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm gonna teach you
how to be a a a a businessman
that sees things simply.
In order to make more money, you
gotta either spend less or make
more or a combination of both.
But there's no other way.
So when you've already and, and
you know try to cut costs and
then you're still not able to
reach that break even point
because people aren't in
business to make break even they
need to make a little bit of
money for themselves and pay
their own personal bills or
whatever they need, but what's
happening is when you don't have
a full workforce, you're cutting
your hours, which in turn hurts.
Your ability to create those
those those gross dollars coming
in that gross revenue and that
can be in a restaurant.
That can be if you're building a
uh on a construction site that
can be you name it, that can
affect uh fabrication.
That, uh, stifle the the
transporting of goods and
services that can, that can
stifle the ability of of of
doctors being able to see you
because they don't have the
support staff and so forth. I
mean you could just go down this
road and it's massive.
And that's why I think it's
important for me to see the
study as a whole.
Because I want to see, hey, you
know what, what, what can we do
now to attract those people it
would be good data. I, I, I
think this is a great idea, um,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the whole, the whole concept of
let's figure out what's what's
happening here.
Um, for New Mexicans, for us,
for us as policy makers.
Say, hey, you know what?
These are things that are
hurting us.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen
that are causing food to go up,
lack of labor participation
rates or um the just in general
inflation sweeping across the
country doesn't matter if you're
selling fuel if you're doing
what I do, a grocery store, it
doesn't matter. It stifled all
of us.
And I, I mean, I just did my
tax. I everybody's seeing the
effects of what we're talking
about, so, um.
I think it's important because
I, I really want the
constituents down in southwest
New Mexico. I want them to have
relief because I speaker
gentlemen.
I lived there
I work with these people all the
time.
I see that little old lady
that's a, that's a widow.
The honestly she just has that
social security check.
She's not gonna get a, she's not
gonna get a, a raise to cover
the, the next inflation rate
that goes up on whatever it is.
And
Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
These little these these these
people that I'm talking about
that are in my community and
around my community, the people
that we serve.
Man, it's hard for them and
they're, they're not getting
that raise from Social Security
to offset this rate uh the rate
of inflation.
I'm seeing people, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, they are
rationing fuel.
$10 on the pumps. I go over the
pumps and there's 4 pumps, 4 to
6 pumps. You got two sides that
they're half of the pumps have
$10 on them.
I should tell you that what's
going on.
And so
You know, again, you know, I, I
hope, I hope the body
understands what I'm trying to
say in that, you know, I I
support your amendment because
it is really serious for for the
people that I live, I, I, I
don't know how the all the, you
know, I don't know the uh
demographics of the entire
state, but I know mine really
well and they need this they
need to know what we're, they
need to know this data so that
we can do something to to better
serve them. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen.
General Lani from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move to Table
House floor amendment 1 to House
Bill 17 as amended.
The motion before the body is to
table House floor Amendment
number 1 to House Bill 17 as
amended with an emergency
clause, a vote of yes and the
amendment will be tabled a vote
of no, and the amendment will
not be tabled. The vote is now
open.
It's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 38 in the affirmative, and 25
in the negative House floor.
Amendment number 1 to House Bill
17 as amended with emergency
clause is tabled.
You still have the floor,
gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker, um, you
know, if you, if you do any type
of uh study at all on anything,
uh, going forward or backward,
you don't do it just in a very
short period of time, you go
back and you and I both know
that, um, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and so I'd hope you
would take a very broad stroke
when you look at this, that you
would look back and, and as the
representative talked about
there are things that are out of
our, um, you know, we can't, we
can't determine when or what
happens, and we certainly can't.
Uh, um, stop some of those
things that do happen. So as
you're looking at this, I hope
that you take a very broad
stroke. We look back and see
what policies were in place that
may not be in place now with
this administration and perhaps
we'll come up with really good
um story at the end of this and,
and hope you come back and tell
us exactly the body what it was.
Thank you, madam Speaker the
gentle lady from Dona Ana and
Orrtero Representative Silva.
Thank you, gentle lady. um,
well, the gentle lady, uh, from
Bernard Leo Yield.
I yield to my co-sponsor.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady, and
representative, um, I, uh,
co-sponsored this bill just
because I think it's a really
important to look at.
As I said before, all the
dynamics that impact grocery
prices and um folks food bill at
the end of every uh shopping um
trip that they take. And so I
just wanted to ask a few
questions for the body and um
and I know that in our um
committee earlier this morning
we talked about consumer
confidence and since the
beginning of the year, consumer
confidence has been in the
decline, um, because.
of all the
Um
gyrations of the uh federal
economy and so in the federal
economic decisions that have
been happening and so, um, just
wondering if you can tell me a
little bit more about that, um,
do you know how much beef prices
have risen in the last year and
what might be causing that
increase.
Thank you very much for that
question, uh, Mr. Madam Speaker,
Representative, uh, gentle lady,
um, according to the information
I have beef prices alone rose by
4.3% in 2024.
And according to the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, the increase
in price is driven by low cattle
numbers.
Difficult weather, high grain
prices and high interest rate.
I might add.
Uh, representative, uh, gentle
lady, uh, madam Speaker, that
I'm pleased to let the body know
that in preparing this bill, I
reached out to the New Mexico's
Department of Agriculture.
And, and they relayed their
support of this um commission
and our standing ready to lend
their assistance in the area of
standing up continuing the work
to stand up, uh, beef processing
in this state to reduce the
cost.
Uh, that consumers in New Mexico
are now facing because meat has
to be sent outside of the state.
Um,
for us to con for it to come
back and us to buy it and
consume it. Thank you.
Madam Speaker.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
Representative, um, yeah, it was
really glad to uh support that
piece of legislation that helped
to bring uh livestock inspection
back into the state. I think
that's gonna create a huge
impact for not only prices but
um for our economy here in New
Mexico, um, Madam Speaker and
representative, I grew up food
insecure. And, uh, growing up on
what we called back then food
stamps, uh, instead, you know,
we call it's.
now, um, but I remember, um,
Being 78 years old and being
embarrassed of going to the
grocery store because that's
when we had the little coupon
book of food stamps and you had
to rip them out of the book in
front of the cashier, uh, or
they were void.
And so everyone knew at the
grocery store when someone paid
with food stamps.
And um now they look like debit
cards and that's fantastic, um,
because where did uh eight year
old learn to be ashamed at the
grocery store.
Uh, for being food insecure and
so the more that we can do as a
body to limit those experiences
for families so that they can
find food, they can find healthy
food and afford it, um, is
really important to me and the
other thing that's important,
uh, is making sure that we're
being data driven and I know
we've taken a lot of action and
had lots of conversations to
bring down costs for uh New
Mexicans around health care,
child care.
And a lot more. And, um, I'm
wondering, can we make decisions
like that without information or
um what might, what might be the
impact of a commission like
this, uh, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Well, thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, gently for your
question.
Um
I agree that it is crucial to
develop this information with
data and this is what the
commission will do the exports
that will be um part of this
commission will be very diverse
and so, uh, having the economic
development department lead this
effort with staffing and support
will help us to get this data
so.
decisions um and strategies and
recommendations can be made, uh,
and as was noted earlier, um,
the committee after this, uh,
the commission is established,
uh, we look to have them provide
a report with this information,
uh, in November of this year, so
it will not be one to drag uh to
be dragged on. It is key in my
mind our families can't wait.
We have children, as you
mentioned, we have elders on
fixed incomes, we have young
families.
Like my sister-in-law who have
teenage sons who are both over 6
ft and eat a whole lot and it
is, it is challenging for them.
Thank you, um, thank you, gentle
lady, Madam Speaker, I
appreciate that, um.
I think making sure we have the
data is really important and
ensuring that we have that data
quickly so that it has an impact
and uh makes a difference is, is
equally important, um, so I
agree with you and I think
dragging our feet is not a good
idea, so I'm glad it has um the
emergency clause attached to
that. Um, I'm also wondering,
um, when the initial drafting of
this bill, um, had a commission
in the study.
But it also, but it grew a
little bit after that and so
wondering if you could also talk
about how this bill might help
us invest in infrastructure that
can help continue to make food
affordable and accessible for
families, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you so much. I'm referring
to my notes because I wanted to
try to touch on these key
pieces, um.
And I appreciate that question,
um, because one of the main
objectives of the commission is
to evaluate the current
investments that have been made
or in the past, uh, in the
supply in the supply chain
infrastructure. This includes
transportation, other things
like cold storage and
aggregation and strengthening
these areas based on the
information that's received from
the study could reduce food
waste.
And we're hoping to gain
efficiency in getting the
products to store shelves, um.
Making it easier for local
producers, our local farmers and
ranchers, um, among the others,
uh, to become more uh help them
become more efficient. What can
we do to make their to make
getting those products um into
this onto the store shelves more
efficiently, um, making it
easier for local producers to
distribute this food statewide,
um, and decrease the reliance
on.
The
Food that comes from out of
state which almost always is
gonna be more expensive, um,
and, uh, and then it's gonna
result in stabilizing our hope
is that uh we look to have it
stabilized the grocery pri uh
prices by ensuring a more
resilient and adaptable food
system.
Thank you Madam Speaker, I
forgot.
Thank you, gentle lady, Madam
Speaker, um, I'm also wondering,
so I, uh, sponsored a bill
earlier, um, that would have
talked about dynamic pricing and
it got lots of good feedback and
so I wanted to also um ask about
how this bill could think about
other proactive policies that
could protect consumers from
external price shocks, so
external price shocks like we
saw in 2020 with the pandemic
um, and, uh, as we're seeing,
you know, bird flu on the rise
and and prices of eggs, uh, and,
uh, chicken and so also
wondering how might this
commission help develop
proactive ideas to then target
external things that we may not
have some control over, uh,
completely, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
The commission is going to
examine state laws for certain.
They're also going to examine
this body of experts, uh, that
we're gonna be looking to also
have experience in what's
happening federally. They're
paying attention to all of these
issues that have an impact, uh,
not just across the nation but
specifically here in New Mexico
so um the ideas uh for the
commission in examining these
laws they'll be they may relate
to areas like um dynamic
pricing, uh, uh.
price gouging as well, uh, that
may be happening from outside of
our borders, um.
And those.
Other price manipulations that
unfairly inflate grocery costs,
um, the commission will also
assess how with the expertise of
these individuals how federal
trade agreements and economic
conditions impact these local
food prices.
And
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
they're also going to recommend
state level protections. What
can we do to help shield our New
Mexico cus consumers from those
extreme price uh fluctuations.
Thank you, gentle lady, and, um,
Madam Speaker, I'm also I
appreciate that response um
because I do what um I wanna
make sure and one of the reasons
I again sponsored co-sponsored
this bill was because I wanted
to make sure that it was gonna
create some structural
long-lasting uh policies that
can help uh shield the state of
New Mexico from big swings in um
in access to food and food.
prices and so, um, as you look
at the commission makeup, can
you, uh, tell me, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, the experts that
are included in the commission
and um how having maybe some
more diverse expertise can help
us have a better grasp of what's
happening with um food prices
and food access, uh, Madam
Speaker, General Lei.
Thank you gentlemen lady and
Madam Speaker, I'm happy to do
that and I'll touch on some of
the ones that I think are really
key in there um because having
this broad range of expertise,
uh, helps to ensure that the
commission can tackle those
costs from multiple angles
because it's not just coming
from any one specific area, so
for example economists will be
able to analyze the price trends
and supply chain efficiencies.
Um, agriculture experts who can
recommend policies to strengthen
local food production and reduce
reliance on the costly imports.
Um, consumer protection
advocates who can examine unfair
pricing practices, uh, practices
and propose some safeguards uh
in regulation and food industry
professionals, those that are
actually in the industry who
understand the distribution
challenges and who firsthand can
actually offer some and identify
and offer some cost savings
opportunities those are the
types of individuals.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you gentle lady and Madam
Speaker, um, I only have, um,
one more question, but I'm also
wondering the commission
members, they're entitled to
compensation is that correct,
um, Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Those that have to travel
because we look to have this
commission, um, move through
this uh throughout the state to
get.
Input, so they'll determine
where they're going to meet and
it is very challenging as we
know many of the body in here to
be in a place for a night or two
or to attend these meetings,
some won't have to rely on that,
but otherwise those that will
travel we are just, it's going
to be there per diem. It'd be
lodging in their food, basically
that's pretty much it.
Excellent. I, um, again coming
from southern New Mexico that is
also important so that we get a
broad representation from across
the state, uh, and from all
corners so thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, and,
um, anything else that you'd
want to mention in terms of like
why now? Why is, why is this
commission so important to to
establish now versus, you know,
waiting, um, another session or
so, Madam Leader, um, Madam
Speaker, General.
Lady.
to lady and Madam Speaker, thank
you as I mentioned just a little
bit ago.
are, are the people in my
district can't wait.
I bump into them at the grocery
stores. We examine our receipts
to our.
Grocery bills and we stand there
sometimes and we take a look at
them and compare them and think
what did I buy?
I have 2 1/2 bags because I'm
carrying laundry detergent and
I'm spending $78 and the senior
citizens that are behind me are
saying oh yes I know just what
you mean. I've had to cut back
on this or that.
I think about the families again
who are raising children and it
is incredibly difficult because
more often than not they're
starting out at um entry level
jobs, mid career, and having
been faced with all these other
uh costs that are rising as
well.
It is extremely challenging and
I feel their pain and having
this study done by November will
allow the uh preparations to be
made and perhaps during the
interim, I look to see um for
help us get ready for the
session in uh in 2026. Thank
you.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, gentle lady and Madam
Speaker, um, and I, um, also
wanted um ask who your uh expert
witness might be if you wanna
introduce them. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and body, I've just been
joined by Kendall Chavez, who is
um the.
Policy advisor at the governor's
office.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and I also
just wanna um name my support
for House Bill 17, um, part of,
uh, why this is important is the
economy isn't static. Things
could change and things could
get worse, um, inflation is
ticking up, uh, slightly and so
I wanna make sure that families
have every available opportunity
to afford their groceries and
not have to choose between
groceries or utilities, um, or
groceries and a health care bill
and so, um, the more the faster
that we can get answers and um
and get some ideas that can make
a difference that's gonna be
better for all of us, um, and,
um, again, I'm committed to
making sure that no child goes
hungry in New Mexico. No elderly
person goes hungry in New Mexico
and so um with that I ask for
the body support.
on this bill. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Chavez Eri
Nortero County's Representative
Henry.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does
the gentle lady.
And I wrote it down.
From that county, uh, yield.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Madam Speaker. I
really appreciate that. Sorry,
I, I did write your county down
and I've
Bernal Leo. All right, thank
you, um.
I was looking through your bill
and I have a couple quick
questions and I'm not sure if I
have the substitute or not, so I
might be off a little bit on the
lines, but it, it, it's around
page two.
Under item 3, letter B, and it
has members have expertise in
economics. The members have
expertise in economics, consumer
protection, agriculture, trade,
food production, or nutrition,
and that's kind of what you're
looking for, uh, to, to kind of
set up this committee. Is that
correct, Madam Speaker, General
Edy Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
Thank you Madam Speaker that I,
I mean that's pretty broad and I
think in your study I, I
appreciate it but economics are
such a massive thing as you kind
of, uh, alluded to in your last,
um.
The discussion with, with the
gentle lady from Donana and
Otero, uh, so with that I have a
uh an amendment if I can. I hope
it's very friendly, um.
I like to be friendly if I can,
uh, so I'll pass that to you,
um, and I will wait.
Gentlemen, give us a moment, and
if I can have a roll call, you
got it on the floor.
Gentlemen, that's getting passed
out, but, uh, can you go ahead
and read that?
Number to to me.
Yes, madam Speaker, it is
0.231969.2. wait a moment for
that to get passed out to
everyone. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
OK, gentlemen, can you explain
your amendment?
Thank you, Madam Speaker, um.
My amendment is pretty, pretty
simple. It's on page 2, line 1
after follows.
Insert provided that the that
prior to an appointment, each
commissioner shall have
successfully completed a
university level introductory or
an equivalent course in
economics.
gentle lady, is it friendly?
Or unfriendly.
I have uh a question a couple of
questions, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you for
offering making your offer.
to help me decide whether it's a
friendly or not, um, I have a
couple of questions.
Can you tell me.
Whether this yearquiring uh this
will require those in the
agriculture and perhaps
transportation, um.
Industries to have.
this type of experience.
Oh, y'all switched on me. I
almost said, madam, yes, Mr. uh
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
uh, yes, um, what we're hoping
for is everybody who is there,
uh, has gone through this basic
uh economics 101 type course.
Uh, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, now what I wanna make sure
is is on your commit like I
would like the committee members
to have this. Now that does not
stop anyone from having input,
so having those outside
industries, I think that's
crucial to this entire
discussion. So to your point,
uh, whether it be an
infrastructure, uh, livestock or
any of those other deals. I
would love for them to have
input and for those those folks
to to listen and and see how
that fits into the entire scope.
So, Mr. Speaker, hello and
gentlemen, so.
The
Some of the experts that are in
here uh that would be could be
on the commission would be those
with lived experience. Are you
seeing that?
Suggesting that these
individuals would not be able to
serve?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
absolutely not. All I'm saying
is the commission, the folks
that, and the reason I think
this is germane to the
discussion is if we're going to
use the study to make policy,
um, I think it's crucial that we
have have somebody that has a
grasp on the big pictures of how
all those economics come
together, the entire piece.
Now those experts in those
fields should absolutely be able
to have those discussions. I
just want the committee to
actually be uh have some sort of
economy 10 1 so that they can
take each piece and put it into
the bigger picture.
That makes sense, General Lady.
Well, gentlemen, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
composition of the commission
does include economists and it's
um.
Along with other experts who're
gonna lend their voices who will
lend their voices to this
discussion.
With that, madam, uh, Mr.
Speaker, um.
I would like to, I believe that
the commission needs to be
representative of many voices
and the voice of an eco of
economists and those with that
experience will be on the
commission.
Uh, and therefore I will say
this is not a friendly
amendment, but thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and, and I just wanna
reiterate one more time. It's,
I'm not saying they that
economists on there it is
everybody on there has a basic
understanding of economics 101,
so I'm not trying to eliminate
anybody. What I'm trying to do
with the amendment is just make
sure everybody on that
commission has a basic
understanding of Economics 101.
Because I think when we start
talking about all these pieces
that are coming together, I
think without that basic
understanding, we could miss so
many things.
There is debate on the
amendment, the gentle lady from,
um, Donana Sierra Socora
Representative Do. thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentlemen
yield?
I yield to the kind lady from
all those counties. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and, and, and thank
you gentlemen. Um, I'm gonna
just look at some of the
members. OK, so we're going to
0.3 members. And the legislative
council will appoint 6 members,
and the appointing authorities
shall make every effort, every
effort.
That doesn't mean they will to
ensure that there's an
economist.
Geographic gender.
Culture, racial diversity among
the appointed members. And that
they have expertise in
economics. I've heard the word
expertise, I don't know how many
times during this presentation.
I mean, there's so much
expertise on this commission
that they're going to figure out
what has happened with national
and international grocery
prices.
And I mean, we're gonna, we're
gonna figure this out with a
commission that's going to meet
this summer and bring that
policy decisions for the spring.
One shot, one summer, policy
recommendations. Um, so do you,
I don't see that there's anybody
that's required to be on here
that
They're just going to make a
best effort that they have
economics background, consumer.
So I'm looking at someone with
with experience in economics,
would they have a basic level
economics experience in their
background or an equivalent
through a certification or some
other process. Speaker, gentle
lady, I would assume somebody
would, would have the basic,
yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and someone who's an
expert in consumer protections.
Do you think that they would
have a basic level course in
economics or something
equivalent to economics. Mr.
Speaker, I would say yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, would
you think that someone who is an
expert in agriculture would have
a, a, a class in basic economics
or something equivalent.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would say yes, um, mainly
because the NMSU when I went to
school there, a lot of the folks
in agriculture took basic
economic classes. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Someone, what about someone
who's an expert in trade?
Mr. Speaker, I would hope so,
yes, General. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. How about someone who's
an expert in food production and
nutrition.
Mr. Speaker, General Letty, I
would assume yes, that is, that
would be as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. And so I, I
would think that um, you know,
I, I, it took me 24 years, but I
do have a bachelor's degree in
business. I got uh pregnant, my
3rd semester at college, and I
changed my degree to early
childhood, so I have an
associates in early childhood,
but even that early childhood
class had an economics. In fact,
I think that every degree plan
in the state of Mexico has a
basic economics course or some
sort of accounting course in it.
Um, but the basic concepts that
are part of, um, what are the
basic concept
of economics that you think
would be important for this
commission to have knowledge on.
So, Mr. Speaker, lady, I did
print out a little deal that
that has basic economics 101
course, um, some of the things
that I think are really
interesting that would, would
really work within this study,
um, scarcity and choice, uh,
opportunity costs, supply and
demand. These are things we've
already heard from some of the
debate earlier, um, consumer
behavior, I think that's
something we should understand
production and costs, market
structure, um, and.
The list goes on and on. I mean,
there's so I think that's what
I'm afraid of this this field is
so broad that if we don't really
understand how A impacts B all
the way to Z, we're gonna miss
something. And with basic
economics, all these things
apply, um, role of government
markets uh we talked about that
through the COVID, um, prior
administrations, future
administrations.
We have to be able to put all
those puzzle pieces together to
have a good study, especially if
what the the uh intent of the
study once it's complete it's to
make policy decisions. If I'm
making the policy decision, I
want to make sure they have the
basic economics and we've looked
at the big picture. Yeah, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I, one of the
things that, and gentlemen, one
of the things that I've heard a
lot in committee when I've asked
some questions and I was not
here. I, this is my first term,
you know, um, you and I are both
freshmen, um, but I hear in
committee all the
time, this was vetted in the
interim.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
vetted in the interim, do you
think if we put a pass a bill,
spend $400,000 and we do this
without experts and policy bills
come back the next session that
are actually contrary to best
practices, we could hear the
term this was vetted in the
interim.
Mr. Speaker, uh, uh, gentle
lady, I, yes, that I think
that's what we said. Well, thank
you, Mr. Speaker and thank you
gentlemen. I, I think that this
amendment is really good,
especially when
What, where we want to get.
is to solutions and I'm not sure
that we can even do this on
grocery prices. What I looked up
because I did hear this billing
committee, the mar the margin
of, of um markup at groceries
for grocery stores. It's my
understanding it's around 2%.
And it's very volatile. It has
nothing to do with things that
we can control in New Mexico,
like
Meat processing. We're trained
to get in-state meat processing.
That bill's already passed. The
supply chain study, that's
already passed. New Mexico State
University just finished doing a
business plan on what sort of
scale of operation and supply
chain you need and, and that's
why we're passing things like
farm to table and the supply
chain funding and those sorts of
things. So I can't even fathom
how this commission could help
improve the costs of meat
produced in New Mexico because
there's so many variables,
weather.
Whether they can, the grass, the
cows can graze or they got to
finish them out a lot. This
commission, I don't even know
how the commission can do that.
Um, but when I think about, you
know, some of the things that
were said growing up in poverty,
um, there's, there's nothing we
can do in a commission that
studies the cost of groceries to
address what it was like for me.
To my mom would cook a pot of
beans, ham and beans, mostly
bone, on Sunday, and we ate that
pot of beans until she was out.
Then she made a pot of potatoes.
Put some more, some more a
little bit of ham on those
potatoes, and we ate that pot of
pot of potatoes until it was
gone. To this day, I've never
made potato soup or beans for my
kids because I ate it so much
growing up, but, but a study on
the cost of groceries wouldn't
have changed my family's income.
I, I, I don't, I don't see the
connection to that. And when we
think about the cost drivers on
childcare, something I do know a
little bit about. The
government's been the person
driving up the cost of childcare
through regulations. They tell
us how many square foot we can
have per child. What the
teacher's qualifications are.
How many blocks, whether those
blocks are interlocking, whether
they are flat, smooth,
interlocking. They count them,
and they determine how many
children can be per, per child.
The government's driven up the
cost. We went from spending
about $20 million on childcare
around 99 to over, we are now
supplementing our increased cost
of childcare by $330 million
last year. We had to supplement
the cost of childcare because we
priced the average New Mexican
out of the market. They can't
pay for private childcare and
now we're subsidizing.
So, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I think it makes a
lot of sense. Um,
You know, I would take a class,
a business class every semester
and uh economics especially uh
for economics, um, statistics,
you know, looking at all those
things and learning what drives
market and costs and supply and
demand, that has to be front and
center of every conversation,
otherwise it's subjection, it's
emotionally driven, and we don't
need any more policies in this
body that are emotionally
driven. It has been completely
destructive to the state, and
this might be one of the most
destructive sessions I've seen.
And so to have a basic
understanding of economics is
one of the most reasonable
requests I've seen on a
commission that we're gonna
spend $400,000 in taxpayer funds
for it and I'm looking forward
to supporting your amendment.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentlemen yield?
I, uh, yield to the gentle lady
from Bernard Leo. Oh right.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um just a couple
of questions, um, about the
verbiage, um, in the amendment.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
I believe your amendment says
provided that prior to
appointment, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, are there any
time limits on that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
uh, as far as when you took the
course? No, I don't think
there's any time limits on that,
no, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
didn't really want to reveal my
age, but, um, my degree from
undergraduate and graduate
required me to take multiple
economics classes on both times,
but I couldn't tell you how to
calculate GDP right now.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
I think that um perhaps the, the
word choice.
Doesn't necessarily get to what
you want, um, because I could
certainly be appointed, um, if I
met some of the other
qualifications, and I have
successfully passed 6 economic
classes, um, but it would do
little to no good, um, with this
particular amendment, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the other
question that I have is, and
this may be defined elsewhere in
statute, how we define
successfully, um, Mr. Speaker.
gentlemen, is that a pass fail,
um, is it a letter grade? Is it
a particular
Number
Mr. Speaker, General Letty, I
would think that's up to the
discretion of the appointing
authority. I would hope it's a.
A pass. I mean, I wouldn't want
you failed economic suite on the
commission that doesn't seem
like something we'd want to do.
I mean, I would want them to be
able to have an understanding
of, of basic economics.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, well, I
certainly, um, agree with you
that having, uh, an
understanding of economics and,
and basic uh economic principles
is very valuable and to be fair,
well, I don't remember the
equation for calculating GDP.
There are a lot of other
principles that do influence my
perspective now as a legislator.
So I do appreciate the value and
the thought behind this,
however, I don't think that.
This is necessarily the right
way to do it. Um, so thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. There is further
debate on the amendment. The
gentle lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
um,
The gentleman from my
neighboring legislative
district, please yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield
to my neighbor from Eddie Lee.
Thank you. Well, Mr. Speaker, I
stand up in support of your
amendment.
When I look back at all the
college and graduate courses I
ever took.
I now realize that economics was
actually the most valuable
course of all because Mr.
Speaker, it does so much to
explain the world and why things
work the way they do.
Uh, so, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen.
I think it's important that we
acknowledge that.
This is not a difficult question
to answer.
Uh, gentlemen, Mr. Speaker.
I run a household and I'm pretty
aware of the cost of things
today.
I know where we were in years
past with the cost of things it
seems.
Um
Truly, as was spoken earlier,
Mr. Speaker, we really need to
have a long view, and that means
going back and uh to the present
to the future, what might
happen, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, I did want to ask you in
your amendment, you mentioned
that each commissioner shall
have successfully completed a
university level introductory or
equivalent course in economics
and so Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, you touched on this
just a little bit with the last
speaker, but could you tell us,
I know what a university level
course is.
Um, what would be an equivalent
course in economics in your
mind, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think there's a lot of online
courses. There's a lot of
courses where you can get on and
get a bait.
And get a basic understanding of
economics, um, so I would think
those are would be um equivalent
to the university as well.
Yeah, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you say your microphone was, um,
not quite on when you mentioned
online courses.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so yes,
um, it's not hard to find an
online course, uh, so I think
that makes it very easy to do
and accessible for uh each
commissioner to do that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you, you
may know that um I've been a big
proponent of financial literacy.
As have other members of the
body.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
we want to start people and this
does have bearing with your
amendment, but from a very early
age, we want people to
understand, um.
How financial literacy covers so
many topics including uh that
economics element where we're
talking really the fundamental
principle and to see if you
agree with me, sir, Mr. Speaker,
is.
Supply and demand.
Uh, when we have more of
something, the price tends to
drop if we have less of
something.
The price tends to go up. Is
that, is that your
understanding, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that is my
understanding.
You know, I thought Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen of I have a daughter
who's having a birthday soon,
and I ought to get a shoebox.
And fill it with tissue paper
and put a dozen eggs in it for
her.
That'd be a pretty good birthday
present these days I think, but
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
reason I bring that up is, um,
The administration, the previous
administration in Washington DC
ordered that chickens be
slaughtered and when the
chickens aren't there, then we
don't get eggs and that means
less supply.
Uh, not enough to meet demand
and the price goes up, so.
Indeed, I think having financial
literacy background and an
economics understanding of
economic principles help to
explain these kinds of things,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so you
talk about university level
introduction could an equivalent
course.
And I think the answer is no,
but I want to ask, uh, Mr.
Speaker, an equivalent course in
economics, could that be from
the high school years of the
student potentially, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, or does it
have to be postgraduate.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's a great idea.
We're, we're seeing all the CTE
that we have going on, um, I
think some of those schools
could do a really good job and
yes, that might possibly be a,
be another equivalent to this.
So thank you for that. um, I, I
think again it's there, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, my
impression of seeing this bill
for the first time.
Was that we really don't need
it. We have libraries full.
Of this type of discussion why
are prices the way they are?
What are they, what are the
drivers of those prices and so I
really think we already know the
answer, and my concern is the
way the the bill has been.
Given its parameters.
That this is really just
spending nearly half a million
dollars to finance what I think
is a politically driven exercise
and attempt to criticize the
current president who's only
been in office for, I believe,
Mr. Speaker, maybe 2 months,
something similar to that, but
let's um.
Let's try to keep the politics
out of it and let's see if we're
gonna do this, and as a study of
the cost of groceries, that's
economics and so I think you.
Amendment is totally on point.
It's correct, it's needed and um
final thought, Mr. Speaker.
If this bill gets through the
house and over to the Senate, I
really hope the governor will
veto it because I think it's a
waste of taxpayer money.
And uh so I thank you for the
time Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you for your answers.
Thank you. There is further
debate on the amendment, the
gentle lady from Donana and
Otero Representative Silva.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker, uh,
does the gentleman from Chavez,
Edd and Otero County Yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Dona Anna and Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I appreciate this
conversation, and I have a
couple of questions. Um, I'm
wondering in terms of uh a
university level introductory or
equivalent course, um, first, I,
the way that I read that, I
don't think New Mexicans can
afford for us to take a semester
long course in order for us to
come up with a um a plan of
action for uh food prices and.
And, um, and potentially, you
know, rising inflation on food
in the coming months and year,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
so, um, I'm just wondering, um.
Like, do you think New Mexico
and New Mexicans can afford for
um,
Potentially appointed
commissioners to to this task
force to take a semester long
course, um, before they can
begin their work, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, General lady,
absolutely not, but I think the
good thing is, is we have
universities in the state of New
Mexico that have been teaching
economics for years.
And so I do think we could
probably find somebody that has
graduated with an economic
degree in one of those fields
and or at least had an economic
class that would probably take
care of that, so no, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
think we'd have to wait very
long. Um, I think we have a, a
good, uh, group of, of students
out there that probably have
gone through this.
I see. OK, so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so you are this
amendment is proposing that um
New Mexicans not necessarily
professors, but, um, people who
have taken economic courses, uh,
volunteer to teach each
commissioner a uh an uh.
university level introductory
course and so we'd be um
Enrolling more New Mexicans into
this commission through their
teaching efforts, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no.
What I'm asking is, is for the
folks that y'all have named um.
The, the folks that you have
named to be on the commission.
Also have economic background.
Um, so as I said earlier, take
the agriculture, for example,
um, again, being a graduate from
NMSU I won't date myself either,
um, it wasn't terribly long ago,
uh, but having graduated from
NMSU and being an agriculture
department I do know a lot of
agriculture students had to take
basic economic 101 to graduate
with their degrees. So I do
think in all of the all of the
names that you have mentioned on
to be on your commission.
Uh, you could probably easily
find some folks.
That went through college and
had a basic um.
Economic class to to help them
understand how economics work.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and just so that
I'm clear though, if they
haven't, then we are going to be
also on top of studying the food
prices and how to lower uh food
costs for families also be
looking for potential teachers,
professors, volunteers that
could teach commissioners if
they didn't already have that
background, um, and so, um,
again, I.
I just don't see how, um, like
the logistics of that could work
if, um, if they don't have that
economic background and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I have a
theology degree. I almost went
to seminary, um, and so it feels
like we're asking this
commission that is part time,
uh, temporary, um, doesn't go
through um the next calendar
year, uh, to have more
background and experience than
many of us.
do as we're legislating and
making policy is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, Generaletti, I hope
so because when I'm looking at
some of the legislation that's
been written in this body. I
don't know that they understand
economics and so yes, if we are
looking to have a study.
That is going to look into the
prices of, of food and how it's
affected based on economics,
then yes, I do want to make sure
the person now when you say to
teach them, I'm not looking for
teachers to teach those folks.
I'm looking for your
commissioners to have a basic
one.
Economic background 101. Now, as
I said earlier,
If you have experts in the room
that want to contribute, I think
that's probably definitely
needed. I would go ask the
livestock group, how is this
working all the things that we
have put into place, how is this
working into the system?
The reason we want the basic
economics on the commission is
they need to take all that
information, formulate it and
make sure the report we get.
That let me remind you, we're
gonna write policy on.
Is from somebody who understands
the basic economics.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and so I'm
wondering would this also have
required reading or homework
that people would have to
submit um again to um to, uh,
the, um, gentle lady from
Bernalillo that spoke earlier
around um like how will we know
they have successfully completed
if they are passing, are they,
are they required reading or
homework, Madam Speaker, uh, or
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
have no idea what we're asking.
I don't know where homework or
reading comes in, they need to
be able to read, um, to make
sure they can do that, but I
don't think we're assigning
homework or anything. This
commission.
I just want them to have basic
economics so they understand the
big picture.
The experts that are talking to
them to help them understand how
it works within the big picture.
But I, I, I, I apologize, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I'm really
not sure the reading and, and
homework. I, I don't think I
answered that the way you're
looking for, but maybe you can
help me clarify.
Uh, yeah, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you, um, yeah,
I, I think we can agree that
we're, we're both, um, a little
confused and um I, I, I don't
understand and I don't think I
agree either, so, um, but I'm,
I'm also wondering, do you
believe, um,
Or this amendment reads as if
experts are only those who have
attended college level courses,
um, is that, uh, how you read
this, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
because that's how I read it is
only, only people who have
attended college level courses
and successfully completed them
are experts in determining uh
the identifying problems and
solutions that we have here in
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, General Letty, or
equivalent so that next piece is
or u so if they did complete a
university level introductory or
an equivalent as I, as we talked
about earlier in the debate, um,
there's a lot of flexibility in
that, uh, they maybe it is a CTE
course that they graduated from
and and got a credit in, uh, it
could be an online course that
they graduated from and so what
I'm asking is when they apply to
the commission and they turn in
their resume just like when we
turn in our resumes, we
uh, our expertise and if on that
uh resume it says, I graduated
and I had and, and the
requirement is a a basic
economic class, then they should
be able to either provide their
resume. There's a lot of, a lot
of ways they can provide that to
us to show that, OK, yes, they
do have a basic understanding of
economics 101.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen so then would it be
equivalent for my grandfather
who was a bracero and farm
worker who could look at 2 acres
of, of dirt and know exactly how
many onions to plant, how many
would die, how many would be
successful, how much fertilizer
in pounds he would need and how
many gallons of water it would
take that season to water just
by looking at that with a 3rd
grade education, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, you
know, as I said earlier, what
I'm looking for on the
commission is to have basic
economic 101. Now your experts,
much like your grandfather, much
like my father-in-law who can
look at a field and tell us when
to plant, when to harvest, how
to harvest, where to stack it,
when to stack it, when to do
that. I mean, I can go through
the whole list.
And he doesn't have a basic
economic 101. Now I would look
to him to be an expert to
explain how that harvest works.
So that on the commission, as
the commission's making
decisions on how that affects us
statewide and globally, I, I
would look for him for the
expert.
But the commission should have
the expertise in the basic
economics 101 to be able to put
these puzzle pieces together.
I'm not discounting anybody
because I'm just, I just like
what you said, I know a lot of
folks who have.
A high school education at best,
less than a high school
education, um, that I would look
to for experts in a number of
fields, but that doesn't mean
that they should be on the
commission making decisions
based on economic global
economics because this
commission is gonna have to look
globally to understand how the
economics within our state are
affected. We can't just look at
the state and go a affected B,
it has to have a better
understanding and so yes, I
would hope we look to those kind
of.
folks' experts.
But for our commission I want
them to have a basic
understanding of economics 101.
Thank you, uh, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, I think you've made my
point in terms of having a
commission that can have a
diverse set of experiences, uh,
expertise, uh, we, I would not
expect any commissioner on any
anybody that rep that represents
or sits on, uh, here in the
state of New Mexico to have
every bit of information that's
why we have bodies of people
making decisions together is
that some of us are experts in
food production. Some of us are.
experts in oil and gas, uh, as
you are, gentlemen, Mr. Speaker,
um, and some of us are experts
in farming and economics and
nutrition and together we have a
holistic set of experiences and
a viewpoint that can help us
make decisions and identify uh
problems and with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I yield.
Thank you.
There is further debate on the
amendment from Santa Fe,
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
gentleman from all those
counties yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady from, is it just
Santa Fe? Yes, Mr. Speaker, he
did.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Speaker, I'm,
I'm looking over your amendments
and
I know you, you're bringing a
certain type of merit to, to add
to this, this pretty this really
good piece of legislation and
your me says um
That's the other one. On page 2,
line 1 after follows, insert,
provided that prior to
appointment, each commissioner
shall have successfully
completed a university level
introductory or an equivalent
course in economics, Mr.
Speaker, if you turn to page 2.
On the bill that reads, I think
it is, let's see.
Under section B, um, it gives
all those the provisions of the
commission and one on
sub.
Section letter B under B.
Uh
Lowercase b members have
expertise in economics, consumer
protection, agriculture, trade,
food production, or nutrition,
would you by that by those terms
there would recognize that
anybody that's.
Applying to this commission
would have.
Had some kind of
Economic background, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, I
would, but if you look up a few
to 3.
It says the appointing
authorities shall make every
effort.
To ensure that and then to be,
and so what this what this uh
amendment is saying is rather
than every effort to for these
expertise, what I would like to
see is that they do have
expertise in economic, basic
economics 101.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and so as we, we have
a process, uh, through your
appointment and even as we, we
have a process through the state
in hiring individuals and
looking at their background,
looking at their records and
making sure that they have fair
assessment. I would say these
provisions go above and beyond,
um, even some of what we look at
when we're, you know, some of
the hiring, um, definitions and,
and things we
look, we look at because we have
such a uh diverse public here
but it really doesn't for me, it
does include that, and I hear
that you're not, you don't
really see that through the
through what we have defined
through this legislation, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I would just
say that it's inherent that
through this careful language
that is implemented in this
piece of legislation that those
that would be looking to even
fulfill these positions.
would have a background in
economics.
As it being, it's the first
thing that's mentioned here, um,
on that line that I, I already
stated, I would just say that I
don't think that as we are
pointing commissions that we are
looking for those official, um,
Education records unless I, I'm
missing something, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that I don't know
that maybe you do know.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
no, I'm just gonna go back again
to two lines above where it says
they're going to make every
effort to shall. They're gonna
make every effort to.
Or let me, let me say that
right. The appointing
authorities shall make every
effort to ensure that and so
what I'm asking for is to take
that next step because on this
thing, there, there are a lot of
things that we have appointed as
a body in here, but what we're
asking here.
It's a pretty major undertaking
that I, I really could
appreciate. I'm very interested
in the study, but I wanna make
sure that the folks that are
putting all these puzzle pieces
together. And when it was said,
I made the point. I don't think
I did because
When those experts are in the
room, I want them to be able to
to talk with folks that
understand how the economy
globally works because we have
to understand the global economy
to understand how it's impacting
New Mexico. I think if we're
just looking at how New Mexico's
impacting New Mexico. We're
gonna fall very short on this
piece of legislation. So what
I'm trying to do is take that
next step and make sure that
commission actually has a a.
Total understanding of how the
global economy works and why
that's interesting, you know, my
cousin just graduated from a
major university with economics
and when I'm talking to him, he
blows my mind, and even though I
might understand some things,
and I can put some puzzle pieces
together.
He's able to help me understand
the whole puzzle. And that's
what I want because I do think
this is a crucial piece. Um, I
do think that we should
understand how things impact,
but I don't want to have um a
study done that falls short to
what we're truly trying to
accomplish, especially if we're
going to spend $400,000 on it,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I hear
what you're saying, and I
commend what you're saying. I
think we want a full scope. Um,
I would, I'd also contest, um.
Or ask that do are
There's going to be reports
given to us as legislators and
those reports are gonna be given
to
If I'm not wrong too, they would
be filtered to the legislative
finance Committee.
Would you concur, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm
sure they'll look at them, yes.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that, that's correct. And I
would say that we have a world
class, um, staff in our for our
legislative finance committee,
and when they vet the, when they
vet these uh um economies
locally statewide, nationally
and globally, they give us then
those reports of all that
information, especially if we,
we have a study that's in place,
they look for these types of
studies, and if there is
anything missing.
I would, I would mention that
they, they provide and guide us
through that information those
informational pieces as well. So
we have a state economist here,
um, at the LFC who is
To me and um I'm sure to most of
us is is world class and one of
the most thorough, one of the
most intelligent and, and um one
of the best economists that I, I
think that I've worked with, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and I've
talked with many economists,
even globally. I have friends
that that um have graduated from
international economic, um,
schools, and I would say that
this is, this is very thorough
in this legislation as it's
written.
Um, to, to develop a processes
to which you're um recommending
through your amendments is a,
it, it really doesn't hit the
mark for me though I understand
it and I want to say I do
recognize what you're trying to
do, but it's inherent to what
this bill is, is laying out in
front of us, and I'd also add,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that the
knowledge base that we have from
our local individuals that may
be um part of this commission.
They need to be understood and
they need to be recognized and
they need to be part of this
commission. We argue that.
Day and night in this body that
we have to have that
representation in the that that
diverse representation for our
own state and I'd say that that
is included in here as well and
to
Mr. Speaker, through your
amendment, if that were to
reduce
Uh, somebody from not
participating or being, uh, they
wouldn't be included because
they didn't have that one
specificity that we'd have to
look back in their college
records, which I don't think is
a normal uh process or procedure
that that could exclude them and
then that voice would be lost.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, would
you
Concur with that or have
anything to add to that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, general lady, no, I
don't, I don't really agree with
that because as I've said a
number of times, I think those
experts in the room are crucial
to, to the gentle lady earlier,
uh, her grandfather who's a
farmer, uh, to all of our
agriculture folks, the farmers,
the ranchers, I think those
experts need to be in the room.
Um, so I don't think we're
taking a voice from anybody. We
need all those voices. What I'm
saying is the commission.
Should have a basic economic and
I do think that that those
things are required. I know
when, when we hire at the
library in, in, uh, Artesia,
which shocked me, you have to
have a master's degree to be a
librarian. I had no idea, but
that's a requirement that we
have to go find. And when we ask
for that, they have to produce
it, but I do agree with you if
if with what you're saying about
LFC and a world class economic
uh economists.
Maybe they should do the study,
um, and that would save us a big
chunk of money, um.
Because I agree they are a world
class group.
So maybe they should do it. Or
if we're going to do, do it this
way, I just want to make sure
the report we give to them.
Actually has vetted everything
we possibly can to make their
life easier, and we can say,
these are the experts we talked
to.
This is the commission we made
who listened to those experts to
give us the best report so that
when we make policy based on the
report that hopefully the LFC
goes and looks at and goes they
crushed it.
That would be great.
Mr. speaker gentlemen, I think
we're on the same page. I think
we want, we want the best for
our state and that's what I'm
hearing from you and, and really
trying to figure out where those
guarantees are, and I would
concur with that, but this is
just an extra step that I think
that is not really necessary,
though I hear your spirit and I
commend you for that and, and
really giving us and looking out
for our state, but I would just
say that.
Our processes are, are really in
place. The language that I'm
reading through this piece of
legislation really um is
significant and really covers
everything that you're talking
about as far as I, I read it and
as far as I can tend with those
that we have um employed and
then it's they, they are, they
are missing.
Really, they're, they're not
missing the mark as far as I
know and what I have experienced
as being a member on on House
appropriations and finance, and
I would just say that.
Maybe they could do the study
through LFC, but this is
actually the better way of doing
this because we have so much
work for them already to do. So
them getting a report and then,
so then,
There's another vetting process,
if you will, through LFC after
this, this study would be done,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I
hope that gives you some
comfort. I hope that gives you
some resolve in knowing that
the, the, when this is done,
then, you know, there's an
additional um measure in place
and I, I really can't say much
more, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So
thank you for the time. I
appreciate your efforts.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Katherine Grant and Hidalgo,
representative Terrazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
gentleman yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I I yield
to my friend, uh, Representative
Trot.
Mr. Speaker, my friend.
I don't know it's gonna get
heated on economics, but I have
a story about economics. I was,
I was in college and I stayed up
all night. That's the way I pay
for my college. I paid for my
own college, and I, and I worked
at the funeral home all night
making removals and stuff like
that to pay for my college.
And I went into class and a lot
of times I'd fall asleep in
class with speaker, and while I
was falling asleep in class, my
economics professor said.
Rasa
And they raised my head.
He says
Do you know how to calculate
GDP?
And in front of the whole class
and um I just happened to
honestly have it open to that to
that page and so it's, it's
consumption and plus investment
plus government spending plus
that's not X in or exports we'll
give you that that formula and
Of course, I wrote it all on the
board and then after I did that
it um.
He tells me, well, now, for now
I want you to calculate it. So I
went ahead and did that.
But I never fell asleep in that
class again.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
all I was gonna say is this we,
we, we're talking about
economics. Look, if I was
writing a check for $400,000 Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I want the
best scope.
possible
We're going to spend $400. It
was my 400,000 bucks out of my
checkbook. I can guarantee you
I'd have the best people doing
the best thing.
Giving the best go by possibly
could.
I like your, uh, you know, I'm
I'm OK with your, your, your
amendment that you're trying to,
you know, perform, but you know
it's the, the, the.
Understanding of basic
economics.
For me is how you understand
supply and demand.
I understand.
The things that cause how you
come up with GDP.
And it's basic things like how
do you, how, what is inflation,
unemployment, how does all this
have a part in this retail sales
consumer confidence, trade data,
interest rates permitting and
industrial production, those are
just your basic stuff that you
have to have and then what
happens, Mr. Speaker, I'll close
because I want, uh, we need to
move on, but what happens is
this.
To the body we're talking about
we're asking a uh 3 people to
have a conversation with as
experts with other experts, you
have to have at least some basic
understanding of some of this
stuff.
Um, I can talk to you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, about
embalming.
In the chemistry of embalming.
And I can talk to you or, or
how, what our work and how it
works with the health department
and so forth. I can talk about
uh other things that I, I'm real
good at banking and other stuff,
but you're not gonna get it and
we all know that because we all
are experts at what we know.
But we don't all know everything
about everything else. So, but
when you're asking for a panel
to understand what they're about
this situation, right? We're
giving them a scope of work.
You wanna make sure that they
have at least that basic
understanding, so you know I,
I've had those conversations
before with people and, and, and
sometimes I I get across to them
by saying look you're trying to
explain something to me.
If you can explain it to me
you're gonna, you're gonna kind
of work slow a little bit
because I don't understand this.
Uh, it would be like if I turn
around and try to explain to you
the chemistry of embalming in in
5 minutes you're not gonna get
it, so the point that I'm making
is we want somebody.
That understands this, so I, I,
I think a basic economics 101 it
is, it's not that you're asking
to take the course. I think they
should already have the course
when they take it. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Serrato.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from Chavez Eri in
Otero County's yield.
I yield to the kind lady from
maybe the Santa Fe and something
else. Santa Fe.
Y'all have a lot there you go
just said. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen. I, I
appreciate this discussion. I'm
curious because you, you said
you're taking some economics
classes as well. Do you know the
concept of Economan out of
curiosity, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, if
you're trying to say my economic
classes would qualify me for
this, they would not, but I
would be smart enough not to
apply, so no, I do not, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this wasn't
a pop quiz. I'm not gonna ask
you for a regression or
something like that, we're good.
No, the, the concept ofconoman
is, is kind of a funny topic in
economics classes and um and it
makes me, it makes me laugh
because it's this idea that if
everyone operated like they're
supposed to, according to
economics, that would be acono
man, and he would do everything
according to the rules. But as
we know, human behavior doesn't
follow the rules of economics.
In fact, there's a lot of things
that play into it. You look at a
lot of different economic
theories and they, you know, you
kind of come back to this idea
of, um, like luxury items,
what's considered a luxury item,
like why does that do the
opposite of what supply and
demand is supposed to do and,
and full, and just to be fair to
you, to be fully honest, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I just got
out of my, I got my MBA two
years ago. So this stuff is real
fresh in my mind in that sense.
And so, from my perspective, I,
I appreciate the intent of, of
where you're going with this.
But in my mind, I'm curious why
we don't
had at least a basic course in
psychology, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, because that to me
may make sense, right? You we
could create a more rounded
understanding of what's
happening in the market. Why
would we not include that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, as well.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, I
would be happy to amend my
amendment to include it because
I do see what you're saying. I
mean, when I'm talking to my
daughter who is in college right
now for psychology and the stuff
she understands on how things
impacted, it is very interesting
to me, but I think that's kind
of my point is we have to
understand how things work on a
higher level than just our
expertise, and I think that's
what, uh, the, the former
speaker or former gentleman was
talking about.
We're very good as as earlier,
my father-in-law is probably one
of the greatest farmers I know,
and then we can all say that,
right? But I really am, I think
he's a, he's an incredible
farmer and rancher, and he
understands cattle. He
understands when to feed them.
He understands all the things he
understands about them.
But I don't know that he would
be the expert on how that
affects us globally and so.
To your point, I think
psychology does ask that same
question of how does this affect
us on a global thing, um, we
could add a lot of that, but
from prior debate, that probably
wouldn't go well, um, so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, gentlemen,
I apologize. I'm just repeating
you. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
you know what, no, I understand
that I, I guess that gets to
kind of where I'm, I'm getting
to in general, that there are a
lot of components that affect
this. Uh, I keep hearing the
word expert thrown around a lot
in this amendment debate, and I
will say, and I think we all
agree, taking one class in
undergraduate in economics does
not make one an expert and it
and it for my concern is that it
creates a false sense of
security that there is something
being produced out of here that
it wouldn't be.
In fact, I would, I'm actually
more concerned if all you have
is a basic level of economics,
because how global business
works doesn't work like my
economics book freshman year
taught me. Um, how the market
state to state work, um, you
know, within North America,
that, that is a different thing,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. The
other aspect that that concerns
me also is that there are a lot
of different schools of thought
when it comes to economics. And,
you know, depending on what
decade you were born in and
whatever, you know, the
government at any various time
is, you know, it's kind of um
um, following one school of
thought over another, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I.
I'm concerned also the idea that
is there just one school of
thought that will, um, overrun.
I is there a school of thought
that we'd hope would would take
the lead in this discussion, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, from
your perspective, is there
something, and I'm not trying to
put it on the spot. I am just
curious if there is a direction
that you would hope that would
kind of take the lead on it, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no
nothing that I want
particularly. What I want is
when the report is is presented
to us that it is complete as
possible and to your point
earlier, I agree with you. I
think if you have, to me, I
would like to go further. If you
have just the basic economic
101, you might not get it. So I
would like even more than that.
Um, so to your, I, I think
you're correct on that. I do
think we should have somebody on
there that understands more than
just the basic of economics,
which is what I'm asking for at
least have.
basics because I think when
we're we're starting to put
these puzzle pieces together as
I've said a number of times, I
want to make sure we understand
on a whole, and if we don't
understand on a whole, then how
are we going to.
Right policy based on what that
report says. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
And, and I, I see your point,
but I, I do see your point in a,
in a different avenue, and I
want to do a plug right now for
the UNM School of Economics
because every year, their
graduating PD PhD, PhD class
will do, will just, you know,
discuss their work and they run
the regressions on whatever
policies that we've been
implementing or changes that
they've been seeing happening
and then you get a specific
economic analysis and a specific
regression and, and they may not
be
fully conclude, but they do show
you, you know, the relationships
between the A and B, um, you
know, we, we talked a bit about
it in childcare last year. It's
a great presentation. I suggest
everyone attends it because that
is an economic analysis, but how
I, I'm I understanding of the
commission is, is different. And
I do see it similar to what our
expertise is here, right? We're
uh masters of none, uh, you
know, familiar with a lot. And
that I think empowers it more
because otherwise, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, why wouldn't we just
have AI run an analysis on
what's affecting the, you know,
grocery prices. OK.
computer can tell me, but a
computer can't tell me, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, how it would
affect
an individual parts of our
state. How it might have affect
it could tell me a little bit of
the history, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, but it could not tell
me how that related on a human
level, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
So, what I think this commission
brings and and what I would hate
to reduce from it is that
Collection and understanding
and, and empathy overall, and I
wouldn't want to bog it down
with a requirement of, of entry
level anything, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that may not be
related. So while I do
appreciate the intent of this,
uh, of, of this, uh, amendment I
unfortunately cannot be
supporting it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
There is further debate on the
amendment that gentle lady from
South Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the kind
lady from.
Santa Fe?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am
from Santa Fe. Thanks, um,
super, I think you hit a tone
here for a lot of people and
maybe some PTSD from economics
courses for those who took them,
um, but just kind of looking at
those who are in school today,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are you
aware of how many people are
enrolled in an economics class
today in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no, I
did not look that up, but I
would assume the bulk of, of
anybody that's gonna go to
college and get any kind of
college degree, typically
there's an economic class within
that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, based on
the data from the um higher
education department, that's
actually not the case. Um, you
know, I know we're trying to
increase financial literacy,
etc. at the high school level,
but at the university level
right now, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there are only about
5100 students enrolled right now
in an economics course in fall
2024, um, from, from just last
semester, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do you know how many
students we have enrolled
overall in the state of New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, General Letty, I
don't, but I would ask a little
bit more to expand on your
question. How many degrees
within the college require a
basic economic 101 to graduate,
so they might not be enrolled
today, but does, does their
degree require it? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think part of that
question is just understanding
enrollment today and then of
course across the span of your
entire university, um, course of
education, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is just ensuring that
at any given
point in time, you know, we're
trying to get this commission
together this year, um, and only
4% out of 115,000 students right
now, uh, 5100 are there enrolled
in economics today, so only 4%,
4 out of 100 students, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, would be
qualified, um, to be able to
perhaps be on this commission.
Was that your intent with this,
um.
With this amendment, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, to sort of
eliminate 96 out of 100 people
from possibly be part, being a
part of this commission. Mr.
Speaker, no, but I'm also in the
amendment. I didn't say they had
to graduate this year. And so I
would think if we took a look at
the last 1020 years of graduates
from NMSU, UNM as we just heard
there are world class, uh, UNM
group maybe that's who we should
give this study to is UNM and
have them do the study during
the semester. We did that.
NMSU, uh, we took a restaurant
took a study, made a market plan
for them and presented it to
them. So we do apparently have a
lot of world class, um.
Economics coming out of our
schools and I'm saying not just
this year, but over the course
of their career or they could
take, have taken an online
course to understand how basic
economics work.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. I think the
unfortunate sort of bar raised
here isn't actually the
familiarity that we're looking
for for students that have that
familiarity. I'm not aware of a
qualification even to sit on the
appropriations committee where
we passed a $10.8 billion bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. Do you,
are you aware of any
qualifications to be a
legislator, um, here in New
Mexico that require anything
economics related.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe you, the qualification
would be you're elected, so
you're an elected body, which
means the folks who elected you
assumed you could take that
responsibility.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you have
to be 25 years old. You have to
be a citizen of New Mexico and a
US citizen, and that's about it,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and so
you can be the chairman of the
appropriations or chairwoman or
chairperson of the
appropriations Committee passed
an 8 $10.8 billion dollar budget
and never have taken an
economics course, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so when
we're looking for folks who
understand the price of eggs,
who understand the price of, um,
everything under the sun when
it.
comes to buying a box of cereal,
making a salad, making ends
meet, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
you know, you don't need
qualifications to be on the
price is right. If you're in a
grocery store, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know what the
price of groceries is and you
know how hard that hits the hits
the bank account today, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we look at
what's happening with this
commission that experience in
and of itself and serving in
this legislature as we
understand the bar is about
being part of the community.
It's about understanding.
what folks are going through,
um, the threshold that you're
asking for here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think does not meet
the demand of what people
understand about what's hitting
their pocketbooks about
affordability and about
accessibility for the very basic
needs, which is just being able
to feed themselves and their
family affordably healthy food,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I
cannot, um, support your
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Joan lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House floor amendment number 2
to House Bill 17 as amended.
There's a motion before the body
table House floor amendment
number 1 to house.
Number 20, I'm sorry, my
apologies, number 2. The House
Bill 17 as amended with the
emergency clause, a vote of yes
and the amendment will be tabled
a vote of no, and the amendment
will not be tabled. The vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 31 in the affirmative, 22 in
the negative, House floor
amendment number 2 to House Bill
17 as amended with an emergency
clause has been tabled.
gentleman used to have the
floor.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, uh, body for the debate,
um.
I hope, uh, unfortunately I
won't be able to support this
bill, uh, mainly because, as we
said earlier, uh, I definitely
want to raise the bar. I think
that's important when we're
doing studies, uh, that are
going to affect policy for the
state of New Mexico to me, I
don't want the bare minimum
qualities I would like to raise
the bar and make sure that we
are including every expert that
we can find so that as we're
putting a very good robust
report together, um.
We have the best information we
can to write policy with that,
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
There is further debate on the
bill, uh, the gentle lady from
Borneo, Representative Chavez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, do you yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you so much and I know
there's been a lot of debate on
this commission that we're
putting together and so when I
was reading through this bill, I
would wonder if one of the
reasons that groceries are so
expensive and driving up costs,
especially here in New Mexico
and our district in Albuquerque
may be the out of control crime
and shoplifting that we're
seeing. I know that retail crime
has skyrocketed stores right
now.
are having to lock up basic
necessities, they're having to
pay for private security and in
some cases shut down completely.
I'm sure you're aware the
Walmart on Central and I believe
is it Wyoming or no San Mateo
had to recently shut their doors
and so there are members in the
international district that are
looking for other options to
shop. Um, I know that where I'm
at, even on Paseo in Wyoming at
Smith's, they
now have that large beam light
in the parking lot because
there's been so many theft, um,
they have an entrance blocked
off on one of the entrances
after 6 p.m. because there's
been so many shoplifters and
then um people are stealing
right in front of you. I know
I've been in line.
And people are stealing whether
it's alcohol or groceries, and
they don't even chase them
anymore because they're stating
that it's so dangerous. I think
I remember even reading um a
newspaper article that the
governor um was quoted in saying
in the last 24 months, she
hasn't been in a retail store
where there was somebody
shoplifting while she was
actually there, um, so with
that, um, on page 2, I know,
same, same area.
that we're looking at when we're
looking at commission I have an
amendment and I hope that it's
friendly.
And I'd like to call a roll
call.
You will have a roll call book.
We're locating it.
Rick
R
gentle lady, we do have a copy
of.
OK. Yes, it's gonna get passed
out, yeah.
gentle lady, if you could please
identify the 231 number.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, 0231975.1 and
if you would be kind to move the
amendment, please.
OK, I move house floor amendment
number 3 to House Bill 17 as
amended?
Thank you gentle lady. Uh, we
will wait till it gets passed
out.
lady, it looks like the bill,
the amendment has been passed
out generally to explain the
amendment.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, if you look
On page 2, line 1 after the
comma.
Insert, and one of whom shall be
a lost prevention specialist.
When we're referring to the
commission members.
gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you gentle lady, so, um, I
have a couple of questions.
Um, if I may.
Can you describe who is a loss
prevention specialist.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
loss prevention specialists are
employed by store owners to
limit their losses from theft by
discouraging legal behavior and
apprehending anyone attempting
to steal products. Their role is
to hold people accountable for
the damage they caused to the
company through vandalism or
stolen items. There are various
activities are aimed at reducing
financial loss from theft.
In a retail environment, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um.
How many can you tell me how
many loss prevention
specialists, you know that we
might have.
I cannot give you an exact
number, but I know that at the
stores.
Just in my district alone when
we're talking about Walgreens
and Smith's and Albertson's.
There are loss prevention
specialists at each of those
locations.
Thank you. um.
And I'm wondering, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
this might this area might be
accomplished, I think, uh, um.
By someone.
Maybe in a rather than a with a
specific title I do get where
you're going, but with this
someone in the retail grocery
industry be someone who can
contribute those ideas in a more
broad way.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no, I
believe that would be separate
because these individuals
specifically are for retail
theft, and I think um knowing
that you share my Bernalillo
County district retail theft has
skyrocketed and grocery stores
are included in retail theft.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it um.
And thinking about this, the uh
that information that data
actually would be held by the
retailers.
Would it not
A crime specialists are the Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, crime
specialists are the experts in
this area, so I guess I don't
understand your question or
statement.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
do these individuals work for
the real retailers themselves is
that what I'm understanding?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
would seem that the retailer
could contribute that knowledge.
To this commission.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do you
have a retailer in this
commission? I did not see that
on the list.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
that was actually discussed and
then um.
Did not happen, so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, then I
think that this is needed since
there're since there isn't a
retailer listed in this
commission.
General lady, is this a friendly
amendment? No, Mr. Speaker.
Is there a debate on the
amendment?
The gentle lady from Chavez
Curry and Roosevelt
Representative Ree. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Well, the gentle
lady from Berna Leo yield.
Yes, gentle lady, I'll Yale.
I really like this idea,
especially, um, you've explained
to the body that the definition
of retail is included in
groceries and am I understanding
that correct, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is correct.
And you talked about uh the
definition of a loss prevention
specialist. I think sometimes,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
call them loss prevention
officers, but specifically, can
you tell us a little bit more
about what they do, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what
they do is they're employed by
the individual retailers or
groceries themselves and they
are there to discourage.
And apprehend um sometimes the
retail theft.
Offenders in the store, um, as
you know, I think.
This is one of the reasons why,
especially in my district every
single thing is locked up. I
can't go to Walgreens. I can't
go to Smith's. I can't go to
Albertson's without having to
press a button and wait quite a
while because everything is
locked up due to retail theft.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
let's go back a session or two
when the, do you recall a bill
passing the retail theft bill.
Do you recall that bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I do
recall that.
Bill, I remember watching the
session that year and reading
all about it. And can you
explain a little bit to the body
for some of the people that may
not have been here. Why was that
bill so important and with what
was going on across the state,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I was not
here, but as I recall, I believe
that was passed and it was so
important, um, because our
retail theft was skyrocketing.
There were grocery stores and
other stores across the state.
that we're having to close their
doors, due to the amount of
theft that that individuals were
facing and owners of stores
across the state.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
and you may not know this, and
you can tell me if you do. If
not, I, I, I probably can help
you answer this. Are you aware
that based on that passing of
the law that there are retail
theft organizations that have
retail theft specialist officers
in committees all over the state
now because of that bill?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes, I
do remember hearing a little bit
about it. I know it had um
bipartisan support. Can you
explain that just a little bit
because I wasn't here at the
time. Uh, well, based on after
that bill passed, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I actually sit on
the one in my county, um, where
different retailers, um, from
whether it's groceries or, or
stores, law enforcement and
different agencies loss
prevention officers or
specialists, as you're calling
them in your bill, we actually
have a.
committee that meets um I think
quarterly all together across
the whole state of New Mexico to
discuss the problems that are
happening in different areas
with retail theft and all these
different um these different
areas and how we can deal with
them so it's actually expanded,
um, in order to fight this
issue, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
So again, I sit on one of those
committees and this stuff is
addressed all the time based on
that law that was had bipartisan
support, I believe when we
passed it. Um, were you aware
that that was happening?
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
was not aware of everything that
was happening across the state
with the different, um,
committees, one that you belong
to, so that is really
interesting. So clearly retail
theft is a very big and
important issue in this state.
And when we talk, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady about retail
theft in the how it would impact
um.
The grocery part of this, um.
Have you ever seen you, you talk
some about some personal
examples that you saw, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my,
myself, um, over the years in
the job that I've done, um, I've
seen, uh, Mr. Speaker General
Lady people push out carts of
groceries and do these beer runs
and all these different things
and it it is a big problem I
think in all areas of the state,
um, and so.
What do you believe happens, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when
grocers are faced with these
high um shoplifting types of
crimes as retail theft that
happens in grocery stores as far
as pricing like we're discussing
in this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's when owners have to
increase their prices across the
board because they have to share
the loss that they're facing and
so that was one of my reasons in
wanting to put a prevention
specialist into the commission
because when owners of stores
are having to eat the prices of
the loss every single day,
multiple times a day on
groceries, alcohol, whatever.
it is that they're stealing at
that grocery store, they're
definitely gonna have to end up
raising the prices across the
board on everything else. And
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would think this would apply and
especially smaller areas with
smaller grocery stores in
addition to these larger chains,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
would you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would agree with that. I think
actually in the more rural areas
or smaller towns, they don't
have sometimes the same
technology that bigger cities
like Albuquerque would have when
it comes to the beam lights and
security and the specialist
across the store, so yes.
Um, and that's why I really
support adding this um
specialist to this commission,
um, they have specialized
experience in how to deal with
these situations just from
sitting on this committee I can
tell that they can work with the
retailers in order to um reduce
the theft in these stores, which
would in turn make sure that
grocery prices aren't raised on
people across the state, uh,
because of theft because uh Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I think
it's been discussed among.
his body many times there are a
lot of contributing factors to
why groceries go up, and I
believe this is one of them and
so, um, I love this amendment
because I think we're putting
somebody who really understands
what's happening in the stores,
um, criminally, which raises the
cost of groceries on this
committee, um, I, I support this
amendment fullheartedly. I, I
don't know why anybody in here
would not support it. Uh, it
just makes common sense,
especially Mr. Chair and gentle
lady.
the whole push for this retail
crime theft provision where we
all knew this was a huge problem
across the state and while Mr.
Speaker, generally, we are
dealing with it, I think in a
good way with the bill that was
passed and the committees that
are being done this would add um
a really unique perspective to
this situation that we're trying
to deal with um, with the
groceries. So I will be
supporting this amendment and I
thank you for bringing it. I
think it's a great amendment and
with that I'll yield, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Chavez Edrian Otero,
Representative Henry.
Oh, Paul, my, my apologies,
Hall.
Mr. Speaker, in San Juan County,
but I appreciate you comparing
me to a man 20 years younger
than me. Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, a gentle lady
yield. I yield.
I do support this, uh, gentle
lady. I, as I
Kind of thought back on my
career in law enforcement.
One of the reasons you have a
retail specialist, the retail
specialist's job is to go and
look at losses throughout the
store. Have you ever heard of
the term shrink?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Well, for the body, I'll define
it since you, I'm lucky enough,
you know it, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, shrinka term is a term
used by the National Retail
Federation describes inventory
losses caused by theft.
Operational or process mistakes
and systemic errors.
The reason this is important
Is they go and they look through
how these losses are occurring.
It's not just shoplifting or
internal theft. It's a
combination of things.
So
recording um accordingly.
The grocery, the grocery sector
is the one that has the greatest
average shrink rates.
As food and beverage continue to
be a top item targeted by the
aforementioned by Representative
Reed, the organized crime retail
groups which do exist.
They come in and they take it.
Who
Lots
And so for a grocery store in
and of itself to operate this
type of a program is not
realistic, so they hire.
Retail
Specialists who watch this
they're the theft specialists,
they become aware of where the
cameras are, where they need to
be. They watch the inventory and
a lot of times that's what leads
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, to
the locking down of our retail
stores.
Grocery stores most commonly
operate on a 1% profit margin.
So for theft in a grocery store,
that equates to about, they must
recover $100 for every $1 worth
of shoplifted inventory.
Every community in the state of
New Mexico is faced with this.
The, we have two Walmarts in the
city of Farmington, they each
average over $1.3 million lost
per year.
Just in the Walmart. That does
not include Target.
The Sams or any other of those
stores, they have full time
specialists in teams of
specialists who watch what's
happened. They watch the trends,
the trends exist. Santa Fe
reported in 2024 shoplifting in
the capital city of the of New
Mexico was up 33%. Were you
aware of that gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, no, I'm not, and that's a
little shocking, especially
here.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the total retail losses in 2022.
Um
They lost over $513 million in
the state of New Mexico, which
is 26.2 million lost in tax
revenue alone.
Did you know that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I did
not.
gentlemen.
At this point in the session you
cannot offend me, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um
A study by the National
Association of Shoplifting
Prevention.
states that some retailers may
raise prices by up to 20% to
compensate for theft, and that
was a study done as late as
September 4th of 2024.
So in compensating and raising
those prices.
I can see how this 20% would be
passed on to the consumer. Would
you not agree?
Gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, that
is.
Surprising and I'm glad that you
have that factual information,
because like we stated, this
does a lot of factors play into
the increased prices, and I knew
that theft was one of them,
especially because it's such an
issue in my county, so thank you
so much for pointing that out.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I can't emphasize enough that
when we look at this, if we
could put a person such as this
on a commission, they bring a
different perspective. They
bring the perspective of, of not
just the other factors which are
real, which have been mentioned,
drought, uh, energy, whatever
the case may be.
Theft is so over the top
throughout the entire state of
New Mexico, much less throughout
the United States. Those costs
are passed on to us as
consumers. So in, uh, I just
wanna let you know how much I
support this amendment. I
appreciate you bringing this
amendment forward, and I yield,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady.
Thank you. There is further the
gentle lady.
from
Donana Sierra and Socorra
Representative, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Does the gentle lady.
I yelled to my friend from Donna
Anna. OK, I'm just, I'm, I'm
just gonna get us back on the
purpose of this bill because I
feel like, you know, in the
conversations we've gotten so
far off, just just reading the
title, Creating the commission
on the reduction of grocery
costs.
Requiring a study of the cost of
groceries and requiring report
with findings and
recommendations by November 15th
of 2025. Making an appropriation
and declaring an emergency. I
had to go back and I had to look
at it again because it felt like
the purpose was to have
community members come together
and talk about how they feel
about grocery prices. But Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, this is
indeed to appoint commissioners
and give them a title of
appointed by the state, and I
just want to make sure that I
wasn't
this wrong, it wasn't a
community organizing or coming
together to discuss how we feel
or shame or what it is like to
live in poverty, but I have
experienced, um,
But we're actually creating a
commission we're giving people a
title and authority under the
state of New Mexico and our,
our, our, our authority as
lawmakers, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, is that how you
understand it?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
that's exactly how I understand
it and looking, like you said,
just at the title and the
conversations that we're having,
we need an input from every
aspect of why we need a
reduction in grocery costs
because they have increased so
high, I just thought that this
would be an easy addition
because as Representative Hall
stated, 20% is a lot and just
because of retail theft.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I mean, I agree with you. I
mean, if
I have had Socorro County, uh,
knock doors. I learned that a
little over a year ago, they
lost their general store, their
their Dollar General, and the
purpose that it, the reason that
it closed was for theft. And I
can understand that. uh, Dollar
General sort of are known for
being affordable. And so the
prices are the same in all
stores across the United States.
So if you're in a town like
Socorro, it closed because of
theft. That was the reported
reason. And you don't have
scale, the volume and the scale
of operations.
To recoup that 20% lost, and you
have a 2 to 5% markup, there,
you can't make ends meet and
your doors closed and that's
what happened, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and just last
month, the Dollar Tree, I should
say the dollar 25 cents tree in
Socorro also closed.
And that closed also because of
theft.
And I would go in there and, um,
there would be people outside
that were asking for help, or
would you buy me this or buy you
that? And I did and I was
checking out and the the cashier
said, we're closing our store. I
hope you're not buying for the
people outside that are asking
you to get stuff for them
because they run in here and
steal stuff all the time, and
I'm losing my job. Again, $1.25
they have some exceptions to
that now and that store too. But
if you set your price at $1.25.
That's a price fix.
And then you have theft.
That proceeds, that, that
exceeds your profit, you close
your doors and people lose their
jobs. So, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I
I'm, I'm, I'm just sort of
I don't even know how to
understand that your amendment
isn't friendly, especially if
you and the sponsor live in an
area with high crime, retail
theft.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
thank you. I agree, and I
thought especially because
myself and one of the
co-sponsors have Bernalillo
County and the Walmart on San
Mateo and Central just closed
that district is really hurting
right now to find um a store
retail somewhere where they can
buy their groceries or essential
needs, um, and, and they're
really looking for that and
nobody's wanting to open the
doors because there's such a
problem with crime and
homelessness in that area right
now. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you,
gentlemen, and, and they'll
refer to these as grocery
desserts.
And, and I mean, I would think
that it would take people with
expertise to come together over
a summer and to give us a report
by fall on why it's happening.
I, I also wonder if there's
other studies that have been
done in other states that we
could just look at and get a
report or do a study, but this
one is actually a $400,000 price
tag for taxpayers, and on this
commission, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we are
not going to have anybody who
has
experience on loss prevention,
we're not gonna have anybody who
has that has assured, a certain,
uh, that we're assured has
experience in economics and
we're not gonna have anybody who
is a retailer, a retail grocer
on this commission. I'm
Sounds like a community
gathering to me, um, other
people say that taxes are theft,
but inefficient use of taxpayer
funds are certainly something I
can't vote for. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but I will
support your amendment.
There is further debate on the
amendment that young lady from
Donana and Totero Representative
Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, does
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield?
Yes, I.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, can you cite your
sources for shoplifting
contributing to rising food
prices.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
was actually Representative Hall
that was reading it to us, so
I'm sure he could share that
with you after the debate.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I'm also just
wondering like why someone would
need to shoplift food, um, or
baby formula and for me I, I
would agree that um I don't
wanna live in a state where
people are having to steal food
to feed their families, and I'm
wondering if having a role like
this on the commission might
lead to policies or
recommendations that might
criminalize people for trying to
feed their families, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
actually think that it might do
the opposite because if somebody
is in there that's looking day
in and day out and especially
seeing what types of people are.
Are making the thefts is it
maybe a teenager that wants to
steal alcohol or is it really
somebody based on the zip codes
based on the stores, based on
lower income maybe are they just
coming in here to get ramen
noodles? Are they stealing beans
or are they stealing treats. I
mean, it could be, are we
looking at statistics? Is it
teenagers or is it somebody
maybe from a family, a mom
trying to steal food, they will
have the history and statistics
and I actually think that it
could help.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I, I do think this
amendment might take away from
the central, um, intent of the
bill in terms of looking at a
broader sense of what is causing
a rising food prices, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, are you
familiar with the recent attempt
to merge the two supermarket
giants, Kroger and Albertson's.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes, I
am.
Um, that's awesome. Not many
people are, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then are you
familiar with the testimony from
the Kroger executive?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't recall the exact
testament, but does that have to
do with this amendment?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady, it
does because the senior director
for pricing, Andy Grof was
questioned about this exact
thing by the Federal Trade
Commission, uh, and in an email
where he admits that the grocery
store chain um set prices that
were above inflation rates and
so, um, and, and that they were
basically price gouging and so
I'm wondering if um someone in
this role would also bring
uh, that analysis to a
commission like this where we
look at big corporations that
are making record profits from
uh uh from artificially raising
prices on certain items, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
they would probably just stick
to the theft, um, what's
happening with theft, what
they're stealing, and I'd like
to add, um, Representative Dow
did state that two of her dollar
General stores which I'm.
Almost a 99% positive definitely
doesn't price gouge with those
prices is included in having to
close their doors due to theft.
Thank you for that Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because um in 2023,
Walgreens admitted that they
might have cried wolf a little
too hard, um, in closing their
stores and um blaming that on
theft when actually uh it was
their own um budget setting and
said, you know what, we might
have hired too much security and
put in too many security
measures, uh, that were an over
response to uh potential theft
in their stores and that's what
caused
Their stores to close, um, in
the Bay Area and so um I'm
wondering if you are aware of
that admit from uh if you're
aware of Walgreens admitting
that a couple of years ago, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I am
not aware of, of Walgreens doing
that, but I am aware of again
all our Walmart closing on
Central and San Mateo and their
main reason was because of
theft.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I will
tell you that I do know that
corporate profits from inflation
have increased 53% from April to
September of 2023. 53% of
profits coming out of
corporations are from them
artificially increasing prices
beyond inflation
we could please stick to the
amendment, please. Yes. Thank
you. Um, and so, um, I think
that and in the past 40 years,
it was 11%. And so,
Um, and as it refers to this
amendment, I think someone is
stealing but it's not who we
think it is. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker, Janet Lady.
Thank you. There is further
debate. The gentleman from
Catherine Grant and Hidalgo
Hidalgo represented Terazas.
Speaker with the gentle lady
please shield?
I yield to my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you know, so what I did
is.
I call my local grocery store
not, not a, not a corporate
grocery store. I just literally
was on the phone when when you
called on me.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and I,
and I asked him.
I said, uh.
What, so what's your, what's
going on here? Are you seeing an
uptick in in theft, he goes, yes
sir. I said, what is it
generally?
He says, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, he says it's been about a
1.5% is what we had always
experienced and now we're up to
3%.
Now I think of what 3% is, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this, this
is, this is what's hard.
If you've never had a business,
you don't understand how how at
the end of the day how small
your margins really are after
you.
You know, after you, you, you
get your, your revenue and then
you gross, uh, uh, net and then
after you pay all your expenses
and if you take care of your
people properly, um, and you,
and you pay them fair.
And so forth it gets down pretty
thin.
In grocery stores, Mr. Speaker,
I asked him.
What is your margin?
What's your overall margin?
He says 2.5%.
So when you see a grocery.
A cart full of full of
groceries, his margin after he
pays all his expenses and
everything, it's 2.5%.
He's they're up to 3.
in loss. He goes, he's
struggling.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I asked him what are they
stealing from you?
Are you stealing the ramen
noodles?
What are they stealing?
He says they are stealing
usually liquor.
And the, the meat department
and, and meat I don't need meat
department.
I said what are they stealing?
Are they stealing the, the, uh,
ground beef, he goes, no,
they're stealing the rib eyes
and T-bones.
If we could please stick to the
amendment, please.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thank
you very much. I'm just trying
to make a point, Mr. Speaker,
that that it it is I I I I
understand it's a, it's an
important part of the of the
whole structure of us
understanding what that does to
to stores.
And again, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I'm not trying to
make this. I don't even want to
make this political. This is
just a matter of fact we need to
get a good scope of what we're
doing.
And at the end of the day, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen,
Or gentle lady, what's happening
is the more stores that closed
down.
The higher your, the possibility
of your um.
Of theft and and your loss
prevention numbers start going
up.
You're gonna offset that by
raising your prices.
You have to
You, you, you don't have a
choice, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
If you want to stay in business
you gotta raise your price.
Just stay in business and um you
know that's saying that nothing
happens wrong, Mr. Speaker
gentle lady that your freezer
doesn't break.
That you don't have to replace
the flooring that you don't have
a leak in your roof.
That's just a just in running
down the road and, and, and
keeping keeping the doors open.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I just
appreciate that you're what
you're doing and I, you know,
and I hear the debate it's
getting kind of, well, I, I,
it's a little lot bigger than
what I thought it would turn
into, but, um, you know, I want
the studium uh you know it
sounds good, but it just, when
we start stifling it like this
and narrowing it too much, it's,
it's, it's frustrating because I
do want this to be an effective
study to help, uh, give, give us
a good give us good guidance I
thinkloss prevention is part of
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
There is further debate on the
amendment representative from,
uh, the gentle lady from Bernard
Leo Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield? I yield.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what is the education slash
qualifications for a um.
What the person that you're
suggesting on the committee.
Sometimes it's law enforcement
history, um, I don't know the
specifics. I could probably look
it up for you if you want to
give me a second and gentle
lady, I actually have it to
become a loss prevention
specialist, a high school
diploma or equivalent is
typically required along with
strong observational and
communication skills.
Mr. Speaker, generally, that's
great because we were just
opposing a degree from a
college, so that's great that
they don't need one. They just
really look at theft and loss
prevention as a whole.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, our loss prevention
specialist people who have
expertise in consumer
protection.
That was one of the um included
recommendations on, on the
duties of loss prevention
specialists, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
not sure what that means.
I can reread you the definition,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
you'd like.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
please.
They are employed by store
owners to limit their losses
from theft by discouraging legal
behavior and apprehending anyone
attempting to steal products.
Their role is to hold people
accountable for the damage they
cause and the company through
vandalism or stolen products,
they're involved in various
activities aimed at reducing
financial loss from theft and
fraud and retail environment
they're responsible for
accountability of that activity.
So Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady, um.
To me it sounds almost like
they're security guards as
opposed to someone who would
have data.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
because security guards do also
work at a lot of these stores.
This is a prevention law
specialist and I actually think
that Representative Hall made
some good examples of what these
roles are responsible for and
and and what they do.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I just can't support this. I, I
don't believe that, uh, a loss
prevention loss prevention
specialist has the um.
Qualifications and knowledge
base. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you. There is further
debate. The gentlemen from
Lincoln Otero Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a gentle
lady yield.
I yield
Gentle lady
I wasn't gonna speak.
But
I like your amendment.
And the reason I like your
amendment is because this is
literally impacted me
personally.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this happened in Otero County.
And I was at a store, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady,
I saw two individuals walk into
the store.
And start stealing stuff.
Normally
We would
Try to keep them from doing
that, but, you know, we
nowadays, they say that, you
know, a little bit of stuff is
not worth your life.
Or the lawsuits or anything.
And Mister Speaker and gentle
lady, I observed these two
individuals start to steal.
And law enforcement was called.
And they had.
The employees, they didn't have
a loss prevention specialist.
The employees tried to stop
these individuals.
And it ended up
In an altercation.
So I decided to not get
involved.
Until I heard what was going on
in the supply room in the back.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
The reason that that produce.
And, and things are up so much
is because.
They're right. If you lose so
much, you have to balance
everything out and sometimes you
have to charge it to the
consumer.
And this, this individual you're
talking about, uh, a loss
prevention specialist, it might
be real hard to even find one
after seeing what I saw because
because I heard the yelling and
the screaming going on in the
back room. I went back there and
watched an individual and it's
on tape.
Watched an individual punch.
A 70 year old woman 3 times in
the face.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
because I am a gentleman. I
didn't worry about that.
And guess who won?
The good guys won on that one.
And the police showed up.
They took that gentleman to
jail.
And they, they didn't get the
other one until the next day at
noon, but the one that they had
arrested,
was already out of jail by the
time they picked up the other
one.
So every, I think everybody
ought to get
A loss prevention specialist and
they should be trained in some
kind of a law enforcement, not
maybe, maybe not just a high
school diploma and, you know, be
able to take the job on, or at
least take some kind of
self-defense or how to take
people down because that is
exactly what we're dealing with,
and that's why I'm going to
support your amendment.
Thank you. There is further
debate on the amendment. The
gentleman from Chavez.
Eddie and Lee Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Burnley Yield.
I yelled.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I too was
sitting here and hadn't really
planned on speaking on this, but
I really like your amendment.
It brought to mind things that I
hadn't really realized.
Gentle lady, uh, Mr. Speaker.
I
While I was waiting, I was
looking, I looked some stuff up
on my laptop here.
know what the most 5
stolen items are from grocery
stores according to
Surveys
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't.
According to the survey, I was
just reading and it's still on
my screen here.
Sadly enough, baby formula was
the number one item.
As to us
representative Rossa said, meet
and seafood, the high priced
cuts are #2 on the list.
Cheese was number 3.
Spirits, alcohol, uh, and, you
know, was, was next.
And last on the list, so it must
be women stay on as cosmetics.
But, uh, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh
Oh
It also had a survey on there
what arrested shoplifters.
What types of
businesses they targeted mostly.
Do you know what they are gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, I
don't. Could you please let me
know what that is.
6% were grocery stores, they
claimed were the easiest to
shoplift from.
So,
uh, with that said, gentle lady.
This bill makes perfect sense if
we're trying to reduce the cost
of our grocery items, not just
in New Mexico, but
This is, these were nationwide
surveys.
Uh, gentle lady,
Uh
Mr. Speaker.
Just a little.
Inside on the, on the steps on
the specialist that you're
wanting to put on the board.
Uh
What did you say their
qualifications were?
They need law enforcement
officers, retired law
enforcement officers
specializing in theft, and I
believe um Representative
Thompson read off the rest.
Yes, yes, she did that, uh.
lady, Mr. Speaker, why?
Do you think that you were
talking about everything locked
up in your, in your stores. We
all experienced that. It's, it's
horrible to walk in there,
you're gonna get one little
item, you get in the store and
it's under lock and key and you
have to ring a buzzer or go get
somebody or something.
Uh
The reason that most of that
stuff is locked up is because of
the people you're talking about.
The lost the specialist.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker.
Do you agree that, would you
agree to that assumption?
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman,
yes, the reason things are
locked up, um, especially I know
in Albuquerque, um, because
there are so many thefts and the
store can't keep up with it, um,
so they're having to lock every
single thing up. So yes, you
can't even run into a Walgreens
real quick to grab one thing
because you're waiting for 10
minutes for them to unlock the
little clear.
Shelf, so that you could get
detergent. So it's very
unfortunate.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, I would also like to
say,
When Walmart locked something up
in Albuquerque.
What do you think they do in
Artesian New Mexico at their
Walmart stores.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman,
probably the same thing.
Yes, I mean, the chain stores
hire these specialists for their
loss prevention.
And I implement these rules and
regulations in every
store that they have.
So
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, I
would say that probably in our
art theft is not as great.
As it is in Albuquerque.
Would you, would you agree to
that, Mr. Speaker, a kind
gentleman, you are probably
right. I think in the metro
areas, it's probably much higher
than in the rural communities.
I, I hope so, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, but
But
We pay the
same price.
As consumers.
In every store in the chain
stores, no matter where they're
at.
With that gentle lady, uh, this,
uh yield the floor back to you.
Thank you.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
I think Mr. Speaker, will the
kind lady from Burley yield.
I i
So we're, we're talking about
loss prevention specialists, Mr.
Speaker.
Young lady, and it's, it's.
A specialized field.
They track
The uh items that are being
stolen.
They make recommendations on
where
To put cameras.
Um, how to rearrange the store.
How to make sure that.
The easily stolen items are a
little bit more protected, so.
Um, Mr. Speaker.
Kind lady, um.
There was earlier debate.
Regarding the difference between
lost lost control specialists
and a security guard.
Um, you don't need a.
College degree and there was a
lot of debate.
Prior to this and and the point
was made that we don't want
people with
Uh, economics degrees.
Um, and I think this would be a
perfect example of.
Uh, somebody that could bring a
different uh perspective to the
table. Would you agree with
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, I
agree.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, they
would bring the perspective of
What is being stolen.
Um, because they're, they're,
they're, uh.
Watching the cameras, um.
They know who is stealing.
What they're stealing the times
that these things are going
missing.
The amount of these items that
are being stolen.
So I think
You know, I, I, I.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, fully
support.
Your amendment
Especially in light of the
previous um debate.
Um
We, we
The body decided that somebody
with an economics degree was not
needed.
Uh, so I, I just wanted to stand
in full support of what you're
trying to accomplish and I hope
and I urge the body to uh vote
yes on your amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, so this is
really they specialize in
trends, trending and what's
happening with loss prevention.
It's not a security officer as
someone tried to stay earlier,
so thank you gentlemen for that
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House for Amendment number 3 to
House Bill 17 as amended.
There's a motion before the body
to table floor amendment number
3 to House Bill 17 as amended
with the emergency clause, a
vote of yes, and the amendment
will be tabled. A voter no and
the amendment will not be
tabled. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 22 in
the negative.
House for Amendment number 3 to
House Bill 17 as submitted with
an emergency clause has been
tabled.
Gentle lady, you still have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess
I'd just like to close to say
it's very unfortunate that we
don't want to just add in this
very simple, um, position that
specializes in trends, um, as we
know again, stores are having to
lock up basic necessities,
hire private security and close
down stores and shut their doors
in some instances, so, you know,
I know sometimes we make these
things so political, but
groceries are going up. Prices
are going up.
People are having to close their
stores because of theft, so had
this been added, I think it
would have been a great addition
to the commission. Thank you.
There is further debate on the
bill. The general lady from
Donana Sierra and Socorro,
Representative Dao.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Joan lady from Bernal Leo.
Forgive me, Mr. Speaker, I was
just making a note, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady I yield. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. Um, I
think
For me,
If, if I'm thinking about us as
lawmakers and what we can do for
grocery stores or any other
retailer in the state.
Um, I think it would be nice to
give them a stable and reliable
regulatory environment. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, would
you agree?
Yes. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you to the lady.
Um, from what I know about
economics, some predictability,
stability and regulations and
allowing businesses to plan for
future growth, to have greater
certainty.
Um, facilitating long-term
strategic planning and
investments, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Predictability. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, do you
think that'd be nice for
retailers such as grocers in New
Mexico.
I would not, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, I would not
disagree. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, and I heard, I, and
gentle lady, risk management,
you know, stable and regulatory
environments and risk
management, a reliable
regulatory framework that helps
businesses manage risk by
providing clear guidelines in
reducing the chances of legal
challenges, theft, complicated
issues, compliance issues, Mr.
Speaker Jelani, risk management.
Would that be beneficial to
retailers such as grocers?
Mhm
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
factors that you've brought up I
have agreed with thus far. I do
not disagree with this one at
all and what I'm pleased to hear
is that all of these factors are
those that will be considered by
the commission members.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
these, these are, how do we know
that, um, on
How do we know that is
predictability and certainty and
regulatory environment, part of
the commission, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I believe it's
going to be.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
believing something's going to
be, is very optimistic, but
what's in the bill is what we're
voting on, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, overall
stability and reliability and
regulatory environment, that's
what's essential for fostering
healthy business, a healthy
ecosystem that can grow, that
can have sustainability.
That can respond effectively to
market demands.
What I hear a lot, especially
our mom and pops. There's been a
lot of attacks on corporations
on this floor, and thank you,
Mr. Speaker, for the point of
order.
Um, suggesting that corporations
are preying on folks and forcing
them to steal gross, uh, baby
food from stores. That's just
not, that's just an inaccurate
assumption. Um, basic economics
tells us that stability in in
the regulatory and reliability
in the regulatory environment is
something that allows us to
respond effectively to market
demands. That's really what our
mom and pops are left with
replying, they respond to market
demands. And this idea of a 40%
markup.
It's something so foreign to my
district. I just, I just don't
know of it. I mean, it's just
not something that, that I'm
familiar with. I, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, you know, I, I
voted no in committee because I
think there's got to be
secondary studies that have
looked at this and that have
done this and and now that I've
listened to the testimony and
people's perceptions of the
predatory nature of grocery
stores and the wide open lack of
assurances of who would be on
the commission and the fact that
we're going to pay them the cost
to
anticipate it, it, it's just.
I'm, I'm almost mind boggled at
this. Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, are you thinking that
they're also going to talk
about um corporations and, and,
and expect corporations to lower
the cost of their goods by price
capping. I, I saw the word uh
price capping, uh, price gouging
in the bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that those factors again
are going to be part of what the
commission considers.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you,
gentlelani. And do you believe
that that happens at the
distribution level or at the,
the local New Mexico retail
level.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is what's going to be found out
through this study, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
OK. Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady,
Do you, when we talk about the
price of eggs, what, what is,
what percentage?
Do we have a lot of, of, uh,
folks that, that
Do poultry in New Mexico and,
and do we have other than like
farmers' market and stuff, do we
have retailers? Do we have
producers that are doing eggs
and in large mass that are
selling those to local grocers.
We would like to
Mr. Speaker, madam, um, and a
gentle lady, not at the scale
that they would like to be able
to offer to the people of the
state, so, uh, the examination
of why that is we all would like
to know so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that will probably more
than likely also be a part of
the conversations that are going
to be taking place. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um,
I, I, I don't think I have any
more questions. Thank you.
There's for the gentleman from
Lincoln and Rottero
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady, my next door
neighbor inappropriations yield.
I yield to the gentleman from uh
Otero and Lincoln. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
There's been a lot talked about
today and I, I don't mean to
rehash a lot of stuff, but
You and I
Setting in appropriations,
listening to everything that
we've listened to with boards
and commissions.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
This board that's gonna be put
in place since this does have an
emergency clause on it.
will operate until March 31st of
26. Is this correct?
Yes, that's the expected end,
um, they'll have a report
produced, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, my apologies again,
um, yes, the, the report will be
produced in November so that um
they will follow there will be
need need to be some follow
through that will take us
through the end of the session.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
With the boards and commissions
that we currently have.
What I keep hearing is.
Sometimes it's hard for them to
get reports out.
We literally gripe all the time
that we're not getting reports
that people are not being
transparent as they should be.
We don't get the, the reports
that are generated where we can
literally put our eyes on things
and make good decisions that is
appropriators.
And these boards and commissions
are put together and, and
they're not temporary boards and
commissions, their boards and
commissions that that's what
they do.
And gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
I just, I, I have reservations
thinking that this temporary
board could put such a, a
robust.
Report together.
That they could really do their
job, and I know that I don't
have confidence in that.
But I'm just gonna ask you for
the record, do you have full
confidence that they could give
us a good generated report and
that that 400,000 that we're
gonna spend.
That we're always trying to find
money in appropriations for
different things. Is that the
best way for us to spend our
money, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Let me clarify that one of the
amendments that was produced in
the appropriations Committee uh
stripped the appropriation from
the bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
body, the economic development
department has committed to um
take on this task to lead, um,
the commission with staff and
support uh in such areas as
research and any other support
work that's that's uh that will
come from it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. That's
good to hear. So, one of my
other questions that just
through this, I wrote down was
Does this or will government
intervention.
Our, our commission.
Will it disrupt free market
competition and create
unintended consequences for our
suppliers and retailers.
Because we are working in a free
market.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
For the last 4 years in the
business that I'm in, I
averaged.
Because I have diesel trucks. I
averaged a cost of fuel, $4 and
above for 4 years.
And I had to pass that cost onto
my, my customers. That's just
the price of doing business.
And as long as we have
High fuel prices if you think
about
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
you think about, let's just take
something that I know, just take
a beef cow.
And from the time that that Kiev
is born, just follow a beef cow.
From what you have to feed it.
So we have to have our
agricultural people we have to
be able to feed this beef. We
have to be able to vaccinate
this beef. We have to be able to
haul this beef. We have to be
able to take it to the butcher
and get it butchered, and then,
and then it gets hauled.
All over the place, so with fuel
being the way it is and how that
impacts everybody. It's just,
it's a, it's a compounding
problem that happened, it's just
a ripple effect. So, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady,
As far as that pricing and
disrupting free market.
How, how does the, how does the
board fix that?
Thank you for your question, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
The commission is going to be
examining all of these points
what they're going to do is make
recommendations to this body.
Not just to me, not to certain
individuals, but the entire
body, so.
I believe that that's what's
going to be considered at this
level.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and just going back
to the commission, do you?
I just can't get my mind wrapped
around how we would let them
only work for a year.
It, it seems like it should be
23, maybe even 4 years, but why
would we dissolve them after one
year.
And I, and one other thing I
had, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, as I heard, you know, the
grandpas and the father-in-laws
that were the really good uh
farmers and ranchers.
I know some of those folks. I
know some of those old cowboys
and they do know that, but if
you told one of them, and I'm
not saying all of them, but if
you told the ones that I know
that they needed to put a report
together, they would laugh.
And I think that this
commission.
Being as resourceful as I hope
they're gonna be, are going to
be reaching out to those
father-in-laws and those
grandpas that really understand
that business.
And if anybody in this body, and
I'm sure there's many that have
served on a board.
It's hard to get something going
in a year. It's really hard to
roll out a plan in a year.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
One more time, do you really
think that this board should be
dissolved after one year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
With the commission examining
all of these factors.
It is entirely possible that one
of the recommendations that
comes back is that these issues
may need to continue into the
future for.
For, uh, for resolution to
address.
The reports themselves are going
to be facilitated by the
economic development department.
It won't be the members of the
group the the staff from the
economic development department
who is very committed to
carrying this out and doing it
in a very professional way and
expedited manner because time is
of the essence here, um, we'll
be able to provide that
information to us.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker,
I hope I'm not out of line if I
say this, if I am, I, I hope you
correct me, but I'd just like to
know, gentle lady.
Cause I feel like I've known you
for 3 years now. This, tell me
that this is not a politically
generated bill.
Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
The people in my constituency uh
of my district.
Or um, if you will examine it
almost evenly split.
Access to food.
Access to quality food, the
ability for our farmers and
ranchers and everybody else in
their retailers and so on
anybody who is within this
system.
This cannot be a partisan.
Activity.
It cannot be. This is about our
children, our elders ourselves
even.
So
My friend
Gentlemen
Mr. Speaker, this is a
nonpartisan a bill as I could
bring forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady, because I
really, I hope that this body, I
hope we, we really vote our
values.
And I know that there's
politics, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I get it.
I've seen it.
And nobody, I, I don't like
politics as much as the next
person. I come here to work
every day, and I really vote the
way I believe I vote my, my, my
feelings about my values, and I
vote my, my constituents and
what they tell me and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I still
haven't been able to figure out
how to make everybody happy.
And we have to get on one side
of the fence or the other. We
have to vote yes or we have to
vote no.
And gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
One of the things that I come up
with after all of this
discussion.
was
Would direct policy changes such
as tax incentives for food
producers.
Or increased food assistance
programs be more effective way
to reduce
Grocery costs to consumers. Is
there a way that we could help
our farmers, or ranchers, by, I
know that we don't want to cut
taxes to that, but we do have a
problem, and I hear that.
One side versus the other, they
think that this is a good idea
and we've offered up some
amendments to make it feel a
little bit better to where we
can have some assurances.
But
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you think it would be a good
idea to give a lot of that tax
money back to our, our producers
to where we can keep a lot of
those groceries here and reduce,
maybe reduce some of those
grocery and, and beef prices.
Thank you gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that is one
of the questions that will be
posed in front of the
commission.
And will be returned to us with
their thoughts with their
recommendations.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for the debate, gentle
lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Catrin Sierra
Socorro and Valencia.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Bernal Yil,
please. I will yield.
Thank you lady
oh excuse me, thank you so much.
I'll tell you the part of this
bill that I really like.
is on page 2D. 2 absences from
meetings of the commission.
Uh, constitutes grounds for
removal. We should put that in
every commission bill that we
have.
Every single one of them, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady. We grobble
about, well, who's going to
remove them and who's gonna do
this on, uh, who's going to do
that?
That's in school board language.
Um, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
so I really appreciate that
language because we want people
that are appointed to these kind
of boards to take it seriously.
We want them to show up and, and
yes it is servants work, but
we're all standing here doing
servants work. So I appreciate
that when you're appointed to
the board that you need to take
it seriously. So I want you to
know that I really appreciate
that portion of the bill.
Um, Madam, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
I wanted to talk a little bit.
About, um, where it says
strategies to support food.
Uh, business that produced
locally grown and so uh of
course, um, I think most of you
all know in here that I'm a
rancher. I have been my whole
life. I was raised on a ranch.
We're still ranchers, we raise
beef.
Uh, and, and for consumption,
beef cattle for consumption.
And Mister Speaker, kind lady,
over the years I've watched my
parents struggle with the prices
of cattle. I've, I've watched.
Um, how really ranching doesn't
pay.
Uh, you cannot survive off of
just ranching alone, you have to
have something else that you do,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman, uh,
lady for, uh, to be able to pay,
uh, for your ranch, for your
ranching habit. My, my husband
and I always tell him, uh, you
own a construction business to
pay for your ranching habit, and
it is a habit because it is a
way of life. It's the way we
chose to raise our children. It,
it was a, I'm very proud to be
raised on a ranch. And so,
But some of the other issues
that I think, um, one of the
questions I have, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady is, where does NMDA
come into this anywhere. They're
not named, it's said in here
that, um, the commission who can
hire staff actually.
Um, can request assistance from
ledge counsel and economic
development, and I was wondering
why we didn't include NMDA in
that process.
Thank you for your question, uh,
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
um.
New Mexico, the um.
Oh my goodness
Department of Agriculture.
I just saw the initials and I
couldn't think of what they
stood for, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, and in, uh, the, um,
Department of Agriculture works
very closely with the economic
development department and
specifically.
On the food and agriculture, um.
Uh, of food and agriculture and
will be at the table.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, but it doesn't say that
and when we don't say it
specifically in the bill, it
makes us wonder, well, will they
be there? I, I appreciate your
expert witness, and I know how
hard she works in that area. So
for the, the New Mexico grown
and all the other the uh all the
other things, but for it to not
say it specifically, it concerns
me because, uh, this is really
what we're talking about is
feeding New Mexico, New Mexicans
feeding New Mexicans, which just
really makes me happy.
to, uh, to be able to do that,
uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
where will this commission be
housed when the staff, um, when
they hire staff, where were
these staff people be housed.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
economic development is using
their current staff.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I, I
believe I heard from, um,
someone who's on appropriation
that there is $400,000 in the
budget for this. Is it under
economic development,
specifically for this, or is it
under other someplace else?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I may need to get
some assistance from my chair or
vice chair of the appropriations
Committee, but it's my
understanding that it is
absorbed within the economic
development department.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
kind lady, um, surprises me that
they're gonna absorb anything
when they're asking for
You know, increases, uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, and this not
being part of.
Maybe they're, they're, uh, what
they were had intended to do,
um, I, I have a hard time
thinking that they're going to
absorb anything, any entity that
works in state government,
always ask for more money any
single time that we have.
A request for them to absorb
anything. So, uh, that's
concerning to me, uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady. I also
wanna, I wanna talk to you a
little bit, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, about, um, how theft does,
it really is a big part of why
prices are rising. Uh, last
week, my gas station was broken
into in the middle of the night,
uh, and this is the 2nd time,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and yes,
we have, um, security, and we
have, you know, uh, cameras and
we.
have alarms and we pay every
month for, for security, but in
rural New Mexico, Mr. Speaker,
not blaming anyone except the
thief who I hope we catch.
Uh
But they can't get there fast
enough.
You know, it's a small town,
they're asleep, they got to put
their clothes on, get in their
unit, and then come down and the
thief is gone. And so, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, I just want.
People to understand that that
theft is a big part of, and I
really wish that was included in
here because it is a huge part
of why prices get raised, um,
being a business owner of.
A little grocery store in
Magdalena, New Mexico. It's a
gas station, but we carry
groceries because we don't have
a grocery store because our
dollar store closed.
And so now we have a big giant
empty building in the middle of
town.
And uh it's pretty ugly building
actually that no one's gonna
buy. Why would they buy it?
We're not a thriving economic.
Force in the state of New Mexico
and so Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
I, I just am concerned.
I, I like the idea of trying to
figure out how can we help New
Mexicans save money on
groceries, but being a business
owner, I understand the
regulations that I have to
follow and what that costs me.
I understand buying a building,
paying property tax on
commercial property. I
understand having a payroll.
And paying a a good wage and
caring about our employees. I
understand.
The economics of electricity and
what it actually costs to power.
Up everything so that we have
people can get gas at night
without having to have someone
there. I understand being open 7
days a week.
For the community.
I understand the cost of a
generator system being put in
because we have so many power
outages.
We put in a backup generator. I
understand that cost.
I and so
People that signed the front of
a paycheck.
Understand
The cost of doing business in
the state of New Mexico. I
understand what it cost me to
bring gas into my gas station.
I understand what it cost me to
drive down to Socorro to get the
groceries to put them in my gas
station because we have no
grocery store.
I understand when it starts
going bad, donating that stuff
when it's close to getting
expired, it's not selling or
donating it to the senior
center. We're donating it to the
food bank.
And so, and that is at a cost to
us because
It didn't sell. It expired. It's
about to go bad. We need to get
rid of it. Someone can use this.
And so I really want people to,
uh, understand the regulation
part of it where Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
The semi trucks that deliver
these goods.
How they're regulated and, and
just the stacking of everything
and the cost of doing business
in New Mexico.
And Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
we're, we're passing things
through this house that could
possibly
Even raise that even more, the
cost of doing business in the
state of New Mexico and so I
just hope Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, that when we, when this
commission is created that they
really look at the whole picture
and that they keep politics out
of it that they keep policy in
it and that we really look, how
can we help New Mexico thrive?
How can we help New Mexicans
thrive and how can we really
Build up New Mexico without
hurting business. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, this matter having
been under consideration for 3
hours, I moved to close debate.
There's a motion to close the
debate. All those in favor but
please signify by saying aye.
All those opposed name.
Debate is not.
Generally it needs to close.
Mr. Speaker, thank you so much,
buddy and members of this
chamber thank you so much for
the discussion.
I now uh move.
I now move that House Bill 17.
As amended
With the emergency
With the emergency clause, do
now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 17 as amended with the
emergency clause, the vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 27 in
the negative. House Bill 17 as
amended with the emergency
clause
no, without the emergency
without the emergency clause as
duly passed this house.
Mhm
Gentlemen from Kari, Gran
Hidalgorasas, are you ready on
item number 18.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, would you
please get me to that point that
all action necessary for placing
House Bill 371 and final passage
has been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill.
Uh, HB 371, Mr. Speaker, changes
the OHB Act to allow elected
county in the municipal
officials to designate.
The ordinance and resolution on
payroll to pay any within the
political boundaries are open to
recreational off highway
vehicles,
gentlemen, close.
I now move, Mr. Speaker, that HB
371 do now pass our final
passage of House Bill 371. The
vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The borders are closed, but I
would have 65 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 371 is Ui pass this
house. gentle lady from Zantafe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports
It is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Tax, Business,
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59.
Has had it under consideration
report seen with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move the
committee report of favorable
report for Senate tax, Business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senator 59. All
those in favorna.
I suppose
I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
to has been referred Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 11 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted G Andres from speaker,
I move adoption of the committee
report of a farewell committee
report for Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 11 as amended. All those in
favor say 9.
Fathers Bona
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 292 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that a do pass
and then revert to the taxation
and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted D Wanda
Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption for
House Bill 292. All those in
favor signified by saying I.
All the suppose nay.
I saw that committee report
adopted.
You want me to slow down a
minute?
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 456 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted.
Do you want Johnson chair? Move
adoption.
We are in adoption of a Faville
committee report for Is 456. All
those in favor of Cinna.
All those supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 570 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. D. Wanda
Johnson, chair. Move adoption.
We're in adoption of a favorable
community report for house with
570. All those in favor of say
9.
He is a bone.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 618 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 618 do pass, respectfully
submitted. Do you want a Johnson
chair?
Move adoption.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House 618, but a favorable
committee report for House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 618. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
All the supposed name, the
Isabic Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker.
Hi
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 31 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respect, respectfully
submitted to Wanda Johnson chair
adoption. We are in adoption of
a favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 31 as amended. All
those in favor signified by
saying no.
All the suppose name.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 41 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee.
Respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson chair?
Move adoption
adoption of favor for Senate
Bill 41 as amended. All those in
favor signified by Saint no.
All those oppose, nay, the Iabic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 63 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee,
respectfully submitted to Wanda
Johnson, chair.
We are adoption of a committee
report for Senate Bill 63. All
those in favor but say I.
All the supposed name, the
Isabic Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 299 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want a Johnson
chair?
Move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 299 as amended. All
those in favor signified by say
9.
All the supposed name.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Tax, Business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 353.
Has had it under consideration
in report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended amend referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair, adoption. We are adoption
of a favorable report for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 507, all those
in favor of C59.
All those
You guys weren't paying
attention. I read the wrong
number.
Mmm.
We are on adoption of a
favorable community report for
Senate.
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 353, all those in favor
signified by saying I.
I'll suppose, nay.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Miss
We did.
I was listening to you.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to who has been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 507 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and he referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 507. All those
in favor C5 but say 9.
All those opposed name, the IAI
Committee report adopted.
Oh
Only for you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Memorial 29
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report.
Rolesville House Memorial 29.
All those in favor 59.
All the supposedd named.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Memorial
53 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Memorial 53. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Well suppose me.
The I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Memorial
56 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We're in an adoption of
favorable community report for
House Memorial 56.
All those in favorina.
Well boy's name,
PI Saba report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred Senate Bill 45
as amended has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair. Move
adoption adoption of favorable
community report for Senate Bill
45 as amended. All those in
favor abbasena.
All the supposed name, the
Isabic governor report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate Bill 53
has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Move
adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 53. All those in
favor 75 but say no.
Of the supposed name, the ISabic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 105.
Has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption.
We are adoption of committee
report for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 105.
All those in favor of abbasena.
Alpone
the guys have it we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 118.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the taxation and
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, move adoption. We're
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 118. All those in favor are
signified by say I.
All the supposed name.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling
and grossing committee to has
been referred House taxation and
revenue Committee's substitute
for House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 47
with the emergency clause has
had it under consideration
reports that same has been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
designing by the officers of the
house.
Respectfully submitted Mariana
Anaya chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are adoption of committee report
for how accession and Revenue
Committee substitute for House
government elections and the
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 47
with an emergency clause. All
those in favor of saying no.
How the supposed name.
The CAC report adopted that the
record reflect that the duly
enrolled in engross copies of
how Taxation and Revenue
Committee substitute for House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 47, with an emergency
clause were signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling
and engrossing community team
has been referred House Joint
Resolution 2 as amended, has had
it under consideration in
reports that same has been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house, respectfully submitted
Mariana Anaya chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are adoption of a favorable
committee report for House joint
resolution 2 as amended. All
those in favor 5 by 9.
I suppose nay.
The ISAVE committee report
adopted that the record reflect
that the duly enrolled in Gross
copies of How's Joint Resolution
2 as amended, were signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 66 with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate tax, business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
as amended with the emergency
clause and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansen a chief clerk will be
entered.
Message from the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the House that the Senate
has passed Senate Bill 375 and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Sherry delehan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
gentle lady from Santa Fe, we go
to that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
It is ordered.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 42, an act relating to
child welfare, amending and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978 to enact a new Mexico child
safety and welfare Act.
Enhancing the state program
administered pursuant to the
Federal Comprehensive Addiction
and Recovery Act of 2016.
Moving that program from the
Children, Youth and Families
department to the Department of
Health. Amending requirements
for plans of safe care requiring
the children, youth and families
department to implement the
multi-level response system
statewide, enacting the family's
first act within the Children's
code, requiring the children,
youth, and Families Department
to develop and implement a
strategic plan for approval by
the Federal administration for
Children and Families, requiring
provisions of the strategic plan
to identify and provide foster
care.
Prevention services that meet
the requirements of the Federal
Family First prevention Services
Act, providing access to and
requirements for confidentiality
of certain records and
information specifying to whom
and under what circumstances
information that is held by the
children, youth and Families
Department that pertains to
child abuse and neglect may be
shared, requiring that
information be provided about
child fatalities or near
fatalities, protecting personal
identifier information of
department clients, providing
for
Rulemaking requiring reports,
declaring that foster children
are not residents of foster
homes for purposes of homeowners
insurance, Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 42.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 42 haven't been read to us
by title is referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 327, introduced by
Senator Jaramillo, an act
relating to motor vehicles
enacting a new section of the
motor vehicle code to create a
low rider capital of the world
special registration plate for
cars, trucks, motorcycles, and
tow trailers, establishing
criteria for a cessation of
issuance, making an
appropriation, Senate Bill 327.
Senate Bill 327 haven't been
read by title is referred to the
House Transportation, Public
Works and Capital Improvements
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 364, introduced by
Senator Nava and others, an act
relating to law enforcement,
amending qualifications for the
appointment of law enforcement
officers to include
authorization to work by the
United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services, Senate
Bill 364364 been read twice by
title is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial 3,
introduced by Senator Nava, a
joint memorial honoring New
Mexico's institutions of higher
education, bilingual education
faculties' efforts and
requesting the legislature to
decree a joint bachelor's degree
in elementary bilingual,
multicultural education among
the University of New Mexico,
Western New Mexico University,
New Mexico Highlands University
and New Mexico State University.
Senate Joint Memorial 3.
Synod joint Memorial 3.
Senator joint Memorial 3 have
been read to us by title is
referred to the House Education
Committee.
House Memorial 58, introduced by
Representative Hochmane Hill, a
memorial requesting the
Department of Health to study
psilocybin-based medication
treatment. House Memorial 58.
House Memorial '58 haven't been
read twice by title is
reordered, printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee.
House Memorial 59, introduced by
representatives Murphy, Zamora.
Ree
And senators Woods and Boone, a
memorial requesting the
appropriate interim legislative
committee to study the benefits
of a formal economic
relationship with the Republic
of Ireland and propose
appropriate legislative
initiatives, House Memorial 59.
As Memorial '59 I haven't been
read to as my title is referred
to the House commerce is order
printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Memorial 60, introduced by
representatives Ferrari, Silva,
and Lara, a memorial requesting
the appropriate interim
legislative committees to study
issues stemming from the
regional spaceport District Act
and the Spaceport Development
Act and make recommendations
House Memorial 60.
How's Memorial 60 haven't been
written to as my title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 61, introduced by
representatives Torres
Velasquez, Thompson, Hochman
Wiel, and GA Romero, a memorial
requesting the children, youth
and Families Department to study
and implement strategies for
autobiographical storytelling as
a trauma-informed strategy for
children. House Memorial, 61.
House Memorial 61 was by titles
or reprinted and referred to
house, health and human Services
Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Clerk to read messages from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
Bill 5 as amended by the House
and further amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Messen will be entered.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Chavez, Representative Murphy
with a special guest.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
members of the chamber. Um, I
have a very special guest to
introduce, uh, Mark Daly, if you
stand up, please. Mark is, um,
the chairman of the Senate of
Ireland, and he is here in the
United States, um, working with
a number of states on um Irish
trade agreements and we are
actually going to start the
process of considering that
ourselves. We have a lot of
common ties and needs between
education, uh.
in particular and also energy,
um, I do have a certificate
form. I picked out a couple of
bullets here that I'd like to
mention. Uh, he was born and
raised in Ken Kenmare
County, uh, Kerry, Ireland, um,
which uh is interesting. He was
actually born in the hospital in
Cork, which is where my family
came from in the early 1790s.
And he was also previously
before he was a public servant,
he was also a reality TV star.
He, uh, he participated in uh
Treasure Island, which is kind
of the British version of uh
Survivor and uh he had a he he
kind of had a, a comparison
between that experience and his,
um, time running for the Irish
Senate, and I'll quote, we spent
5 weeks starving on a deserted
island in Fiji and I can tell
you it was a walk in the park
compared to my Senate campaign.
Um, he has, uh, served on the
Irish Senate, which is known as
Shannon and um is very um
respected for his, his, uh, work
on foreign affairs and in
particular his work on the uh uh
peace process between Northern
and Southern Ireland, um, he
founded the American Irish State
Legislators Caucus, which, uh,
all of you will be invited to
join, I'm sure, and, uh, his
leadership and vision had left a
lasting legacy in Irish public
life and international.
Uh, diplomacy, one last
interesting
fact about uh my friend Mark is,
is that there's only been 3
people in 100 years that have
served as the chair of the Irish
Senate twice. So he's the 3rd 1.
Anyway, help me welcome, uh,
Senator Daly, if you would.
Welcome to the house, Senator.
Lastly, um,
Mr. Speaker, um, I also really
want to introduce the most
important person in the room is
my beautiful girl girlfriend
Tyra Miller.
So
Welcome to the house.
Thank you all very much. Mark,
thanks so much for coming in.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senator,
I do have a question. In
Ireland, is the Senate also the
lower chamber?
So it's different from here.
Welcome. Welcome to the upper
chamber.
Our co-equal chamber.
Gentle lady from Bernard Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
want to honor um a wonderful
young gentleman, I think with
Irish roots, he is my
legislative aid this year, um,
John, but we know him as Jack
O'Donnell. It's his birthday
today, um, and just to make it
very clear, Mr. Speaker, Jack
and I are not related even
though we both um look like
vampires. So if you see him,
please wish him a very happy
birthday.
Happy birthday, Jack. Jack,
gentle and lady to sing.
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, Jack.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after the conclusion of the
floor.
Members take note other
announcements a gentle lady from
Los Alamos real Los Alamos,
Santa Fe, Sandoval.
At it, I, I know who you're
talking about, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Um, this is to remind
everyone that your House
Judiciary Committee will meet 15
minutes at the conclusion of the
floor and in addition, food is
being brought in and it is more
interesting than the usual
sandwiches that I have brought
in, so if that's an inducement,
the, the, um,
Please come.
Now I'm nervous.
It's a little bit more
interesting. I wonder what it's
gonna be.
I guess I should go to committee
to find out.
Any other announcements, gentle
gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow morning, first at
10:30 for a wonderful brunch and
then we will have committee at
11. Thank you.
Member signal.
General men from San Juan
representative Heandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be
really brief. I just wanna
acknowledge the hard work of all
of our young athletes this week
with a state tournament. I'm
gonna read off, uh, those
athletes, the schools that made
it through into the
championship, uh, Class 1A boys
outside of Tucum Carry, New
Mexico from House District 67,
um, Logan, uh, is in the
championship versus uh the
school near Cannon Air Force
Base House District.
3 represents uh Zamors uh area,
uh, Melrose, so they'll be
played in the championship class
2A is gonna be between um the
two A Boys, Mr. uh Mr. Speaker
is gonna be uh from House
District 64, Texaco versus House
District 41, um, Mesa Vista from
C class 3A, House District 47,
Saint Michael's versus House
District 70, Robertson from uh
Class.
For a House District 19, uh,
Highlands versus House District
54, uh, Artesia and onto the
girls, uh, our, our class, uh, a
girls houses 67. Again, uh,
representative Jack Shotfield's,
uh, from Roy Moscato, uh, how
versus how 63, uh,
representative Zabora, this is,
uh, Fort Sumner, um, class 2A
house 666, um, Tatum.
versus how District 70, uh,
class 3A, uh, which just
concluded, um, and I wanted, uh,
this was how to fix 70, uh, West
Las Vegas was facing Navajo
Prep, which is in my district
House District 4, and they are
back to backs, uh, 3A state
grill champions.
How's, uh, class 4,
how district, uh, to, as well as
for Kirtland Central versus uh
House District 9, House District
5, House District 6, Gallup
uh class 5A, girls, uh, house
61, how in 62, Hobbs versus
House District 24, Sandia, and
uh, oh, last, last one that was
for, Mr. Speaker, last one,
class 5A.
29 Volcano Vista versus House
District 24, Sandia High School.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and body gentlemen.
Congratulations.
Other announcements. The gentle
lady from Berlin Senator Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to keep in line with my
benediction this morning, um,
what did you say when they get
excited?
What do fish say when they get
excited, gentle lady? Oh my God.
That was a good one.
That was a good one.
All our members, any other
announcements, I have a special
announcement if no one else has.
Announcements.
All right.
Mm
Members tonight.
There is a celebration.
In honor of our very own.
Representative Doreen Gallego is
the chairwoman of the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee as a 2025
Albuquerque Business First woman
of influence. Round of applause.
And because she's gonna be here
working.
She's gonna miss her award
ceremony.
So, uh,
Treat her bills with special
love if they are in your
committee tonight, because she
is sacrificing her reward to be
here with us, but in all
seriousness, congratulations,
uh, Representative during
Gallegos, who's of course other
uh not only our state rep and
chairwoman, but she's also the
executive director of Mesa
Valley Casa, which works with
kids who are in tremendous,
tremendous need, uh, through the
court system so thank you for
all that you do and
congratulations on this very
well deserved award.
OK, members, I've got
announcements on 3 bills that uh
I believe.
5 bills apologies that have
already been cleared with
leadership. um, these are Senate
bills, 274 Senate Bill 159,
Senate Bill 168.
Both of those bills have a house
commerce, uh, in economic
development referral, and then
each of those also have a 2nd
committee referral and the
chairwoman has uh worked with
all of the members of her
committee and they all agree
that they do not need to see
those 3 bills in their
committee. They still have
another committee stop.
They, they will just be
dispensing uh the house
commerce, um, so it's, I'm gonna
read these 5 to you so you all
can have it for the record.
Senate Bill 274, Senate Bill
159, Senate Bill 168.
Senate Bill 302 Senterville 303,
and I'm looking around the room
andresentative Hernandez, Peter
Armstrong.
Chairwoman Gallegos, Vice on
Nonu.
So we will consider those
dispense see no objection.
All right, members, we have.
How
House Bill 120, um.
I'm sorry, House Bill. I'm
sorry, Senate bill, 213.
Um, that is a yielding for
transit. Let me look up the
actual title.
OK, Senate bill to 213 yielding
to transit buses, sponsored by
Senator Gonzalez that has two
referrals. The first one is to
have transportation, public
works, capital improvements
committee, the House Judiciary.
In conversations with the
chairman and also with the
sponsors we they have agreed to.
Drop the house transportation
public works capital
improvements committee referral,
and send it straight to House
Judiciary.
Right, one last bill.
And that would be House Bill
120, um, the last referral for
that bill is House
Appropriations. The
appropriation was amended out of
the bill.
Uh, and judiciary in a committee
sub so we will be dropping the
house reparations Finance
Committee referral for House
Bill 120, no objection that is
so ordered.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In honor
of our, um, 3 hour debate today.
What did the
I did. It was all by myself.
Yeah.
Wasn't me, Mr. Speaker. Um, what
did the men say when the
refrigerator door was opened.
One day I'm gonna think about it
and I'm actually gonna get it.
But not today.
Close the door. I'm dressing.
Yeah, that's pretty good.
That was pretty good. We were
saying Borego doesn't agree with
it. She was shaking her head
competition.
Competition is good. Any other
announcements before we break
for the evening, unless you have
to go to the judiciary.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until noon
tomorrow.
The house was set in recess
until noon tomorrow. Go lobos.
