Small Representative taxed I'm
here.
Thanks for Sarinana.
Chairman create.
Okay in the.
Questions or comments or Nelson
to the committee.
Isn't very I did not I did bring
guns once on Saturday and.
The circle flat so I can.
Who's the only known three is
the other.
the non related questions or.
Senator school first up we have
some percent fifty six
distributed generation facility
supply cap thank you for these
might slide we're going to use
the hand held that the my kids
life okay thank you what is the
hand held if there's public
thank you.
Thank you for for having the
Brighton early I'd like like to
get things going early in the
morning what this does out when
renewable energy distributed
generation first started there
was a push to try and increase
the number of people putting
that on and also utilities were
paying rex at the time when I
put the system on my house I was
probably getting fourteen or
more sense for each kilowatt
hour that I generated in the
hundred twenty percent made
sense at that time because you
didn't want people putting on a
system that was five times as
much as they were using and
getting the extra REC money to
pay for all of that that didn't
make sense and so the hundred
twenty percent cap makes sense
at that time it doesn't anymore
no longer are people getting
racks the only thing that they
get is if you over produce on
your system you get the of
weighted cost of energy which
varies a little bit but it's
much smaller of the purpose for
this is we are now moving to
where people are trying to put
distributed generation systems
on their houses that are now
moving them off of gas heating
moving them off of gas water
heating gas cooking which is
substantial increases in there
putting electric cars on and the
hundred twenty percent cap
artificially limits them from
being able to right size a
distributed generation system
for what their house currently
would be and so this removes
that artificial cap it was
necessary in the past it's no
longer necessary.
And with that I'd be open for
questions.
Okay
just slide show hands of the.
Second page the response other
people in the audience who would
like to speak on this.
Sure there okay so we'll do
that's what that's a number ends
we'll do a fifteen minutes each
side ninety seconds person we
will provide you
we're gas we're going to
opposition person or just that
you come up and use the Mike so
people online can hear.
so if you would like to speak in
opposition go ahead formal I'll.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Rougemont
whether New Mexico rural
electric cooperative
association.
And our association stands in
opposition of this bill because
it affects our cooperatives in
in rural areas and so I will
that the managers tell our story
on this legislation but the
association is in opposition
thank you.
Good morning chairman the queen
and members of the committee
Carl so Sir with Public Service
Company Mexico.
Now is Senate bill fifty six I
really want to bring the
attention that did the that this
is for.
third party or at least systems
they're not customer owned and
when you really read into it
it's because it's the person who
owns or controls any part of a
do need system and later on in
the bill the refers to a host
where the host is defined as the
custom of a public utility.
So in this section of Los.
It is meant to apply to own
systems why are we defining who
owns and controls and and who
the host to customers so I just
really want to bring that to
attention that these are leased
or third party systems and
really it is a part consumer
protection protection issue as
the hundred twenty percent cap
is is a mechanism.
That prevents.
Third parties from oversize and
in turn over charted our most
vulnerable customers are fixed
incomes are elderly are veterans
are stay at home parents in a
works in collaboration with the.
With the consumer protection act
that was passed in two thousand
seventeen were over nineteen
disclosures.
Have to be brought to the the
customer's attention before they
sign so by removing a hundred
per twenty cent per twenty
percent cap we're going
backwards from a consumer
protection agreement or
Steinborn so with that we oppose
the bill thank you.
Good morning.
Good morning members of the
committee Mr chair my name is
Mahdi role metal on the general
manager of the terror county
electric cooperative in
Cloudcroft New Mexico.
so I guess just the start as you
all know cooperatives are member
owned and not not for profit.
Otero specifically has.
A a great deal of experience
with rooftop solar net metering.
Two years ago that was the
federal report I believe is from
in a and R. yell that listed
Otero as the fifth have having
the fifth highest penetration of
behind the meter solar in the
country only behind for
utilities and white so we have a
great deal of experience with
this I also see it as a consumer
protection issue the economics
the way this works you put a
rooftop solar everything that
you offset that you use is
you're avoiding paying retail
energy which is in the state
nine to fourteen cent range
depending on the facility.
Anything in excess.
You only get avoided cost which
is about two to four cents.
So when you oversize the
economics completely go upside
down on rooftop solar.
And so we have to have a great
deal of experience with members
who have been taken advantage of
that are either oversized and
and and basically they're not
getting the Economic sorts even
undersized and they're not
they're not thank you Sir thank.
So obviously propose.
Members of the committee Mr
chair
my name's Chris Martinez the
executive vice president general
manager Columbus elector
cooperative we serve lunar
questions Luna grant Hidalgo
County
Consumer protection I'm gonna
just speak to one of concern of
many R. Pirtle use an example
that we had we have fenders
solar vendors to come in and on
occasion of they may or may not
contact us submit the
application in the proper manner
we have smart metering it
notifies us when there's no
authorized installation we had
an unauthorized insulation to
speaking to one
we contacted the consumer the
consumer gave us a solar
companies name try calling the
solar company trying to set
right to deal with these issues.
It's it's almost impossible to
speak to somebody who contacted
PED's office we finally
contacted the of the public
regulation commission so the
consumer letter saying this was
a safety related issue that he
needed to resolve the issue of
the consumer finally contacted
the company but if you offer
unlimited access and it exceeds
the capacity of of the
installation systems fail there
will be damage and so we at
least with a hundred twenty five
percent rule there were some
limitations without limitations
I PED I believe the situation
becomes very much more dangers
thank you.
Mr chair members the committee I
do Antonio with Xcel energy we
serve the eastern part of the
state I think from up we're
coming from this opposition to
do respect respectful opposition
to the US senator here
there's an equity issue here we
believe that when you have when
you go above the hundred twenty
percent
and you're fairly well to do and
can afford to do that what it
does is it there's only limited
capacity
with regards to future capacity
on lines it takes away the
opportunity for the I think
lower income folks to actually
have solar on their side on on
their systems and aced out so
from just from an equity
perspective I think this is a
not good bill thank you.
Good morning gentleman a clean
and members of the committee
have David spread that I'm the
CEO of the spring or electric
coop and as a group you've heard
of previously we stand in
opposition for consumer
protection issues at first they
do issues on the system as you
just heard from Mr Dantonio if
the system is sized oversize for
the installation we will quickly
eat up the capacity on any
feature that we serve because we
serve a very lightly loaded
system with very few consumers
per mile and so that capacity
will be eaten up by one person
and then no one else.
Actually access the system to
actually do that so from a
consumer protection and equity
standpoint we stand in
opposition.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I'm Bob
affairs general manager Lee
County electric cooperative and
we're opposed to this piece of
legislation we serve all of our
communities that and our service
or the city's she might have
three or four houses connected
to one transformer so if you
have one person decide to put
over a hundred twenty percent of
solar on their house that system
has to be upgraded affecting
those other members that are
connected that same transformer
who pays for those upgrades
you're starting to shift cost
also we have a wholesale power
supply contract with R. G. and
T. that prohibits us engaging in
excess sales as well so all of
our retail sales we have to
purchase that energy from our G.
and T. not from our members so
the size of system larger than a
hundred percent you start to
push that energy back on to the
system not for personal use
again our cooperative we are
opposed to this piece of
legislation thank you very much.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
Hastings on the CEO and general
manager of tennis mountain
Selectric waterproof I just
north of Santa Fe in a the
Espanola area we are the largest
coop my total members New Mexico
we to at this pop up see this is
very much a consumer protection
issue among many other issues.
So just to tell you a quick
story for the fly by night solar
developers come in.
A talk a great game they over
sell their product they go ahead
and build it without contacting
us or this is Terry permits to
do this.
I had a young couple in our
office.
We told them that you know what
this isn't gonna work we don't
have enough capacity is not
enough room for the kilowatt
hours that you're putting back
onto our system yeah you know
the young woman started crying
and end up they were already
paying the solar developer
payments even also developer had
not done anything with us as per
Mexico ought to make that work.
We we strongly object and
Arkin's this thank you.
Morning Mr chair members the
committee my name is Joseph at a
previous court alleged
cooperative general manager I
think what we're have entered
right now is that we're talking
about a hundred twenty percent
of your annual usage so if you
connect the new appliances which
are more efficient the new
devices in the home page for
more energy efficient and you
had that the charger we're gonna
look at your annual usage to
determine that hundred twenty
percent because the system is
built to personal mentoring
someone reforming electrical
engineer and so the physics of
it when you start pushing the
system that much it's going to
trip us source CoreLogic is
strongly opposed to this
legislation thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Robert to
steal I'm the CEO and general
manager of continental divide
electric we serve along the I.
forty quarter west of
Albuquerque all the way to the
Arizona border
I don't want to be repetitive we
do agree that this is a consumer
protection issue several years
ago this legislature passed the
renewable energy act which was
just devastating to our
consumers of.
Because we serve the area that
included the Escalante
generating facility that was
forced to be shut down its coal
fired units so we lost hundreds
of jobs in our area we can't
afford we need to protect the
interest of our consumers so we
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Olena Brandenburger I'm the
general manager for central New
Mexico electric just south of
here we have services in Levin
counties surrounding
predominantly at Torrance be in
the book of them
I won't be redundant of that
same position as as the other
CEOs I have spoken and you want
to also share we have over five
hundred a distributed generation
accounts already so like some of
the others we do have experience
in this area and it it's not
positive of it's very it's the
concepts are very confusing for
our members
they are not informed correctly
of most of them are told they
will have no bill of that is not
the case as far as when they put
the solar panels up so they have
the cost of the solar plus they
have the other costs that go
with it in order to stay on the
grid.
The other issue that I have
concerns about with the hundred
twenty percent is that's going
to bring in a different type of
entity that wants to build those
types of folks probably as are
some already not going to be
from our service territory so
they're not going to have the
the vested interest like we do
the co ops of that we do for our
members so central New Mexico
electric is opposed to this
bill.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for having
us today my name is Travis
Solomon from southwestern
electric coop I serve over we
serve over in the northeast
corner of New Mexico and Clayton
like many of the things you've
just heard our co op is of one
of the smaller ones serving less
than a hundred members therefore
we look at our membership a lot
like family and so they are
already being over promised by
the solar companies that are
coming into our service
territory.
And we've had to put mechanisms
are in place where our members
can come in and we help them
that those of.
The solar companies come in and
find so we have seen first hand
some of the things that they do
in the sales pitch to try to
hide some of the truth and we
believe that if they're allowed
to do that already they will be
there over promised already they
will be oversold at this cap is
extended above so therefore we
we do not support this bill that
is being presented to you thank
you.
Okay we're gonna we're gonna go
online is there anyone online
who would like to speak in
opposition.
If you do please raise your
hand.
Okay so the testing done now and
we're not quite there with
public comment we're gonna do a.
They would like to speak in
support.
Again please formalized.
Sir.
Amount yes I think chairman
McQueen and committee members my
name is expanding Andrews and
I'm an architecture in Santa Fe
I'm also the president elect of
the New Mexico chapter of the
American institute of architects
and I'm here today to
to to support the passage of
Senate bill fifty six Hey I New
Mexico has a committee on the
environment we have architect
members who are experts at
climate change in climate
action.
And we see this is a fairly.
Simple thank.
Removing that cap in rewriting
the rules now we believe that
the rules which haven't been
updated as I understand it in a
long time could be the solution
to the issues that the the
executives here have just spoken
to it shouldn't be in the
legislation it should be in the
rules.
I've been an architect for
thirty seven years.
The billing codes that I have to
designed to are changed every
three years and a lot of these
issues with fly by night
contractors and things it gets
dealt with in the building codes
by street strengthening the
rules and regulations.
So I believe that if we pass
this legislation we can resolve
many of those issues in in the
writing of the rules and I A. I.
New Mexico will be happy to help
in that regard again thanks a
lot Mr chairman and senator
Senator.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning members of the committee
my name is Jan day sure that
Representative renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico many people's voice as
ria we have a over sixty members
we've been engaged in the solar
industry in New Mexico since two
thousand and four so we're very
familiar with this issue the
hundred twenty percent cap.
Based on your historical usage
is an arbitrary cap it's not
based on any science not based
on any data but it's been in
place for many years at one time
you may have had a real purpose
possibly a consumer protection
issue that it's been reference
here but with approximately
forty thousand solar systems
installed in New Mexico I'm on
residential commercial buildings
it's no longer needed it's very
outdated it's archaic.
It is now appearing to the
adoption of solar energy energy
on homes and businesses so for
example if you use five thousand
kilowatt hours in a given year.
You're limited to a system that
produces only six thousand
kilowatt hours but I ask what if
you want to get electric vehicle
next year what if you want to go
on a building electrification
project that's going to increase
that usage substantially maybe
double that why should you be
limited to a system based on
your historical usage if that's
going to change.
You've heard that this is the
consumer protection issue but
that had that was addressed in
two thousand seventeen by the
distributed generation
disclosure act which I worked on
which our organization were done
with some of the companies in
this room and I'd also like to
add that there is no legislation
that thank you Sir okay thank
next thank you.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Danny callin the climate and
jacket with conservation voters
Mexico and for reasons that the
sponsor and Mr these are
articulated than I ever could we
are also as transport the bill
thank you.
Thank you is there anyone online
who would like to speak in
support of this bill please
raise your hand.
First up we have barbecue of.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
letting me speak I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico eight
supports policies and incentives
to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by developing clean
renewable energy sources
reducing the cap on the size of
the distributed energy facility
will enable residents of the
state to contribute even more to
the transition away from fossil
fuel sources we stand in support
of this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you next up we have stiff
you are spurred.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee I have worked with
three fifty New Mexico in rural
areas but I'm sticking with my
own experience today we put on
solar and have begun to
electrify perhaps
and we could cover everything
and till we got our car and then
this year we put on a heat pump
water heater and now hard I like
to see the bills have been six
hundred dollars a month so I
would really like to expand to
have smaller solar so we can be
self sufficient out here in
rural areas thank you very much
please support just the fifty
six.
Okay I think that's it for
public comment.
The last you could use my
previous.
Both of them that I know that
I'm thank you chair members of
the committee I'm unless I can
you get representing the Sierra
Club with thirty five thousand
members in the Rio Grande
chapter and we also support
Senate bill fifty six we're
eager to be New Mexicans are
eager to be part of the climate
solution and when I moved here a
year and a half ago we were told
that we could only put a certain
amount of solar because after
that the actual benefits that we
get would actually decline it's
not to it would cut off it would
actually decline and since then
we installed an Eevee charger
and he pumps and a combi system
for our water and heating and so
we've really tried to be part of
the solution but it was
frustrating that we only allowed
a certain number of solar panels
so we we hope you'll pass this
bill thank you so much.
Thank you and that ends our
public comment Center soldiers
like to add anything before we
get to the I would like to make
a couple of comments up the
problem the concerned about
consumer protection we've
already had that was addressed
and I think it was the two
thousand seventeen there was
very specific for exactly these
kinds of issues and if there are
still ones that there are
mechanisms through the Attorney
General what this does is allows
people to right size their
systems up there also were
several comments about whether
the systems are able to handle
that last year we passed the
grid modernization.
Bills they bring modernization
bills were designed specifically
for this to allow utilities and
co ops to upgrade their systems
in order to handle additional DG
this particular bill does not
have somebody putting in four
hundred percent of what they
want that makes no economic
sense to anyone this allows
people to right size the system
with the anticipation that
they're going to electrify their
entire house input do need
charging on it it doesn't make
sense to put in the system
larger than what you're going to
need because the cost to do so
there is never a pay back for
doing it unless you're going to
be consuming electricity on site
the idea is the right size it
for your need and the current
hundred twenty percent cap that
is arbitrary doesn't allow
people to do that if right
sizing it might require them to
put on a hundred fifty percent
for all systems they still have
to get integrated on to the
local
whether that is a coop whether
that's one of the utilities all
of those are part of the process
of putting a system on the house
all of that gets taken into
account of the ability for that
system to handle the one co op
that might have the most trouble
is get Carson that has the
highest amount of DG penetration
from my understanding that they
may not be able to handle
additional this is not something
that suddenly everybody's going
to be putting on two hundred
percent of what they've been
doing there will be a little bit
as people are anticipating
increased electric usage this
isn't something that suddenly
going to increase the the amount
that every house is producing by
fifty percent this allows people
to right size their system for
their needs and their house.
I thank you Senator Woods going
to committee do you have any
questions.
Thank you madam chair of
Senator.
I propose you to these areas
Chair and senator.
That doesn't make sense to have
a larger system but.
The host.
Is not the only one involved in
this pictures of.
Madam chair what you're asking
well there's a third party
research.
Madam chair in most in
Representative in most cases
there isn't a third party
there's somebody who might be
installing the system but in the
majority of cases it is owned by
the owner.
I'm sure I read it that way.
Madam chair and senator looks to
me like.
The.
Appliques this is the most the
call.
You have.
Already the.
Leasing the.
So
you have the utility.
At the cap off of.
You have the.
Part
of this bill.
The table
with the host.
Electrical energy.
But we allow them to
use electricity and solid retail
rates the utilities at the White
and so to possibly research of
others is.
Just focused on the host with
this.
That would be the.
We're on that with the
languages.
Madam chair and and
Representative on page two
section see number one defines
what host is and it means the
customer of a public utility
that's not a third party.
Who uses the electric chair
general energy produced by
renewable energy distributed
generation facility and occupies
the site which the renewable
energy distributed generation
facilities located.
That doesn't sound like a third
party.
That sounds like the owner of
the property all of which the
solar panels are fixed.
I agree with you on their.
The issue is that of you have.
The potential for third parties
we we use I mean the house
please wait to see solar panel.
They're paying somebody of feet
that have those on their rule.
And if you take the cap off.
Does not that party get the cell
the lectures the to the utility.
Madam chair representative the
amount of money that you get
from the the get the the wording
right the up weighted cost of
the Energy.
Is so low that it never pays for
the cost of putting two largest
system on they can't do that you
can't make the numbers work when
they were initially put in where
we you were getting paid for rex
that was a concern and that's
why the hundred twenty percent
cap was put on but we no longer
pay racks for these and
therefore it there is no
economic benefit to putting in a
system that is too large.
I'm not an expert on utility
rates or or still in business
but it seems to me that if I
have.
Our.
I use Mexico up to here limited
to supply my needs on the farm.
Well as forty percent.
Take it off we're not.
With with someone not be able to
put in.
The five megawatt.
Community solar thing that we
did more more well that that to
the utility of retail right.
Madam chair representative
that's an entirely different set
area of law I don't believe that
is an all within this Madam but
could could I have Mister deep
vision.
come up as my expert with me
please.
I mean if you take the cap off
of oil to the to have a.
Average quality that the.
Also system come and say Hey you
have enough land to put in
additional panels.
Let me put these panels on.
We also have a lectures the
utility.
Montel right through the through
the retail.
Yeah.
The utilities but we stuck
our of their system will do is
that help workers madam chair
and and Representative nope out
that is not the only way the
cost which is only one or two
cents a kilowatt hour for any
extra that they put back on to
the system and with those rates
you never pay back the system it
doesn't make any sense to do so
that is entirely different area
wait where you're talking about
community solar where they
actually are the generator for
those out extra power this is
dealing with rooftop solar
distributed generation at a
residential area.
Chair and senator I don't see
any limitations here.
I am at the rooftop I don't see
any limitations it looks like
the hose.
We can serve customers the
public utility.
At.
It was supposed to be limited.
Wipers up walls under twenty
percent of their annual needs if
you take the cap off.
This is what hope is there you
take the cap off you're not just
looking at what they're
consuming thank you bill or they
could have.
Third party bill.
S. actually whatever whatever
the.
Utility could take on their
system at that point M. and.
Why be the five what's that we
do in the solar as opposed to
just lay the could be much
bigger than that is there is no
longer limited to their usage at
their home or averages important
whatever we're was located.
Yeah and I think the office can.
Well this thing up to work.
You have some some real problems
we created some real problems
for.
The utilities whether they be co
ops for public utility because.
As I understand other portions
of the law that would take that
electricity at their system can
handle the only limitation is.
In the area can't handle that
this will electricity I can say
about but other than that.
At the cap all.
Looks to me like people can Kim.
Bill.
Work have.
There last four.
Of the system.
In the last three.
Much bigger than what they need
for their for their home or for
their.
National manager for farm what.
That's.
That's what I think this bill
doesn't get to work thank you
prove that.
Do something to the effect of if
there exists a painting to put
in your car charger four million
additional maybe tweet this to
where anticipated this call like
but we.
Share the factored into that but
that's not what that does is
completely takes our capital I
think that's a real problem.
Madam chair and senator.
I have always.
There are if we get to your
statement that it's only for
that Health what we have some
language in here that that's a.
And madam chair and I think that
is covered for the
Representative.
Shares a common point connection
with the electric utility
serving the area the host the
host tenants and employees
served by the renewable energy
distribution generate facility
it indicates it's one side this
is not a community solar system
this is not eight and a large
system for that and again I get
back to the same thing this
allows people to right size
their system the market takes
place covers the fact that it
makes no economic sense to
oversize the system it didn't
initially when people were being
paid racks for having their
system they didn't get paid lots
of extra money in the hundred
twenty percent made sense then
that people could put in an
oversight system as their
retirement plan we don't pay rex
anymore for the systems all you
get is the avoided cost of the
Energy for those some times when
you are producing more than you
are using if you oversize a
system and produce a lot the
extra cost of putting in that
system is never made up by the
little bit of extra that you get
when you're producing more and
if you put in a great big system
and produce a whole lot of extra
that whole lot of extra is in
the works close to what it costs
for the additional size of the
system it doesn't make sense
economically what this does is
it does predict that people
doing exactly what you would
talk about is when they're
anticipating putting in a DG
system because they're going to
shift over to an all electric
house all electric heating all
electric cooking it would be in
the electric vehicle charging
this prevents them from right
sizing that system.
Senator based on that logic we
would having community solar
because it would cost more than
the governor generation that's
the opposite argument that we
are.
It will put those in.
What some hope that they would
be able to get
generate.
Some of the revenue stream from
that.
So.
At at madam chair center going
back to your favorite you Sir
with the limitations all.
What is in this bill is of the
law we say that if you produces
electricity you're not a public
utility.
That's all that does I would say
that you're not public relief
Senator just thank you if you
want to do what you want to do
she needed a new section of
activation we highs the system.
You're wanting to expand to the
home of the Energy.
You utilized in that home or
virtual area for important
whenever
in taking that job.
You have open this thing up.
You were to.
Let's broader than what you've
present today so I I would
encourage you to look at that.
The deal with the issue that the
problems you have opened up to
larger systems.
Those are.
This.
It's just.
The the whole.
All.
Can see.
Issue.
By the.
Kate is this.
one.
Yes acts as the.
Thanks for.
Which.
What was.
Madam chair representative I
believe that would be accurate
yes it's that how much it
produces.
So all.
You madam chair let me qualify
that because I'm not sure that
that is accurate.
It's the amount that is produced
in the course of a year.
And so it's not the capacity of
the the system it's how much it
would be expected to produce
over the course of a year and so
not what it produces that
maximum sunlight but how much
produces over the course of the
year.
Officials will.
So the instantaneous hello.
The system is all rights the.
You are chapters.
For the.
All.
That.
Will all this actually.
Madam chair and and
Representative not necessarily
it depends on how big the system
is how much they're using at the
time the meter runs forward and
back depending on how much is
being used and there are times
when for instance I know the the
system on my house when I am
drawing extra energy off of the
grid and other times I'm putting
energy back on to the grid it's
a back and forth almost
instantaneously based on what
the current needed usage and how
much is being produced a cloud
comes over and I'm pulling
energy off the grid the club
goes away and I'm pushing it
back on it is going back and
forth across the beater.
Let's talk.
For shooting.
Purchased.
Maybe.
All of these.
To
that.
Madam chair representative for
the most part yes there may be
some people that are looking at
putting a powerwall Lauderdale
really total out the great but
yes the majority are question
marks.
Your our.
This thanks spelling Act
seventeen.
Madam chair representative
depends on how much I'm using at
that time in my house.
Sure sure sure.
That was
time during the day.
In order for the system okay
this year will be spent in the
act.
that.
Madam chair representative not
necessarily.
It might be.
But not necessarily it's not one
where I'm definitely putting
power in sometimes I am and
sometimes I'm using more than
that I'm producing.
We
just trying to get out is the
only justification for the
systems is to reduce the cost of
your.
Also there is that.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure that that's entirely
accurate either gets to reduce
the consumption of electricity
off of the grid and so for my
home yes it is reduced my
monthly electric bill to most
months it is zero some months I
get a check a small check now it
was larger when I was getting
racks from the utility but there
are some months when I pay
depending on how much I used
to.
Thanks cost between fifteen and
twenty thousand.
To install this.
Madam chair and and
Representative that depends also
my system cost about ten
thousand.
Okay chair.
How did you develop in terms
have these loans.
All of that two thousand people
were yes.
Madam chair and representative
on mining initially I was
getting paid wraps and so it was
paid back it approximately seven
years for that system partly
because when I put it in we were
still paying fairly substantial
racks now I have an essentially
I don't have a hundred dollar
electric bill a month that works
out to twelve hundred dollars a
year and therefore over the
course your by we're getting rex
and usually by yes is the system
pays off in somewhere around
eight to ten years.
Madam chair person that.
No longer construction on the
wall.
To purchase the systems that
staff and.
Madam chair representative I
believe for the most part that
is accurate.
Is anyone X. eight X. two X.
connect.
Thank you okay thank you Madam
chair representative Scott
to my knowledge there is no rex
be paid in the state of Mexico
at this time
but basically the economics of
the system real simply let's
just take the ten thousand
dollars of there's a federal tax
credit there's a state tax
credit bringing that cost of the
system down currently in this
example to six thousand dollars
so the system pays off through
the energy savings at the
Senator souls reference and
eight to ten years would not be
any.
And madam chair.
Thanks for introducing hello
terms all of this left yes after
all the taxes.
In trouble.
First selling power back to the
to which is that.
Madam chair representative now.
If I may um Madam chair
representative Scott it's it's
the savings so it's basically
it's page the system pays off by
which are not purchasing not
what you're selling.
Okay now here.
Senator Mitch for.
You're logged long hours and.
Yeah retail price.
To usage to see.
That.
Madam chair representative I
believe that that accurate yes.
Okay.
So.
In the course of a month shares
we're going to spend the
majority forwarded to this
organization and later that.
Two leader this two zero.
That power spins backwards.
This is that retail practice.
Is that.
At.
it's coming into its.
Actively to.
To be able to assist zero at
which point.
It goes to the cost of the
generated power.
If I may um madam chairman
Representative Scott so there's
not a a like a buying and
selling day long of energy on
the system essentially what
happens is utility reads the
meter and if there's been more
energy use that generated that
billing meter will have a lot
gonna and your charge for that a
mob.
If it has stayed the same or
less than you're not paying
anything except of course the
basic charge the chilli charges
you for being a customer and you
would be given typically some
form of credit for that excess
generation but the point I want
to make is again you're not
buying and selling in a day
long.
All the time you're you're it's
just once a month there's a
pool.
Okay madam chair Senator Wirth
what I just strong.
Forward I want to meet your
needs to see rob lost at.
It was putting power back is at
the front of return your calls.
Correct Madam chair
representative of different
utilities have different
arrangements on that so you're
not always getting on all
utilities for retail credit on
that so that does very.
There's three investor owned
utilities and.
Like twenty.
Roll call up so if there.
The rules.
I think that.
Oct options.
Now to citing that.
What.
Including partial solar panels
these utilities are obligated
to.
If your.
Here circumstances I need to do
which is the ability for funding
all right.
Madam chair representative on
the line of the obligating
technically they are because of
the way the system is set up
this system is connected and the
way electricity works once it
once there's no longer a
sufficient load at the location
that lectures it is gone going
to go back to the grid.
Okay so.
In that circumstance.
The significant chill walked
hours going back into the system
at times when the utility the.
Doesn't need is that also.
Well maybe as a relative but.
I'll allow.
I agree with you on that yes and
madam chair sure to explore is
it possible that this
right all.
Characteristics you just have
strain on it distribution
system.
Thank you this is that at that
point is really not the is also
Madam chair representative.
It is possible but that should
not happen because New York
extensive screening.
And other methodologies required
by all utilities I
interconnection rule that's been
in place since two thousand
eight and was just updated so
every system this inter
connected to the grid goes
through an extensive screening
process at the utility that's
interconnected to in addition
every system is permitted and
inspected so that should not
have.
So madam chair team match for
fifth.
If it will go.
Just switch your all the players
all homeowners.
Yes.
To disconnect.
Yeah.
Overall charge sure well.
Based on the interconnection
neighbors there are disconnects
and there are various meet
safety means what it place of
and it that's on the customer
side and that on the utility
side there's also other
protections as well.
Secretary.
All.
Next is Representative but.
Thank you madam chair good
morning senator good morning
So couple questions and
A process that I used to own a
committee to to
telecommunication Mexico
locations and also have a kind
of an idea of.
you know.
Trying to maybe additional solar
panels and I would like nothing
more than to support this but I
really have some concerns
So my big my biggest concern
right now is that if you
completely remove the cap.
And you're only wanting to do
some additional.
Solar power.
To maybe do car at the and so on
and so forth why are we not just
raising the cap on I just
completely removing it.
You know I I worry about
My own which I would love to
find a way
Hundred thousand acres four
hundred acres in New Mexico and
I'm adding all the solar panels
and you know I am recouping some
investment they're.
The the concern that I have is
that we're completely removed
the cap instead of just maybe
raising the cap to allow.
That needed power that you're
saying that residential people
may need to so could you comment
on that please.
Chair.
It makes no economic sense to
cover your hundred acres with
solar panels because the the
extra money that you would get
if you're generating more than
you're using on site is the
avoided cost of energy which is
about one typically one to two
cents per kilowatt hour we're.
The utility is going to charge
twelve cents for all of that you
can't make any money doing that
can't use that as your
retirement it makes no sense to
oversize the system it only
makes sense to right size the
system and so the market takes
is what really kicks in here to
make sure people don't put in
the system that's too large but
whatever we did it would be
artificial and therefore there
would be some that may need a
larger amount because they're
going to have.
Three L. I'm making things up re
electric cars they're going to
be doing space seating they've
got all kinds of other things
that they need to it only makes
sense to right size the system
the hundred twenty percent cap
doesn't allow that.
Madam chair and and senator that
by removing the cap.
And then tell me if you disagree
with this but aren't we going
into a whole new round of.
the market.
I mean that that's that's
Senator Representative you know
it there is no financial
incentive to put in the system
larger than the one that's right
for your needs there's no
financial incentive there's no
cap you can do whatever you want
to.
Madam chair representative and
senator madam chair essentially
yes I suspect you put but that
would be absolutely full page
two there is no financial
incentive not restarted you from
doing that.
Include that's the concern that
I have is that there's no.
Madam chair there and senator
kit there's no role.
And madam chair one thing that
does keep you a little bit and
my experts may be able to talk a
little bit more but has to do
with the interconnection of
requirements with the utility
when you're doing things if
you're trying to put your
gargantuan system on of which
you're not going to be using any
of the power.
And and again help me out here
but my understanding is that the
utility is able to say yeah we
can't handle all of that extra
power that you're planning to
putting on that this one
particular line.
And you know put the gate doing
that.
So.
Senator and this may be a
question for your expert.
When you're putting in these
types of I don't I'm not a solar
expert I would love to have one
of my house me just say that
but.
When we're building
and and you know we have
different types of lines for.
Yeah I'm just gonna give you an
example we have different time
of water water lilies for
commercial and residential
they're bigger they're smaller
and so on and so forth and the
pipes are smaller and bigger
is it not so that.
If there's a if there is a a
multi use property that has a
commercial business at a
residence on it that it's it is
possible that the line that goes
into this would have to be
bigger than just a commercial
and that there's no cap then
there's a problem.
Madam chair representative
so you raise a valid point and
again that's why we have a place
a very extensive I would every
state has a place
interconnection rules for solar
and all generating facilities
and the larger the system the
more expensive the screening is
it each and every system that is
in our connected to the grid has
to go through the screening
process and in fact we just went
through a two year long process
to update this screening and and
people from all over the country
were were weighing in
additionally there's other
protections because through the
permitting process and
inspection process but
And and so again we do have
those protections and madam
chair and and senator so there
are a lot of properties in
Albuquerque I don't know about
other places that are zoned for
mixed use which are commercial
and residential combined.
can you comment on that.
If there's no cap well to me if
the the cap is is.
Yes it is not a mechanism to
ensure safety reliability of the
system which I think everyone in
this room wants that's very
important
what does help to ensure that is
the permitting process the
inspection process once the
system is it's all of these are
by people either from the state
of New Mexico or the
jurisdictional like Albuquerque
then again also the inner
connection rule that the
utilities are required to follow
in the utilities and I'm I'm
more familiar with you know but
they have a whole department
that little league analyzes each
and every application it's a
it's a tedious process so
there's a lot of oversight to
ensure the safety realize madam
chair and and senator and
I agree that there are
mechanisms in place but when
you're looking at permitting and
you have a mixed use property
and you have a the commercial
and residential property
together that is owned
appropriately for mixed use.
You know the commercial piece
may override the residential and
there's no cap and there could
be an issue there.
Are to be here a real issue in
in how many solar panels are
allowed and whether or not.
Energy is going to be generated
to be able to be sold and and
that that is an issue that I
have in my mind that is a very
big concern to me.
it's so I'm going to I'm sorry
go ahead Representative if I
might not chair and
representative this is not about
selling energy selling energy to
to anyone here this is about
what you're consuming on site
not have with yourself well if
that is truly the case Senator
and madam chair that I think
that we need to maybe have a cap
that allows for easy uses that
year.
Interested in whether you own
one car this electric for three
cars but there should be
something that set the reason
cap allows that to be.
You know part of this whole
concept so that was one of the
biggest issues that I have right
now
the second issue I have madam
chair and senator and I want to
support this I really do I mean
I really think that this is
where we're headed but I do
still see some issues with with
the way this is written the
other thing that I'm concerned
with is.
We have sixteen call ups in New
Mexico.
Madam chair and senator this
morning I saw about ten of them
in here opposed to this I am
very I think it's a city plan
for twenty eight years and.
I there was not a case that I
dealt with that.
We have yeah we have that kind
of opposition.
I mean every probably every
other case I dealt with that
kind of opposition I'm concerned
the number of the people that
were in here this morning are
still in opposition and I also
saw you energy companies PNM the
largest company in.
Mexico and Xcel energy spoke.
I would like to see this bill
goes through but I would like to
see some people come forward and
say Hey you know we want to work
with these guys we want to get
this done we want you know words
support these folks represent a
lot of people in the state of
New Mexico and in those issues
madam chair from my experience
working on land use cases for a
long time.
This this is a land use case
and that type of opposition I'm
sorry thank and I and I heard
what
Your the gentleman from I think
it was it was AA
so that we can work this out the
rules but if we're having this
agency much opposition in the
beginning it just gets that much
harder to move forward and still
have that opposition and they
come to fruition I think that
it's better to try to deal madam
chair and and Senator deal with
that opposition now.
And come forward with with that.
We can support them to try to
deal with that later and that's
just from experience madam chair
and and senator and you know I
want to support this.
But these are some serious issue
that I and I just.
I'm struggling I'm seeing people
in the background shaking their
heads nodding their heads what
we're talking about well we'll
deal with this later.
And and with all respect to
respect Senator I I want to
support this but I want to have
some of these issues dealt with
now.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative next is
registered thank you very much
of Madam thank you senator that
thank goodness for appreciate
the great questions and
discussion at Senator chair
Senator.
Is there are do you have an
expectation that there will be
increased energy demand from
homeowners for transportation
for appliances is there.
Can you go back through your
reasons for that expectation.
Madam chair representative yes
there is a move across the
country to electrify everything
to move to electric space
heating to electric cooking
using particularly induction
cooking
moving to elector vehicle
charging that I think it's one
of the new Ford trucks that have
speaking of batteries on it that
you actually can read your house
on it for about three days just
off of the charts at that level
and so that is going to increase
the electric usage within the
country and what this does is
allows people with distributed
generation to right size the
system for the amount they're
going to use I think it's been
miss characterized as people
putting extra panels on to sell
electricity to the Electric
Company and make money that is
not the point at all if we is to
use the electricity on site that
you generate and to right size
that and with the increased
usage of electricity nationally
this is designed to take off
that artificial limitation on
how big so that people were able
to right size the system as
they're anticipating additional
electric use.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and I I think
You know I I know folks back
home we're looking at upgrading
their systems to do different
sorts of things and that
requires a lot of different
investment is so madam chair
Senator and I think if folks
there's product knowledge meant
that there is going to be an
increase in leprosy uses an
electricity demand and I
but frankly I fear that if we
keep if we keep the cap as it is
currently based upon previous
uses under a very different
receive that we will have
constituents who are calling us
and saying why the legislature's
setting rules that don't allow
me to get that electric vehicle
over to.
Heating system what happened.
Madam chair Senator do you
There are rules regarding sort
of size of interconnection for
distributed generation and I
know your expertise when to that
a little bit but
Are those rules are those just
guidelines or those rules that
are
whether it's our co ops of our
investor owned utilities are
those rules that they can
enforce and say look this is
simply a system that will
overload what our ability to to
serve.
My understanding is yes but that
might experts as much more
detailed in this area
Madam chair of Representative a
small yes I mean it could be the
inner connection rule is from
the public regulation commission
it's a very long link the.
Document that has a screening
processes and in other.
criteria there and it's it's
very specific utilities are
required to follow that and
there's a lot of thought has
been put into that document in
the new drive that again we
spent two years with numerous
stakeholders from people like
from Sandia labs and other you
know.
Experts so yes of those
safeguards are very contraction
Stallis and chair Senator
experts thank you for that I I
think this shows why are PRC is
so important legislators sets
policy we rely on a strong
public regulation commission
with robust stakeholder outreach
to build this sort of
you know to build the field the
rules of the road as it were for
a rapidly changing and advancing
and energy.
I appreciate that testimony
hello I look forward to sort of
learning more in detail but I I
appreciate that testimony and
again here Senator expert from
my own experience back home not
having one of the systems but
with constituents and others
will go through a very lengthy
at times interconnection
agreement in process with.
Investor owned utilities el Paso
electric in this case seems to
maintenance and not just go out
there build a system that is
tied into the grid with no
oversight.
In fact madam chair Senator
thanks for it seems to me very
much the other case where there
is extensive work before that
system is permanent much less
bills of which the utility or
stakeholders and in fact that
time can stretch sometimes
significant periods of time does
anything in your bill Madam
chair Senator change that with
this require either a co op
board the investor owned
utilities to
It artificially speed up these
timelines for approve.
Representative.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you Senator.
I think so all right I I will
support this legislation I think
well on the very good discussion
and positive discussion anytime.
There is a cap.
And there are changes to that I
appreciate very much the
conversation and I think.
Very relevant points that that
we should hear it from me
ultimately the fact that there I
think within the next year or
two there will be constituents
that are artificially limited by
what we have in place right now
will be able to purchase that
vehicle will be able to hire a
construction crew here in New
Mexico to upgrade their system
perhaps
it it convinces me to support
but I appreciate very much the
very about.
Thank you.
Mrs Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Senator he lives at the March
times at the end yes
These systems right sized is
that a defined term.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure that the defined term
out right sizing would be
building a system that provides
the amount of energy that you
use on a monthly basis out and
certainly it's up sometimes and
others so it's in averaging
across that but building a DG
system that provides the amount
of energy that you are using on
site so that you are not putting
more on to the grid then you're
using you're not using more than
you're using that the overall
average use you are producing
the energy you're using at that
site.
This is not the defined term
subject to of the desires of
that post is that.
Madam chair and representative
you know it's not a defined term
other than economically right
sizing means that you're not
buying or selling extra energy
off of the grid you're using the
amount that you're.
That you're producing.
Madam chair.
Senator at the state that it is
on the.
By not being defined.
Yeah.
What's the issue.
The cat is a real issue for me I
think it is for many of the
people that spoke in opposition
but more importantly than the
cat.
Is the.
Is the.
Level of.
All.
That will be anchored with these
systems and.
And I yeah I think it
I think it's very important
madam chair.
Senator that we listen to these
all.
That.
Let them.
Managing these systems what
we're doing is making their
system.
Kate.
I see there is a.
Yes I will be eight eight more.
Significantly the to the or
Alectra transportation.
In some areas.
Out of all.
She is someone for all of those
you know how are you out that
reduces those batteries the
other day because of the
problems with.
The.
That I think.
This bill fails to address is
how much more complicated it
makes a elector.
Madam.
Managing a system that has these
fluctuating implants.
for different areas.
Is
reason that we have great
modernization bill's going
through right now.
That's the reason.
Electric coops.
Electric suppliers in New Mexico
if you look at prices over the
last.
Three years.
Five years.
The right the right alright K.
W. our our rights the.
Would you agree with that.
Madam chair representative no
actually over the last year the
rates in the past electric it's
gone down.
Chair.
Secretary that may be true in
that case specific area.
The right across New Mexico are
not with one day.
What we're doing is not going to
make electricity cheaper.
It may make electricity cheaper
for those that can afford.
Yes.
On their home.
Rates in general are going up
because of the complications of
the grid and the inherent costs
of this now.
Madam chair in.
Senator.
Without having a cat without
having right sized.
Determined.
Without.
Addressing the complications of
the.
Do you understand why so many
people up this morning and said
they're not against which
transfer the specific date there
the complications that are and
intact with what we're doing
without addressing the body
issues do you understand their.
Madam chair representative most
of what they indicated is they
were concerned about consumer
protection of the grid
modernization has been dealt
with by this legislature last
year and that was where most of
their concerns were there is are
already built on upgrading the
grid grid modernization types of
issues.
Madam chair and secretary
They didn't get the message.
They still believe there's a
problem and I do too and I think
I mean I think we did a really
good jobs legislature.
About education we go to
teachers in the state.
What's this what's that how do
we get there about.
Eight one.
We're not doing that about what
we're to that we're not
listening to the people that
manage much of rural New Mexico.
Their prices at the
Escalate.
That was one get partial Lee was
mentioned in testimony this
morning thank you what the rates
up they have I have a big at
this renewables I also have the
highest rates there is in New
Mexico I think that maybe the
hives.
And that that is in here with
the issues.
Representative
Ruiloba.
Is that a house of like engineer
that work for P. and the.
where they in this committee
after over and said.
Yeah you are right elector rates
are going up.
More it's.
Let's see what the process would
take.
The problem is we need to right
size if you want to use that
term which I don't live.
There's Dr.
But.
You leave the.
The size of the.
For that.
Legislative urban customers
electric cars make.
Make sense you know short travel
back to back home quickly given
that that probably makes sense.
And you have two of those.
Raj we have a elector.
He got electric water heating.
The building all of those
demands that peak certain times
of the day.
And the rest of the day the
systems pushing it out on the
created for everybody went to
work or where everybody's gone
you have a real balance issue.
It's a huge problem.
The system if you're gonna put a
moment right size of your right
size your batteries so you can
get.
It's and store the power that
you are producing.
So that you are really
addressing the cost of.
The lower the renewable market.
That's what's happening.
Do you believe battery storages
should be included in your bills
to smooth that platform that
that.
At the.
Interruption of our potential to
interruption with the real.
Do you think it's a net and
indirect costs that should be
addressed in your bill Madam
chair representative now.
And
madam chair Senator explained to
make more money I think it is
really an issue.
Madam chair representative I
don't think that has anything to
do with this particular bill.
Well it has to do madam chair
and.
Senator with the effects of this
bill it's not in there and
that's the problem that I'm
addressing you're right it's not
in the field.
But it should be.
Jack should be there.
The idea of being right sized
should be there.
This is an open and it will cost
instructions as every one of the
operators came in through the
day the large and small.
And I think that is the issue.
It's not that they can't solve
our it's not that they're
against renewables it's against
the we are not fully addressing
the complications.
increasing the size of so much
re Google units coming on it
with out.
Under the.
Without.
Properly.
Cat being sized having storage
to address the complications
that they.
And so I
I think that.
That so.
Transportations
I think there's areas of it will
be.
It will be well received by the
public and should be I just of
the legislature.
Categorically this is not yes it
was the degree it's not in the
best interest of the Mexicans
and we're going to continue to
raise our prices that we have a
completely address the issues
that we all lowered their thank
you madam chair thank you
senator for renewable.
Thank you Representative.
Madam.
Senator.
This is
This.
Have.
That status.
We're having with sessions.
It was last.
Five percent of usage.
Service.
or.
For allowing.
That was a lot of expanding.
But this is just have a little
bit different question.
Sen.
Madam chair
how often.
Pandemic.
For having us.
What does that change your.
Seven.
How's that.
Madam chair in Representative.
Currently the hundred twenty
percent and then first when this
was put in is been there for
quite some time there were a
century no EDD's available and
so it was not in anticipation of
PED's it was put in all my
understanding almost exclusively
so that people did not take
advantage of the rather
extensive rex that were being
paid so that they work you know
to to kind of up.
They could joke of it but that
they were doing their retirement
by putting in a way oversight
system where they're going to
get extra money from the utility
by selling them energy and so
was to control that.
All of those extra payments are
gone now and so the hundred
twenty percent cap no longer is
necessary in order to do that.
The hundred twenty percent cap
today many people are bumping up
against that and aren't able to
a system that allows them to
meet the energy demands that
they foresee as they move to
electric heating whether it's
through high capacity he pumps
whether they're moving off of
heating water with natural gas
and moving to electric water
heaters cooking with induction
ranges and electric cooking in
charging E. vehicles and when
they are looking at doing that
they very quickly run up against
that hundred twenty percent cap
and they're not able to generate
the energy on site that they do
for their whole.
So
Action.
Do.
Takes us options is that you
have us figure all this got to.
I'm sorry yes yes yes why are
you here
Yes range not.
Do that seven cap with.
Yes Representative.
Our.
The tax on the this was here.
but.
That's a concern.
But that chair Senators in some
cases.
We talked about why size so.
For.
The individual.
This legislature yes and it's.
One to five years.
And that I by.
This one
probably stated that.
This.
There are one hundred percent on
so.
There.
Share.
Senator.
legislation on the solar to
shine.
The.
Sessions that will be required
to reach to measure more servers
are in.
So very soon.
Also need to say.
House shine.
We are watching one since.
So madam chair.
Probably create is as.
As more and more.
Honors.
Options source eleven civil will
be the center of.
I.
Us National Commission.
Eight eight
gas one.
Just checking those decisions as
usage by size for them.
Probably.
As.
In the.
So it is.
Well as far as possible so.
Says sorry at this.
All of these.
All that and.
Selves.
That is going on.
Back to.
Chair Senators is.
Having to more and.
Costs.
Increases.
That.
That the structures having paid
for all this right.
As if you are reading.
You were right.
If we were sure so it is often
share.
By.
They were I love this.
Show off and.
Three I I.
Sure.
Chair the.
I.
forcing all right.
There are costs.
You are right this.
One.
People who are the slight.
Chair Senators.
Our system.
The long range
I need to be able to.
These
special days.
It just.
It's just that's the problem.
You should always have some
we've got.
But now chair Senators we do
this sessions we allow for.
I I.
I wasn't.
Sell that and.
But this.
By Representative now that we.
To go in this particular.
The man's all.
As arching.
House ways.
This is just one.
That the items are.
The
And
it appears.
That.
Just cap off.
Rodeo I for.
And that sure I.
so we.
The.
All.
So the.
Are suspicious it lasted.
Awesome.
I.
A lot of our.
I just wanna make sure I have
our.
R. O..
I want.
Chair and senator.
I think there's problems with.
We have.
As a problem for you have.
Share whether.
Our water will.
Chair here and do this one more
special education
This.
When we have our.
To appease who are forty eight
hours.
I also.
The White House session.
A lot of yes.
And those.
We allows
his actors.
Representative we have one more
field need to be able to thirty
three to really.
So my answer is there are we are
the future of the we are.
and other.
Sure.
Yes.
The.
Sure.
So as you're adding to the
students this is my issue which.
I do believe it's possible.
Prof ready.
And in
those purchases on.
costs.
Next is Representative.
Chair thank you senator
One of the.
Things about being on house
energy is this summer I got to
participate in the legislative
energy horizons Institute which
is a fantastic experience and
one of the things that I learned
and.
For the record our chairwoman
and Representative Nibert have
also gone through this program.
And representative Scott my
fault
you know what there's an
exercise.
That we do is we're taking the
course to try to at the simulate
managing a grid and factoring in
consumer demand and policies put
on put in place by by the states
and for me what was really.
Informative wise how complicated
the energy grid is and that.
One small change.
If the Legislature thinks it's a
small change may not in fact be
a simple fix or something simple
for a utility are great to
handle.
So I very much appreciate having
had that experience in.
Madam chair and senator I was
reading the analysis I believe
that came over from the Senate
and I want to read out one of
the items is number four in the
policy issues including trends
and background and see if.
You have sort of a response to
some of the concerns that were
brought up.
madam chair Senator.
Number four is of potentially
greater concern should a
significant number of facilities
be constructed which would then
start selling electricity to
offset consumers for back to the
power company with the impact
would be the impact on the
electricity grid it's stability
and on the ability of the
state's regulatory authorities
to mandate whatever changes
equipment procedures at such
that might be necessary or
advisable under these
circumstances.
EMNRD points out that if
limitations on the capacity of
the electrical greater exceeded
serious damage can result to
that system.
and so madam chair and senator
I'm interested in sort of the
response and and that.
How you see those you know being
dressed.
Madam chair representative.
What would you read I think
that's talking about solar
energy or DG in general this is
not going to be that suddenly
everybody is going to run out
and put on a two hundred.
That system on their house and
and next month get over right
the system all of it as my
expert indicated requires
interconnection and to ensure
that the interjection of
connections are there and
available which means it looks
at how much power could be going
each direction again the
system's handle it before they
are permitted to go on and so
over all certainly the grid
modernization takes into account
that there is going to continue
to be increasing DG on the
system
and that does required making
changes to the overall system
that's the whole point of the
grid modernization that was
passed is to do those operates
in most cases the three
modernization that has been
taken and I know well past
electric which is our area what
they've done is they put smart
meters on they haven't done the
things like increasing the
capacity of the lines and some
of the other things but they are
fully a lab to do that and use
that as a part of their next
rate case and recruit all of the
cost plus there are nine percent
guaranteed return on investment
for those upgrades.
Thank you madam chair and
senator just so.
For when a.
Consumer host wants to increase
and go above and beyond that one
hundred and twenty percent is
there a mechanism for them to do
that currently.
Madam chair representative it
would be the same thing if
you're putting a large if you
already have a DG system on and
you're going to increase that
you also you have to get go
through all the permitting
process is all of the other
things for interconnection to
ensure that that that meets the
requirements there's nothing
about that changes.
Madam chair and senator sorry so
I guess what I'm asking is right
now under the current set up if
you would like to have a system
that.
Exceeds that one hundred twenty
percent is there a way for you
to.
Get that cap waived madam chair
to move and Representative to my
knowledge no.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator are
It is now is is at said that
there is a way to waive that so
I'll get more clarification
Madam chair representative yup I
could ask my expert who deals
with these things on a regular
basis the if I correct you know
of any mechanism for I'm not
aware of any formal mechanism I
am aware.
That chair representative
Representative Dixon I am aware
that I have heard that there
have been conversations with the
utility on a case by case basis
but.
The the the issue with that is
that right now they're still
that very and so then if you
exceed that then sometimes you
could having an informal
conversation.
Madam chair and senator and
Expert district does your teen
So in that.
If a hose storage if you want to
have a system that exceeds a
hundred twenty percent you would
be having a conversation with
your utility to ensure that they
have all of that you know that
the transformer would work and
the interconnection and all of
those pieces can accommodate any
energy that would be sent back
to the grid.
Madam chair representative Dixon
so that would have to happen
regardless of you have the
hundred twenty percent that
happens at each and every
application.
Madam chair Senator.
Where the
Investor owned utilities or co
ops engaged in this process as
the bill is being drafted.
Madam chair representative I get
I have had some conversations
with the past electric and there
are.
Lobbyist and and people of that
sort they typically are not very
receptive of anything that
increases at.
Distributed generation on a
rooftop solar.
thank you madam chair and
senator in.
Hearing for you know doing my
research up for
this bill I did come across an
article in wired magazine that
was actually talking about this
issue in California and some of
the studies that have been done
and
you know one of the comments in
the article is about the power
grid in those areas can't accept
the additional electric current
generated by solar panels there
isn't enough capacity for
everyone to have solar power
even solar we're free
it there were a number of issues
that.
Came up and it was actually
based on a study in nature
energy looking sort of at the
economic
inequality of distributed energy
and everything that.
I've come across in.
Research that I've looked at for
the analysis that's been
provided to us.
Highlights concerns with energy
going back to the grid and our
grids ability to handle that so
madam chair and senator that
concerns me.
A lot because I don't see.
The input from either the PRC
for our utilities and how
they're going to manage that.
And.
I have solar.
I love it and I would love for
everyone to have so the madam
chair and senator I think that
if we're going to have if
everyone's gonna have solar and
everyone's going to have an
electric vehicle which I think
is where we're moving it needs
to be done in a way that is safe
for the Energy going back to the
grid because I I don't think
nobody people don't have
batteries right now but some
people do if everyone had a
battery and it would be a little
bit different but.
I'm just concerns that there are
pieces to this puzzle that are
not in place to have this be.
Patient and effective.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative listening
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and.
Thank you senator calls for.
Bring this initiative for.
I agree with their efforts.
And the one question that I do
have.
and it seems to be a problem.
Or maybe not a problem.
But an issue of
Of infrastructure Madam chair.
And that's
The
The excess energy.
Are at the excess electricity.
And certain.
Utilities are unable to absorb
more.
Are provided into their credit.
So what was going through my
mind madam chair and senator was
That's an issue with with the
the legislation and and and and
and not problematic
my question to you is.
Madam chair
If we're able to capture.
That Texas.
And kind of
Apply that Tracy.
Who are lower income households.
Not on on on solar.
Electricity but solar panels.
And maybe that's not for this
bill.
but maybe you know if you could
Kind of
Address that if there is a
possibility.
in terms of capturing.
That at electricity.
And run it into a credit.
For low income households not at
did not have solar power solar
panels.
Madam chair and and
Representative and I think I
understand what you're saying
out of the utility companies
would probably be very unhappy
with that because they like to
being able to sell electricity
to the lower income ones they
don't want me gifting that my
extra elect if you will which I
think is with us about is
whether when there's excess
being produced whether that can
just be used to run the meters
for other people once electrons
on the grid electrons don't know
where they came from they don't
really care and I don't think
that the utilities which are in
the business of trying to get
more people on their system and
selling more electricity and
actually they don't actually
make profit by selling
electricity they want to have
more infrastructure which is
where they get their profit but
if we're gifting electrons to
lower income people I don't
imagine that they would be in
support of doing that.
So madam chair Senators souls
on.
so so much for my idea.
Madam chair representative I
think there's more to my idea it
would be important I I'm just of
the eight in the time I've
worked with the with utilities
I'm not I don't think they'd be
very paper
well Madam I think it's an idea
worth exploring.
Really.
Because it this is gonna be an
issue going forward.
I think they're that opportunity
because we always talk about and
share
terms of renewables that out you
know the the lower income folks.
And especially working families
of childbearing age.
you know
are not taking full advantage
of the renewable revolution in
our state and that's because of
the issue of finance manager at
a cost of setting up these
systems especially the solar.
Madam chair but what really
concerns me regarding that issue
madam chair.
Is the kid Carson.
Klopp.
When they say.
That they can absorb.
You know the added electricity
and why do I what I say that
Madam.
It's because get Carson.
And madam chair kind of a
pioneer.
In New Mexico once the coops.
In terms of really transitioning
to renewables almost like
overnight.
And
it's my understanding there the
only call out.
That are reliant on
Some of our for daytime
generation.
At madam chair and there's a
reason for that.
And they're saying they can
absorb but they're saying that
they're asking their their
customers madam chair to to to
store in the battery.
So apparently they have some
capacity in establishing start.
With them there there are
boundaries of the cooperative.
Which is what the other
cooperatives.
Even.
At step one in terms of getting
to that point madam chair.
And and I think madam chair
I think the could question
cooperative.
It's going to explore that.
Why you know
in terms of.
The at electricity that they're
unable to capture.
In their great.
Thank you madam chair because
they got I think that the
technical.
maturity.
Persist the other cooperatives
it was a what's gotten to the
point where they're at.
And you know madam chair the
other question that I had is
Our Senator
Are the coopers under tri state
Under federal jurisdiction under
the PRC.
Madam chair representative I'm I
don't know I'm not familiar with
yeah page where they're getting
their energy or whether they're
under for gore or the other
pieces I don't know about
individual co ops which when
they're under I have I the
things I've heard I think PRC as
some jurisdiction but I I really
don't know.
After the some of the
Members of the coopers of their
this after that question
Representative yes.
Good morning madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee this party is a tri
state generation transmission
association price itself is work
particularly it is federally
regulated costs will fall under.
PRC for several things.
Thank you.
And madam chair
My understanding is that for
that that tri state is.
under the jurisdiction of the
jurisdiction of of shark the
At all.
Energy regulatory commission.
Madam chair
And in doing so
Basically the PRC has no say
over.
Right establishing rates.
and that that was I think the
downside then.
The tri state
going with for instead of
staying with the PRC.
in terms of
There are right.
The right policy terms of
establishing rate the rate
structure madam chair.
And and I think that lends
itself also madam chair Senators
cells.
The fact that
The Carson Alectra held out of
the distracted by state.
generation
Coalition which is the.
Well after collaborative
coalition.
And it cost them a pretty penny
madam chair.
Millions of dollars but in doing
so they were able to kind of
address.
The pathway madam chair to
renewable energy and becoming
self sufficient.
Which the remaining.
Cooperatives that are still
under tri state have been unable
to do.
So madam chair reason why.
There is a lack of
infrastructure.
Development within the existing
cooperatives.
Is mainly because.
Our philosophy towards achieving
a pathway towards renewables.
Is hindering.
That development of the COVID
that element of the
infrastructure to get up to that
point.
While.
The card.
Has grown exponentially.
In terms of establishing that
infrastructure to the point
where that they're becoming self
sufficient.
Hello in that process a person.
The point that they're at one
hundred percent.
Solar power daytime generation I
don't think we can say the same
chair for the other
cooperatives.
Senator what we're looking at
issues that the Senator brings
before us.
I think that's an Asian and an
issue no matter that we should
really take to heart.
Is that if there is no building
of the infrastructure within the
existing cooperatives.
And they're and they're standing
against this type of
legislation.
You know that basically calls
for.
The based on the energy policies
of our state chair and that's in
our office and that has happened
I struck the tristate pulling
out of the PRC altogether and
going with that of federal
jurisdiction.
Madam chair is that the.
It that is that it hop type
manager the cooperatives from
fully pursuing energy policies
of our state.
You know and I think this bill
it is a good example of that
madam chair.
You know and so I think that's
what we have to look at in terms
of this piece of legislation
that it's just not this issue of
doing away with the with the.
What the under the under twenty
percent.
Capt.
It's a matter of.
Our state policy madam chair.
Really laying out the pathway
that if we're looking you
seriously looking at our state
becoming a certain percentage of
renewable.
Dependent.
C..
That we have to look at building
the infrastructure to make that
happen.
And I think this is a step
forward in kind of complying
with legislative policy manager.
So thank you madam chair thank
you center solves.
for bringing this legislation
forward.
Thank you for the next for a
second time in very quickly and
surface.
You madam chair just.
A quick call then and in one
question.
The maximum instantaneous are
the systems.
In order to connect.
One hundred percent annual
average well.
What I.
So.
Need.
Two thirty pollution trash.
Okay so.
All right which.
We're not there is.
Choose to share require.
And madam chair Senator you
can also select.
Or you know what.
Thank.
Consequence of that is Mr.
Question madam chair.
Senator is going to.
Homeowners all and all the luck.
And that is the the charger.
And.
It takes for a period of time.
That's what we should also grant
and you use that data to that.
So shares.
Madam chair representative no I
don't think so but it's just as
easy to estimate how much that's
going to be and that would be
the idea of right sizing it when
you're actually putting on the
system for some people it might
be under twenty percent of what
they typically are using for
others it might be a hundred
fifty percent but it's pretty
easy to estimate those and
that's what somebody would do
because it doesn't make sense to
make it too large or too small
and so you would estimate what
you think it's going to be.
Chair soon to if you start
system program.
And the year two years three
years down the road decided you
wanted to add all of these work
for compliance each into the
charger you could have to.
On.
With new average.
Two sources.
To get to our.
Chair representative yes but you
could estimated also while you
were putting the system on and
get the almost exactly the same
number and it's going to very.
Thank
you.
That.
Representative.
The.
I'm sorry did you want to do
anything without your gift.
We're good for about.
Sure less yeah I Senator small
might have some resemblance or
even.
Yeah there are a number of
issues come up most of the
discussion I think it's been
very off topic from what this
actually does and it's been very
much about concerns about solar
in general on the grid not this
particular bill about increasing
the cap for the few people that
are going to be that need to be
able to put on a larger system
in order to right size it and so
I think many of the comments
that much more I can't solar
more solar going on the system
rather than the actual content
of this.
That.
Chair of the social.
One of the things that I've
heard in the we've heard.
Well there's a knowledge ment of
increased usage removing the cap
in its entirety.
So I'd like to work with the
sponsor
raising the cap and frankly as
more appropriate with.
Related.
And really good players please
tell us.
If the Sanchez okay.
So I apologize for my absence
and said and every parent it
sounds to me like rolling this
bill.
Sure okay yeah I'd like I said I
I think there been this
characterizations about what the
bill does but yeah we have that
I think that could be at least
that be a stopgap until we come
back in a couple years would be
to change things again but.
Okay
if you can.
Your work out language you a
chance to come back because it's
a Senate bill
it's already been through the
Senate I mean I can reschedule
if you guys can work something
out.
I.
Well we're working with
Representative Eli.
Thank you senator.
Don't pack up and leave we're
not there with you.
I understand I hope this one
goes quicker because I'm
supposed to be in another
committee that's got some very
important bills.
As well.
our next bill is Senate bill
seventy seven as amended new
home built
renewable requirements.
if there's members of the public
who are about to excuse
themselves I would ask you to
quickly and partly because
I think we're all expected in
other places shortly
Since.
Just in case Senator.
Germans please could you take
the conversation outside thank.
Etcetera so as many of your
thank you and this bill had a
fairly significant amendment
over on the Senate side
initially it started with new
construction happen.
Distributed generation on the
roof as part of the initial
build the the bill was
significantly amended to where
the builder would need to offer
aid distributed generation
system for the house so that it
could be rolled into the initial
mortgage but it is not required
that they do so the only
requirement that is left on this
is that new buildings have a an
outlet for an electric vehicle
as part of the initial bill that
adds a cost of somewhere between
a hundred two hundred dollars to
the build was what was
estimated as it came out of the
Senate and that's all the stuff.
Thank you is there a.
If anyone in the audience with
anyone like speaking in
opposition to this bill.
That one up.
So I don't think that many that
you keep it in ninety seconds of
depreciated.
Sure thank you again thank you
Mr chair committee have given
money or model from Ontario
county electric cooperative in
Cockroft New Mexico
I think the concern that I have
with this bill is the additional
cost for housing obviously we
serve some of course parts of
the state this would obviously
at increase those costs in
addition if you're gonna talk
graph credo so there are
cheating issues not every home
side is optimal for
photovoltaics.
And so
For those reasons I oppose this
bill.
Mr chairman and committee
members somebody affairs general
manager Lee County electric down
eleven to New Mexico rural
housing is already a big
challenge in our area well we're
one of the fastest growing areas
due to the oil field down there
I don't have adequate housing as
it is anything that adds costs
to new housing down there this
place an extra burden on our
potential new members there so I
just like to consider the cost
or the rising cost of housing in
rural America and I think this
bill would add to those cost
that's the reason I would oppose
the bill thank you very much.
Is there any anyone online who
would like to use our position
this bill please raise your hand
I see none is there anyone in
the room who would like to speak
in support.
Please follow line ninety
seconds.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charles good marker
speaking on the behalf in our DC
natural resources defense
council we urge your strong
support for this bill
it appears that at an amendment
and on the Senate side change
this so that there is not a
requirement for solar homes but
it's to the requirement to offer
it to buyers so that means that
sort and all funds that this
concerns about it forcing.
Our expenses for homebuyers if
it's just offered that it's a
choice R. it does require still
as I understand it the the
charger to be constructed that's
a very low additional cost is
going to save everybody money
there's not gonna be a new that.
Internal combustion engines
available soon so this just
makes sense thank you.
Good morning again Jim day
should and with renewable energy
industry association we believe
it is important yes this bill
because what it does is it can
uses the built environment to
install solar what that does it.
Ensures that we have the power
generated at the point of usage
which is much more efficient.
It also helps to do for
additional vestments into the
grid so it's save some money
there.
We also by having
generation dispersed there's
there's less of a single point
of failure issue and the final
right think it's going to be an
issue that we're gonna be
looking at as we put more
renewable energy in the system
is it's gonna take a lot of land
what this does is a using the
built environment it conserves
all rolled agricultural land so
what we're disappointed on the
amendment that it's not a
requirement now we're very happy
and I think this is a step
forward thank you.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Sam
Caroline the climate energy
advocate of conservation voters
Mexico we are in support of the
bill our state has very
ambitious state climate goals to
be Is Your emissions by twenty
fifty we also are very ambitious
renewable energy portfolio to
that diversifying goals and we
need to have more rooftop solar
to be able to achieve those
goals for those reasons and
others we ask that you support
the bills thank you.
Hello chair members of the
committee on the list I Koenig
are representing the Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter with the over
thirty five thousand members and
supporters we support this bill
integrating solar in charging
facilities into the initial
bills of new homes is central to
our urgent response to the
climate crisis and is much
cheaper to do it initially I'm a
huge affordable housing advocate
I care a lot about low income
people having access to housing
but they also need access at a
cheaper level to
electrification and with all the
tax credits that are out there
and the infrastructure bill
helping with the grid haven't
have just having heard the prior
conversation
I am sorry to see that it was
weakened in Senate tax but I'm
delighted that there still
requirement for charging it cost
me five hundred dollars to put
Evey charging in whereas if you
do it initially up front as you
heard it's a hundred to two
hundred I urge you to pass the
bill.
Good morning Mr chair
representative my name is Kelly
Aguilar on from the public with
the I'm currently a senior at
Santa Fe Indian school and I
encourage this bill to be passed
because I feel that have some
long term.
On the environment I try plus
not been anything yet to support
and be part of the solution for
climate change so I feel that
this bill will encourage them to
put solar power in place thank
you.
Thank you it's not entirely sure
what the students doing but we
do have at least one hand raised
speaking sports study wise for.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members this is steep
widespread I'm representing the
New Mexico solar energy
association and also for the New
Mexico rural we stand and
support at this bill and thank
the sponsor for continually
bringing these kinds of built up
on a personal side when we
bought our house was wired for
solar me very thankful for that
we did spend a thousand dollars
to put into the charger so we
think everybody should have the
opportunity to do this when they
buy a house Senate really as the
previous speakers have mentioned
it really lowers the price if
it's done already thank you very
much.
Thank you next up we have
Barbara Calif.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members this is Barbara Calif
representing the league of women
voters of New Mexico the league
stand in support of this bill
we're also disappointed by the
amendment but it's still
important bill and we hope that
you will pass thank you.
Thank you I don't see anyone
else members of the committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr chair.
What I.
Part of the.
I wonder why Chaves word offer
did not.
Sure that we're going to stall
the wheat the rest of that
sentence their reason for that.
Mr chair and and Representative
no that was the amendment that
was made at the time
the wording or their technical
issues to make it be better jobs
or if you would be open to any
of that is not a purpose for
that.
Well it
seems to me that.
Operating the system.
Maybe a whole.
Specifying the.
The whole foods issues that.
The system may not be able to.
Rules.
I.
And this is our.
Surrounded by supporters.
Using
this system.
Senator the very harsh.
Just maybe just off of the
system.
I have.
The language.
That's that's major here and
there.
Respect to the electrical
receptacle online three page
two.
What.
What is the intention.
So for a lot but.
My understanding is a charge.
By operators in the next three
to four to.
One fifty one portable our
regular.
Electrical receptacle.
Sharks so I said something about
the.
To the wire Mr chair
representative yes I mean it
this is not a regular electrical
receptacle typically I do get
the typically are two twenty so
that they have the fast charging
ability.
So.
Mr chair Senator seems to me
that.
More like to stop people could
be.
Thank you
for your patience.
What are the rules rules on.
Wall wall.
You are.
Service
why else I know we have a lot of
electrical receptacles of will
never be used
I have to pay for those you're
talking about is the actual our
receptacle.
The standard of the levels of.
It is a.
So I would choose the.
Since you are with your chat.
Do some.
Research and markets in the
that.
Jobs.
Comments with respect to the
issue.
Thank you representative
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator
I just had it couple questions I
really appreciated some of the
testimony talking about the
difference in cost add to build
in the charging as opposed to
adding it later on that was one
of my questions so I appreciate
that there are a number of
comments to that effect do you
happen to buy what year American
car manufacturers have said that
they're going to begin producing
only electric vehicles.
Mr chair representative I'm not
aware of a specific here the
things that I've heard is that
by the year twenty thirty fifty
percent of all vehicles states
will be electing.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I do believe that
there's actually a a year and
maybe it's twenty thirty by
which American manufacturers of
said that they will only be
producing electric and so my
point is that by that point time
it'll be very helpful for all
houses to have the capability to
charge electric vehicles whether
or not people in the right now
Mr chair and senator what is the
average.
Length of time
That helps
Exists
I mean I'd say home ownership
but home ownership changes hands
so you know.
Do we have is you know an
average.
Functioning for ten years twenty
years thirty years Mr chair and
and Representative Dixon I'm not
sure that there is any set
amount it certainly depends on
how well constructed the whole
B. is where the home is
constructed their places in the
country where their homes are
well over a hundred years of
where I grew up there were a
couple of homes that were torn
down after twenty years because
they were not functioning and so
it there are so many variables
on place on construction
techniques and everything that I
don't think that's a fully
answerable question.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator it certainly was
sufficient enough to sort of
make the point that
Maybe not everyone has an
electric vehicle right now but
by the point time and which we
will only be able to purchase
new electric vehicles those most
of those homes will still be in
use
my final points first off I
think that sometimes incremental
progress is better than none at
all and so I.
I'm perfectly fine with the
amendments I appreciate those
and then second I really
appreciate that senator that
this bill addresses one of the
sectors for greenhouse gas
emissions that we don't always
talk about which is building I'm
so thank you very much.
Thank you representative
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman will.
Cheers to table Senator next
but.
To charge what the school Mr
chair representative I don't
know.
Mister chairman Senator is.
Is a hundred.
Receptacle what's your
and does the impact on the.
Inclusion in cost for record.
Going to our
service.
Are there other
into the consequences hi this
is.
Mr chair and and Representative
I don't know the details of how
many amps or how big the system
needs to be the whole point of
it is when it's put in in the
construction of the house it is
substantially cheaper than if
you have to go back and put in a
larger breaker panel put in
additional wiring rather things
after the fact that it's a
significant cost to putting in a
charging you.
Okay thank you Mr.
There's a period of.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I mean sales
thank you thank you for
listening
earlier.
Appreciate that
so one of the questions I have
is on page two.
After.
And
Some comments that we received
from the construction industry
the second paragraph it looks
like they were okay with the
amendment this program is
amendments to not addressed
concerns.
Deviously raised by the I. T.
it would be difficult for C. I.
D. to adopt rules by the
effective date of July first
twenty twenty three could you
comment on that please.
Mr chair representative I don't
know what they're rulemaking
process is.
This is relatively simple to do
after having taken off or with
the amendment that's in there
to just add a lot of the
construction requirements of
putting in a receptacle for the
charter
I don't know what their
processes are how long it takes
or things of that sort so I
can't effectively respond to
help on that later.
I don't think we have anyone
here from C. ID Mr chair
Senator so it's difficult to
respond to this but I wonder if
we could leave that open a
little bit long meeting
because July first and if they
can't implemented thank.
Passing legislation that.
Can't be implemented and I think
that's a problem.
And I just wonder if we can
maybe leave that a little bit
more alright he make an
amendment that would allow it.
Six more months just you know
January first two thousand
twenty four something like that
Mr chair and senator.
Mr chair and representative you
know if if that's the will of
this committee that's fine I
don't think that changes that
all that much it just slows down
the process of where we're
actually moving forward in this
area to households that are
prepared for the future and and
senator and and Mister chair I
think completely support this
but I think that.
You know if if it's not
implementable
and they're raising that issue
that maybe we should do
something that and I would and I
would move it if you would
consider it a friendly amendment
to implement this by January
first twenty twenty four.
Mr chair and representative I
don't think that changes the
intent of this very much so that
could be considered differently
that that yup I only Madam might
be is deadlines create urgency
and if the deadline is.
The original one that you create
urgency to get it done then if
the deadline is January first
that all creators and see about
November for the beginning.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I would like to
make a motion that we do a
friendly amendment to change
that date to January January
first twenty twenty four.
There's also.
Thank you I actually I think
it's a great point that
when we put it.
Time frames and effects.
that we know the appropriate
length of time for rulemaking
I'm not comfortable making an
amendment without consulting C.
ID though on an RLD I think my
preference as a member of the
committee I am in support of
this bill but I think an
amendment perhaps on the floor
after consultation with C. ID
and R. LD that would be
certainly be my preference thank
you Mr chairman and senator that
would be perfectly fine but I
think that they have made a
statement in this.
Report and I think that you know
they're raising concerns that
they can't implemented by.
July first and I think we're
passing legislation that.
One of our own state agencies
can't implement.
So representation on that point
I think there's a break is
correct that family the flag to
conserve to give them more time
to.
Maybe they wanted to be July
first twenty twenty
yeah this at least address the
concern that was which.
Any further discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to the.
K. then you'd have an amended
bill.
separate use of force.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you Mr chair thank you senator.
we have Representative Townsend.
Thank.
just a couple of points that
ought to be addressed
Senator.
Where you envisioning these.
Fast charging.
Works being indoor or outdoor.
Mr was and the most cases these
are usually installed inside of
the garage to where you would
plug it in.
Mr chair and
and secretary.
There still are a lot of bills.
Raju's on us can't afford it or
they don't have room for some.
So I would I was the.
I suspect that that's exactly
what you were thinking of the
new ones all of the garage but a
lot of places don't have to they
don't have a garage got a look
at that look at the state the
impact of outboard the other
thing that I chuckled about what
it is.
I have seen probably fifty
generations are charging for
extra money.
For my iPhone over the last
seven years I can only imagine
what's going to happen with
these I don't know which one
would be the one that's been
beyond so although I would say
that gives.
You know.
It makes sense to me could you
put in the early if you know
you're going to have a but.
Senator person it can be on New
Mexico has little chance of ever
utilizing and the with the
thanks technology and I would
sit down in the same as the
owners of the four corners area.
Although I I I see what you're
doing but with the last
amendment thank you
options the office.
You know I don't know why the
contractors points with the
field as obligations that he
has.
He had the.
Additional offered I mean is and
it seems like now it's going to
be more expensive than it and
that was it so.
I really don't see the point
right now and I think we're so
far away from that.
The ability of richly patients
that water down to the point
that it's probably a little we
realize of.
That was would be my conscience
thank you.
It would also make.
For the past.
If you have a second Senator
schools would you like to
thank the posing that's just
the good thank you to HB to
focus.
Representative Braco yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative but when you're
it you can we we start over can
we get to pass as amended.
Travel to pass as amended you
need to say it was twice to be
the cause of the prior one just
you.
I think as amended or public
ever just are just just one
because they're exposed Star
sorry about that the.
Representative break up.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend nope.
Thank you.
Chairman Greenspan yes seven
four.
If you have seven four.
Thank you and I think I look
forward to being back in here in
