Terry create we have a quorum
okay any questions or concerns
estimates from the committee
before we begin.
Okay.
First our first bill today is
Senate bill twenty one scribe
burning during during reflects.
I keep telling us the red flag
bill but that's probably not get
the title.
We could maybe.
The US at the center of your.
Thank you Richard in the and
members of the committee this is
a committee substitute for
Senate bill twenty one has as
amended some of those amendments
were really can a little clean
up things that we did almost
four so it's not really as bad
sound and is it is it was that
under the bill prescriber which
shall not be conducted it
anytime when a red flag warning
has been issued by the National
Weather Service for the area the
prescribed burn you should take
place.
Last year the formation PKF
canyon fire became the largest
fire ever in New Mexico it was
partially the result of a
prescribed burn to get out of
control shows were lost and
property was destroyed fifteen
thousand five hundred households
had to evacuate.
United States for service and
the state for sure or working on
improving procedures involving
the start for.
But for those caught up in last
year's fire ridge to little
image too late.
Even with those procedural
changes there's no guarantee
this type of fire won't happen
again and who's to say the next
of our won't get cloud crofter
angel fire sure she eighty or
Cuba or possibly even
communities like Santa Fe.
In addition the eastern plains
are not exempt from fire.
This past summer I listen to
people from Las Vegas more up in
the surrounding area described
would happen to them.
The fire was only the beginning
to the challenges they face down
and will continue to face now.
The bill gives the legislature
the chance to weigh in and let
those people know and let the
people of New Mexico that we
stand with them.
But to be clear the bill does
not thank you prescribed burn G.
just clarifies that they cannot
be conducted little flag orange
in fact it's simple and it's
straightforward.
With me today I have merry K.
route.
Why expert witness and very
carefully Committee would would
like to make a few comments
about what happened before.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee I Mary Kate Pritchett
residents of San Miguel County
and my family is heavily
impacted by the would speak
fire.
I have I lost my home my sister
lost her home and I lost I don't
need smoke damage burned to the
ground and there's nothing but
I.
my mother once told her
everything she owned our family
business lost our largest Cuban
and then the flights to the rest
of the damage so I have for
instance abridge animal pens
that survived the fire but did
not surprise the flooding
this is a fire that was started
on red flag day as a volunteer
firefighter for the lab to see
temperature fire department.
In the area we were all aware
that these were not conditions
you should burn we are ready the
department was telling a
reception down figuring is
canyon please don't burn
Take care of each other and
that's a good thing that we do.
What we experience from our for
service.
They also don't there is a
misconception that they check
with the locals but they don't
they don't even tell us they
don't ask this but they also
don't tell us the local
firefighters to let you know you
might want to have you here on
stand by
what I really appreciate is that
it you know.
This is something that as as
eventually I am able to rebuild
which is certainly not yet snap
eleven months.
He hasn't been cleared we're not
allowed to do anything so we're
we're stuck or stranded and
we're out of our community.
What I appreciate is that just
the thought that maybe they'll
be some breaks but on and may we
have to we were built.
We won't lose everything yet so.
I just I really appreciate the
senator's efforts there are lots
of good.
Pieces of legislation and
efforts.
Ten by ten by others and we
appreciate all that but this is
the one bills that tries to sit
stem the tide and stop the next
fire from getting out of control
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members will
stand for questions.
Thank you center
We'll go to the audience before
you the committee Sir anyone
audience would like to speak in
opposition.
To this bill.
Did you the
end of the quarter it might.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Craig
Allen I've been forced and fire
ecology researcher for over
forty years here in northern New
Mexico.
Conducting long term studies to
support science based land
management.
I'm actually sympathetic to the
apparent intent of SB twenty one
but I wonder about the potential
for unintended and unwanted
outcomes.
The scientific context for my
concern is that we know in great
detail all New Mexico forests
woodlands and grasslands are
naturally fire adapted in fire
prone to varying degrees.
But after a century of intensive
fire exclusion efforts and
associated.
By all means build ups are
confidently enforcer now
unstable power kids vulnerable
to uncharacteristic extreme fire
behavior as well as our die offs
from drought stress insects up
which with the emergence since
two thousand of our ongoing
chair of the the consequences is
not.
Fire managers are no like bombs.
Trying to defuse the extreme
fuels of overgrown forests
before they explode during
extreme fire weather.
In turn into extreme wildfires.
These foreigners are trying to
prevent the extreme impacts I
need to pick the systems
watershed societal water
supplies in communities.
The accumulated fire hazard is
widespread and practical tools
are few basically combinations
of thinning and prescribed fire.
We're in the specs of two little
up the right buyer.
Yes landscapes of the past
hundred twenty or so years.
SB twenty one may seem like a
simple common sense but trying
to legislate fire prescriptions
invites micromanagement slippery
slope with little actual
practical effect except perhaps
further inhibit and slow the
pace of urgently needed for
sustainability treatments.
Since no fire is not an option
in New Mexico we must learn to
live with fire fire it's really
a question of how do we want
fire.
Society needs the support and
work with our managers we depend
upon them to be successful.
But we also need and should
expect in the demand
implementation happens all
collaboration more open in their
communication focused and
effective leadership.
Things of the sort.
If you want to send a message
perhaps a plain language
memorial directly saying what
you want to be different could
be more effective.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir anyone else in the
audience in opposition anyone
online in opposition your online
and like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Casing then we'll go back to
audience and say when you look
speak in support of this bill
get their their summer you I I
do ask what will the hiring you
to ninety seconds or less come
on the shoreline.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of committee my name is Debbie
Hughes I am the executive
director for the association of
conservation districts we work
with farmers and ranchers that
use prescribed fire as a tool a
lot of this is actually done
through farm bill programs and
private landowners to choose so
we appreciate that sponsor
working with us to make sure
that we were to do doing away
with prescribed fire because
they are tool that we need New
Mexico thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera with
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau we greatly appreciate
Senator Griggs for bringing this
bill forward very much
appreciate the spirit of what
it's doing and think that it's a
common sense approach to
utilizing prescribed burning
which is something that we it
really needs implement
throughout the state so for
these reasons we stand and
support.
Mr chairman Philip Committee
members my name is Bronson corn
I'm here representing the New
Mexico cattle growers we utilize
prescribed burn on a yearly
basis and we burn upwards of
about ten thousand acres here
and we don't do it just for a
natural habitat for the the
wildlife and everything else
because you have to burn there's
grant is that we have is called
the giants Act don't grant in
the southeast part of New Mexico
it's very prevalent but it runs
down around your canyons in your
big draws and if you don't burn
it gets a big it's a rank The
Twilight can't utilize the
livestock can't utilize it and
so the only way that you can
effectively and economically
take care of this not just for
the livestock but for everything
is through burning and all of
our cedar trees are breast
treatments you don't have to
have high winds we've done a lot
of pressure management fires and
you don't have to have high
winds to get a good sustaining
fire because it a fire creates
its own wind it will carry
itself and so this is more of a
common sense approach just not a
lot of match on a on a day on
the red flag warning day cause
of fire will like I said it it
creates its own land so if you
have a thirty mile an hour wind
and fire now you got a sixty
mile an hour fire.
So we urge your support we thank
the senator for bringing this
forward and we sympathize with
those that have lost everything
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is a time
because a less game at W.
director with that far Stewart
skill the forest conservation
nonprofit based in New Mexico I
practice and promote prescribed
fire and public and private
lands a right to restore
maintain or drive far as
interest community in watershed
resilience I deeply empathize
with the communities affected by
hermits peak calf canyon
well I previously opposed SB
twenty one for several reasons I
can support it with an important
word change if possible in
section C. from conduct to start
to add clarity and specificity
for landowners ranchers
foresters and managers that
we're changes important
direction for people lighting
burns prescribed fire on private
lands is a very careful
undertaking and the precise
words of SB twenty one will be
poured over by landowners ranch
managers as they plan to
implement burns of various
scales thank you.
Online.
One of those areas.
The you know the microphone on
if there's anyone want online
who just like to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Existing then what will and the
public comment portion
Members of the committee.
It's got.
This report does.
She.
Our short of.
Hello.
How long is.
You will be effective.
Chairman and Representative the
the bill currently shares you
can't be conducted red flag
warnings been image that we can
put in.
I would suppose that leaves it
up to show interpretation.
That
Use of fire if it has been.
There was a red flag warning in
effect when the fire which
started.
Does that mean for us to put out
people want to close for five
days later.
I would expect that that she's
going to have to rely on the
judgment of
the individuals that repairs As
You Like It must be put out they
should put it out
because of the fire we enjoy in
the situation I don't know
Halloween there's some
discussion about maybe you could
do it differently we're there
have been a red flag warning
when it would show Commanche
instead of conducting an
actually might be a better
better approach but I don't know
if it answers that question
either the chairs are.
Fire you I don't know I don't
think read that many prescribers
or may have dash Mary Kay you to
to jump in but for the state for
sure whatever would have fired
two stations that want to
prescribe or how long did that
that intended for that fire to
to lash you just intended to be
for that that short period of
day to day usual we're looking
at because the management of a
fire.
Is your is it is kind of a day
to day deal it can't get away
from our national reserves the
right.
Every time a lot of prescribers
show if we might we might ask
the the state for Sharon have
the have a manage that because
she's in the army.
Which is true.
Mr given the push the button.
Mr chair and representatives and
Senator Griggs
Very typically when a prescribed
burn is lit the intention is
that it be for that day however
there is always mop up on the
subsequent days and whether
that's a one day affair of two
day affair really depends on the
circumstances and so I do agree
that the word start or commands
does make more sense thank you.
Thank you Mr Mitchell question
thanks Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator into his route.
I.
Have a couple questions from the
fiscal impact reports in the
agency.
responses
Mr chair and senator one of the
main concerns I have.
Was that
The state land office and EMNRD
mentioned at that is written in
this maybe changed and so if if
it has been please please let me
know could restrict all fuel
treatments that use mechanized
or hand operated tools and
equipment because they produce
sparks.
Has that been addressed or is
there a response to that.
Mr chairman and representatives
could you actually that one more
time see if I can if I can
answer that it's not we've got
some long term care sure thank
you Mr chair so in the F. I. R.
Specifically it says the State
Land Office echoed the concerns
expressed by EMNRD both agencies
pointed out that as written
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one would restrict
all fuel treatments that use
mechanized or hand operated
tools and equipment because they
produce sparks.
Share in the Representative you
in state State Land Office has
indicated in most of their.
Land reclamation or state they
use prescribed or not as much as
maybe the US Forscher
perception.
So could a sedation park because
they're supposed to
but as you if you look at what's
what they're not supposed to be
doing a prescribed.
That we're talking about
right at this point we should
come from recognize you you're
not doing a prescribed burn sure
that this bill was not flooded.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator another item
That was
Right at this and in the.
State Land Office.
Analysis was whether or not this
would and I think it was that
State Land Office what whether
the federal government would
actually.
The help to this and I'm not and
I don't know a lot particularly
well are you know sort of fire
management and so I'm just
wondering Mr chair Senator
with the federal government be
required to follow this there's
the year mission Mr chairman and
Representative the the
preemption issues in the bill
are are there are.
The federal government in most
instances of state laws in
effect the federal government
supposed to take state law into
consideration whether they will
or with the wall would be up to
them they're supposed to do that
Imagine you know we have
attorneys in the room and then
they're going to have opinions
about the the preemption side
but the the fact of the matter
is we need to we need to step up
stand up and say that we
believe.
For the protection of New Mexico
the situation.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I don't have any other
questions right now but I want
to keep listening there's.
Thank you
Representative Townsend if thank
thanks Senator
Is the and T. at.
Is that the.
T. at this piece of legislation
bring on the sensibilities Act
Plan.
Your and and Representative I'm
just a little bit daft.
Sure well being able to hear
usual that over challenger at
but I have a thank you.
I mean I think the wife might
like you.
Of.
Senator my my point was isn't
isn't the intent of this piece
of legislation.
Right right some common sense
the point when you've got to
manage.
Mr chair representative
portion portion if what we've
seen this this is not this last
year was it the first time that
prescriber has caused problems.
Issues of yeah bill sends
message the bill statutes and
guidelines for for individuals
and entities to follow that's
what you're for to protect New
Mexico New Mexico which again is
sometime this month in other
states carelessness.
But is some out doing things
sometimes which you shouldn't be
doing we did.
Mr chair and and of.
Senator.
You're right this isn't the
first time this is.
And and I think it is it
behooves us.
To.
To send this message and to top
to.
our.
Or three person.
And to implement.
These steps.
Where.
You're not getting it from
occurring because it is a
valuable tool as many of
expressed your day but it is one
that should be used this some
oversight.
And so I was what's happened in
New Mexico over and over again.
I think this is a good measure
to try to find information right
and it just makes common sense
of a happy to support.
Thanks Jeff.
Systems of Representative break
up.
Good morning.
Senator.
Chairman Senator Griggs.
and I totally sympathize with
you madam and the rest of the
families that have lost.
Property and.
longings.
Fund.
So the
This report it talks about
priority watersheds and forests
as a state identified with those
or where they are.
We do we have.
An explanation and I know this
may be a technical question that
this Kerry is that.
Mr chair and representative once
once again I didn't catch it all
I'm sorry Sir I'll speak up
on the second page of the fiscal
impact analysis it looks about
funding for treatment in high
priority watersheds and forests
and I'm wondering if the state
has a plan that shows where
those locations are.
Mr chair representative again we
have that we have the state for
sure here who bite could crash
that
with for more clarity and I
could
that would be wonderful.
Mr Chairman representative yes
we have that plan published in
twenty twenty online with a map
and we've identified the top
twenty percent of watersheds in
New Mexico that are at highest
risk of wildfire damage to
communities water supplies and
wildlife.
And so just to follow up
question Mr chair and.
Senator
And I guess this is maybe for
your.
Expert
so does include the blessed care
and Sandia.
Mr chair and representative yes.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator when I stand on the
flood control board he had
eighty we have the forestry
division come to us with the
plan for specifically for the
Sandia's case that there was a
fire on the sand years or in the
state yes and how we would deal
with that
facing so I think actually Mr
chairman and senator I think.
Great idea.
That will help to prevent some
of the things that we've seen
Fortunately.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
There's a very good and you
there discussion for the
committee first of all.
Briefly thank you Mr chair thank
you very much Senator great
Senator the the suggestion we
heard regarding sort of
clarifying either even more
going from conduct to start is
that the suggestion that you'd
be willing to.
Of.
Here Representative.
I would I don't I don't know we
show much and I think you know
it's the internet kind of
question right thing else
because I believe that
Either either choice of course
cheers is affected and I don't.
I don't know.
What is actually better than the
other
Mr chair representative but if
it's too will the committee
usually used.
Comments on I'm willing to
accept that okay thank you thank
you very much Mr chair thank you
senator I think
That we're changes an
interesting suggestion to be
interesting to see if are forced
if our forestry Division or or
Energy minerals what their
thoughts and still be some of
the folks administering that but
thank you center.
End of support would love that
word change if it's meaningful
that's great thank you very
much.
This is a.
and previously.
Thank you.
Zurcher thank you senator along
those very same lines I'm in the
FIR of the
there is a recommended
Alternate language for the
sentence and I just wondered if
you would consider that because
it not only does it address the
conducted versus start yeah they
use the word commenced but then
also
The until you know such hours
after the red flag warning has
been rescinded.
Does.
Chair representative you know
the the commands I think I can
go with I'm not sure the rest of
that makes a whole lot of
relationships and.
Going to operate the way they
need to operate as far as it
goes to get with a good morning
and.
Red flag warnings are supposed
to just keep on keeping on in
addition.
Commences the change we need I
wanted to go with Commanche I'm
not sure the rest of it really
does a whole lot so that would
be my thought on on that on the
issue going to the ground but
yeah.
I'm sitting down here listen to
you get which you guys are the
are you the committee's you make
that choice but I believe
commission a workable so the
rest of it on convention.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
for.
Thank you Mr chair.
So
Senator a couple of comments one
segment
it first.
the the the.
the language you're amending is
this bill I cared Public years
ago
prescribed burning Act so it's a
course the field will best in
that and a technical so get it
So I'll share this email I got
from Leslie also in six director
of the western landowners
alliance.
I'm reading to request your
consideration the small but
important change in the language
of this B. twenty one session
one see the current language
this prescribed burn shopping
conducted for the reasons
bungalow please consider
changing the term conducted to
started and then goes into the.
Yeah the idea that a prescribed
burn should will be more than
one the and then we don't want
to cut off their ability to mop
up operations.
So
etcetera I hope this is a
friendly amendment I would.
I would suggest we I will make a
minute to change that were I
wonder center to you
give preference for started for
contents.
In the Mr chair and committee
that's that shortly acceptable
to me and I I think that
I don't really believe that
changes what what we're
attempting to do is
sure I think it's a year which
is fine.
Usual change I will.
The.
I will.
The on.
T. H..
Two point seven we change the
work conducted.
To start.
Sure that from.
That amendment.
The presentation.
K..
But my this year's pointing out
that we use the work conducted
online one the thank I think
it's a.
A different.
so we have a motion and a second
it's a friendly amendment this
very discussion on the amendment
Representative Nibert.
To number I'm sorry number one
the the one of the major fires
the.
Brought this to light.
Was actually started long
before.
The.
When the season even.
Yeah.
The work maps.
The
was just stated started.
We're conducting
compasses I think I'll try to
range of of activity and so.
I.
I kinda like to would be
conducted myself.
I'm more concerned with the next
line.
National Weather Service has
issued that means it has to have
used to the red flag warning
then as we know.
In New Mexico.
Forecast with divisions.
I showbiz and finance so
wondering if that will seven
votes should be.
I think you have what we're
tending that is.
You shouldn't start these fires
or conduct.
This type of activity it's
likely.
To all.
And
So I I just throw that out there
I.
I personally I think the
conductor is a broader concept.
Starting.
This.
That's.
Process it started as far back
as corporations that plus a lot
of other things you madam this
year on the.
Rations for the fact.
The
weather service has issued a red
flag warning for that moment
time that.
Everybody on the news is that
act out forms will be when we do
we see it every.
So I I I just think that there
may be a way to deal with that
so one of the following
suggestions Here Representative
Senator.
The Center Representative we
were on the amendment
it will say
Yeah we know in doing prescribed
burns they're looking at the
weather forecast so I I think if
we stayed started.
I think in their existing laws.
They they know not to start if
there's bad weather forecast and
I see your point of that
language in the bill
But that doesn't mean to me that
they will take that.
Representative Townsend on the
amendment.
Yes Sir Mr chair I think
Representative Nibert because of
that point but this team is to.
Yes.
Because those that are
prescribing Barnes to look at
not only what has happened I
mean is there a red flag warning
on to the it is what's the
forecast for the next several
days and that seems to make
sense that you want to make sure
that those people looking at.
forecast as well
Certainly starting a fire today.
Knowing full well that.
A high wind conditions.
Stamina and anybody that lives
in the Mexico I can for you will
act work will next April pretty
good.
The amount of the the high
likelihood spinnaker and we just
need a conscience I think that.
That concern is real thank you
Mr.
So on the amendment
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chair
Senator.
Actually.
This is that.
Thank you so
Some sessions take place.
Time.
This is change.
To
mention earlier.
Have.
I.
So speaker.
Chair chair.
I actually.
I think I think it's.
But regardless.
Just.
Pass.
Well that's passage.
And that's what.
Sen.
To federal.
Basically saying this is what we
House.
House but we
The status condition.
Log.
Specific.
Because what happens.
Okay so we're still on the
amendment
to repeat the amendment is
change the work conducted to
started.
On page
two one seven my intends for the
amendment is that.
What's the fire is started.
It may be several days before
it's wrapped.
In the work conducted
potentially restricts the
activities wrapping up a fire
it's a red flag warning is
issued after it started and I do
not think we want to restrict
that act.
Senator is a still a friendly
amendment mission Mr Chairman
out of take whichever the
committee believes use.
Shortage of conducted to me was
when we drafted it was we we we
had for but she started in your
destination in your your view is
used equally.
Equally acceptable
just up to up to you all and
the.
I've run this bill for a little
bit more on it's been amended to
time to try to catch the right
language in match The goal is to
find the right language to
provide approach to send the
right message to to everyone who
conducts prescribed.
Okay the state to take a vote on
the amendment.
Representative break up.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
While.
Representative Rubio.
Yes the amendment.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
I sure Sarinana.
J. making yes seventy three.
Even in the bill
Was it for me
Senator would you like to make
motion on the bill yes the.
At on the one of the.
Yes Representative Townsend a
second purpose of Virgo state
you take that on the.
Representative Rego.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend yes.
Okay sure Sarinana.
Every scene yes zero.
It was the best thank you for
your thank you members of.
Madam chair members of the
committee sent bill to a six is
a Nero.
Chairman code exemption for the
forestry division on.
Funds that
They essentially are pass
through entity on from the
federal government so what what
these are these are federal
programs people I for the
federal programs that money
the forcing Division axes Sir
fiscal agent in past of the
money through the to the
applicants who have been through
a procurement process at the
federal level and so what's
what's happening under current
procurement could is they have a
redundant second procurement
process even though the people
of our improved that obviously
as delaying and ex and expense
and sometimes it makes the
federal funds unusable due to
the door.
I'm joined today by C. Forster
Laura McCarthy and and general
counsel still teach
and and I would like to differs
Forster McCarthy for a brief to
brief government.
Madam chair and representative
I'm going to explain two things
very briefly I need this now and
I'll give you an example of the
problem this will solve the
white male parties that the
federal government has stepped
in to increase the amount of
funds in the farm bill programs
that require the state forestry
agency to be fiscal agent for
those funds and we're talking.
Two plus billion dollars that
are available nationally for New
Mexico to receive our wildfire
risk reduction other related
conservation activity.
These are big dollars and our
NGO capacities needed to capture
those opportunities.
These programs specified that
NGOs are most eligible
applicants and that's what
creates the conflict with our
state procurement of.
The the simple is the community
wildfire Defense grant programs
that itself has one billion
dollars available.
There was a federal notice of
funding opportunity in this past
fall we had
applications from New Mexico
twenty two applications of which
six were NGOs these projects
could be up to ten million
dollars.
project and a total of forty one
million dollars requested the
federal competitive process has
already concluded and we are
just waiting for notification of
which New Mexico projects were
selected but if SB two oh six
does not pass and the NGO
proposals are selected through
this national competition we
will still have to conduct a
state procurement to pass them
the funds even though we will
already know the fact selected
so it's a duplicate of process
here and it's still unlikely
violation of the code because we
already know the funds need to
go to so madam chair we feel
that Senate Bill to all states
asking reasonable exception
applying only when there is a
federal competitive process they
can substitute for state
competitive procurement.
Thank you.
At
the
opposition of the bill.
All right anyone online in
opposition raise your hand.
Thank you all right that's the
audience at any point in support
of the bill.
Want to get in the line and
we'll do this really quickly.
Good morning good morning madam
chair members of the committee I
was gonna with the Serra club
you're gonna chapter we support
this bill for the reasons that
the sponsor and expert have
mentioned just want to highlight
that these projects might
include rural fire defense
community wildfire prevention or
protection of urban and
community forestry our forest a
watershed restoration and
protection of reforestation and
we strongly support this bill
thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Debbie Hughes with the
association conservation
district we support this bill as
well the soil and water
conservation districts are
political subdivisions but they
work closely with state forestry
to help with this money on the
ground by hiring contractors to
do some of the work our state
association is a nonprofit has
also worked to bring millions of
dollars to the state through the
farm bill program and so this
amendment basically just aligns
with what we're already doing
with other programs of thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza rich
lobbyists on behalf The New
Mexico coalition of conservation
districts and the New Mexico
forest industries association
and we status our support of the
bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee correct Peters senior
policy advocate for conservation
voters New Mexico here's stand
in strong support of this bill
we believe that this provides an
opportunity to get I apply for
implement essential federal
funding to communities across
the state for this reason and
the ones a for mentioned we are
strongly encouraged to passcode
thank you thank you I want to
The audience of the money anyone
in support please refrain.
No one.
Representative.
Yes Sir chairman members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak in support
for the the justification and
Matt Carrillo and I'm the
forcing watershed health manager
for the nature Conservancy if
passed bill streamlined process
to get funding such as the
committee wildcard and grant
opportunities that point McCarty
shared
shovel ready projects on the
ground and really have the time
to waste on machines running the
clock down on the to fully
support this bill thank you.
Thank you that's all I see so
we'll go back to the concert.
Madam tapi answering questions
first person.
Townsend.
Yes there thank you.
So.
What you're doing is is trying
to get reciprocity between the.
Persisting.
Plans is that correct.
Mentors intends only called
reciprocity because it's not
it's not suddenly goes the other
direction we're just trying to
streamline it so federal
government as a competitive
process toward funds and uses
the forestry division is a
fiscal agent in the very take
the warranties there's just no
need to go through a separate
procurement process to to
deliver the funds.
Seems like samples
Representative.
Madam chair representative seem
skeptical that my bill makes
perfect sense.
My point is.
But I say that yes thank you
thank you to the next as
Representative nine.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair.
The government or the language
on page seven.
I guess the money that would be
applied this is pretty broad
scope it talks about urban
forestry projects to
restoration of watersheds to.
While grant projects so it's you
pretty products the vote.
With these requests.
The open ended for the project
early grants for specific to one
area or the other.
So Madam chair representative
Nibert keep in mind that these
are grant programs of the
forestry division these are
federal programs and they set
the terms these are sort
descriptive terms of the
programs we're we're targeting
there are certainly more details
in within the federal guidelines
madam chair Mister chair I guess
my question is is the for
service for the federal
government whichever department
issues a grant.
Do they have specific projects
in mind that the grant money is
used for do are they just
wanting projects to come to them
and I can fit within this
broader right.
You madam chair is a number of
different answers.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
Funding comes in talking.
Ability.
That have
programs associated with them as
a lot of our bill so we would
patient grant programs for
violence.
The urban and community forestry
grants Act speaks for itself
what fire right those speak for
themselves so they are separate
programs.
So this legislation would
capture that water ran
regardless of.
Which specific wrapped may be
offered at that particular time.
Madam Madam chair representative
Nibert it would capture all of
those programs but it would only
apply in that very unique
scenario where the federal
government is administering this
grant program by selecting the
award he but then looking to the
state as the fiscal agent and so
that's a nearly universal
programs that the federal
government ministers that way
but because of as the state
forester mention because of the
additional funding available to
these programs.
That opportunity has become more
significant and so addressing
this scenario is there but the
safeguards are you have to have
that specific scenarios where
the federal government has opted
to pick the award the but is
relying on us to simply
administer the funds and ended
minister the contracts so I I
think that's and that's a
narrowing of the universe of
what might be covered.
Madam chair.
Mr chair yes for for.
I world or text Scott Walker
capital outlay projects we have
that with the university that
oversees those even though maybe
go to.
This program for that purpose
with the county or city may be
the of the restaurant agent
that's really what's happening
here to the state is the cockpit
of funds with that the actor
Survation online for Madam chair
representative Nibert two okay.
chair Mister chair saves to pay
that
New Mexico should never.
Let them
what it is go by the wayside if
they're available for projects
in our state certainly would
like to see that for these
federal funds that go to these
purposes and I think the state.
lately aportes.
I have six the state to to.
She.
From a losing lots of.
Lots of communities yeah and
of Watership tragically I drove
through the experience this past
Sunday and it was reliable so I
hope that these funds these
grants are made available that
will help us deal with are
forced to choose thank you after
thank you Mr chair thank you
Forster.
The next descriptions.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair.
Yes state any input into the
selection precious.
Out of state to complete.
It gets to the state mentors as
got all the through my experts
on that.
Madam chair and representative.
the state does have input into
the national selection process
in that.
State employees are put on
National Review panel
however they are never in the
position of reviewing
applications from New Mexico so
we might have staff reviewing
applications from Idaho for
washing or Montana for example.
So madam chair Mister chair this
with the present conflict of
interest.
Issues that would preclude the
state employees from with you on
state projects that occur.
Madam chair and representative
the federal agencies that are
setting up the competitive
process sure that there is no
conflict of interest our state.
And madam chair Mr chair thanks
for.
Our.
Change funds involved.
So matching state funds involved
with these words.
Madam chair and representative
it really depends on the program
and whether that is required is
that this statute that creates
the purpose most typically the
farm.
So madam chair.
Mr Chairman days.
Matching funds.
What the.
For work automatically allocated
disease programs.
The federal funds come in half
as.
Work.
Madam chair and representative
the Max needs to be worked out
for an application is submitted
and that is one of the primary
functions of our general counsel
is to make sure that New Mexico
is not hi submitting
applications for funding for
which matches buyers without any
having a line on the.
State that the capital that is
appreciated by yes.
Hi to the forestry division for
forest and watershed restoration
has made a tremendous difference
in our ability to supply those
matching funds.
Once again madam chair Mister
to.
All of this this money including
the matching funds yes awarded
to a contractor.
At the federal level.
In terms to the states for
administration all.
Is that.
Madam chair will Representative.
Yes once the award decision has
been made but I think it's the
state forester just alluded to
if there's an app in order to
put an application in to be
selected as an awardee if there
is a match requirement you will
have to work that out in advance
and so whatever the source of
the match will be is going to be
did that decision in allocations
gonna be made pursuant to if
it's from state funds allocation
decisions you all of maybe
statutory programs you the stab
last other components so.
We will have taking consistent
apps actions in saying yep we
have a match for this
application the application
can't go in until there is a
match and so we're not short
circuiting reviews are
automatically having to match
programs that we haven't already
vetted before the application
went in if we are providing
state funds for the match of the
match is coming from non state
funds we don't obviously aren't
participate in the vetting of
those.
Chair Mister chair us to.
What changes for Mister for
water my missing.
Madam chair of the as
Representative Townsend said it
makes perfect sense.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman.
I see and this is a great help
having disbursement for NGOs and
and would look to let patients I
think that's wonderful I don't
see anybody else.
One question and Representative
right.
Mr trump.
Madam chair and make real quick.
Should call already owns.
Really.
The anything that all.
The need of restoration project
watershed project and the
anything.
Help
the station.
And up and down the.
I see on page.
set up
the new language specifically
talks about watershed
restoration.
Madam chair and representative
this.
I think that that is yes.
I can't I think I'm trying to
sort of put a finger on this.
Federal program for each of
those I feel much more confident
in saying yes to the body to
lake because of the private
leaves there and and this
funding could you know we always
try to put federal funds on
private land wherever possible.
As of avoidance of the State
interrogation I
I also think that there are farm
bill programs that address
thank you restoration of the
problem.
And of.
Representative.
Madam chair
I think it is that.
I hope that the the case of
those of both of those families
are area of.
Yes the amendment to the fiery.
On for.
Four years and then for five
years a long time.
And there seems to be
All of the resurrection and the
a lot of people are concerned
about so madam chair
Representative.
Thank you very.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair
I was just going to make a
motion actually
because I.
Honestly see this the pretty
simple.
Process and I think there is
very little
Madam chair and Representative
room for.
Representative Scott mentioned.
This year I think was the word
used
thank you know as a division
manager I'd involved with
federal grants and receiving
them in passing through it
really this is sort of a pass
through to get the work done for
the federal government and I
think the state really just acts
as a up.
Intermediary there is a lot of
accountability to the government
because they have to in the end
have to account for it and
Ensure that every penny was
spent spent in the report back
to the federal government so I
don't see this as a.
You know as allowing for any
room.
That was.
Cause any mischief and so madam
chair I would make sure we
improve this.
I think this
should be.
Representative break up.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia yeah.
Representative Montoya.
But Representative Nibert yes
ma'am.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
I almost at the state noticed
from going to that I'll say yes.
By your Sarinana.
Your McQueen yes I was there a.
Is Senate bill twenty two.
Thank.
This one.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay Senate bill one issues a
bill that on.
The Sanchez Senator crystalline
and.
To kind of update our some of
our grant programs letter of
recycling in the state.
And we have different programs
primarily that we find in the
state of New Mexico for litter
and recycling ones for later the
keep New Mexico beautiful clean
and beautiful program to go to
the department of tourism and
then the other one madam chair
is called the recycling illegal
dumping Act which are
Representative primarily for
recycling infrastructure to
communities
it goes through so of New Mexico
environment department so this
can I work with the state
agencies extensively and I'm
kind of doing a lot of
comprehensive the reduction work
the session so this is an
attempt to streamline these
bills and help also move the
ball forward in a number of ways
so it really just makes updates
to these programs streamlines
its so that more money can be
available for really the
recycling infrastructure one
could be more functional to
communities because right now we
have a.
Kind of a.
The I'm I'm healthy requirement
in there that seventy five
percent of all those ones have
to go to tire recycling because
that's kind of the lead lead you
to that program that no longer
works and they're not able to
get away.
Funding that they want there's
also not enough of.
Collaboration between all these
different state agencies then be
on the two I mentioned you have
department of transportation we
have ten million dollars to
special session to go for
roadside litter then you've got
state parks outdoor division so
what these bills also do is
require them all to work
together finally what I'm really
super excited about is that we
help launch a statewide anti
litter campaign which I think we
talked about maybe in this
committee before you know taxes
really I knew this when they get
the don't mess with Texas
campaign that's been massive and
that Mexico really is to send
because we have a massive with a
problem we also have a growing
toward Connie in so this bill
really we take a step forward in
these efforts and without
happy to answer questions thank
you very we go to the audience
is anybody.
Hi first online is there anyone
in opposition situation came to.
I see no one anyone in support
of the day.
Sign up at the microphone.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Sarah
Pierpont and executive director
of the New Mexico recycling
coalition we represent over two
hundred twenty members
throughout the state from small
towns like fort Sumner to big
cities like Albuquerque and
they're all letting me know the
illegal dumping and litter have
really been a problem in their
communities especially with the
pandemic it's just like a free
reign to the letter more and so
right now there's not crossed
collaboration with a different
different entities this bill
helps put together the
department of transportation the
tourism department solid waste
bureau it creates specific
funding for literal wariness and
we strongly support this bill
and appreciate the Sanchez
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you madam chair Dan this
are representing waste
management of New Mexico
managing the state's landfills
is becoming an increasing
challenge for all of us and we
believe this bill is an
important first step in getting
the kind of collaboration
necessary to address this
problem we strongly support the
bill and thank senators diamond
and Senator Steinborn.
Good morning members of the
committee was gonna what the
Serra club over the chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members and supporters
we stand instructs a point to
this legislation as a recording
nation between agencies leader
affects the scenic beauty of the
state and our potential as an
outdoor recreation destination
and so we just we urge you to
vote yes for this bill thank you
all right online we see more
less please read.
What.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee more live shows
registered lobbyists for found
central solid waste authority
the authority collects Health
and recycles waste from white
sands to Texas border waste
management is complicated
process from manufacturing to
everyday tracks usage to
disposal and we appreciate the
Sanchez focus on the importance
of recycling.
Control.
Collaboration and education and
the authority looks forward to
being part of that collaboration
thank you again to the Sanchez
thank you for listening fiber
cable.
You madam chair I'm not seeing
the committee room anymore but I
hope you can hear me.
Can you okay so I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico the
league supports policies that
reduce the generation and
promote the reuse and recycling
of waste materials the league
also supports policies to ensure
safe treatment transportation
storage and disposal of
materials that cannot be reused
or recycled in order to protect
public health and natural
resources I urge the committee
to support this bill thank you
very much.
That said so back to Senator any
additional comments.
madam chair nope stand for
questions I thank you many.
The time.
Thank.
Senator
there's.
Note on.
At the end I are about the
Attorney General report the
spill my child like the anti
defamation laws are usually that
we can't.
Yeah so madam chair
representative you know we had
we had nonprofits to the list of
eligible entities to receive
grants from the recycling
illegal dumping Act it's you
know we.
We would be like any other R. F.
P. situation in the state if
you're issuing a service
contractor getting value back
for it it's an appropriate
contract
so I appreciate that they flag
it but it would not it would be
for a service rendered and the
state does that every day all
day thousand times a day to
different entities for services
being rendered to the state in
this case we added it because
there's very important partners
who work in this space who want
to be part of the solution who
often are connecting
organizations like the New
Mexico recycling coalition who
have been around for decades to
help communities work together
come up with solutions help
facilitate education campaigns
and so well the right funds.
Significantly we go to
communities there's a little
piece there to help with other
players that can be helpful.
And.
Madam chair Senator.
In in the opening paragraph of
describing this bill it talks
about requiring collaboration
can you speak director I mean
the word to use the the
opportunities for collaboration
and what values we pretty the
DMV I.
Sure there I really appreciate
the question madam chair
representative so right now we
in terms of weather control we
give funding literally to three
different agencies are gonna
transportation we gave ten
million dollars a year ago we
give money to the tourism
department for the clean and
beautiful program they have a
coordinator that we give money
to the solid waste bureau of
Environment Department for the
right requests none of a more
together than we have state
parks believe it or not to those
agencies have separate different
marketing campaigns bobsledder
imagine having a company that in
two different branding
strategies just doesn't make
sense and delete your message
and so and then there's other
players be on that
which this bill also works to
like Hey let's work with our
national force a lot of frontier
communities rely on their
national forces being an amenity
that brings and torso there is a
real need for people to
collaborate together I'm not
only a centralized marketing
strategy which is built would do
really put it under tourism who
category has that roll up the
number to get him all working
together so that they're
implementing a coordinated
strategy for education so that
if you see a great.
Anti litter campaign you're also
saying that at a rest stop
you're seeing that at a state
park I think you're seeing that
and the National Forest you're
saying that the small business
in town so there's a need for
collaboration right now.
We're diluting we have no
collective strategy really is
the state to dealing with this
issue in this bill seeks to come
up with better action.
Madam chair and.
I appreciate that.
Do you think there's any actual
of patient please that the
departments will it will be able
to bring in may be expanded
beyond with the influx of of
this bill.
I just think Madam chair
representative will be more
effective that's all because and
I I do think hello the
efficiency is the right word but
I think effectiveness is the
right word in it might be
efficiency I mean if you have
for example no DOT will do
roadside cleanups and they're
going to communities trying to
help well then you've got a
separate grant from the the keep
Mexico beautiful program where
people can apply for grants for
the sorry state purposes so
suddenly people working together
they might be able to synergize.
And address some of these issues
and some of these communities or
share the workload like we share
workload with capital outlay.
Rather than just have all the
silo as efforts.
And madam chair.
Senator out page two.
Section one the.
Talks about.
Aiding in the status of a and
the partnership cooperate with
cities counties and other
our state government.
Comma federal land management
agencies in New Mexico nonprofit
organizations to develop these
big to that a little bit what
what exactly is is the only on
what you're talking about sure
ma'am Madam chair representative
this this is just the
cooperation peace this is for
the department of tourism.
Keep New Mexico clean and
beautiful program these are this
is kind of an introductory
paragraph into that section a
lot it says here the agencies we
want you to work with the kind
of collaborate on strategy
they're not be eligible grant
entities kids that sections down
below and that's really limited
to just communities and this
grant program but it but it does
say that we want them because
they actually have an advisory
board in law to keep New Mexico
clean and beautiful is made up
of of tourism regions who gets
to appoint someone to the state
and I think Sarah's on it as
well with recycling coalition
but we want them to collaborate
with other a broader range
apartments it's so that I can.
It's not just the local
governments but it's also the
National Forest the BLM lands
that surround them it's
organizations like the recycling
coalition so again we have a
comprehensive more robust and
more effective openly strategy
for that control.
And.
On page four of the.
It appears that you're trying to
force all of the media dollars
into a single campaign the dress
that will fit your opening
statement do you have any idea
of what combining those dollars
meet.
Yeah Madam chair representative
was not really a combining of
dollars because we're not taking
money away from anyone else what
we are doing is we're putting an
end to to be on point to be the
lead entity on creating an ad
campaign and that is the
department of tourism because
they have to keep New Mexico
clean and beautiful program I've
had a lot of conversations with
all the departments about this
and let's face it marketing is
their business that's what they
do there they they develop
incredible ad campaigns they
know how to do it they've
developed a brand New Mexico
true and they've actually
developed a brand for this call
keep New Mexico true that they
believe is kind of the winning.
The winning Brandon because New
Mexico true so seared in and so
adopted by the public and so
well not just here but beyond
including our visitors so that's
the vision here is to build off
of cute New Mexico true into a
major anti litter campaign and.
But that's not to say that other
there won't be other state
efforts but hopefully we can get
everybody behind one message.
And madam chair and.
Are there any provisions and
your bill to.
The gauges sesame so we we know
what they're this is working or
not.
Madam chair representative
there's no there's no there's
not those metrics in this bill
but I will say that you know
when it comes to recycling and
litter you know certainly
there's metrics on diversion
late diversion rates no keep
America beautiful does national
studies on.
Littered items I think they did
one recently there might be
anyone coming up but there's
there's research it happens
periodically and.
Thank.
Thank you Representative next
December survivors.
Thank you madam chair Senator.
I see overall page I were
creating a new position of is
that a position.
That we have.
So so madam chair representative
that would be a new position and
they have a fund the recycling
illegal dumping Act funds which
has which has a surplus an
ongoing surplus of which they
can hire this position from we
do the same exact thing in law
in the I keep New Mexico clean
and beautiful program and in law
that's where I got the idea that
we require them to hire
coordinator to manage that
program from the fund so
fortunately there's a balance in
this fund that we can do the
same thing and we really need to
because our recycling litter
waste diversion staff and solid
waste bureau has really been
whittled down to.
Maybe one or two people and the
debate in the garage welcome any
right I think they're losing
some staff of what they do have
so with this is an attempt to do
what we really needed was a
state this bill to staff up and
this will hire one position to
do that I also put in junior
funds for what it's worth to the
Department to also hire another
person to help with this up but
that's what we do.
Madam chair and senator looks
like.
I really like this was having to
walk many miles long I was
picking up the.
The trash
We certainly have a need for.
What to be more aware of what
they're doing as they throw
their caps and everything else
divers out the window here so I
I I agree with.
Effort here but overall six.
If the goal is to.
You know with the problem that
we have state is what we're.
and there's grants available
I'm wondering why.
Winds five and six to federally
recognized law office
division's.
Have federal dollars nonprofits.
You're probably referring to
Revenue Code
W. five oh one see three types
that is why we limit that to
those organizations that there
may be other organizations in
Mexico who.
Area out these very functions.
Fair question madam chair
representative I think.
You know if you're five oh one
C. three organization you have a
level of validation of that in
by the federal government
your charitable organization
here
Get up you have transparency
it's just a starting point I
personally would not be.
Opposed to if needed if there is
a proven benefit including other
types of players I think
certainly any of these entities
could contract out with private
company to support this work
probably some of them do but
that but there are nonprofit in
the space doing this work and so
there was a need for this and so
we added I will say on the flip
side of the coin.
There there would be a
sensitivity if you added a lot
of people that you would dilute.
The focus being primarily on
communities receiving grants.
And that's really what this
program is for so so we wanted
to open it to include non
players who could be very
supportive and helpful but not
really radically change the
program who who normally gets
the funding for the program.
Well it the goal is to deal with
tires and.
Recycling is
Yeah there's grants available.
Make that I thought of those
we're going to waste management
that certainly is not up to
recognize not profit
organization thank you sorry
public for a large public
company for that second.
Help.
Get these tires the.
Pile up here and there are
grants available to help.
With that.
Why would we not want to
encourage
Anyone okay regardless of
whether it's a public company or
profit or anything else what are
we not and.
Them to try to secure the grants
to.
To the very work that I think
needs to be done in New Mexico
that is deal with the tires deal
with the tragic deal with with
all these things that that we
see on our highways and by ways
thank you madam chair
representative if you go to if
you look at page takes six same
page and look at.
line fourteen.
It does include or contract with
vendors to promote recycling
anticipate legal top sites
consistent with provisions of
the act.
So I think this is absolutely a
partnership
This is a partnership with
companies like waste management
they do use these facilities so.
I'm just concerned that we're
restricting and maybe it
subcommittees it may be that
there are.
Recycling disposal efforts are
all conducted through a for
profit.
Google yeah yeah.
I would I would hate to.
Have.
As for the
though she grant opportunities
that that would.
Maybe available.
If we use to.
to reduce the very things are
trying to reduce the and so the
the.
more profit.
Or even not just a lot of.
Federally recognized tribes or
these
certain tax benefits accrued
from that.
We work with the the the people
to government entities.
The nation's pueblos and tribes
land grants.
What part of this associations
which.
So see Asians is one of those
catch all.
Categories of.
At a two and two nonprofits and
solid waste authorities
but it doesn't bring in thank
you.
Others who may be very that
there may be more capable of
addressing the issues that we're
trying to to address this
legislation so I I just blow it
out there need to be that we
should look at.
What's that make it as broad as
possible this is a public
benefits from from these
activities thank you Mr chair
representative so here's what
I'll do I'll commit to calling
the people involved around the
program you talk about this
issue hi share your feelings
about it I think we may be
covered because there's language
where they are allowed to
contact the director of the law
contract with private vendors
so.
it may very well be covered and.
Maybe a good reason why also
it's not and that made section
it it's because you have public
entities who are normally the
ones contracting.
Contracting their service with a
private hauler even if it's
at a let's let's look into it
and see if it's needed not
needed I'm certainly open to it
Maybe maybe we later at the.
Well I imagine that.
Representative lawyer to get
around the city by for profit
entities.
Have whoppers Association
creative do it but that they can
we ought to make this really
easy because because of goals
are laudable the
The need is is readily apparent
in every type of drive that
harm.
The the it is is very active
anything we can do have a lot
of.
That matter the who gets these
massive whose built work work
needs to be done in the the
efforts of thank you the the
traction in particular recycling
tires
you know that's.
That's been a problem in our
state who your presents and all
those plastic that so as of.
So those are things that the I
certainly would support I
appreciate your willingness to
check into that see that there's
a reason why it's marketed or
whether this applies to go I
will go back thank you for thank
you Representative this thank
you senator we're going to
Representative but I.
Thank you Mr chair
Senator Steinborn it's really
wonderful to see this bill in
front of us
I was the counselor in
Albuquerque who increase the
fines for littering.
And
I would I had a bill that did
just that we also have a group
that consisted of the city and
the county representatives are
blils and communities
that assisted with cleanup
actions.
And I will tell you building on
the west side
people dumped everything from
tires to construction materials
to I mean they were just it was
just unbelievable mattresses
I mean the list goes on and on.
And it was really difficult
issue
I'm still down or to the area of
some twenty five to about golf
course and further up the hill
on to answer and some of those
areas
we were constantly picking up
things and coordinating with
DOTA I did a lot of coordination
with you.
Every time they sent a crew out
the cost.
that ten thousand dollars a pop
and this was like on a monthly
basis
and you know.
That adds up.
In terms of scale of somebody's
budget.
I really like that your veil
talks about coordination with
tribes
and just coordination in general
and I mentioned that city county
group because I think that that
is a group that probably needs
to be contacted and I can
certainly put you in touch or
whoever yes tourism and whoever
all as simple as that group
because that group meets it's
still meeting and I know that
counts opinions involved with
that group as well especially
and I mentioned the west side
because for some reason people
feel that that's like the wild
west and we could still go out
there just dump we're we we want
to
The other thing that I like
about this bill madam chair and
and Senator is the whole
discussion about education
And and Representative Nibert
there are limited places even in
Albuquerque that except tyres
and that is really a specialized
industry
there was discussion for
building a recycle of plant over
on sort of hundreds eighteenth
St essential that dealt strictly
with tires and maybe restate
some recycle of the tires for
building materials
so this this issue I mean I I I
really like your bills I think
it's got some really good stuff
in it
a think that education is huge
you know.
I have to say this it's
unfortunate cross the caller the
Colorado New Mexico border madam
chair and and Representative and
you see you see a difference and
I think a lot of that has to do
with education but also
recycling
and our recycling efforts in New
Mexico are not
are not up to par I guess you
could say we need a lot more
industry to come in and sort of
take over and and I understand
people to understand what true
recycling as because I came to
learn as a city council madam
chair and representative arts
center
that you know plastic dishes
that you recycle and I do a lot
of recycling and I was kind of
well I mean you have to rinse
out the bulls sometimes and put
it in the recycle bins and know
that because they otherwise some
of these recycle plants won't
accept if they're not cleaned
out so there's a lot of
education that's involved with
this issue
The
The other thing that I was kind
of appalled at when I again on
on this journey of being a
representative was to even just
coming into this building and
finding that there were not a
lot of recycling efforts
happening even within city
government and state governments
well I'm sorry state government
because.
I had you know maybe a couple
can that there wasn't a place
really to put it and so I mean
even internally so I think this
this effort needs to be within
city within state government I'm
sorry keep St city that state
government and.
Externally I think that this is
a this education process and it
is a process and it doesn't
happen you know madam chair and
and senator doesn't happen
overnight
that a I think the what question
that I do have in your bills
this page for we are talking
about the fees.
So here we go governments have
the nation Indian nation it's at
the bottom and I don't see it a
number online but.
That kind of second paragraph
from the bottom.
These are we talking about
their.
Little bit confused about that
Madam chair of the Senate.
I have.
Madam chair representative
thanks for all your comments I
think that these are referring
to are the fees collected for
the New Mexico clean and
beautiful program and what what
what that section is doing is is
saying no more than X. amount of
these fees can go towards that
since really the apportionment
of the revenues region's come in
the program.
So that those fees that are
regenerated back into the
program is that what's that yes
chair representative yes that's
I mean the fees run the program
it's kind of an enterprise
program that way so it's an
enterprise fund it's an
enterprise yes it is well.
Yes it is because the fees
comment from ratchet vehicle
registrations actually and a
dollar fifty from each one
basically goes towards that
program and out of that they
hire a coordinator they have the
requests they do it all.
thank you madam chair and and
senator I think the only thing
I'm upset about it and asked me
to cause us deal with you now
Madam well hi.
Let's work together on a doing
more here in the state capital
thank you madam chair and
senator I'd love to meet with
you transformation about the
efforts that we made in
Albuquerque we're working
together on last.
Representative listening
Representative.
The talks.
Our our one that will.
Agencies.
Statewide.
Are those.
Yes Representative you have
before service.
You have bureau of land
management.
You have reclamation in the
National Park Service you got a
handful of federal land
management agencies here in New
Mexico those are.
May want to come to mind.
So.
Because Madam chair
representative they manage the
New Mexico clean and beautiful
program it's not well known but
but they long have been
established as one of the key
agencies in our state the
manager anti litter and that's
what this is about them that
programs about.
They give out grants to give out
almost a million dollars a year
grants to local governments for
litter cleanups little marketing
campaigns
so that's their business and so
we're talking about litter
control the what the intent to
language you're asking about is
to say a let's not have that
conversation just and that our
cities that would maybe work
with me like with the filters
that eight or.
You know whatever it is.
You up but the National Forest
you want to have that
partnership you want to have
that conversation so.
That's what.
It.
I have.
Right.
Yeah.
Or we have to.
Or and she.
You.
Right yeah I just use one which
part is the the toward the end
of the.
It does a little bit Madam chair
Representative I agree and the
these are things that have been
around a long time they all have
very strong ownership of what
they do and they're very proud
of what they do I think people
do it actually pretty well you
know they they are distinctly
different like clean and
beautiful with tourism are
little litter pick up programs
you know it's let's get together
on a Saturday do a cleanup of.
Thank you have the right grants
which are getting which is
always bureau which is actually
managing solid waste programs
around the state they're
permitting landfills they're
doing that work and they're
giving out grants infrastructure
Baylor's recycling equipment so
they will have a little
different.
I looked up the purposes of this
bill is being part of a bigger
conversation and so it took a
lot of time looking at all these
things and how we put together
happen make it work better
together we're the optimization
on because I do look at is a big
comprehensive conversation but
there are different believe me
nobody wants to give up their
style or wants to change but
they are all opened optimization
working together I think that's
the kind of sweet spot for us
now.
Chair Senators.
all of these years all these
other states.
Thank you.
I.
All and.
Alright.
K..
Representative no we don't we
don't but they have taken
against for example
We're division right the outdoor
division is obviously promoting
New Mexico they're working a lot
of different partners if there
was a statewide letter anti
litter message they would be a
perfect conduit to help get that
out the.
A major brand because they do a
lot of marketing same thing with
all these guys you know state
parks.
All the different divisions this
is to create a whole government
strategy people working together
but it doesn't require that they
do anything other than to
collaborate on strategies.
That's all it's just
requirements around the table
share information collaborate
disseminate information.
Soft so this is for the.
So.
Just like that one.
All of the.
Some of that money.
Hi with that are controlled.
Our.
I'm not sure why.
The card this.
Based.
Average.
Totally
totally that Madam chair
representative because Hey
number one as I mentioned
earlier they're not the only one
doing litter picks you have to
keep New Mexico clean and
beautiful products you may have
a community you've got two
different state agencies that
they could potentially work with
the published problem
it's really important that
people are talking.
And that is that is the
department of tourism also put
South message and may.
So they have a different message
it's not that tough of mafia
other that program which they're
very proud of it that more that
up north so they they very that
passion about this place to
believe me and I met with them
and they want to be involved and
so.
Okay sec report that they are
when we get everybody on the
same page share.
By all means collaboration.
The collaboration.
All
right.
Plan.
All
I mean the.
It's been my experience.
You can.
Mexico marquees.
Some of this for the response.
One group.
In some ways judge of.
Earlier.
Yes.
How will this.
I don't see right.
Because everybody the.
I.
They've got to do
for the.
I was.
Hey we're on.
Well everybody.
Can't recall
And I am not sure if they have
this.
Our.
Hi yes Representative works.
The action.
Just last.
I've seen on.
Yes.
Requests.
All.
By I don't know.
Madam chair.
Look at.
Success stories.
Yeah Madam chair representative
again you've got programs here
that I would actually disagree
are successful we keep New
Mexico played a beautiful
program is doing a great job in
a grant order ways bureau right
grass very very important I
spoke to solid waste directors
I've spoken to others who are
receiving these letters ramped
about very popular establish
programs that don't want to be
messed with they don't want to
be moved you don't want to be
taken out of there to me so
that's kind of a strike you're
you're you're breaking something
that's working in order to try
to create something better and I
think that something better is
how you get these parts to work
together in a complimentary way
that would be reasonable fix the
improvement here I'm glad you
mentioned Colorado.
If we want to call Colorado
Colorado senator Dan single use
plastic bags single use plastic
straws and plastic containers
will look for your vote on the
house floor.
now we've got the visual
information about what brexit
Colorado's doing that are
keeping the roadways cleaner you
know you gotta get serious about
that stuff but anyway I
appreciate where you're coming
from and I think cities do have
a voice in the right in the in
all right programs by getting
people to talk together there's
additional venues for sharing
information so.
Including other partners like
apple revision but also
communicating with city all
these things will help
disseminate information about
grant programs message and and
just put it all together.
Chair.
This.
As.
I.
Yeah.
Paperbacks.
Thousand.
And that is.
It's not.
But having said that I'm still
once again.
Everything.
Yes.
For instance allowing.
And contract the state this
And.
Do that one.
Madam madam chair hi.
I.
but.
It.
As I was.
A request by.
I
just.
All the.
Are the people.
Our.
I.
We have a yes I just.
It doesn't make sense.
Senator all.
I
think.
Thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair soon
turned over pictures.
This is a Representative will
be.
I'm just.
Madam chair representative I
would say no but it's also not
the only issue that communities
are dealing with such that it
would warrant seventy five
percent of all money having to
go to page only that problem.
It's still included in this.
Okay.
And madam chair chair to work
day up to size.
The tire.
Recycling issue.
Madam chair representative going
we're doing is there is a risk
there is a requirement of all
right now seventy five percent
of these funds must go towards
illegal tyre recycling abatement
at a problem we've heard from
the HSD is they have a hard time
given up grant funding because
there's only so many tires
cycling efforts out there and
this is the recycling
infrastructure program and
reason that language is there
along now because the history of
this program the lineage of this
program started for their
collecting fees on tires that's
where it started the kind of
started as a tire recycling
program and then it grew into a
recycling illegal dumping
program and now the funding
language needs to.
Involved with that so this is at
the request of the people
manages programs.
So this will be able to do that.
And and the the people give up
the funds will be able to
determine okay here the grant
applications that came in and it
may be that one year tire
recycling gets a lot of money
but it may be that they have
almost no requests request for
another year so it's just left
more flexibility a fund which
consequently will be there will
be more funding available for
the range of waste diversion
efforts.
I
respectful language.
And the.
One hundred and fifty respect
to.
I'm sure that that's something
that's never been done it's
never been you know that was the
original language it was put in
there as if they were gonna find
an issue loans out of this
program to underwrite a private
iterations it's never been done
and I think people now feel it's
probably not a good idea it's
not appropriate for this grant
funds to be turned into a loan
program for.
Yeah at enterprise so.
Not needed in part of this yes
cleanup of this bill is a
cleanup modernization of Bill
for these programs.
Okay that.
To ensure to act to.
Have a concern about the.
Which.
Middle and.
Lane where the funds are in.
Spam why is that necessary.
Again Madam chair representative
it's just that their their
solution for it they're solution
oriented organizations who are
who are running education
programs the coordinating
entities are not necessarily a
middle man as far as picking up
waste themselves I probably
would need to just pay them
getting grants to to be doing
that although they certainly
could be could be but is
probably more of the information
all.
Coordination piece that they do
very well and
So there there there is value
added there that I've seen first
hand and and so that was not
able to add them to the next.
Chair of Senator one last
question.
the.
This recycling just on economic
electors point.
Yeah that's a good question
there's a myth about recycling.
and I I.
Used to be on the board of many
recycling organizations that are
tackling a long time okay
curbside recycling going rosters
and there's a myth out there
that recycling should pay for
itself quoted quote that the
selling of commodities should
pay for a program and if it
doesn't then it's a bump that
it's flawed it in reality there
is a fee that associates most
recycling programs all because
it because it doesn't the sale
of the commodities alone don't
do it so there are costs
involved in diverting that
landfills but there's also costs
and just land filling them and
then having to pay to subsidize
an expansion of the landfill
creating a new landfill to a
public how does get built into
fees so it's just really a value
system for etcetera etcetera you
do you want to keep materials
out of landfills do you want to
use less raw material so is it
economical
it is because here here here
shipping cost or maybe land
filling it towards another
strategy.
And you know it's like a lot of
things in the public we may
invested because we've you
there's a public at.
Just like part.
Is part economical.
Find the public benefit so at
the answer that that way.
I think it's I think it is
important it does have a value.
I was just.
Cheers Division standalone.
Business entertain.
There would be no opportunities
for generating a profit from
recycling Mr speaker.
Is is that accurate or mostly I
would say that that's a kind of
an over simplification chair
representative there are some
commodities that are very high
value added businesses out there
like fifty scrap metal where
they can actually make a good
living doing.
And then there's some
commodities to change through
time.
Like classics like glass.
are as a country we used to sell
still do a lot of material to
China that market changed
dramatically a few years ago
when China's that we're no
longer going to accept anything
unless it's ninety five percent.
uncontaminated.
So that changed how communities
have process goals
so it's just really.
It depends you know for a at the
if it's a something that has a
fee associated with like a lot
of cities in New Mexico contract
with a private company to do our
recycling.
They're being paid to do.
So for them because they're
being contracted to do it
they're able to you know spread
out over a large rate base be
able to make a bit of business
out of doing it so different
models out there and then
there's some things which are
really tough to do because we
maybe garden up buyers of it and
the you know the contamination
issues so it's really to
changing changing situation.
You know.
At the end of the day the best
route to use this to reduce.
waste at the source.
And that.
So that's where it is a whole
field of.
Recycling call produce
responsibilities where you try
to work with companies to not
reduce waste to reduce our waste
in the first place.
So it's you know another way to
look at ways to how we reduce it
but.
Conversation.
Chairman Senator.
The reason we use plastic.
One milk comes in the gallon
Gen.
This past.
And.
There are significant consumer
benefits to.
Why is she evolved in the.
So.
There's one.
All I need to.
Encourage the credibility is to.
Or.
For traditional to advertising
would be.
What we St thank you Mr chairman
thank Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center.
just one one question from a
constituent right make a motion
is that okay up so I did have a
constituent reach out to me on
this bill and ask if we do
actually really recycle anything
anymore or if it's just an
illusion.
No answer required that.
One of the.
I will definitely make mention.
Madam chair and senator I do
have a question about taxed as.
And I know that.
To that Hey Tyra to.
I just wanted we have the the
all.
They collect.
to.
That our.
Both sides.
I just looking.
And that.
Every.
And.
To have.
Program.
Is that why not just allow the.
Charges.
And then.
They would.
Yes we have
a saying that.
Yes.
All.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and in the
past the only hear that
question.
All right this agency.
Representative Briggs.
Representative Dixon yes
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative night we're.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
I sure Sarinana.
Chairman queen seventy three.
Thanks everybody motives of the
three.
Happened.
Right.
Madam madam chair before we get
to the next item
if anyone is interested in going
to a recycling plant may be
happy to set up to work.
All right Senator souls back for
second time and we do have an
amazing.
The finders.
Madam chair I do have a cell an
information sheet through
everyone that explains some that
number came from the to their.
Mediating the motor we.
At.
Can I move
house energy and natural
resources committee amendment
number one.
Point two two five nine four
five point one.
The madam chair when I was here
before there was concern about
just taking the cap off
completely that that would open
it wide up for things and so I
went back I took that very
seriously I went through and did
some calculations as to how much
if somebody had a house that is
a typical size house.
That uses gas for heating
cooking hot water
the national averages somewhere
around eight thousand kilowatt
hours per year and so if you
were to go all electric as far
as everything except for heating
cooking and water so that covers
your microwave your lights your
hair dryer you're plugging in
your TV's all of those type of
things that's where that eight
thousand number that is
currently used so that we take a
hundred percent of what your
current electric bill is out
we've gone through and done some
very rough calculations of best
piece kinds of scenarios if you
move to induction heating the
most efficient that would add
another four hundred forty two
you go through electric up and
yes a very basic kinds of
calculations heat pump water
heater the most efficient type
without about two thousand one
hundred ninety five kilowatt
hours based on data from the US
department of energy heat source
your source heat pumps with many
splits I can see that there are
electric vehicles we talked
about where that is certainly
the way the country is going and
these numbers were based on a
Nissan leaf which is a very
small low electric use one and
most vehicles would you
substantially more than that and
so I think these numbers are
very conservative I apologize
the next will section there that
by columns when I was printing
it did not line up they did
while my computer but not when
it printed but that would put a
total of twenty eight thousand
two hundred thirty five kilowatt
hours if you were to switch over
and have all of those pieces as
part of your electric bill on
the backside then shows the
basic calculation as to what
that would be for a percent that
would indicate that you would
need based on what your current
electric bill is if you were to
put all of those things in not
everybody does but that would be
the maximum and again I'm very
conservative numbers would
require you to put in a
distributed generated system of
three.
Fifty three percent of your
current usage.
I'm proposing a two hundred
percent cap.
I think that's well we in
standards it's by no means that
everybody who puts a DG system
this gonna put in one is two
hundred percent of their current
usage that would be the maximum
they would be allowed to with
this particular bill
and that's why the amendment and
what it did was put back in the
other language instead of a
hundred twenty percent of the
bill it's a two hundred percent
of the bill.
I think a lot of did I get that
to you to the yeah point two two
five nine four five one.
Thank you
All right committee.
Do we need to move.
We moved I I I did not I was
going to move reductions of
there's questions I'd.
Thank you senator thank you
madam chair Senator question
about the amendment I just the
the figures are very helpful in
constructing the amendment we're
coming back with it did you have
an opportunity to talk to the
utilities and the cops I did
talk to a couple of the
utilities they did not find any
actual numbers they just grab
the number and said a hundred
percent.
I think that is too low based on
the actual numbers out from US
department of energy as to what
it would cost.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator did you up.
Have a chance to talk with any
of the rural co ops I did not
have the talk with any of them
they didn't come in to see me I
did have some conversations like
I said with PNM and also heard
from the past so electric.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Chair Senators are you.
The term.
Madam chair yes.
Cherishing.
Madam chair and representative
I'm not sure how you mean how
would it affect my calculations
this is talking about the total
amount of energy used per year.
Changing have.
That is what we charge.
For.
One of the.
Average age.
The.
Your.
All.
Transition.
And.
What is.
Activities
Or
appropriations the.
Thank J. The New.
One two.
Average.
So.
The two actors.
One sixteen.
These are.
This is.
That is.
This
This is.
The the.
Education.
Each.
Okay.
We do too.
All.
Transaction.
It actually hurt.
In more than one instance in
California.
The price of panels at noon on
the Senator is thank you.
these all.
The solar cells are going to
generate power sun shining.
And you got to do something
with.
And the utilities which have to
cherished.
So.
I understand the need for smart.
I understand the need.
For each match with this will to
Representative.
Maybe for.
More robust distribution systems
to handle these sparks or
maximum capacity it's.
Really reflected in the annual
average because the systems are
General six hours of this.
And the rest of the time.
So.
I can't support this I cannot
support this two hundred
percent.
Amendment.
For those reasons it looks to me
like you have insurance Senator.
This significant change for
instability emissions.
Thank you the technician.
Thank you madam chair thank yous
are up.
I read the amendment correctly
not only.
Addresses the increased I.
Twenty percent to two hundred
percent we have.
Address the other concerns that
are raised in our last vision
that was tied to the.
So I just want to confirm.
The residents are you could
build system yeah yeah keep.
This is tied to the using.
Madam chair representative of
the amendment essentially goes
back to what we currently have
which is only the residents
there and changes only the
hundred twenty to two hundred.
So only the resident it doesn't
allow putting in a huge system
to to try and make money and as
I said before it doesn't make
sense because you'd be selling
the utility electricity at below
market rate because you only get
the avoided cost you don't get
rex or any of the other big
bonuses or anything of that sort
with it.
So I I sure so I appreciate you
doing that right the issue is
really one of Representative
from Lee challenges related to
and that is whether or not.
It is reasonable.
To have this to hire for staff
limitations will from hundred
twenty percent to two hundred
percent.
And.
Madam chair so
It does seem to be.
That.
Because.
To.
You're creating bigger problems
for.
The utility bill a the smaller
the utilities.
What.
The.
At the number of potential
people that what are these
systems the bigger problem it is
to.
Ballots that power that's
created during those.
Hours of the day.
So electricity's being use as I
liked your your response to.
Have a news.
Are you.
What the balance.
The homeowner.
For for the electricity hello
how it affects the.
What the on the other at whether
that considerations part of your
analysis get into this two
percent.
Madam chair representative out
let me see if I I can insert
some of that now in general this
bill.
All it does is updates what we
currently have and so people can
still put on lots and lots of
systems and everything about
under twenty percent.
But it doesn't allow them to
right size the one that that
they're looking for Colorado by
the way is also at two hundred
percent for a maximum and so
this just matches what Colorado
is doing as well I learned that
after the fact that was not part
of the choosing two hundred
percent.
Work out that way
of the concerns are taken in by
the bills that were passed on
grid modernization that those
are designed specifically for
these things for the utilities
and they're able to recoup their
costs and they're right
basically all of the cost for
grid modernization solar NDG
systems are not going to go away
they are going to continue all
of the interconnection concerns
that you're talking about are
all part of the process of
connecting any DG system into
the electric grid and so if they
are not able to handle it based
on where that particular
transformer it can be denied at
this point because it's not
capable of handling that but
there are already mechanisms
within the large utilities I
can't speak to whether or that
the rural electric coops are
under that same system or not
but they also have to go through
the interconnection rules are
requirements and it's a document
it's about fifty pages long of
all the things that have to be
met to interconnect and so it's
all covered with in that as to
whether the system is already
full we can't handle anymore
that technically person wouldn't
be allowed to put that on but
hopefully that those utilities
and rural electric are building
the capacity to handle more and
that would be able to and so
that really is handled in a
different place not particularly
within this it certainly is a
concern I fully recognize that
but we passed read modernization
some other things so that as
this continues to build out they
would be able to moving this up
to two hundred percent doesn't
mean every system suddenly going
to be two hundred percent that
cost a whole lot more not
everybody's people but we're
ready to do that this just
allows that those systems can be
put on yeah and if somebody were
going total electric they need
to put a three hundred fifty
percent system on there this
would not currently a lot of
that I.
this would require people to
choose which of these electric
upgrades they're planning on
doing in the near future and
right sizing a system that would
allow that.
Madam chair center let your
brought up the issue of grid
modernization and the ability of
the utility to in that sense.
See a return all calls on that
investment because one of the.
One of the crucial issues with
respect to.
All this is.
Who is very those costs and so
we we create work with creating
systems that complicate the
ballots and.
We therefore need.
Or
Ability to handle the influx of
power.
Changing sources of power
throughout the day.
and the utilities are having to
make those investments to
anything at all that and and yet
the people that all.
Thank you for that all the
servers.
The utility doesn't use this our
goodness of their heart they
were basically getting.
Reasonable return on their
investment the charge to the
public regulation commission is
to allow to have that the
reasonable rate of return so
ultimately the consumers and and
part of this publication.
It's really being passed on to
the people largely that do not
have these types of systems and
of course the ones that are
taking the power off the grid
twenty four seven
and and.
Not having those complications
so that's one concern and then
the second concern.
Is.
As was pointed out earlier.
Solar is solar and battery
technology or someone that.
All other sources most of the
sources provided.
Electricity is basically
spending pop around in our for.
Solar.
Is putting the electricity on
the grid without that spending
that time.
Battery technology if it ever
gets it would likewise not
requirements been technology but
but everything else so when you
put all this energy on to the
Representative to the
distribution system from the
solar those.
Third of have.
Have that certainly no more than
half of the day.
You.
You have to reduce.
The generation someone and and
so that.
That is a complicated factor in
how the two of these have to
deal with.
The course of the wind is
intermittent as well so so we
have you know just not.
Are traditional methods of
putting electors.
But we have.
And that is.
Captain goes we have solar
that's fair for
to questions that in all these
complicated systems are
requiring substantial
investments of the consumers are
are are you for.
And so if we if we go to the two
hundred percent.
And that I was as a
representative from.
point out.
That's five mid day and these
many of these homes property
occupied during those times
they're not using all that most
of that energy it finds its way
to the bridge.
Madam chair representative that
happens occasionally work I mean
it's happened a few times in
California which has a much
higher rate of penetration of
solar than we do they are
dealing with their grid
modernization so that they're
able to handle that some of the
areas I would not necessarily
agree on is putting distributed
generation the ladies the need
for additional out right basis
to add additional capacity with
the utilities that saves
consumers money when those
delays are there because the
power and during those high use
times is out to everyone at
below market rates and therefore
it delays those extra costs to
consumers we saw that in the
area I know it's all passable
electric but we're they've had
some very high fuel costs which
are passed right on to all the
the consumers but the
distributed generation the extra
during those peak times of the
day.
Is on the grid for all to use
without paying the very high
cost I think some of the extra
fuel costs peaked at somewhere
around a hundred and sixty
dollars per kilowatt hour where
do need coming off of systems at
those peak times comes in at
somewhere around three thirty
dollars a kilowatt hour and so
there was a substantial cost
that was passed on to consumers
for anything the DG wasn't
filling in the gap and so there
are times when it absolutely
states consumers money that
we're do need because it offsets
the need at the the utility to
buy power on the open market
typically in a need.
Sure Senator.
When utilities are.
Trying to build up their system
and you have these other.
Sources of what trends are
turning on the news.
The utility really has no
control over these tax systems
other than.
To say they're wanted
distribution system can't handle
it yeah I'd knowledge if the
system can handle thank you
thank you for that.
This trump card.
But I want to these types of
systems they get tied in and the
job he really has no.
The ability to.
All that so this we.
On the other hand the utility
has to build out its.
Reliability factor to be.
The other.
And so I always say that this
stuff
yeah could take place I suspect
the Chiles do some calculation
of how much energy that you
Callum between the hours of you
know maybe nine AM eight AM till
four five PM six PM
That.
The reality of it is they have
to have the capacity to their
purchase for produce.
So electrons to power their
system right get maintain
reliability Act these whites
which.
At the peak rates and and so
you know part of our concern.
My concern is is that that.
We are not we're we're.
Funded by statute so complicated
factors for two or three years
and they have expressed concern.
I have expressed concerns with
with
this potential increase yeah.
It's a new issue area that
that's complicated to begin with
but it's more complicated
because we could do that'll
factors.
I I I would hope that there's
been discussion with the
utilities and with the coops.
I would hope that the house.
Bills like this.
Move forward there's thank you
for collaboration and for
work in that regard because it
is.
I think one thing I've learned
the past year so is a.
This is a highly complicated
there the you have to maintain.
With them so that would.
I have to.
Constructs.
The balance between the
electricity we utilized.
Electricity being generated at
every moment in time.
And so.
I don't know I don't know how to
do it I would just be online
comprehension how do you keep
those states are balanced it's
always over durables but we're
creating.
Potential a new a new variable
that's going to have to go into
that calculation and concern
about the Senate Mr or so I'm
encouraged you and others to
really try to.
Said that while the children's
try to solve.
That raised by the career this
is it's critical all of New
Mexico that we have.
Reliable dispatchable energy at
our food.
I think we all on the thank you
Mr chair so.
thank you Representative never
apologize for my absence we are
on the committees of right we
all the.
The amendment.
Given that thank you.
Representative Montoya and the
men.
Now.
As.
And
a lot out.
Getting.
I live in this area.
I.
The.
That's.
I was hoping that.
That is.
At this.
Thank.
On this.
So how do you
This is.
All
all all also.
That.
Is.
So that.
And what I.
Well that.
A loss.
So our.
I.
And and and uses for.
That this is a.
Hey this.
This.
Decision.
All of the.
it.
During.
Actors.
Others.
Sure.
That.
All.
All.
Is this for this.
So.
Act that way.
Law offices.
It certainly is not.
is.
All of these.
I I see.
That is.
This.
That.
Position have.
This is the issue prices.
And these whatever whatever's
going on.
So
that.
I.
California based on page.
Houses well that.
Them right all of their.
Mr chair.
To be Mr chair heard anything
choose not to also the.
Chair Senators is.
Not just.
Right.
All of these.
We have a long.
A few a few.
That's that's still lives I was
able.
That.
To the creation.
Probably for.
If you add to that is.
Senator.
The.
This.
It is also.
Volatility.
It also.
I also see how.
Yes there
important.
Yes.
Thanks.
I don't.
Right.
Is
this right.
Thank.
Thank you Representative we have
two more people on the list they
have began roll call.
Well of course finish but I do
ask you to be reached
Representative Townsend.
Thank you chair on the that we
Senator.
I think we can agree that.
These rural electric co ops.
You have a smaller thanks love
the name.
Have the greatest.
Challenge.
Integrating.
Additional.
Input which is right to that
would you agree to that.
Mr chair representative yes they
they do it again that's all
contained within the
interconnection rules as to
whether they're able to handle
that extra capacity.
And
Mr chair and and senator.
I reached out to.
A couple of those that you have
to remember and they said this
is still problematic are you
aware that it be reached have
you had any conversations the
staff was like they lined up on
alcohol wait the other day and
and and I'm still concerned
about our rural electric co ops.
It hasn't been any real.
We try to reject advocates and
supporters to Jerry and
Representative no they did not
ask me stop me they're out what
I clearly got was they don't
want anymore solar on their
systems and all that they really
were even dealing with the under
twenty percent they don't want a
more solar on their systems at
all they already can stop any of
that through the interconnection
if they don't have the capacity
you can demonstrate that.
And senator out pulled up go
that was the the committee Madam
California had a couple of times
where they at the at the
invalids issues and is it true
that do you now that they've
done that are in the errors on
that it is negative cost.
are you aware that Mr chair
representative I don't know I
was just going off of the COVID
that it made in the suit it to
to be correct there's a big we
have out there where Arizona and
California often buying extra
power from our utilities when
they got extra at fairly
lucrative prices it's called
trying to member up off system
sales and I know it but again I
know well pass electric better
but I'll pass electric makes
lots of off system sales out of
Palo Verde and other places to
the Arizona California market
because they've got extra to
sell.
And.
Chair and senator.
I think that shot.
And I see that problem is going
to continue to.
That we have I think we have to
stop and let the created go
through the modernization get
some support at.
What we're forcing on them is
just going to be.
It is not of much bigger
problems.
And
We have.
PNM talk of that issues with the
being out of balance and and in
love in that.
And you know we we saw all of
the the.
But the other day and said this
is a real problem.
Not one of them said that it
came out the.
Just the number.
Down to present it would solve
itself.
Problem.
And and I the.
I have to be concerned with the
rural New Mexico not only my
district but all of these
districts to meet all over for
you have Albuquerque Los crucis
in the bigger.
Stinks how are.
You have more opportunities
status but in rural world.
It's not.
It doesn't work that each stand
up I think it will work when we
get storage and things like that
figure it out we're not there
yet and so I think to changed
your problem I do not have the
the role of elector option by
any of the state we can work
this is a real problem and
because of that I can't afford
that hi I believe that's where
we're going but we're not there
yet and this just.
Identifies addition thank you
madam chair.
The very go.
Thank you Mr chair and
thank you senator
I do believe that you went back
in this state that for on the
question that we asked regarding
the caps and and I very much
appreciate that because it's
it's clear.
What I was concerned with in
the.
I asked this question before and
made this point which is the
meeting with the representatives
of the collapse and are electric
companies
I'm still getting a lot of
information back from them about
their concerns and even with the
two hundred
show up go up I mean cap.
and I was just looking at some
information the other day I
signed you story of the home
builders Mr chair and and
Senator.
There was a news story just last
week which couple outside
right you know what they talked
about is the infrastructure that
currently exists and use up to.
Infrastructure does not support
is not there for these new
subdivisions and that really
caught my on my and it just so
happened that it was on the news
and I thought to myself well
that's exactly what we're
talking about right now is how
does a how do we support these
new subdivisions coming into and
if the infrastructure can't
support
even.
These numbers that you provided
to us.
We're kind of doing a disservice
to the public.
And I think that that is worth
some discussion and some in some
future meetings Senator and and
Mr chair
the other thing that really
concerns me as the.
Who's gonna absorb the rate
hikes for putting these and to
new subdivisions and and
typically if we're dealing with
these co ops across the state
it's going to be the consumer I
mean at some point in time
somebody's got to pay for the
systems right.
And one of the big issues that I
went back and did I did a little
bit of research for myself just
to understand the median income
of four percent in New Mexico is
twenty six thousand dollars and
the median family income is
forty one thousand dollars in
New Mexico.
and you compare that to Colorado
which we keep bringing up
Colorado the median income for a
an individual in Colorado is
thirty seven thousand dollars
which is about ten thousand
eleven thousand dollars more
than New Mexico which really
does concern me Mr chair because
we're we haven't talked about
any bills for.
Subsidies to the poor.
We're living at twenty six
thousand dollars
I just you know I very much
appreciate your going back and
looking at the cap but I I still
have some concerns about who's
going to pay for these its
infrastructure and.
And as we all know.
Usually the consumer pays for
that.
And you know we're dealing in a
situation right now where people
are struggling to just come out
of the pandemic and now we're we
say that we're going to increase
infrastructure capacity
and I understand that a lot of
this goes to the PRC
but they're going to push for
more rate hikes and we were
ready just also seeing a rate
hike so I'm I'm really really
concerned about some of these I
want this infrastructure to
happen.
the other thing that I have a
question Mr chair I didn't see
the Tatian date but I assume
that if the governor signs it's
after the session at the rate
hike with.
Once she signs it would go into
effect so that would be another
question that I have is what is
the implementation date for this
but as you can see what I'm
saying is that.
It is
infrastructure improvements at
some point and we're dealing
with sixteen call ups that
represent the state and the
population of the state and so
Mister chair with that you know
I I do appreciate senator that
you went back and did this cap
and I still hear that people are
not supporting cast
but.
To me more importantly is who's
going to pay for the this
infrastructure.
Mr yeah I respond.
Thank you.
Close sure and like to to
respond to your comments because
you're absolutely right all the
infrastructure is paid for by
the consumers
by putting on more DG that is
the in that infrastructure is
paid for by the resident not by
everyone else and therefore it
the ladies putting in large
additional capacity that the
utilities need to put in in
order to meet the new app
subdivisions there is
infrastructure that is required
to put those in that's the grid
modernization is to put in
infrastructure that can handle a
larger amount of electricity at
each residence out but that is
already in there there were some
comments also about whether each
person should put a powerwall
battery on their wall if they
can afford that that's wonderful
but the grid modernization also
is for the utilities to put you
in battery storage there is
utility scale battery storage
that is capable of absorbing the
extra electrons when there is
over capacity that is the exact
point of those the battery
storage issue is more on a
seasonal battery storage we
don't have storage that last
over months but we have very
good storage that levels out
that duck curve over the course
of five or six hours up and read
modernization would be for
utilities to put in for battery
storage so they could absorb the
extra electrons on those
occasional times when there's
too much and it would need to be
curtailed in some manner if it
were not able to be sold off
system sales page the utilities
make extra money in capacity off
of
I think the two hundred capacity
and one of the things that.
Let me go in a little bit I'm a
psychologist by training two
hundred over one hundred is like
oh my god we're putting you know
twice as much on to the system
as we've ever had before that's
not the case we're already
putting these systems on up you
of them are going to opt to put
it into two hundred but it is
not a doubling of the total
amount of of of elector systems
are suddenly going to double
everything that's out there this
is going to be a very slow ramp
up with the understanding that
utilities to have an option of
putting it in storage of grid
modernization of which they all
get a return on investment and
that return on investment is
paid for also by the people with
the G. systems we all pay a
portion of that for access to
the we pay for the electric
lines and other kinds of things
it's not just a take by any
means it does the lady the need
for additional capacity which is
very expensive in which is
usually what's covered in the
right cases from the PRC.
I was there to the motion.
Chair I move adoption I don't
think we move adoption of the
amendment okay thank you for
that.
I I moved it for just
this reduction of and house
energy and natural resources
committee is one for the option
there's a second state should
take the the on the amendment.
Representative Griego.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Yes Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes all.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
Not.
I sure Sarinana.
Evergreen yes yes I want to
drive.
The one to adopted.
The.
There's a motion on the.
I move do pass on Senate bill
fifty six thousand seven.
Station take the the
Representative radio Mr chair
before we so
I have a request.
The Sanchez.
Representative right what is
your this.
Tell me Representative Reagan.
But there's a very we're
rebuilding well I have a right
to ask for something before I
those don't I know you don't.
Then I would have to vote no.
There's a very good let's now.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
I sure Sarinana.
Chairman queen yes up to six.
The six the motion fails
So what to make a table in
motion.
Right.
The vote to table and just.
Okay so we're gonna see what
happens.
Right.
The motion to.
Representative break off.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio.
No to table.
Representative got.
Representative small no.
Representative Townsend yes
table.
I share Sarinana.
Chairman Payne yeah.
Except for.
Thank.
So
I guess we're just.
