Representative Nibert is here.
Representative Rubio.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
I sure Sarinana.
Chairman I think there.
Have a quorum.
Okay.
Here's the thing.
I.
Figure out what's going on.
Yes Mr chair Representative
Ortez and I will just put the
bill on without them today okay.
Thank you so
For the phase of the mission our
second date our own standards
for finances and pictures.
The.
Receptors.
That.
At the experts despite the is.
Yeah we're not really set up.
It is.
The agency that earlier out of
the.
Similarly serve with
so we were discussing briefly
about.
Have any of that situation and
it's just like working under C.
two thousand.
This is this is a parent come up
with some other committees.
One of the yes I assume was a
one the power was only for other
things and.
You know sort of activities that
might be more appropriate to
committee
General during the session.
We like that people from centers
of the.
So so that's reduces bill of.
Also in their eighties will play
on the Senator of that.
The published in.
Survived by.
Last week in the complicating
factor this Saturday is that
these three are members also on
your rations the meeting at same
time.
That's true.
Mr chairman I believe it's word
subcommittees so that might be
what is different.
Yes groups meeting in different
locations so four of our members
it is your right to.
Sir it's up
So that's that's.
The deal with the richest cancer
model through we will as we have
in the past.
We're we're we're not gonna
take.
the.
That will change that
thank you the area of our
members.
So I will assume all of our
members in the bills that yes
those maybe absent for debate on
the bills but we're right in the
last over so they can test
their.
it's not.
All the yeah.
Thanks to the leaders of.
Right.
Mr chair when I was on city
council.
Some of our members were able
to.
Tender meetings through Sioux
and they were able to vote that
way and wonders of.
We could ask for maybe a rule
change well that to happen I
don't know if that's appropriate
or not but I just thought I'd
mention.
Right
The issue is that the process
for the rule changes cover so we
have with this committee they're
trying to find time to needs
the discussed rule changes that
would allow people to versus
moblie their deal
I suspect this is the on so what
they're considering.
The store is.
Yeah.
The pandemic there's
technologies which I probably
would be very left to adopt
turns out I really like it but
yeah we're gonna happen half of
technology and it's on.
I appreciate the suggestion
we're probably at that
eventually but we're not there
yet Mr chairman to the speaker
thank you.
Here is a very.
In their rooms.
I don't know if any of the
microphone I don't think that it
should
Those same lines Mr chair would
it be worth mentioning to the
speaker that I appreciate that
we can have experts in the
interim but a lot of times.
You know if there is an expert
that does not live in New Mexico
on a particular bill the only
feasible way for them to serve
as an expert with the B. as in
not just for this committee but
for others and so is that
something that.
Members should ask the speaker
about.
I think it's worth the mention
of the future yes tools I don't
know I also if we want to
proceed with the next result to.
With that.
it's just I I think it's an
observation that was I was
caught off guard but it this
morning.
sure working around the.
Yeah it's just that I I mean I
think this is.
It involving practice.
The the the local.
Thank you Mr chairman edition
that.
The other questions about it.
Else's from.
Well we were just talking up
Saturday and everything
will be in two places.
The state.
Yes it for our members on your
committee.
Fitting
in my expectations before the
bill.
Call your side of the.
Okay.
Okay now thank you Mr I think it
will work to have schedules in
to be as close as possible and
the participate as fully as
possible appreciate being able
to.
Okay so the first.
The.
Mr chair.
Amendment this is a bill
amending and updating and
modernizing existing forest
conservation act which is sort
of.
That number is two two three
eight zero five.
Twenty three just eight so this
is a state agency bill.
modernizing the force
conservation act which is what
enables the state forestry to
division to do what it does get
it clarifies its role
my mic making a more consistent
with what they actually do
especially in the aftermath of a
major force fires and chair I do
believe we have an amendment.
From Representative Nibert.
Sure I do have to this afternoon
thousand appropriate time I
would move the amendment it's
To order number is two two four
six zero four point one.
Secretary.
made sure that this is
different.
Representative I would like to
explain it.
Madam chair of the amendment.
Is
doing one I guess technical
fixes and section I.
The.
The amendment is to really.
So some issues that popped up
when we first read the bill that
was.
We're expanding the role of the
forestry
The state forester.
Deal with some things that are
not associated with the V. and
I.
They have to allow them to do
rehabilitation work in and
preventive war and the issue was
raised whether or not that
activity and as a site with
police power would allow them to
go on to private property
without the landowner's
permission for that type of
activity and so to clarify that
we have.
Senator fix on page six want to.
Strike the word.
And then again on page six one
eighteen strike the words
prevention and the word and to
make it clear that the police
power of the state to go on
private property without the
owner's consent is limited to
those situations where there is
a fire.
The Santo and that that fire
suppression were.
K. to allow access to
governmental entities to fight
the fire but not to do the
restoration reclamation work
because those would require the
current practice of getting
permission from the landowner
and actually as I understand
from the state for for an
agreement with the landowner to
go on and do those types of
activities.
Is there any objections.
Chair a point of order.
It's the amendment we don't have
the amendment but it is and then
they basically just a verbal
amendment that.
Sure.
After I did that it was sent to
the committee Senator to a bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Yeah.
I.
Is there any objections.
Thank you madam chair in this of
the all I had the I I am joined
today by our state forester
Laura McCarthy and I want to
give her the opportunity to say
a few words.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen chairman
queen and my name is Laura
McCarthy in the state forester.
And
Of the twenty twenty two
wildfires affected everybody
statewide from the Cookes peak
fire in Colfax County all the
way down to the blacks fire and
in the southern part of the
state and over to the McBride
fire in Lincoln County and
everybody wants to do something
to make sure that we are
prepared the next time and this
as a state agency sponsored bill
is what to us is the appropriate
measures that we need to take as
a state.
To respond to the twenty twenty
two wildfires.
If that madam chair.
Thank you are you go first to
the audience those of you for a
favor of this bill.
Mr chairman in during the last
committee that the we get it
getting texts and emails about
not be able to hear so we wind
up and use the money for
everybody here.
Okay so if your neighbor line up
and you will have to speak on
the topic please don't repeat
and the bill.
They'll tell you to stop.
Whenever you're ready.
All right
the estimate okay good morning
madam chair members of the
committee there is going to with
the circle of you're gonna
chapter representing our thirty
five thousand members in New
Mexico we stand in support of H.
B. one ninety five this bill
expands and updates how forestry
can carry out fire suppression
and restoration activities in
ways that meet the current
climate crisis and extremes
driving a president of fires so
we just can't stand supported SO
you will vote yes on this bill
thank you.
Good morning madam co chair and
members of the committee Debbie
Hughes executive director with
the New Mexico association of
conservation districts we also
stand in support of this bill we
did have some concerns that they
were gonna be able to go on
private land to to do some of
these other activities besides
suppression I'm not an attorney
the representative Nibert
assures me this takes care of it
so we really appreciate that
they could be able to spend
state and federal money to be
able to go on private land has
been destroyed and help some
these restoration Committee so
thank you very much.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee are you
better off on behalf of
commissioner of public lands
Stephanie Garcia Richard we
support this bill it's time we
and it's important we have some
real concerns though about an
aspect of the bill that I think
is actually very similar to the
issue that representative Nibert
addressed which is the provision
that essentially permits state
forestry to conduct activities
on state trust land without the
commissioners approval or
cooperation seems like a very
easy fix don't think it does
anything to change the structure
or the purpose of the bill which
we really support to hopefully
the sponsor and EMNRD state
forestry will work with us to
make this simple change thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
this opportunity my name is as
make any end date and I'm the
southwest region director for
the foresters guilt or national
nonprofit organization focused
on ecologically and associate
socially responsible force
management with roots in New
Mexico going back thirty five
years the guild works in New
Mexico were to reduce the risk
of severe wildfire and support
local economies enhance forest
and watershed health across
jurisdictions and increase
forest resilience to
disturbances like wildfire and
climate change we work closely
with the forestry division on
shared stewardship and landscape
scale collaborative forest
restoration projects that are
aimed at enhancing forest and
watershed health and increasing
community resilience to wildfire
we support this amendment to
update the forest conservation
act because it is woefully out
of date and to better serve New
Mexicans and address our current
welfare crisis the forestry
division needs an updated forest
conservation act that recognizes
crucial issues like post fire
rehabilitation and erosion
control and incorporates a
broader view of what forest
management and wildfire
mitigation and tales in this
rapidly changing climate
Furthermore as qualified it wild
and firefighters ourselves we
stand behind increasing
firefighting safety standards as
well as qualifying New Mexico to
receive more federal funding to
enable critical forestry
programs for landscape scale
restoration projects for
stewardship and post fire
rehabilitation thank you.
Good morning everyone and thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today in support of H. B. one
ninety five my name is Caleb
dots on the executive director
of the China peatland Alliance
for nonprofit organization whose
mission is to practice and
promote conservation and the Rio
Chama and San Juan Chama region
we work in customer Watership
partnerships but our main focus
is working on private lands the
San Juan Chama project watershed
in our region produce about
seventy five percent of
Albuquerque's drinking water in
a given year and about fifty
percent Santa fe's Water and
they provide for countless other
water users in the states but
these watersheds are risk of
severe wildfire as we're
painfully reminded twenty twenty
two New Mexico is a wildfire
crisis to confront these
challenges requires all hands on
deck and it requires state
forestry department that has
modernized modernize mandates to
address our modern challenges in
this area make a fires we need
to foresee Division that's
clearly authorized to work on
forced health forcing watershed
restoration and post fire
recovery the forestry division
is guided by the forest
conservation act page last
updated more than thirty five
years ago and is overly focused
on commercial forestry
regulation and fire suppression
crucially this language needs to
be updated and modernized to
clearly state that the forestry
division is the state
contracting agent for forest
conservation and forest health
my only concern is the H. B. one
ninety five does not address the
impacts of New Mexico's anti
donation clause which currently
limits the state's ability to
invest in private lands which
happened to make up forty three
percent of the state's endorsed
plans that's compared to thirty
percent for Senate states for
some for service.
One in Mexico as a large
proportion of privately owned
forest land it is unique among
western states that there's
constitutional language that
limits state investments and
conserving privately owned
forests and watersheds that the
public depends on for public
water supply hopefully the state
will eventually addresses issue
what H. B. one ninety five will
not address the anti donation
clause this proposed amendment
will memorialize the force you
division's authority to receive
federal funding under the
cooperative forestry assistance
act and this will enable the
department to receive more
federal grant funding which
could be used on private land
subject federal guidelines and
so highly in support this thank
you.
Good morning madam ****
committee members my name is
Bronson corn with New Mexico
cattle growers and I'm here to
stand in support of house bill
one ninety five it's not very
often that the general public
gets to yes the has to feel the
effects of wildfire like the
agriculture industry does and
for that we're very sorry that
they did in twenty twenty two
but that being said with things
that have been stated already
the problem that we did have
with the language in this bill
was resolved and we're very
thankful for and we are glad to
support house bill ninety five
thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee correct Peters
senior policy advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico
here to stand in strong support
of the H. B. one ninety five for
the aforementioned reasons in
addition to the ability for the
amendments to better realize and
capitalize on essential federal
matching funds thank you again I
appreciate the opportunity pry
coming.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
I want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward and the
amendment that was placed on
this morning we stand in strong
support of house bill nine one
ninety five we appreciate the
work that's been done to update
and amend the forest
conservation act these
amendments will of the state
forestry division the ability to
meet its goals and conduct post
welfare recovery activities
which are currently outside the
agency scope our state is in
dire need of additional on the
ground work especially in our
forests including riparian
restoration seating and
reforestation of Arbor and areas
this bill will allow state
forestry the ability to contract
out for that work and for these
reasons we stand and support
thank you.
Those in opposition.
Is there anyone in opposition.
Okay the next session thanks for
go to the
Virtual.
the only have fifty people if
you are for the bills raise your
hand.
Start with and this is for a
minute gonna be this.
The.
Estimated.
we can't hear you so we're going
to anyone against the bill.
Twenty but against so let's go
back to sponsor for anymore
comments.
madam chair thank you
I would like to just address Mr.
Concerned.
the language that they're
concerned about this on page.
Four point twenty resisted
Division whether independently
or in cooperation with federal
state or local seats is
authorized to do these various
activities it's not the
practice for intent or or
reading of this language that
this authorizes the the the the
forestry division to go on to
other people's land and engage
in the these activities in the.
In the absence of something like
the force.
so I I appreciate us concern
it's it's similar to some of the
other landowners right I mean
these are things Peter prove
forced tell when when the
statute says big the forestry
division can do this
independently it means the force
treating Division could do it it
and doesn't need to work with
the for service or some other
state agency is still we still
to put this to include
cooperation landowners we're not
we're not saying that they can
go on the other people's land
whether it's state trust land or
anyone else's land and gauge in
these activities that's that's
never been faxes the the
forestry division and we don't
expect that to change.
Right.
Questions from the committee.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair I
would not only reiterate that
first section for.
I believe it.
As.
Yes.
Specifically have reciprocal
language between the Mr public
lands and the state forester
three.
The chairs in the average
balance always agree with you at
all
the way to the madam chair and
Mr Chairman I think it's very
clear those two sections that
there's a reciprocal
relationship that they have to
cooperate with one another to go
on the state trust lands to
engage in that type of
activities so I think it's
pretty clear.
So madam chair Mr chair I I
think you're right that issues
related on each.
Can I get a motion.
To take.
I don't know learning gas so
there would be make a motion to
approve yes.
I move.
Thank you.
Okay got all the.
Thank you madam chair right
quickly twelve read and.
Representative our friends
comments but I want to make sure
of something.
And a lot of the contracting of
poverty language on section
four.
Can eight private land owner or
a state trust.
Representative.
what happens if they fail to
agree on the process.
Madam chair
sort of like the.
madam chair and representative
hi if we fail to come to
agreement and get signatures on
that agreement we do not take
the action.
And is that
To that legal precedents I mean
is that I know you choose you'll
take the action but what about
your predecessor and madam chair
and representative that is at
the insistence of our general
counsel it will not allow us to
take action unless we have a
signed agreement.
Thank you very much thank you
for allowing me to.
So we have a motion second
second.
Yes
radio yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Share Sarinana.
Chairman queen yes.
Seven zero.
What is that to see you the
motion carries you have a it
depends on house bill one ninety
five as amended.
Thank you madam chair version
I receive just and I I from the
committee there there's a
related bill over in the Senate
dealing with procurement could
accept exemption which hopefully
will work its way over to us it
just as a preview the the
division acts as a pass through
for some federal funds people I
for those funds three federal
procurement yeah we're trying to
make them not that twice like
not have to do procurement at
the state level the very been
approved at the federal level so
hopefully you'll see that.
Thank you madam chair thinkers
and I remember sitting.
Computer of this.
Thank you to the vice chair of
return of our state the second
bill today is.
House bill one eighty five
environmental standards for
appliances and fixtures
Representative Ortez thank you
Mr chair members.
Tries or experts are.
Listening but will not be
participating be assumed so
please bear with us as we are
there really are quite expert at
this bill and the so we'll be
communicating with them as we
can thank you again I appreciate
that so Mr chair members of the
committee at H. B. one eighty
five is is that I think a
fantastic bill it does a lot of
things it stays New Mexico
residents and businesses money
it conserves water need reduces
toxic pollutants of the bill is
at.
The bill is in two parts first
we talk about the appliance
efficiency standards
this is not unusual for states
to adopt efficiency standards
it's been doing it since the
nineteen seventies many states
that have adopted the specific
standards in twenty eighteen at
so the the standards that are
right here in this bill so what
the bill says is that in order
for the products that are listed
in this bill to be sold out they
have to meet energy star or
WaterSense efficiency levels or
another efficiency level that
develop my trusted source and
the reason why these products
are in here is because the
states are allowed to to set
standards for them there's no
federal preemption and many of
the products that that are in
the bill are standards that are
already there they're already
available off the shelf and I
think most importantly that
these appliances will save
consumers money at in fact we
think that by twenty thirty New
Mexico residents and businesses
will save about fifty eight
million on a chilly bills two
point five million gallons of
water and eighty gigawatt hours
of electricity and I did some
research on how many homes are
powered by kick what that's a
seven fifty thousand homes
Representative Scott.
So that's the first part of the
second part of the bill is about
clean lighting this is about us
transitioning off of fluorescent
labels in favor of LEDs this is
a huge money saver but it's also
safer for folks to handle
fluorescent light bulbs LEDs are
way better than they were ten
years ago they're more efficient
they're more cost effective we
can replace our our selections
of the committee all kinds of
sizes and shapes and they they
really have a great cost savings
about twenty million annually
from transitioning to LEDs but
the reason we also want to
switch over from fluorescents to
LEDs is because of the safety
issue something like seventy
five percent of fluorescent
bulbs are not disposed of
correctly serviceable to have
mercury in them so as our
custodians I and you and your
regular New Mexicans remove
fluorescent bulbs they can break
releasing mercury vapor are
super super dangerous so we want
to make sure that mercury
doesn't you know doesn't
vaporize in in front of someone
changing that level but also
into the we don't want to be
placed in our water ways in our
you know in our landfills can
leach into our water ways so
this bill is about saving money
it's about protecting New
Mexicans safety and I I want to
be very clear here this is not
about asking anybody to replace
their existing appliances this
is about you know putting new
products on the market that are
more efficient there is that are
safer hi and I also want you to
know that we've been working
with a lot of folks including
New Mexico gas company on an
amendment
the potential amendment to the
bill and and we actually do have
an amendment to offer today Mr
chair and I probably should have
said that before I started.
Of was sent out I I don't know
if it was passed the vote was
sent down we should we should
have this on the best.
I.
It is.
They were to be read the to the
to the first year it two two
four five five seven point one.
Zero funding.
This bill is also survived.
Representative stock has a.
The amendment for discussion.
Which is.
Yes I will this first two points
as on page eleven straight line
six in its entirety and remember
the succeeding paragraphs equity
that is at a drafting error on
and number three at one three
one blind twenty five straight
Department and insert.
In lieu thereof Attorney General
on in on the four on page twenty
two line three straight shall
answer in lieu of.
In lieu thereof maybe that is
that is to streamline this bill
so that the reports from the
public directly to the journey
Attorney General.
is there any discussion on the
amendment.
Those of us.
Thank you Mr chairman at so.
Online six.
It says replace travel service.
What is.
from the state.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
Is.
Members of this committee this
is Tammy single currency is my
expert.
Thank you
for using
the thank you.
Okay I'm sorry without my
glasses today the the.
It's a state regulated.
So what does that do.
What exactly.
State regulated.
Mr.
We talked.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
so this was left standing in err
in the drafting so we do not
want that to be in the bill we
do not want that to be regulated
so it was just an error in the
drafting we just want to remove
it it's already regulated.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Your available to any other
discussion on the amendment.
Any direction to the of the of
that.
No objections the minutes
of the second leg of the bill is
and which is here for the
presentation I don't Mr chair
thank you very much so will
Of the public
if you would like to the the
in opposition to this bill.
If you're in the room.
Through this
please reject any opposition.
Is there any opposition on one
issue is that these if you would
like to speak in opposition line
please raise your hand.
We have a couple of first of
Jacob Cassidy.
Thank you there you go.
Hi can you hear me yes okay
great thank you
administrative capacity with the
association of home appliance
manufacturers we represent the
The manufacturers of major
portable air clear here and
floor care appliances excuse me
and I I I heard the comment
about an amendment for a product
and there was reference to the
the line in the bill so I was
trying to pull that up so I
could see
what was referenced
They have as opposed to the bill
because it includes air cleaners
air cleaners are currently
undergoing federal reserve
regulations are being
implemented really as we speak
so I'll stop we may be not
opposed to it if that was the
amendment
and and forgive me for not
having that in front of me right
now.
So
yes what.
That yes what product was
Except as the reference to.
The.
General service lamps okay so
not air cleaners all right real
quick then I apologize just
wanted to clarify and not.
Not be incorrect with what was
done
so little about two weeks ago on
the eighteenth of January
department of energy Sen final
standards for consumer room air
cleaners to the White House for
final regulatory review this
final review takes about ninety
days
And this is a result of the
department of energy's ruling on
September thirteenth of last
year that this product would be
included in the appliance
standards program so really this
this piece of this for for New
Mexico to focus on is is
unnecessary and really we just
ask that that you simply remove
it from this legislation and
that's our our opposition we we
think this is best done at a
federal level I'll stop there
happy to take any questions.
thank you Mr Cassidy except we
have Carla.
Good morning Mr chairman it's
Leri Sonntag here I'm a small
business owner and the a member
of the New Mexico business
coalition.
And I just wanted to echo what
the previous.
individual said that this bill
is unnecessary.
And from the financial impact
report it says the bill's impact
on businesses and consumers is
indeterminate out some specific
deadlines and requirements for
the environmental Department
goes on to say there's no
funding applied with the bill
that just the worst thing you
can do for businesses and
consumers when it comes to the
increased cost is to have better
indeterminate and undefined I
think we need to vote no on this
bill thank you.
Thank you
the for their hands
with that audience
But because forties region.
Okay so I think the microphone
pretty well.
I want to as well right the.
What this means for one of.
The great.
The general.
There we go thank you good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington I'm the registered
lobbyists for the City of Santa
Fe which places a priority on
environmental friendly
legislation and policies and
this is a bill that the City of
Santa Fe has flagged as a
priority and supports this
legislation we would like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
four.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee at risk at a with
the Sierra Club you're gonna
chapter representing our thirty
five thousand members in New
Mexico we're strong support of
H. B. one eighty five by setting
applies to fit your standards
that other the thirteen other
states have set will save New
Mexicans money and on their
utility bills while reducing our
climate and water compact this
bill is a really positive step
forward and therefore we're
urging the will vote yes I thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of Charles good
marker appearing to be half of
natural resources defense
council we urge your support for
this bill in addition
well you've heard already about
how much energy and water will
be saved both electricity and
natural gas and.
The simplest reason I can say to
why we strongly support this
bills of the cleanest energy
possible is the energy we never
have to produce because we're
reducing our demand and that's
what this bill is fundamentally
all about thank you.
Sure to the office.
Okay that's for the audience
will go online first up we have
we're currently.
Hello good morning Mr chairman
and committee members onboard
McCartney.
yesterday I heard on the news
that petrol I'm denying state of
Texas got slammed again with an
ice storm and a quarter million
citizens lost power.
What what what we're looking at
is this bill it's a no brainer
it saves our systems money by
requiring more efficient home
appliances but more importantly
for New Mexico state is over
three thousand billion gallons
of water.
I strongly support this bill and
I also like to have my lights on
thank you.
Thank you for that it's that we
have seen the county.
Yes Representative.
It was also so we're gonna go
the study wise bird.
Good morning chairman McQueen
and committee members I'm
Stephanie by Richard speaking on
behalf of fifty New Mexico and
especially its rural advocacy
group in support of HD one
eighty five giving our growing
water crisis the efficient at
plumbing fixture standards in
this bill are specially welcome
potentially saving millions of
gallons of water per year in New
Mexico and as for Energy H. B.
one eighty five or be a
financial burden for businesses
and households an international
energy agency study has shown
that US utility companies are
ready customers are already
saving three hundred and twenty
dollars a year from similar but
different efficiency standards
which for rural households is
significant the appliance
standards and awareness project
shows that many other states
have already adopted the
standards and H. B. eighty five
leaving New Mexico vulnerable to
the dumping of less efficient
appliances we urge you to please
vote yes on this bill thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Barbara Calif.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Barbara Calif
speaking for the league of women
voters of New Mexico the league
stand in support of this bill
which will result in the
reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions by promoting greater
energy efficiency and will also
help protect clean air and
conserve water thank you.
Thank you that's that we have
Lorene.
Senator.
All right here we go.
A good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee
I'm speaking in support of just
the one eighty five and more
environmental standards it will
save people money save our
precious water and save our air
from tons of carbon dioxide
please vote yes on SB one eighty
five thank you.
Thank you for that and I think
we see throughout the state.
I thank you chairman claim I
apologize for the technical
difficulty and apologies to
sponsor and my college the ram
for not being there in person
today this bill has potential to
stay Mexicans money as well as
reduced environmental impacts
and for those reasons and all
the ones you've heard today to
support the bill thank you.
Okay I think that's it
Representative what to do that
before you Mr chair thank you I
do want to address the the
federal standard that in motion
right now we're we're not
certain that that will go
through so we feel that New
Mexico should proceed with this
with this standard until the
federal process
Finishes this is for the air
purifiers for the air cleaners.
Okay thank you thank you of
going to the committee for
separate Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Representative traded bills one
that but questions
Mr chair representative using.
Is it your hope.
That this bill will cost
manufacturers to meet yes yes
cation.
for New Mexico.
independent of what is available
yes Representative Staats thank
you Mr chair representative
towns and that that is that it's
a great question you there are
many factors are already meeting
the standard there are thirteen
states that already have these
appliance standards in place so
the products are being are being
produced there up to market out
what we what we don't want to
happen is for manufacturers who
are making an efficient products
to dump their products in New
Mexico so we want to make sure
that those efficient those cost
efficient energy efficient
products the state for drugs are
coming into New Mexico and
that's what this bill will to.
chairman and representative do
you have.
List of those states that have
of the documentation.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
speaking slowly because we are
now compiling the list of
states.
From our experts who are
listening.
Okay.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
of the thirteen states in the
intermountain west Colorado
Nevada have the same standards
California Washington and Oregon
and other states seven other
states with.
In other states that are not in
the intermountain west.
We've got Colorado Nevada Mr
chair at California Washington
and Oregon New York Maine
Massachusetts.
Rhode Island.
A couple of others.
We will.
Right committee Mr chair one of
my favorites I miss you all
there there are others coming
through.
When you talk about this bill
saving consumers in New Mexico
lots of fun.
Have you looked at the cost of.
Clients's built under this
standard Mr Chairman
representative verses.
others that are available on the
market.
That is another fantastic
question Mr Mr Chairman
representative towns and I have
a couple other states to act
that was New Jersey oh why are
you in okay.
At ten would you like to answer
that question Mr chair
representative Townsend so we
have not done an analysis on
each of these individual
Appliances for New Mexico but
this this exact set of standards
has been adopted and thirteen
other states and a lot of
analysis has been done each of
the standards that are included
in this bill are cost effective
meaning that any any addition up
front costs are paid back very
quickly with energy savings
because they're much more
efficient or in water savings
because they're much more
efficient in operation of.
Chairman and and.
Representative that's a that's a
big statement I would.
I deal in facts I would really
like to see that documentation
money my experience
has been that when states the
dopt unique standards.
it drives the cost for their
residents I can give you many
that.
And on top of that.
Los crucis has passed so.
We have a chance close to let
me.
There's nothing that prevents.
A resident for home buyers
everybody.
I was in their home could go to.
Surrounding state and then
forties that regard to fund.
The state statute is that
correct.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
if this only deals with what's
for sale in New Mexico so
certainly if someone wants to
travel to another state they may
but all of the products in this
bill have are cost effective
they have extremely short
effects that's what they were
chosen by all the other states
to be in this package
and so I I would be happy to
share the detailed analysis that
came from the appliance
standards awareness project
project to would be here as an
expert today if if they could be
they've done this in the
thirteen other states and they
do have all that in depth
analysis and I'm happy to get it
to you right after this meeting.
Mr chairman and Representative.
I I would appreciate that
But because.
It almost sounds to me like the
foxes in the chicken house and
well you have a manufacturer.
Scribing something that's better
normally is better for their
bottom line not necessarily
equitably better for those and
some.
Mr chairman and I have a couple
of more real for that.
Well I'll leave those I I would
say this that.
Mr Chairman.
Representative we have to be
very careful when we adopt
standards for two million people
thank you save the world what we
do is because of our two million
people to incur higher costs.
I mean I've heard all sorts of
comments about.
I believe that he lives.
I have.
But maybe that made a
difference.
I think the market takes care of
a lot of things that we.
This the.
We should.
Mandating like the others I
think we'll artificially raise
the cost me many of the
manufacturers and many of those
distributors in New Mexico will
have to make changes in their
warehouses coming into New
Mexico.
but because.
From the state you thank upon
the taxes loan part part of a.
And that's typically where the
flow of of our clients is coming
so I I have some concerns but
continue to this question thank
you very much thank you Mr.
Thank you here thank you
Representative up.
I have to
Have concerns state like ours
two million people starts of
those eight standards and may
not be standards that are
utilized across the.
The United States and.
You gave us a pretty good list
of states.
One that's closest to our
community.
Everyone that seems to be.
The big market place for.
Purchasers of many of these
appliances would be.
It's not all state so I I I'm
wondering if through this effort
we're we're going to put our
local.
Vendors.
At an additional disadvantage.
Because they're going to have to
only sell right we certain
products that would not be the
case across the state line in
taxes where there may be a wider
array of both sides types of
appliances what happened so do
you see this as being
a measure that would put some of
our local.
Stores have an economic
disadvantage particularly those
on the water Intel's with the
state of Texas.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Nibert
a really important question and
the time to answer it at the
data that we have collected
shows that that the states that
have these appliance standards
are at that the consumers of
these new products are are
saving money and will we will
get you mark that date as of
that you you have in front of
you that the point of this bill
is to is to save money for for
the consumer so I I don't know
exactly if you know a less
efficient stove or if appliances
less expensive than a more
efficient when I think sometimes
it is sometimes it isn't but
over the the lifetime of you
know of that appliance consumers
are saving money because they're
using less less energy.
Mr chair representative Nibert
I'll just add that you know this
bill does not state that stores
can't sell anything they just
have to sell the the good
products and so if you want to
buy any of these thirteen things
that are included in the bill
you still will be able to do
that you'll just have the
efficient versions available to
New Mexicans so that they can
save money at home or in the
office.
So Mr Chairman.
Representative so your
definition of good.
Energy efficient on that
committee Mr chair.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert yes my
definition of good is a product
that saves people money saves
emissions from the environment
six mercury from our environment
and creates lower utility bills
for New Mexicans that so Mr
Chairman representative we're
taking.
Where were opposing our
definition of good on on the
public.
They are going to be amended.
In the scope of potential.
Product so thank you I because
maybe less energy efficient than
others
but.
The thing I've noticed.
In my lifetime is of.
The market works pretty well.
And if people see a savings.
As a representative from from
States sounding said.
He's going to move in that
direction because he is saving
money.
The market works and and and and
I would sit up here and tell you
every day the market works but
the market works.
For that individual and
individuals make those choices
and sometimes that our baby I'm
going to select a product that
is less energy efficient because
of a particular reason even
though I'm going to pay more
overtime to utilize that
particular function.
Yeah and I would.
I think the argument sometimes
you go to
An upscale retailer for four
power comes.
Sometimes you go to harbor
freight.
For a as a as a weekend warrior
that harbor freight tools.
They worked out just fine and
I'm making the choices the
consumer to buy a less
efficient.
Additionally cheaper product
that's not going to last as long
of a duration.
If I were a professional using
that tool every day on my off
for the more efficient more
energy efficient to one it's
going to save me more money over
time but that's because as
individuals we have different
needs and demands of our for
state government saying okay New
Mexico and you can always buy
these products because in our
estimation those are the good
products
I have a problem with that is in
the the market forces are
allowed to work
lamps are on their way out.
I don't think anybody disagrees
hello thank you for us alliance
of about R..
They're all the way up because
there's a more efficient way of
lighting today than there used
to be.
But we're not going to make that
change over
I I go through this list and I
see
If we stop.
Well.
What what locations
watchers fires were so hot food
hold with virtual all that
stuff.
Yeah.
Commercial enterprises are
generally going to look for
their bottom line they're going
to try to make that trade off
between officials say now cost
inefficiency over time it
selecting the products that they
choose to to engage in that yeah
we're going to we're going to
supplant our ideas for for those
that actually have to pay the
price
Mr chair representative.
With bills.
The people who have current
products that don't meet the
standards.
Those drugs have to go to the.
Dr is that correct.
Mr chair and representative
Nibert they'll just have their
products in their home we're not
regulating enforcing the change
out of those products this is
when they buy a new product.
Madam chair representative of
this get real personal one my
wife decides to replace a
dishwasher that still seems to
work just fine.
But maybe that's wrong color for
the next year
We can't sell that dishwasher
came with.
Under this act.
Mr chair representative Nibert
this is the this is dealing with
new appliances and lighting in
the state of New Mexico
So I don't believe it would have
any impact on your ability to
sell on Craigslist or wherever
you supplies Mr chair
representative Representative
you know I believe we have
better success on Facebook.
This.
But no it would not affect that
and I certainly understand
wanting a new color.
Yes I guess Mr Mr chair
representative I I I most of
overlook the word new are I just
thought this prohibited the sale
of drugs and don't do those
standards and I'm concerned
about whether or not the
restaurant or B. or others who
have current appliances that
don't meet the standards whether
they could market those used
drugs under this act.
If if that says more water I
miss madam the point is that
worries.
Because all I see is that these.
What that's offered for sale the
state.
Items offered for sale not
estimates the new part.
At.
Mr chair and representative
Robert you are correct I stand
corrected.
So so.
Mr chair and representative what
do New Mexicans do with drugs
these problems.
But they have in their home.
They're still usable.
But they can't Solomon New
Mexico are we going to have to
always across the state line for
sale or for.
What take that up and and if.
If we look at that is in fact
not.
A loss of.
Economic activity other was that
factor factored into your cost
savings.
We didn't see New.
Mr chair representative Nibert
very very good points we we are
open to amending this
legislation.
To include.
In certain new in section four
so we're talking about new
products.
So we can address hopefully
start to address that concern
even.
Page eleven.
What made the so you to have
in the so I'm not too happy with
this bill.
What is point those things out
because I've
tired of the cost of side your
cost to an individual we have to
not just look at the energy
savings that
we have to look at all costs
and certainly I would consider
the residual value of current
equipment we.
I'll have to secretary into
decision making and whether or
not
good appliances or something I
want to go to so that that
concern Representative Nibert.
Yeah so what the the the the.
Transaction is not apply these
funds to these parts of.
It probably in that list.
Your lives service.
Thank you Mr chair.
Probably several places of.
You could deal with the issue
already but this is not
sufficient.
Mr chair of Representative.
Doesn't say water.
What I now have to fight three
shower heads and settle on.
Mr chair representative Nibert.
No one is forcing you to buy
three shower has instead of one
other forcing me to buy a shower
head that only allow so many
drops of water for second to
come out.
Mr chair representative member
that and that is your personal
choice how much water you want.
On on your hair
And we go ahead with that.
Mr chair and representative
Nibert yeah I will just say that
all of that water efficiency
measures in this bill have been
through rigorous national
standards and so they would you
know the old days of efficiency
and water getting very little
water out is no longer the case
and I'm that you would not
be able to get that national
standard for efficiency if it
were at highest highly effective
device.
But
Mr chair representative I I do
chuckle sometimes because I the.
We built the house forty years
ago and
You know all the water the good
products at that time were
required in we did we did those
certain things but but the you
know we contractors as well you
know you can put two shower
heads in your in your shower.
Because it's one oh we allow so
much water that comes through.
So that's what we have and I
notice.
Today in a lot of experience the
architectural magazines house
you see showers with six eight
ten of.
Share our.
Yeah I think because.
Full make the conscious choice.
I want something.
That they provide to be suitable
for the for the for the so
people get around.
My other comment Mr Chairman
representative
yeah and this happens.
I see the restaurant all the
time people are flushing the
toilet multiple times.
That state does that really save
water we limit the quantity
water with that goes for flights
if if people are having to flush
the toilet multiple times is
that really state water I'm just
questioning some of that because
that's that's what's in here
so as you know we have a thing
with this one is but this much
water three but if you have to
flush it twice that level that
right Representative flush it
three times of trouble
and so I a question sometimes of
promise of of some of those when
when the.
People.
React.
A difficult aspect to it to some
of the things that were.
Yeah.
Yeah I think the market works.
The market works well with
people could save money and
can be shown that can save money
over time they're going to move
in that direction maybe not as
quickly as we would like but the
market will move.
S. of lights will be a thing of
the past
May not be tomorrow but it will
be a thing of the past the
lights got with ways.
Right now there.
There are back.
But that there are a point that
you know bring this thousand but
but but they they were replaced
because there were more
efficient ways of life a little
more efficient ways of
providing water.
So I I just have problems with
the the government particularly.
A small government two million
people.
Putting standards that.
I know what the reaction is
going to be on the side of the
state.
It's going to be we're going to
taxes Miner warrants is.
unfortunately that.
is are much too regular basis
because our local vendors lose
out that occurs this this is
just others.
Here thank you Representative.
Is the I'm not too keen on
health.
This is another.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative are there.
Federal regulations in place
that would cover Fischer
standards for.
All of the products that are.
This legislation.
Mr chair representative Scott
the items that are in this bill
are specifically not regulated
at the federal that is one area
code in this package we're not
allowed at the state level to do
higher standards in the federal
system.
So.
Follow up on that.
Two weeks.
One question.
Given those
two million people.
It would be.
Thank Mr Chairman representative
that there won't be any products
manufactured.
Specifically.
To come to conform with these
regulations will.
Yes.
It would be more likely to the
shins or that don't conform
Shipley the.
Is that correct.
Mr chair representative Scott so
again there are thirteen other
states have adopted staff set of
standards so there's definitely
strength in numbers
manufacturers are already
complying with these
requirements because it there's
so widespread in the United
States these the standards and
so what we're asking for here is
that we want to make sure that
those products that are
complying with the standards
make it to New Mexico rather
than having manufacturers don't
better worse drugs on us well
they're selling them more
efficient in the states that
require them so there's
definitely a string the numbers
of of having multiple states
with the exact same standards
manufacturers are already
creating products to fit that in
fact every product in this bill
has multiple manufacturers
providing that product in the
United States.
Mr Chairman representative in
export that made to
specifications already.
Mr chair representative Scott
yes.
Mr Chairman representative we
are are you representing.
That.
Most or all cases.
Products meeting the
specifications would be.
Less expensive alternatives.
Mr chair representative
I think the market action and
there are there's a range of
options and you can price some
are probably more expensive some
are likely less less expensive
but we know that the products
that are being offered you know
have been rigorously tested you
know they they have that energy
star standards or WaterSense
measures so the market has
responded by creating products
that meet the standards and
they're selling them they're
doing well.
Madam chair right the.
Unintended consequence the.
For example to increase the
costs of.
Affordable housing is not a
possibility.
Mr chair Representative Scott
again every appliance in this
section has been approved the
cost effective meaning that it
has a very short pay back even
if there is an incremental cost
at the up front the the at the
operation of that appliance pays
back the cost very very quickly
in every instance of this bill.
Madam chair and representative
that we have some great tax
credit programs that.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative of.
A little bit hard this.
Just making.
Of state law to.
California Canadian regulations
could you.
Elaborate a little bit on line.
Is included in the bill.
Mr chair representative Scott
you there are thirteen states
thirteen other states and I can
tell you what they all are at
this point they include Colorado
Nevada so those are you those
are our neighboring ishe states
Nevada you sort of in Oregon
Washington Hawaii lots of other
states that are not as big as
California that have the
standards in place I'm not sure
Canadian.
Mr chair or Representative Scott
is.
Can't answer you on at the
Canadian standards but these
thirteen other states you
California does that lots and
lots of customers I think this
is where we're we're starting to
the cost savings on those
products because there are so
many that are being produced.
So and just open chance we're
going to pay.
Our.
The standards to California
regulations that may change this
actor.
Mr chair representative Scott
the efficiency standards in this
bill standalone but they are
identical to the states and the
reason that they're identical to
thirteen other states because
those states have already done
the work for us really those
states have already set the
standards manufacturers are
already complying with those
states rules and so all we're
saying is that New Mexico wants
to be part of that we're not
trying to be a leader on this
we're not trying to you know
create additional items in this
list we're taking the exact same
list from thirteen other states
so that we can reap the benefits
of those products for New
Mexicans.
Okay.
Mr Chairman representative let
me refer you I could now.
H. five P..
Mr Chairman representative.
If you can explain to me in
plain language what that means
how will consider voting for
you.
Representative Scott
Gonna have to give us a second
for this
this is the one I think you may
have heard me speak with my
expert I said you Representative
Scott Mr chairman is going to
talk about she.
What it does is.
As it relates to.
Prometic.
Permittivity.
Mr chairman and representative
got it I'll let you know if it's
the comments on the color he was
the color hue at is related to
the Cup color you all let you
off Representative Eli thank
heavens what Mr.
Responsible for.
So it.
Thank you.
Representative which has we've
we've talked.
This.
This is shipped.
This.
And
The last the.
Your house
I stand
I work for a.
this is better for a
small contract.
San Juan County operating
percent.
Pretty much everywhere else and
I know.
I did about this and.
I think that the concern.
That I have is that the in doing
just.
Really all we're gonna harm.
And our to help others we're
gonna harm to groups.
That is New Mexico businesses.
And
for.
Because what is going to happen
here Mr Chairman is.
Well we're gonna be doing is
replacing items that are on the
shelves.
Or removing items are on the
shelves that are in in like home
depot Lowe's.
But in reality people who are
building homes.
In their efforts by point that
they do that.
to construct a new home.
they're already ordering all of
these items online out of state.
so large projects.
They're not ordering I want to
lows two to three billing a
hotel.
You can go and pick up the
number of items that you need to
get out what was.
And I would suggest those large
businesses that are putting in a
hotel
they're already worried about.
Water consumption they're
already worried about the cost
of utilities especially now when
they've just skyrocketed.
so the folks those folks are
already making the choice for
higher efficiencies high
efficiencies they can get
because it's a matter of of
which change.
The.
That the people who are on the
on that.
Building a brand new building.
Most of these products from any
construction company copy
purchased locally as it is.
What what this is going to do is
be the it's gonna be a secondary
market it's going to be after
you've built a home and now you
or your you want to change the
color.
You go to the store and you have
a limited supply.
Because.
As mentioned all of these
appliances come in multiple
colors.
But.
If.
The a lot of times of support or
you're not worried about callers
are worried about replacing it.
Finance that we went out for
they're tired of this already
of of what they're paying for so
they're looking to upgrade but
now if the price.
Apparently.
Has got to high they may just
stay with the much more
inefficient plants and they have
for fifteen years they like to
replace and.
But the cost is too high.
when you're talking about eight
eight a new home.
Right now in the past two years
once again I'm also a realtor
which is why I still do.
Cost to finance a new
construction.
Two points two percentage points
in the mortgage rate.
Yes in most instances almost
doubling.
The cost of what that mortgage
would be.
So if we do increase the price
which this would increase the
price we we've talked about when
we talk about solar.
Solar becoming more saturated.
As we've been within this
committee as we talk about Mr
Chairman.
Austin.
Of the the solar eventually
coming down as it gets
saturated.
Widely accepted.
the cost comes down with people
who are on the front end of and
in reality if we if there
thirteen states right now
Representative front in thirty
seven states.
Have not.
So we would be on the front end.
Of adoption.
And we know those those those
costs are usually borne by the
people have the most money to do
so initially and then it becomes
more widely saturated the cop
cost comes down to everybody
that in New Mexico.
There is one area where we.
That is the number of for.
and so what we're really doing
here is eliminating.
The opportunity for folks to
have options.
Now I may not have a choice of
color.
Unless I go online.
And now more harming local
business because now we're
forcing more people online
especially when it comes to this
considering a mortgage because
of what little bit of money they
might save state out if they
were to be able to purchase
these out right.
If anyone of these items were to
be purchased outright by an
individual.
I do believe that quickly they
could recover.
Cost savings.
But if it's having to go into a
mortgage.
The state any cost savings that
happens the price of the item
gets higher and now you have a.
On top of that this seven
percent.
Excellent.
And your now financing that
product or if you just have to
go in and you can't afford to
pay cash for and and you finance
it out right in the last two
years the price of the interest
rates and just automatically.
It it make it to the point where
that person would be getting
something that is much more
efficient item they have in
their home which is fourteen
fifteen years old.
They might have to continue to
use that product it's in their
own homes that they like to
change
They went up by they may not
purchase.
And.
Mr chairman hi this is just a
little bit just don't just look
at all the.
But we have a prime example of
this right now.
You start to limited options
what happens.
This last year during interim
committees we heard testimony
one of the committees that I was
in that we need to start
regulating that all ages and
stories have to be organic.
We we argued about that but that
we do with the difference in the
cost
we didn't go that route
fortunately.
We didn't get I don't I don't
see that that that that build up
to the doorsteps of the
committee that sat on but
related to going to organic we
saw it happen just a reduction.
Aids available at a price for it
is right now that are not even
organic.
Greatly exceed the price of what
people who are purchasing again
engage that.
And now all the people who have
been hurt the most.
The ex for the poor
the the the people who can still
afford it are still doing it.
They're just writing about it.
And I'm just concerned Mr
Chairman once again the
unintended consequences is
limiting options for the for.
And that would be.
And that once again I would say
second place is what you are
seeing the static but keep those
people driving cars from the
nineteen fifties there's no
options.
For more options.
And so I would suggest well
intentioned but I think this is
happening anyway.
And I think as the national
standards go this way.
Cost drops for everyone.
The poor in New Mexico are
better off.
If we don't implied by that
standard.
I think it is better off of the
plant's standard cause us just
as a standards are creeping
creasing already if we don't
remove options if we keep the
prices low enough.
For want to place.
Clients currently.
They're doing it without having
to be on the front end of the
higher price of these.
that the standard so
Mr chairman I would suggest as
it is.
since we can't force this on the
internet and we can't forces and
other states
People who
are needing to be apprised
provided the state.
Either physically this
purchasing your by state
or just by purchasing on so once
again I I I I I I do believe
it's this these prices can come
down.
people make this decision.
On their own they're doing it
already and to those who have
the options thank you Mr
chairman.
Here's some of the very go.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative and called the
former city councilor
townspeople corn thank you for
your bill I also have some
concerns about this bill and the
minister I'm gonna start from
the back Mr chair forward
reading that there are penalties
of up to five hundred dollars
for each bike violation and then
that the violations can add up
daily
I am a smile small business
owner and I do deal in antiques
and I don't sell any of these
products that are listed here
but I do know of vendors who do
sell these types of products and
so I just wondered if any of you
have talked to any of the
antique
vendors or anyone in that
industry because that is the
complete business Mr chair that
is a very viable business in New
Mexico and and so I have some
concerns with that Mr chair the
other concern and Representative
the other chair that I have I
mean the other concern that I
have is with regard to the
sunset date this would go into
effect if signed by the governor
in on July first and the sunset
date begins on
January of twenty twenty four Mr
chair and that only gives
businesses like six months to be
becoming compliance
and so I you know I don't
believe that that's a enough
time for us and I and I do
respect what you're trying to do
here but I think
coming from a different
perspective
I am concerned that there are
people and and businesses that
would be out of compliance very
quickly so that's that's one
issue the other issue that I
have Mister chair.
Is with regard to affordable
housing
currently we're trying to
encourage affordable housing.
Albuquerque in New Mexico
because there's such a lack of
affordable housing and often
time developers are dealing with
a gap in financing and I think
my colleague
this way stated it very
eloquently
there are going to be increased
costs early when this is going
to affect into effect so quickly
and.
Many of these products maybe not
available that quickly so Mr
chair I would ask that possibly
My colleague
Representative Ortez and.
Councilwoman.
People court maybe.
These thoughts with regard to
often times.
Developers are looking for that
gap in financing because they
can't build quick enough because
they don't have enough money to
do that and now we're adding an
extra burden.
Well I support the concept.
Mr chair
of of moving in this direction
in terms of you know regulating
appliances and and things like
that that would help our
environment.
I am concerned about.
Some of these issues so for that
reason right now and raising
this these issues that I would
like to be in the future if we
don't prove this today or if we
do approve that I don't believe
that this bill is ready at this
point but in the future if we
can.
Discuss some of these issues I
would appreciate appreciated.
Representative did you want
Sanchez.
Mr chair if they are ready to
respond to some of those issues
I'm happy to listen but
open to listening in the future
date.
Mr chair representative but I go
I want to address the for it
affordable housing issue first
week.
I was gonna say we do have an
app for that but really there
are some there are programs that
exist right now that will that
will help developers meet that
gap
CD is one of them sustainable to
tax credit their their number
of.
Programs available to to ensure
that affordable housing has also
that the drugs in the plans that
keep that
forcible and safe over the long
term in terms of energy usage
would you like to add anything
to that sure thank you Mr chair
Representative Greco so I would
just say that affordable housing
means more than just up front
costs affordable housing means
people who live in that home are
able to afford to operate that
home this is a conversation we
have a lot with other types of
regulations again I do not
believe that this bill would
have any impact in the up front
cost on affordable housing but I
do want to also address your
concern about antiques because
again this bill is only for new
products we will make sure that
that and that is in there but
it's specifically spells out on
page eleven minutes that it's
not including anything that's
already in your
you're a inventory in so there
would be absolutely no problem
with anything that you have in
your inventory now through
December thirty first of twenty
twenty four being sold out these
products that are in this bill
are all widely available and
being sold now in so there's no
there would be no problem with
replacing that inventory with
these products.
Mr chair
thank you for that answer
councilman
Representative Ortez.
I am still concerned that six
months is is it really too short
of a period to implement this I
think that there needs to be up
a little bit longer since that
period and so for that reason
I'm still.
Thank you Representative
regulars in Sarnia.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for reading this bill.
Right
I need the money.
Yes it is
city water which we absolutely.
Is.
Eight thousand the water is very
important
as a couple years ago and the
defense will be.
This is what we need this is
what everyone can do the same
and because.
And
I just believe this is a.
Can you address.
Questions.
Thank you Mr chair last year
Sariñana yes thank you for the
question so there's a lot of
concern around online purchases
because this is already being
implemented in thirteen other
states those large online then
have dealers already have their
system set up they're not
they're not selling these the
less efficient products in those
states and so would see
literally be at in New Mexico to
the list where those less
efficient products are not sold
of the bill does cover all
products sold in New Mexico.
Thank you thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you presenters I have a
couple of questions.
Can you walk me through at first
an example
the cost savings actively
looking at a dishwasher.
So the.
Initial cost comparison and then
the.
Monthly cost
you know in your water and
electricity and at what point in
time you would break even.
And start saving you know
having that.
the actual cost savings for the
council.
Mr chair Representative Dixon.
We should be able to do that.
Thank you perhaps Mr chair at
present your national experts
might need a couple of minutes
to do that and that was just one
example of that and then
appliance if you have something
I'm open to any.
Simple.
Mr chair representative Dixon
action that.
We probably have to use another
example because the bill does
not include dishwashers
We do have that savings
analysis.
I believe.
Do we have that now this is.
Is
chair Representative Dixon my
apologies we do not have the
analysis in front of us are our
experts do but but what I will
tell you is that in general what
we're talking about with all of
these men of these appliances in
this bill is there is an up
front cost and for most of them
the efficient version is either
the same cost or tiny bit more
so there could be there could be
a small incremental cost to
these products there were X.
there was very much more
efficient in water use in
electricity and natural gas use
so they pay back in the
incremental cost up front it
would be a very short time
period in the everything that in
this bill has been tested and I
can give you the data at a later
point to show that they are cost
effective and they do pay back
very quickly and everything you
know we didn't put anything in
this package that was not a
quick pay back and cost
effective.
Thank you Mr chair and
counselors I will note.
That my when my husband and I
install solar on our roof.
Years ago my husband who is an
engineer crafted this wonderful
spreadsheet and that showed
exactly what I'm not.
We are investment and now we
save hundreds of dollars every
month.
I getting a check from Canada
so I do know that you know this
information isn't available not
everyone is going to have their
own spreadsheet designer thank
you could provide some of that I
think it's helpful to know the
difference in the cost versus
the savings and I think part of
the concern is that our society
does not value for sort of look
at.
We we tend to focus on the up
front cost an increase in price
without paying attention to the
long term savings and when we're
talking about.
Hard working new Mexicans who
need to live in unaffordable
homes have affordable monthly
utility costs.
So that they can find other PSS
cities like food and medicine
that really can be I have a game
changer so I think.
Perhaps educating policymakers a
little bit more on the concrete
figures would be helpful
Mr chair and presenters one of
the other thing is that you know
I have sort of come to
appreciate as a policy maker is
the importance of specific time
frames for when we're asking
agencies to implement
new rules and regulations and.
I struggle with.
Legislation that is not
specific in what we are.
Us and expected
of our agencies so one of the
things.
You know I think that would be
helpful is what concrete time
frames and.
For expectations of our agencies
so if we are asking and the
Attorney General for energy
minerals and natural resources
to do something I think it is
beneficial for consumers for
businesses I'm into those
agencies to know exactly what
the rules are to be issued and I
think we've had some recent
major policy changes that
Mr chair and and you know as
we've seen
delays in rules and how that
affects businesses and so I
would
Really encourage are to be
fleshed out if at all possible.
Mr chair representative Dixon
The bill was written
specifically to avoid
rulemakings and the like
because we're going to be the
fourteenth state that's done
this there's not a need for
rulemaking there's not really a
need for enforcement per se so
that the bill does include that
because it's not needed we're we
are going to be piggybacking off
those thirteen states that went
first and there any setting
those standards and we're just
going to get that the benefits
of those products being sold
here without having to further
burden our state staff because
we all know that they do not
have the capacity to add on
additional rulemakings at this
time.
Thank you Mr chair councillor I
think my last question is
probably a lot of those lines
and just relates to that.
Broad question of why we're
doing this in statute as opposed
to
just regulations are.
Other mechanisms if you that.
To leverage.
Mr chair and representative it's
and it's really up to the state
to do regulations are for
statute Colorado did statute I
am part of the reason with it is
because they don't have time in
the you think they probably have
more staff and we need to do
with making but that that's
that's the reason why this is
that we're doing it this way.
Statutes not regulations.
Thank you
Mr chair I don't have any other
questions.
Thank you representatives and
Representative I've heard for
second I.
Thank you Mr chair
representative if this passes
could you have one thing to it.
Could you put a requirement that
all charging cords being
uniformed.
Representative Nibert thank you
for that I just a couple quick
questions of my own
You know I think the government.
It has a role to play driving
safety efficiency.
This property.
I think it's very clear that the
work cost at this point of sale
it does not mean less expensive.
and I think we should we should
be looking at that we should
know.
Industries that direction.
I think this is a and I think.
We have the session yesterday
and
churches Committee about.
You have.
The high heating costs some of
that that comes with that and.
By I made a fictional because
it's less expensive but if you
get with a forty dollar bill
which was the simple side.
That's not actually less
expensive and we need to said
that the market will still sell
less division
I think there's a role for the
government like in that.
So with that what's pleasure the
committee Mr Chairman yes.
That is also the motion and a
second on the bill as amended
can you take a look.
Representative Borrego.
Mr Chairman wrote in favor but I
also would like to see
So discussion possibly on the
census states.
The Representative radio I think
we should that as we take those
it's best to say
yes and then if you would like
to explain your vote that's
that's an option that you can
reserve.
Just for I think that's what I
was doing Mr chair but thank you
for that.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative is not.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend
Shares are now on the yeah.
Chairman Greene yes.
For it to pass seven the four
thank you.
getting thirty nine hours of
night.
All I have a brief work with you
forty eight thank you very much.
