Thank you, madam Chair so
Is it? What? There are no
community substitute does but HP
20
226
In his original form and
I'll get to that and then
choosing the changes manage the
Cannabis Regulation Act.
Complied at
They're supposed to be a dash
tube point C Dash one an immense
a
Which was an accident in special
session in 2021, specifically,
Section seven of the act.
As amended to provide for state
criminal history, background
checks and national criminal
history background checks as a
condition to be licensed.
Also, it adds new definitions of
applicants.
Licensing.
And H C, um packed Committee
institute would also require
applicants to do the following
required the
To receive and maintain
information and data from the
Department of Public Safety and
FBI regulating
Relating to licensing
disqualifications based on
criminal history, as in new
subsection, prescribing the
process, DPS would follow to
conduct state and federal
criminal history records checks
and then we are L D. C. C. D.
It also adds new language on
page 26, starting online for to
make CCDs access to an applicant
furnished by DPS and FBI be
subject to any restrictions
imposed by federal law requires
two CCD to consider readability.
Charter evidence and educational
achievement as part of the
criminal history record
information provided by the
applicant and adds new language
starting on page 26 line, 15 to
require an applicant
To provide DPS and electronic
set of fingerprints the process
DPS would use to conduct state
and federal criminal history
checks.
Of an applicant adds new
language starting on page 27.
Line 13 providing for
confidentiality for the reason
why we're doing all this with
this.
The the amended version attempts
to address the concerns raised
by TP DPS to add more special
The the amended version attempts
to address the concerns raised
by TP DPS to add more
requirements of the FBI for DPS
to obtain and share information
with our L G.
And two I have brought this
bill.
Last year, there is another bill
running in the Senate. Um
Because currently
As mentioned in our current
statue for Canada Cannabis
Regulation Act, We are to be
conducting FBI background
checks, and that has not been
occurring because there's been
some
Um, miscommunication if you
will, with the FBI and getting
the right language in place for
that to happen And what this
bill does, Madam Chair, is it
It reflects what has been doing
and what a language um cannabis
regulation acts primarily, what
is language used.
Um, in Colorado, where they are
conducting and having FBI
background checks, Madam Chair
And, uh, with that.
That's the bill I have, as a
committee said.
Thank you, Um or any other
discussion.
On the substitute.
It's been moved in.
To adopt the
Thank you to the end, um,
opposition, Madam Chair. My
interest. Yes. Sorry. I do have
here with me. Um, Are you sure?
I mean, I'm sure it's of the um,
Okay. Thank you.
I already checked? No. Okay.
Alright. Representative chair.
Um, I
I want to thank the sponsor.
since this is an effort, um,
that we've been working at, I
think collectively.
Um, to try to understand what
the relationship should be like
between the FBI and, um,
regulation and R l D, um
As I've spoken with the sponsor
and and and with the agency
right now, we have to.
unfortunately conflicting ways
of how to address the background
checks that are being proposed
in front of the Legislature. Um,
the sponsor has said that and I
hope I'm not speaking out of
turn and please correct me, um,
would be willing to work. Um
In tandem with the proposed
legislation and House Bill 128
and Senate Bill six.
on how we propose in this, UM
committee today.
Um
Should that be the case, Madam
Chair. Um I would love to work
with the sponsor to make sure
that we're cohesively growing in
the same direction. This bill is
I think
Was great as a suggestion from
2022 is proposed.
Um, but on upon conference with
The eight the agency who will
inherit this law. Um, it may not
with the FBI.
It sounds like they need to be.
Sort of working together some
and right now it's not clear
what that
Rulemaking process should be, um
And so I think, And as we've
heard, um Madam Chair
representative
House build. 226 is just a
broadening of many
responsibilities. That may not
be a good fit for this.
Um, I would be willing to move
this forward with a promise from
the mimic the language and
Senate Bill six and 128.
So that way, if 128 that we have
a a fail safe with FBI
background checks in the stand
alone, Bill, would that be
something that we could do
before? Judiciary? Madam chair,
I think
As um, to to respond to Yes,
We're just trying to get this
right. We're just trying to fix
this.
Everything in place, um, very
important from conference. We
are finding that we need to. We
need to narrow the
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I want to thank you for your
enthusiasm. Um, in this area,
and, um, for your rigor and, um,
moving forward that I think
I can vote in favor of this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And I just like to add your
discussions are also includes
some of the, um, concerns that
came over, such as the
definition of applicant
analysis.
Um, we'll go to representative
Madam chairman and actually
represents
Why have move a do pass? Um, you
know, do not pass on House Bill
two House bill that can, um
how's consumer and Public
Affairs Committee Substitute for
house? Bill 226
Is there any opposition for do
pass on
Can be substituted. Thank you,
okay.
You have a do not pass on house
Bill 226 and a do pass on
committees.
How's it coming Consumer in
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house Bill 226.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Committee. Thank you. Good
job. Thank you.
