I'm sure we have a forum.
Um, if you would like to go
ahead and present House Bill
183, protection of women's
Sports Act.
185. Yeah. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So
I sit here with my sponsor or my
co-sponsors today representative
Jennifer Jones, Representative
Rebecca Dow, and Representative
Rod Montoya, and we also have um
some expert witnesses they're
sitting over there, uh Peyton
McNab and coach Kim Russell, um,
that will be having speak also
as experts, just there wasn't
room at the table, Madam chair
for everybody, so, um, basically
HB 185, which we're calling the
protection of Women's Sports Act
is an act that
ensures that women and girls
have the same fair opportunities
to compete in athletics by
requiring that women's sports
remain exclusive women, female
athletes, this bill safeguards
the integrity of female-only
competitions. Current policy
allowing men and women's sports
was adopted without the input of
female athletes and
Men are taking away awards,
trophies, roster spots, playing
time, resources and
opportunities from this bill
aligns with the spirit of Title
IX.
which was established to ensure
equal athletic and educational
opportunities for women and it
aligns with President Trump's
executive order by clarifying
that women's sports are reserved
for females, the protection of
women's Sports Act helps to
ensure the legacy of Title IX,
making sure that the
advancements of women have made
an athletics are not being
rolled back, so this is not a
band, this is a protection.
I like to defer to all my
co-sponsors.
How touchy these are, I said in
this committee as well. I
haven't been
glued them down so they don't
move, so you just have to swing
the. OK, thank you. And there's
a handheld too. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, um, as was stated by
my co-sponsor.
Um, this is not a ban.
Um, this is a protection for
women and women's sports, um.
Title 9 under President Trump
has been re
Instituted to be a protection
for women.
And so, uh, what we're doing
with this legislation is bring
uh New Mexico into line with the
president's executive order.
Um
The
President's executive, a
separate order he has.
Um, could actually put
Uh, our schools in difficult
position.
New Mexico law is at odds with
federal law.
And
That being the case, we are
concerned that if we don't take
this action, uh, New Mexico
schools superintendents, school
boards.
will be in a position of either
defying the president, which
would then
caused the loss of funds funds
to our universities and many of
our uh.
Of our public schools that are
receiving those dollars.
Um, what we're hoping to do
here.
I uh
Bring us into alignment with
that and by so doing, putting
our school boards.
Our superintendents
Um, making it clear for them.
So that they're not worried of
violating.
Uh, Federal executive order.
Um, or violating New Mexico law
to be in compliance. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
this isn't anti anyone. You
don't have to be anti anyone to
be pro-woman, and we all know
that.
There is always a space for
everyone to play.
This excludes no one.
But what it does.
I protect scholarships and
opportunities for women.
It ensures that female athletes
are not displaced by male
athletes.
It preserves athletic
scholarships.
Team spots
And opportunities that are
essential.
For young women to insult in
sports.
And to access higher education.
New Mexico, uh, and
independence, uh survey company
just completed a survey in New
Mexico of likely voters, 94% of
respondents, 94% of respondents
in Mexico's likely voters.
Oppose allowing biological males
in girls' locker rooms.
84% believe that sports should
be separated by biological sex.
92%.
92% of the people impacted by
this bill.
Those are the young people who
are 18 to 24 in New Mexico,
explicitly opposed boys being
allowed in girls' locker rooms
and competing in girls' sports,
this group of young New Mexicans
was the strongest.
Demonstrating that young people
are not.
They do not want this.
It crosses party lines.
And it shows particularly strong
numbers from Native American and
Hispanic groups.
I know that this body has
advocated for yes means yes and
has demanded that women have the
right to consent.
There has been no right to
consent for a biological male in
sports, restrooms, and locker
rooms. And that is why I am here
protecting, uh, advocating for
protecting fairness in women's
sports.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, I could
just repeat everything they've
said, but I won't, I just want
to add as a registered nurse,
uh, a long career in healthcare
that I come from a perspective
of physical assessment,
background in genetics and
treatment for both the sexes,
male and female, and I can
assure you, and I think we all
know the common sense that's
involved in in um.
And uh
Mail, the differences between
male and female in in
competitive sports, especially
after puberty, puberty, um.
Man will nearly every in every
case be faster, stronger,
bigger, and better at sports,
and that creates a situation
where women will lose their
opportunities and lose their
safety. So I'm sure I would ask
that um I defer to um one of my
experts uh they're sitting over
there and then Kim Russ.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members. My name is Peyton
McNab. I am a female former
female athlete and ambassador at
Independent Women's Forum.
I urge you to pass HB 185 to
protect female athletes like me.
I love sports, the camaraderie,
the discipline, the team
bonding, and the confidence for
the future.
I was a 3 sport athlete in high
school, participating in
softball, basketball, and
volleyball. On September 1st,
2022, I was struck in the head
by a spiked ball during a
volleyball game by a male on the
opposing team.
As a result of the sheer impact
of the ball, I received a
concussion and neck injury.
I was always very aware of the
possibility of injury during
competitive play, but my
experience on the court that day
was different.
The hit was so violent that I
was knocked unconscious, lying
in a fencing position for over
30 seconds.
Years later, my body and mind
are still recovering from the
hip.
I still suffer from partial
paralysis on my right side,
vision problems, cognitive
issues, constant headaches, and
more.
This incident was 100% avoidable
if only my ras is a female
athlete.
if my routes is a female athlete
had not been excluded on the
basis of being inclusive to
allow a male to compete with
women.
I nor my teammates ever agreed
to play against a male athlete.
We were forced to by our state
athletic Association.
Women have no right. Women have
a right to a fair and equal
opportunity on and off the
playing field. Men have no place
in our single sex spaces.
Now, this legislation has an
opportunity to provide new
Mexican female athletes with the
protection that I didn't get.
I speak to you today to
represent not just myself, but
to ensure all female athletes,
my little sister, my cousins, my
teammates have access to fair
competition.
Women deserve to compete on a
level playing field without fear
of injury.
This is why it is crucial that
you pass HB 185 to prevent other
female athletes from suffering
from injuries such as my own.
Please pass this bill out of
committee today. Thank you.
Kim Russell.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Kim Russell. I am an
ambassador at the Independent
Women's Forum, an advocate for
women and girls. I have been a
coach for over 28 years. I am a
mother of 4 and a lifelong
athlete. I urge you to support
HB 185, Women's sports have been
my life and my passion.
In college, I played 2 sports at
the NCAA Division One level.
And I have been a women's
lacrosse coach for 29 years.
I've been inducted into 3 halls
of fame for my contributions to
the game of lacrosse and was
appointed to the Women in Sports
Commission for World Lacrosse,
the governing body for the sport
of lacrosse worldwide in 2024.
Many of my players
affectionately refer to me as
the hippie love coach.
I'm also known as barefoot Heart
warrior, not only because I'm a
yoga instructor. I'm often
barefoot, I read energy and
coach intuitively, but because
I've given countless
individuals, a safe space to
thrive and to feel a sense of
belonging.
I've coached running down the
sideline while nursing one child
with another in a backpack, and
a third running with me.
I am a woman through and
through.
When I accepted the job as head
women's lacrosse coach at
Oberlin College, which included
being a wellness instructor as
well, in 2018, I was so excited
to be part of an institution
known for its academic rigor,
open-minded dialogue and freedom
to express oneself. And then I
learned the truth. Oberlin, like
many institutions of higher ed
these days, only supports free
speech when your values align
with theirs. I learned this
firsthand when I spoke out
against males competing.
In women's sports.
Without protections,
opportunities to compete are
taken away from women, to say
nothing of trophies and awards.
No school should have to choose
between doing what's right and
protecting their reputation. HB
185 shields schools from unjust
accusations while upholding
fairness in sports. Recent
polling from the New York Times
shows 79% of Americans believe
men should not compete in
women's sports, and New Mexico
specific polling shows
84% think women's sports should
be for females only.
You committee members, have the
opportunity to be heroes for
women's rights.
This bill is about upholding
truth and preserving the dreams
of female athletes.
This is a widely supported issue
and one that has received
bipartisan support at the state
and federal level.
Please vote yes for HB 185 to
ensure fairness and protection
for all. Um, is there anything
else before we go to here.
OK. Um, we're going to go to the
audience and um those in
opposition.
OK, we will take 5 people, 1
minute, and I think we have it
organized with.
Equality New Mexico.
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Marshall
Martinez. I'm the executive
director of Equality New Mexico,
the statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization. In the US last
year, over 600 bills were
introduced to attack transgender
people.
In the last election, we saw
nothing but the repetition of
one attack and
mischaracterization after
another. But these are not New
Mexico values. In fact, in a
statewide survey conducted of
1500 New Mexicans last year,
more than half of them agreed.
Youth sports are a place for
young people to grow, exercise,
build friendships, and this part
is really important. And that
youth sports would be much
better for everyone without the
interference of angry
politicians deciding who can
play those sports.
New Mexico has a long history of
accepting, loving, and affirming
our neighbors, family, and
friends, and we urge you to
continue that tradition. Thank
you.
Next
Chair, committee members, my
name is Jude Glazner, and I'm
here to speak in opposition to
HB 185, Protection of Women's
Sports Act as a representative
of the Transgender Resource
Center of New Mexico. Far from
protecting women, this bill
would prohibit trans youth, many
of whom are also young girls and
young women from playing sports
as the gender they most identify
with and instead force them to
play with the same designated
sex regardless. Likewise in
specifying that gender should
only be consulted if placed on
the birth certificate at or
close to birth, this bill fails
to honor the lawful correction.
of our most personal document.
The truth of the matter is that
all people have to work and live
with others who are different
from them all the time, and
protecting our youth from that
only serves to sabotage them. If
we are truly concerned, trans
athletes may have an advantage
over their counterparts than we
already have methods for
fairness without exclusion, such
as weight class, age, and skill
level distinction.
And if we are truly concerned
that all male sexed people are
inherently more capable than all
female sexed people, then we
must not make policy based on
sexism rather than fact. Thank
you.
daughters competed in scholastic
It would prevent them from being
able to predict that they
identify with.
That works participation.
consider funding for other
evidence base for coaches.
AEDs in all schools, increased
facilities time is up.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
My name is Rachel Ray. I use
them pronouns, and I'm a
non-binary person and policy
associate with both futures and
advocacy organization by and for
women and people of color in New
Mexico.
Growing up, I often felt the
most free and strong in myself
while playing soccer when I was
struggling with mental health in
high school, playing soccer
helped me to persevere. Did our
team lose every game that
season? Yes. Did playing give me
a sense of community and
belonging also, yes.
Everyone of all identities and
all bodies deserves the
experience of joy and the chance
to build new skills and
friendships. We all deserve the
autonomy to participate in
community life fully, and New
Mexican values of inclusion,
community, and family support
this.
Not only does this bill exclude
trans people, it also ignores
the reality that non-binary and
intersex people exist, and we
deserve the right to play, to
learn and to grow in community
just like everyone else.
We ask that you vote no on HB
185.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
Pastor Kristen Schultz, I serve
a community on the west side of
Albuquerque and volunteer with
Lutheran advocacy ministry. Um,
I'm also a parent of a queer
high school student in 25 years
as a pastor, I have worked
closely with and learned from
the LGBTQ community. One thing
I've learned is that transgender
girls are girls, and that, um,
roughly half of transgender and
non-binary youth are at high
risk of suicide more than one
in.
10 attempt suicide legislation
such as this which discriminates
against transgender youth, um,
It is a part of that mental
health profile, um.
It also prevents transgender
girls from participating in
something that is positive for
them and empowers
discrimination. Finally, as a
person of faith, I know that
transgender people are created
in the image of God and our
beloved of God. These are our
children and we have to protect
them and care for them.
Thank you. Now we'll go to um 5
people on Zoom.
And you have
will take the 1st 5 and you have
one minute, please.
Diane McCash.
Good afternoon committee. I'm
Diane McCash. I'm the mother of
a daughter that competed on a
championship Division One
basketball team in college, and
I urge you to vote no on this
attack on an already extremely
vulnerable, and especially
lately, very publicly vilified
group of girls and women. Thank
you.
Vip Gonzalez.
Hello, my name is Viviano
Gonzalez, and I am from the Mesa
Valley in southern New Mexico. I
grew up in the farmlands, public
schools, and sports teams of the
Southwest. As a young student
with more energy than I or my
teachers knew to do with.
Playing sports became a key
outlet and support for my life.
Playing on teams since 3rd grade
through high school, fostered
the collaboration, teamwork,
friendships, and liberty and
liberatory experience of
exercise.
That has carried me here today.
I played on the softball and
basketball teams with teammates,
parents, and coaches that once
bullied me because they didn't
know any better. They're
hateful, narrow ideas of what I
should look like or who I am led
to years of self-harm and an
attempt to take my own life
before high school graduation.
Today we know better. My
friends, their parents, my
former coaches, and I all know
better. This bill is another
attempt to create an enemy and
foster the hatred in our
communities. As a coach for over
a decade and now of multiple
state championship teams in
rugby and in softball. I have
dedicated myself to support our
young cat
um thought.
Um, I've, um,
Uh, to support our young
athletes in fostering the
powerful values of teamwork,
sportsmanship, and community. I,
I offered you to vote no.
OK, thank you. Next.
Mm
Dodge Burnett.
Good afternoon. My name is Gage
Burnett. Thank you so much. I am
a staff member with the Quality
New Mexico. I'm also a 3rd
generation Rotarian dedicated to
service and a transgender man
living in Las Cruces, who has
found a home here. And I chose
Las Cruces in southern New
Mexico is a place to start my
home, to build my family,
because people here know how to
value differences and love their
neighbors regardless of
identity. I know firsthand how
scary it is to grow up different
and to try to find your way as a
young person
a new path in the community that
may not understand who you are,
but loves you anyways. What we
know in New Mexico is that
people who are different, people
who are transgender or
non-binary or gender expansive,
deserve equal access to
competitive sports and
athletics. We know that the only
people who should decide whether
a trans athlete competes, are
the players themselves, their
teammates, and the coaches who
hold the team's best interests
at heart and want the best for
their for their uh participants.
Mexico athletes do not need this
committee or any other body to
tell them how to play their
sport, or who to play it with,
or what values to a spouse. Let
the teams live their truths and
share their values and play in
the way that they want to and
that celebrates their
communities. Thank you for your
attention.
Zoe
Hello, my name is Zoe Aru and
I'm a former collegiate
basketball player and current
youth basketball coach, and a
nurse in Albuquerque. I wanted
to speak both as a woman who
spent countless hours in my
youth in team sports and also as
a nurse who believes in
evidence-based healthcare that
this bill is harmful. Let's
start with the data. Available
evidence does not indicate that
trans women retain any
biological advantage, nor do
official reports enumerating
actual barriers to women in
sport ever named the inclusion
of trans women as an issue.
As a former athlete and current
coach, I deeply understand the
importance of sports in a
child's life. It taught me how
to be a teammate, how to make
and achieve goals, how to solve
problems, and how to regulate my
mental health. We've heard so
many people on both sides talk
about the importance of sports
in their lives. This bill takes
away the opportunity for trans
youth to compete in sports. And
that's really not OK. A ban on
trans women athletes does not
protect anyone. Instead, it
endangers all women and girls in
the category, especially those
who are already marginalized.
Please vote no on HB 185.
Hazel
Hi there. My name is Hazel
Valente Compton. I'm a community
organizer for Quality New
Mexico. When I was 12 years old,
I came out as trans. I didn't
have to face losing my access to
extracurricular activities due
to me being trans. And I learned
so many life lessons that have
and will always stick with me.
Lessons such as collaboration,
teamwork, friendship, and
exercise.
We cannot deprive trans children
from these important life
lessons that will affect them in
their work, in school, in their
friendships and relationships
for the rest of their lives.
Please vote no on House Bill
185. Thank you. Thank you. Now
we'll go to the audience for
those in support, and if you
want to raise your hands just to
let us know who all is in
support.
OK, and we'll take 5 people.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
My name is Mary Joe Gallegos,
and I'm here to speak in favor
of House Bill 185. This bill is
to ensure
That girls and women have fair
and safe opportunities to
participate in sports, allowing
males to compete in women's
sports is dangerous. Women have
been seriously injured.
Playing against men, men
outperform women in almost every
sport. Males simply have a
biological advantage over women
in many areas, like having
higher bone density and content,
a larger skeletal structure,
larger hearts and greater lung
capacity, no matter how intently
a woman athlete trains, she will
never be able to overcome the
biological differences. It's
unfair to force women to compete
against men when they're already
in innately biological.
advantages that they cannot
overcome. Women who have trained
tirelessly have lost out on
medals, trophies, and
scholarships having to compete
against biological member males.
President Trump signed executive
order to keep men out of women's
sports, making it the official
policy of that women's sports
are for women's only, and that
sends a signal to athletic
programs all across the USA.
Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen,
because that's all there is, men
and women, male and female, boys
and girls, since the creation of
humankind, the biological
differences have and always will
just be objective truth.
Written in the DNA of each of us
of our 37 trillion cells.
Only in our recent societies's
mass delusion psychosis have
group, groups that are
narcissistic bullies,
politicians, educators, and
physicians dared to defy.
Our deep seated cellular
identities.
It is not discrimination or
hateful to say that men are made
to be bigger, stronger, and
faster than women, and
convincing kids that a
declaration will change who they
are.
It's fundamentally delusional
and dangerous. We need to keep
boys and girls' sports separate
and vice versa.
Let's stop lying to our kids
about biological differences and
protect them in their spaces.
My boys also wrestle and do not
want to compete against girls.
It's awkward, uncomfortable, and
according to them, it is too
easy.
Please protect our kids and vote
for this bill. Could you please
state your name? MichaelL
Peterson. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Taylor Peterson
and I'm 15 years old. I, and I
played water polo. I don't
believe the boys should be
allowed in girls' sports because
I play a sport that is
completely dependent on the
player's strength, size, height
and weight. Boys and young male
athletes are taller and, more
powerful, and faster. And when
they compete in my sport, me and
my team are left at a
disadvantage because they
Or because he can swim faster,
hit the ball harder, and change
directions second faster than
any of the girls on my team can.
This is not because we don't
work hard, this is because we
are biologically different. And
because we are so different, he
can easily injure members of my
team and the teams of other
schools. Those injuries will
happen to someone's daughter,
and if that happened to your
daughter and her friends, what
would you do? Would you just
stand by while your daughters
are being injured and left
behind in their own sport.
Please vote yes on HB 185. Thank
you.
for your time.
Hello Chair and committee. My
name is Ariana Escalante, and
I'm a high school athlete here
in New Mexico. I urge you to
pass HB 185 and protect
biological female athletes God
clearly tells us in Genesis 1:27
that we were created male and
female, not given the choice to
choose as a power lifter, a male
in my same weight class can
squat up 2 or more than 360
pounds, where I work hard every
single day just to put up 225.
All I'm asking is that as
female.
athletes would no longer be
robbed of titles, championships,
or scholarships. You never hear
of women transitioning into
males and competing in their
sports and in their professions,
and that is for an obvious
reason that male and female are
created different in the eyes of
the Lord. And so because we are
created differently, we should
be organized in competitions
accordingly. I thank you for
your time and consideration and
hope that you pass HB 185.
Adam Chair and committee, thank
you so much for the opportunity
to speak today. I urge you to
support House Bill 185, the
protection of women's Sports Act
to uphold fairness and safety in
female athletics.
Biological differences matter.
Studies show that male athletes
on average have advantages in
speed.
In strength and in endurance
even after hormone therapy. This
creates an unfair playing field
for female athletes who have
trained their entire lives for
fair competition.
Beyond fairness, this is about
safety and privacy.
As Representative Doo mentioned
the statistics of the most
recent poll here, right here in
New Mexico, that largest group,
ages 18 to 24, 92% of these
respondents, said boys do not
belong in girls' sports.
Girls and women deserve equal
opportunities, fair competition,
and safe spaces. So I urge you
to stand with the vast majority
of New Mexicans and pass HB 185.
Could you please state your
name? I'm Jodi Hendricks with
New Mexico Family Action
Movement.
Thank you.
Nicky McCarty.
Hello, good afternoon. My name
is Nicky McCarty. I am the state
director for Concerned Women for
America of New Mexico, testified
for concerned Women for America
legislative action Committee. I
am also retired athletic
director where I spent over a
decade advocating for fair
opportunities for all athletes,
allowing biological male born
athletes to participate on
women's sports teams,
compromises female athletes. It
raises serious concerns for
safety of our women athletes.
It's imperative that New Mexico
upholds the rights of female
athletes to separated
participation in women's sports
and safe and fair competition,
allowing male born athletes in
women's sports diminishes women
and all for which they have
worked. Last week, the NCAA
changed its participation policy
for transgender athletes,
limiting competition in women's
sports to athletes assigned
female at birth only. On the
same day, the nation celebrated
National.
girls and women in sports day.
Isn't it time New Mexico joined
the rest of the nation to uphold
the dignity and safety of our
female athletes and their
obligation under Title IX. I ask
you to vote yes on HB 185. Thank
you. Thank you.
And the next person, if you
could keep it to one minute,
please.
Carla Sontag.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Sontag, president and CEO of
Better Together New Mexico. We
stand strongly in support of
this bill. We don't feel that
this has anything to do with
discrimination.
We respect anybody's right to be
who they want to be. But this is
about fairness and protection of
women. There are many stories
about women who have been hurt
by
Biological men who have come
into their sport. I am a mother
and I am a grandmother, and I
care very much about my children
and my grandchildren, and what
happens to them.
Men's strength does not change
if they, if a woman becomes a
man or a man becomes a woman,
biologically they are still the
same in their strength, and it
is not fair to pair them against
women. I urge you to support
this bill and protect the women.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anything
else before we go to the, oh
wait.
One more on Zoom.
Denise Weaver.
I don't share, members of the
committee. My name is Denise
Weaver, and I'm a mother of a
female athlete. I want to ask
that you vote to move this bill
through committee as stated, the
NCAA has officially changed its
policy, realizing that allowing
biological men to steal records,
titles, and honors from female
athletes is unfair and wrong. To
not vote for the protection of
female sports and protecting
female sports is against
principles of fair competition.
My daughter plays golf, tennis,
and she swims. For her to
compete in any
these sports against the
biological male is not only
unfair but unsafe. Males should
compete against males and
females should compete against
females. That is fair for all.
This is a common sense bill. I
would expect you to protect the
rights of girls like my daughter
and many other biological
females who enjoy competitive
sports in New Mexico. To do
otherwise violates their rights
as female athletes and will
ultimately destroy girls sports
in the state. A vote for this
bill.
is a vote to protect all
athletes. Thank you.
Thank you. Now, uh,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
quick clarification, this bill
would still allow um.
To participate.
protects women's sports
now representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representatives and
experts and everyone for being
here today.
Uh, I have some questions about
the bill.
I guess I'm just gonna jump
right in.
So, Madam Chair representatives,
I'm looking at your
The analysis and the definition.
Madam
How do you define an athletic
club.
And I believe, let me see what
page that is. I think it's on
page 3, I believe it starts.
On section 4, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Chair Representative, I I think
it means it privately or
publicly operated organization
that operates for competition or
allows.
OK, great. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative. So
this is not uh
Stopping at the high school
level or the collegiate level.
This is any kind of club or
association from the way I
understand it, Madam Chair,
Representative.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Representative.
OK, so for example, I think in
2023, there was a
Cycling, I think it was called
the Tour of the Gila. There was
a transgender athlete who won
that, and it was
Biological man who was a
transgender woman. So if this
took effect.
With that association be
included in something like this,
Madam Chair and Representative,
I believe so.
And I would also, Madam Chair
representative clarify that it
doesn't
prevent, um.
The actual coed um practicing
together, um, unless provided
that no such player takes a
scholarship or spot at a school
from.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative Reed. So, OK,
that, that helps me out a lot
about clear clarifying that. So,
Madam Chair Representative, so
why is now the perfect time to
put this bill forward as opposed
to yesterday or tomorrow, Madam
Chair representative.
Oh, Madam Chair and
Representative, it's always the
right time to predict the
progress that was put in place
by Title 9,
what happened in House Bill 7,
that took away women's right to
actively consent and to have
private spaces and women's
sports was not right. This is
correcting that wrong. In
addition to that, we do not want
to jeopardize federal dollars
for our sports teams, and, um,
as I said before, this is an
anti anyone. You don't have to
be anti anyone to be pro-woman.
There is always a space to play.
No one's being excluded.
And as NCAA has done, anyone
who's not born female is welcome
to play in male sports. Everyone
gets a chance to play.
Great. That's, that's good to
hear. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative. So, I
guess,
We talked a little bit about
strengthening Title IX's.
Language and what it does for
women's sports. So I guess,
Madam Chair Representative, the
way I see that this bill is
coming forward is, it's trying
to enhance.
Title 9 to protect women, and is
that kind of the purpose of the
legislation to ensure that women
feel comfortable and
Feel like they have a fair shot
when it comes to competing in
sports, Madam Chair,
Representatives.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
first I would say I actually
filed this bill last year filed
before President Trump actually
did his executive order, so, um,
but it is important now with the
executive order, but Title 9 is
still Title 9, and always has
been Title 9, and so we
basically now need to comply
with what President Trump has
put in place, we need to modify
this um with what he is
basically stated, um, we don't
know if in 4 years.
President Trump will be the
president, um, it's not
legislation, so it's not
codified in federal or state
law, um, and so it's essential
to pass legislation at both the
federal and state levels and so
this is the time, um, I believe
now with the executive order
coming down that we need to get
in line with what the federal
order is.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, you're
right. I mean, we don't know.
President Don Junior is on the
way in the next administration,
so
You're right. We don't know if
President Trump will still be
there, but we might get another
one. But Madam Chair,
Representative.
I guess I'm, I just want to make
sure that we're clarifying the
language in the bill to ensure
that New Mexico doesn't lose out
on those federal funds. So Madam
Chair Representative, would this
be kind of a safeguard for the
state to ensure that those
federal funds through Title IX
continue to come to our state,
Madam Chair and representatives.
Yes, um, are with what we've
passed
um and how we have madam.
Um, what we have, uh, what we
have uh.
Current law
Would put us at odds with that.
And it puts our superintendents.
Um
And our university presidents in
a difficult position if we move
forward, they're they're gonna
be told two different things.
One from this body.
One from the federal government.
And the problem with that is the
federal government will withhold
funds.
So I think this is important for
us to protect our protect our
institutions and protect those
who are running those
institutions.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and just to
clarify, so folks who
So students who identify as
transgender, but still,
want to play sports, they would
still be able to play sports
within their gender class. Is
that correct, Madam Chair
Representative? No one would be
forced out of a sport.
Based on their gender.
Representative, no one would be
forced out of sports based on
their gender, but they would
play on their biological sex,
the team of the biological sex.
So this is all.
Born females would play on
women's sports, and if you
identify as anything else, you
would play, you would play in
male sports.
Perfect. OK, biological sex.
So yeah,
clarifying that, we're just
making sure that folks
are playing with their
biological sex, but they still
get to play sports. So we're
still allowing that.
No one's excluded. So, OK, that,
that makes so much sense, Madam
Chairs representative. I had
this, this idea that there were
a bunch of angry politicians
with pitchforks and torches
ready to just go after
transgender people. And that's,
that's clearly not what I see
here today. I see 4 smiling
faces, I see a very, very
positive bill just to enhance
women's sports.
And Madam Chair Representative,
I guess I would just say just
from my district, I've gotten a
lot of support for this bill,
probably more support than many
bills that I've seen.
Come through the pipeline this
session, which is encouraging to
me, because I think affirming
women's rights.
Is one of the pillars that our
country was founded on.
And it took a lot of time to get
that equality for women.
When it came to all the
amendments, the 19th Amendment,
for example, in our
Constitution.
And so, Madam Chair
Representatives, I, I applaud
you for standing up for women.
We all have very strong women in
our lives, you know, I don't, I
wouldn't be here without my mama
pushing me along and she, she
got here from hard work. And I
think that that's something that
we need to ensure and, and, and
restore.
Or women in their respective.
sports because Madam Chair
Representative, I think that
that's just an American ideal.
Everyone having an equal playing
field, literally and
figuratively. And I think that's
super important for our state.
And I thank you so much for
helping keep those federal funds
in the state. I think that's
super important. And I don't
think we want to lose out on
anything like that, especially
opportunity wise for our young
women and girls. So thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
representatives, all the
questions I had.
Hey, next representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives.
So
And rips it down. I'm sorry that
we didn't think about bringing
our transgender friend here who
speak on this bill. I absolutely
love her. She spent the night at
my house. I adore her, and she
would have been a perfect voice
to talk here today.
Um
My chair representative,
experts.
So is this legislation that
you're bringing to bring
fairness in the women's sports.
Would you pretty much summarize
that that's what this is.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh represented
fairness and safety.
Thank you. Fairness sounds safe.
I'm not going to pretend that
this is not a complex and
extremely polarizing issue
because it is.
Um, my parents were lesbians in
a very early early era.
Um
One of my very dearest friends
is gay. Now the French
transgender. I, I
Who you are is in your heart and
in your soul.
Per end of story.
Where I have the issues are.
Manure representative, do you
think me at my size would be
fair to wrestle a 100 pound girl
in sports.
I'm, I'm staying with the same
sex. Do you think that's fair?
I'll answer, it's not.
Representative Representative
Lord, I don't, I don't want to
compete against you
I think there's a lot of guys in
here don't want to compete with
me either.s representative just
point of um yeah, I'm in the
bell. No, no, that's, I was just
going to add that in wrestling
they have different weight
classes. Yeah, and that's kind
of my, that, that's kind of what
I'm trying to get at. Look.
No, but
I don't know it would be my
committee that is homophobic or
anybody who doesn't care about
people. We're here because we
care.
The issue has become.
How do we
Protect and keep our girls safe.
Because I'm gonna just be
honest, if I had a daughter that
was playing in sports.
And
Somebody that was transgender.
Made her not get her
scholarship.
I'd be angry.
A man have people reached out to
you to tell you why they have
issues with this is they have to
do with scholarships, does it
have to do with.
The size and strength difference
has to do with safety. Tell me,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
my district is 33% Republican
and I have been contacted by so
many people that have said they
voted for my opponents, and
they're probably not going to
vote for me even in the next
cycle, but that we are right on
this and that women need to be
protected, their opportunities
need to be protected. Their
ability to be on the podium and
receive a trophy needs to be
protected and that this is a
safety and fairness.
issue, and so folks that would
not support me in any other um.
Context
are saying that this is the
right thing to do. And I think
that's what this body is about,
and you know, you mentioned the,
the, the difference of the size
of us, but I think that the, uh,
young woman who testified about
body lifting.
It's, it's, she could be
competing against a male athlete
of exactly the same weight. And
he would outlift her.
Madam Trevor said that's a great
point. I used to work at Gold's
Gym and work out all the time
very heavily.
And lifted heavy weights and I
used to work out with a.
A woman that was transgender.
Smaller than me
could outlift me every single
time we would frustrate the hell
out of me because she was so
much stronger than me and
smaller than me.
So I don't see, to me, I look at
the fairness issue.
I'm not sure it represented, I
think the other most frustrating
thing is usually I try to bat my
my base myself off of studies.
There's not that many studies.
All I can go off of is all the
articles that I see of people
who missed on a scholarship who
got injured.
similar, there's not like I
can't pull up a stat that says
when somebody has been on
estrogen when they're
transitioning.
One week
10 weeks, 6 weeks, 8 weeks, 10
weeks. How does that affect if
they're playing, like, I'm
trying to look for a number,
like they're playing sports here
when they're transitioning and
they're playing sports later. I
have no idea how those hormones
affect. All I know is there a
question in that? Yes, I'm
getting it there. Man
representative. So when you were
looking, when you were drafting
this bill or had people reach
out to you. Were you able to
find any stats that were similar
to what I'm talking about
because I can't.
Ma
That's what experts are for.
There are statistics on this.
And the statistics are that no
matter how long, so a male could
be on estrogen for 3 years, and
because they are still athletes,
they are still working out. They
lose no muscle mass or strength.
Does that help you? Yeah, Madam
Chair, and that's with taking
the estrogen over a long period
of time. Correct.
Madam Chair,
Representative
On that, uh, more than
statistics.
We have obvious things right in
front of us.
Um, we have the NBA and we have
the WNBA.
If there was no diff difference.
We would just have the NBA.
We have the same thing in golf,
we all across sports.
Um, we have to to.
Do what we've been doing, we
have to ignore.
Uh, are on eyes. Reality is.
We know very well.
That at that level in
particular, because now we're
talking competitive for and and
if they're competing for if, if,
if women are competing for
scholarships.
We are obviously taking away
opportunities.
And as I said, all we have to do
is look to professional athletes
where potentially a scholarship
player plays.
As an amateur and then maybe has
an opportunity to make millions
of dollars playing professional
sports.
So, um, the reality is,
That's why, that's why the bill
allows on page 4.
male
participation as
a a.
Spot or an opportunity.
From a woman for a scholarship.
So
This is two parts. It's not just
safety.
However, safety is very
important as as our
Expert witness has described her
own.
Example
And, and so when you hear, Madam
Chair, and Representative that.
Studies don't show we don't need
studies to show we have, we have
people who have been harmed.
We had the incident.
Um, at, uh, UNM.
Where did you see the vicious
spike that the lady on Lady Lobo
took to the face.
Um, another was injured and, and
was lost not only her
scholarship, but had to stop
playing sports
uh against that same individual
who played for Fresno State. So
the reality is.
It's two parts, and we need to
make sure that we understand
we're doing this for two
reasons.
For safety.
Those of us who are parents,
That's the reason I'm here. This
is, this is generally not an
area where men.
talk because we're told we have
no right to talk on the subject.
But the reality is I'm a parent.
And I'm a grandparent, and by
the way.
Grandparent like multiplies.
affection like 10 times over
versus being a parent.
And I have granddaughters.
And I
I am not interested.
And my granddaughter having to
compete against someone much
stronger, much bigger.
With an unfair advantage, but.
On top of that,
Just the fairness aspect of them
being able to my granddaughters
being able to compete and have a
chance to win.
That is all mixed into this. So,
um, representative can we keep
it to the what the question was
about the statistics and
You had your chance to present.
Madam Chair
This is a very emotional issue
on both sides.
And the reality is.
I am here.
Yes, ma'am. The answer to the
question is.
Yes, it's unfair, and yes, it's
unsafe.
And all we're trying to do is
create.
Fairness and safety back into
women's sports just like Title
IX was created for.
Manian representatives, um, I
agree absolutely what you just
said because what am I very
dearest friends to how my
campaign has.
Granddaughter that I adore. I
just absolutely love her.
And she, if she decided she
wanted to go into sports.
No, I don't feel that it would
be fair for her to have to
compete against somebody who's
bigger and stronger for
scholarship, but also for safety
reasons. But let me ask you
this, manager ribs and. So do
women
I'm gonna say Violet, I don't
want to use these terms, but I'm
just gonna use this for this
thing. Biological women.
Do they have the right to say.
We don't want this transgendered
person to play on our sports
because they're beating all of
us and wrestling because we're
just bigger than us. Did they
have that right right now, Madam
Chair and representative under
current New Mexico law, women
have no say. They have no
opportunity to affirmatively
consent when a biological male
is competing against them in
sports, so it is in their
restrooms or their locker rooms.
And see right there, that's, I'm
sorry, ma'am that's feminism in
action. We as women should have
the right. We shouldn't be
suppressed where we can't say we
don't feel comfortable as this
group of people and having
somebody in our sports for
whatever reasons.
I feel like we're losing our
voices here as women.
And that's not to say that
transgender women are not women.
I'm not saying that at all.
Please do not put those words in
my mouth.
What I'm saying is that biologic
women are losing their voice.
In sports, I feel like this is
taking feminism back 50 years.
I'm sorry, that's the way I feel
about it because my parents, I
said, my parents were lesbians,
born in 1919, they adopted when
they're much older.
And they went through a hell of
a time, she became a doctor. She
went through a lot of stuff to
get to where she is and she
fought really hard. It was an
upstream battle.
What I'm saying is, and she
didn't have the opportunity for
any fairness at all, being a
female doctor.
Holy
And what is your question? There
was no fairness.
So the point with this Madam
Chair representative is
What I want to see, and I'm
getting to the question where I
started with this.
Is this about fairness in
women's sports, protecting
women.
For safety and for scholarships,
is that all this bill is about,
ma'am Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I would say yes, it's about uh
it's about safety, and we'd like
to add something in terms of
health care. It addresses your
previous questions. There have
been reports.
Um, not just about, uh, about
women being injured in a game,
but health care problems that
are a result of a woman being
afraid of going into the
restroom because they're out of
fear of encountering a
biological male, developing
urinary tract infections, other
female problems that they have
resulted from them not being
able to use those spaces because
they're not safe.
So yes, this is about safety and
opportunity for women preserving
that.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, I would just
remind the body, I believe,
well, I, I know I voted yes when
Equality New Mexico came and
said that they wanted gender
neutral restrooms, single stall
restrooms to be neutral. I voted
for it immediately because it
seemed like a fair solution for
all, and it's what equality in
New Mexico asked for, and many
other advocacy groups. Now
advocacy groups are asking for
women to lose the right to
consent and to compete in
fairness and protections, and so
they're the line keeps moving.
This is about fairness. It's not
a ban. It's about.
ing women's sports. It's about
safety and fairness.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives, and again, this
is a very complex and polarizing
topic that we have.
And
What I want more than anything
is I want for a biological
females to feel safe and have a
voice.
I want women to have a voice.
Now, I'm gonna say something
real quick, Madam Chair.
About the topic in general,
please.
If you would like to when you
explain your vote,
that would be out of it.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, um.
Do we have answers of what we do
for transgenders to play in
sports because I look at
primarily keep the female safe.
I was actually talking to
someone outside.
Who is part of the LGBTQ
community who said, I support
your bill, but I can't tell you.
I can't come in and talk about
it.
And there's a lot. I've heard
that a lot of people who will
not come in and support it, but
they agree with it because they
played sports and they don't
want to play against somebody
who's big or strong, giving them
unfair advantage.
The amount of chairs and have
you given any thought because I
have given this quite some
thought, you know, do we have
all transgender sports and give
them all scholarships, and boy,
they have the advantage of
everybody they go right into
college.
Do we make it where women can
have the voice to say yes or no,
but what if 80% say yes and 80%
say no.
So Madam Chair represent him,
even if we went down this road
of the complexity of what we do
with this, the primary goal
should still be to keep our
biologic women safe and to have
rights.
In sports, would you agree with
that, I'm sure.
Yes, Madam Chair,
representative, that's exactly
right.
And Madam Chair Representative,
I'm sure if Equality Mexico,
other advocacy groups came up
with the sport, came up with an
alternative that protected
women.
In sports, greeted fairness, and
had them competing against
biological females that many of
us would be open to that. That's
a different bill and it's for
them to bring. We're here to
protect women. Title 9.
Safety.
and fairness.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Representative. Did you know
there's one sport that women
excel accelerate over all men.
Shooting.
So Man representative shooting
is inequality sport because
women were better at it. We have
better, uh, yes, everybody's
nodding because they know.
To match your representative, I,
I support the bill. I, I'm very
sad.
That it's so polarizing.
I really am. It breaks my heart
seeing what my mom went through
not being able to buy a car.
Because they told her she had to
go get her husband and she's, oh
man, she cursed him out, still
bought the car with cash
anyways.
So I'm not saying that there's
not issues. We're not saying,
nobody is saying that there's
not issues.
Nobody's saying that transgender
people are less than all we're
asking for.
It is for them to have a voice
or a female biological females
playing sports have a voice, to
not be harmed to say we don't
want this and to have
legislation that backs that up.
So
Hopefully I won't end up in the
paper being called a homophobe
tomorrow because that's gonna
make me very angry because my
parents were lesbians and my
friends are gay and lesbian and
and.
What's in your heart doesn't
matter. What matters is I'm
trying to keep our biological
female safe. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, next we have, uh,
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So just
To get my head around this. How
many transgender women are
playing New Mexico sports at the
high school or college level.
Right now.
Madame Chair and Representative,
you know we don't collect that
data.
We, we like to base our bills on
data, but thank you for that. So
I'm just gonna quickly, Madam
Chair, when I was in high
school, I had an uncanny ability
to catch a football. I mean, I
could catch any football.
And the, the coach started
talking with me about joining
the team, so with this bill, I
didn't do it.
Or social pressures because the
quarterback was also my
boyfriend, and I thought that
was just a little, you know,
just a little too much, but, but
so would this bill have
prevented me, I mean, and we
know that we've had female
football players, um, so, so
girls can play male sports, but
males can't, so that is
discrimination.
Madam Chair and uh
representative.
Title 9 makes it not
discrimination.
Title IX was created
specifically because women did
not have options.
to play sports without.
The possibility of having play
against a man, so by federal
law, it's not discrimination if
we're just protecting women's
rights.
I, I, I think there are people
who would disagree with you that
on that madam chair, but I'll
move on. So I did play
basketball at a small rural high
school. I mean, I'm pretty tall
for the Navajo reservation, but
our point guard was probably 5
ft nothing and.
95 pounds. We played against a
team that had a 6'3 girl that
was probably 220 pounds. That's,
I mean, how, how do you, so
should we have separate weight
classes for every sport and
height classes, there are going
to be differences, Madam Chair,
between
Women, I mean, and so how, how
do, how do we say that this is
the way to go when we allow tiny
tiny women to compete against
other big women.
Madam Chair, Representative,
this simply returns to what
happened before House Bill 207,
and what has worked in
competitive sports at the high
school college level for
decades.
Uh, Madam Chair, so just my, my
son played.
Young America Football League,
my husband coached and the best
player on the team was a girl. I
mean, she
kick their butts repeated. She
was a running back. I don't want
that to go away. Um, Madam
Chair, the plural of anecdote is
not data, um, because we hear
stories doesn't mean that that's
how the world is. Those are
stories, um,
And then, um,
And then it's also interesting
to me, Madam Chair, that you're,
this bill is allowing males to
practice with females but not
play. So if there's such a giant
need for protecting women, why
are you allowing males to
practice with.
Women
So when you play as a practice
player, it is known that they
are not going to play at the
same competitive level when you
play in a coed game, men don't
play the same intensity against
women. Um, I'm 5'4 and about 120
pounds dripping wet. I've only
been bigger when I've either
been pregnant or nursing. Um, I
chose to play coed field hockey
after college. My worst injury I
ever got was from
The man also was not that big,
but again, his
Um, power and drive drove me
into the turf and popped two
ribs off of my sternum.
When we play,
We take that, you know, when we
play coed, we take that risk.
When practice players are
invited to play. It is not with
the same intensity. Anyone knows
there's always risk of injury
where you're, whether you're
playing against men or women, as
somebody who coaches lacrosse,
lacrosse is a really dangerous
sport as somebody who played
lacrosse, it's a really
dangerous sport. As women, we
actually don't play with helmets
like the men do.
Men
get much worse injuries, and it
is a much more what I would call
violent sport. No, the best
female on a women's lacrosse
team cannot shoot the ball over
90 miles an hour. The men can
shoot it over 120 miles an hour.
that would kill a girl's goalie,
even with full protective
equipment on her.
Manical stuff. Thank you.
Thank you
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I've been playing sports my
whole life and I.
Just as a disclaimer love
beating the boys and at what
they're best at, um, and have.
Um
A whole life long and still do
in the house and uh when we
challenged the um.
The Senate once a year.
Um
That's not what we're talking
about today, Madam Chair. Um.
Sports are a powerful platform.
For fostering inclusion,
resilience and community.
Trans women like all individuals
deserve the opportunity to
participate in sports and
experience the physical, mental,
and social benefits that come
with athletic engagement.
Excluding trans women from
sports is not only
discriminatory, but it also
undermines the core values of
fairness, respect, and equality
that sports are meant to
promote.
Scientific evidence shows that
trans women who undergo hormone
therapy, do not retain inherent
athletic advantages over
cisgender women.
In fact, policies banning trans
women from sports are often
based on misconceptions and
stereotypes rather than robust
data.
By embracing inclusion, we honor
the diversity of the human
experiences we all have and
ensure that sports remain a
space where everyone in New
Mexico can thrive.
Trans women are women.
And their right to participate
in sports should be protected.
Let us champion policies that
celebrate inclusion, reject
discrimination and uphold the
true spirit of sport, unity,
perseverance, and the joy of
competition.
Together we can create a world,
a state where everyone
regardless of their gender
identity, has the opportunity to
play complete, compete and
belong in New Mexico, trans
people belong.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Was that a question?
Can we make statements now?
No, OK.
Thanks, Madam Chan about
multiple times in this committee
is about debating the bill, and
we, um, we're talking about
trans people in sports today and
trans women in sports today,
Madam Chair, and I have a
statement about what this bill
does. Thank you. I also had a
statement and I was cut off
because I had to turn it into a
question, that's not fair.c me,
you had plenty of time to make
plenty of statements. We are.
I was making statements and you
cut me off on a personal
privilege.
You cut me off.
I am the chair. I'm allowed to
talk. I'm allowed to talk
arbitrary I am allowed to talk.
Not
at this point we have emotions
we're not equal now I got it.
Madam Chair, I moved to OK.
We have a motion to table, would
you please take resentative
block a table with a long
explanation.
No a table and I want to make
statements in my explanation.
Representative Romero Yes to
table. Representative Thompson.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair, guest
table, Madam Chair, yes, to
table.
With a vote of 4 to 2, uh, your,
um,
House Bill 185 has been tabled.
Representative block to explain
his boat and one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I hope
you got your timer ready. Madam
Chair, I appreciate you guys for
being here today. I'm sorry that
this bill, unfortunately was
tabled like many other very
common sense bills that actually
can save lives just like this
one. And it's a shame that
that's happened, Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair, it's also a
shame that the rules again.
Or bended again after speaking
to the speaker again have been
bended and so Madam chair, that
mason's page 4756 as an
essential part of free
discussions. Every member must
have a right to present that
member's own views for the
consideration of other members
of the body. So Madam Chair, it
would be great if we could
follow the rules, and I'm sorry
that your bill died just like so
many of the other good bills
that save lives. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair.
Representative Lord, one minute,
please. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives, as
everyday occurrence in here, we
get shut down on our side
constantly whenever we try to
ask questions, we get shut down.
It was an absolute mockery what
happened the other day in our
committee. My point is, is that,
uh, a representative here was
just allowed to talk for 5
minutes and make a statement
without asking a question. I
made numerous statements. I was
told to get to the question. So
you see how there's a, a, a
variance. There's not equality
here. We are not equal on our
side. There's only here.
needs to stay on the bill that
is statement on the bill. The
statement on the bills I didn't
get to talk, and again, I'm
being shut down just like I am,
and every time just because I'm
a Republican, I have no
equality, no equity and as a
woman, my voice is silence.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Um, we will go to, if you will
clear the room if you were here
for this bill, and we will now
hear House Bill 163.
I guess representative Reed, you
get to stay.
No
Yeah
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
Believe it or not, that happens
a lot.
Anywhere
you get those.
anywhere.
OK, if you can please clear the
room quietly so we can get to
our next bill. Thank you.
Yeah,
0.
Yeah
Those
are yours
they are.
I
saw them like that's.
Hey.
Let's get to the next bill,
please.
We'll go ahead and um start
testimony. People are here,
they're just went to the
restroom real quick.
Um, OK, um, House Bill 163, um,
additions to delinquent act.
Representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, this bill,
what, what it essentially does
is I I've carried this bill
before, um.
When we're dealing with cannabis
and as as we all know we've been
trying to fix some of the
different things, the cannabis
situations and, and this is one
of those um fixes, um, what it
does is it basically makes, I, I
consider it a comparison to a
minor possession of alcohol, um,
when you're a minor when you're
under the age of 21 or let's say
if you're 17 and under a few are
caught with alcohol because it
is illegal, you are cited and
you um have the ability to where
you were.
referred to the juvenile
probation Office. And when you
go to the juvenile probation
office, they generally handle
them informally or get you help
if you need help and if there's,
if it's something that has to go
through the the juvenile system,
it can go through the juvenile
system, you don't see it very
often. What we're seeing is the
same problem now with um
cannabis, obviously it's illegal
for a child to possess cannabis,
um, and what this bill does is
it treats it like a minor
possession.
of alcohol, so what it does
basically on page two, it moves
that section over um kind of in
line with the uh with what the
alcohol possession of alcohol is
a minor would do. Um, and what
it does, it also makes an
exception, um, for possessing
cannabis as a minor if it's, you
know, legally prescribed, that's
what the um Lynn and Aaron
compassionate Youth Act is, um,
so it, it allows for it to be a
delinquent offense, um.
is listed as you can see, um, on
page 3, traffic in cannabis was
added in there and that actually
refers to.
Marijuana or cannabis, and so
that was added in there, but the
problem the schools are having
is we have kids who are coming
to school high, they're smoking
cannabis, vaping cannabis, and
there's nothing the schools can
do about it. There's nothing we
can do as far as um helping
these kids get services if
needed through the JPO system or
the CYFD system, and so what
it's doing is allowing basically
possessing cannabis as a minor
to be treated like it would if
you possess.
alcohol. If you then possess it
under the age of 21 and you're
18, you would still go through
the magistrate court as listed
in the statute, um, and, and
there's like I think
requirements that you have to,
um, do love uh for our base drug
education system 4 hours of
community service, something of
that nature, um, and right now
that's what happens um.
If you're under 21 years of age,
that's what could happen to you.
The other issue also is.
It's just one of those things
that um I know there may be
concerns of, oh, we don't wanna,
you know.
Make possession of cannabis a
delinquent act because, you
know, it's cannabis, but.
But the thing is, is that when
you actually deal with these
children and we can actually
help them and get them the
services they need.
And then they do go through,
let's say to juvenile probation
for one if they do go through
the system, their records are
sealed anyway, so it's not like
this is something that's going
to affect them later in life,
but we're really trying to do
here is, is give law
enforcement, give the schools,
give teachers, you know,
something that they can actually
do with these children that are
coming to school high or smoking
marijuana at school or
possessing marijuana at school.
It's not so much the selling of
it, it's the using of it and
it's, it's.
Just not um something that's
conducive for a good learning
environment, um, or just even on
the on the streets so that's
basically essentially what this
bill's trying to do, again, the
records would be sealed, um, I
worked in the juvenile system
for many, many years, Madam
Chair and committee and these
are something that are generally
handled unofficially like a
minor in possession. I got a
minor in possession. It was
handled under fistally when I
was a child. It doesn't ruin
your life, I mean, or anything
of that nature, but what.
it does is gives the school some
tools to help deal with the
problems they're having in
school and then help um provide
resources to families if needed
through CYFD. And with that,
Madam I'll stand for questions.
OK.
Representative Block.
Thank you, ma'am. Do we go to
public comment?
We'll take 5 people in 1 minute.
Hello, chair, members of the
committee. My name is Mike
Ibizzini, policy manager with Bo
Futures from Albuquerque, we're
in opposition of HP 163.
Research consistently shows that
criminalizing youth for minor
offenses like cannabis
possession leads to worse long
term outcomes rather than
deterring future substance use.
According to the NE Casey
Foundation, youth who go through
the formal justices juvenile
justice system are 38% more
likely to be re-arrested as
adults compared to those who
received diversion-based
interventions. Furthermore,
studies from the National
Institute of Justice indicate
that youth incarceration
disrupts education and
employment opportunities,
increasing the likelihood of
chronic system involvement
instead of punitive measures,
the Office of
Juvenile justice and delinquency
Prevention recommends
community-based alternatives.
Please oppose, um, and this this
bill also ignores best
practices. Please oppose.
Thank you. Next.
Hello, um, Madam Chair
Committee. My name is Dean the
ACLU of New Mexico. We ask that
you vote no on HB 136. This bill
expands the type of delinquent
acts children can be prosecuted
for.
Concerning children and
possession of marijuana, there
is already a civil process for
children under 18 found to be in
possession of marijuana, which
incorporates evidence-based
responses, attendance at a
4-hour evidence-based drug
education and legal rights
course at no cost to the child,
and 4 hours of community
service, defining this as a
delinquent act exposes children
to detrimental and life altering
consequences. Possible
commitment to a placement out of
home, inability to get a college
loan, housing aid, and many
other other types.
types of jobs. These
consequences disproportionately
affect children of color and
those in marginalized
communities, missteps in
adolescence should not endanger
a child's opportunities as an
adult. Evidence-based research
continues to tell us that
criminalizing children and
incarcerating them does not make
our community safer or assist
our young people.
We want what we all want what is
best for the children in our
communities and throughout New
Mex.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook with the Law Offices of the
Public Defender, um, and I, I do
hear the sponsors, uh, reasoning
behind this bill, and I
understand that as a mother, I
would have concern if my child
was high at school, of course, I
will say as just sort of a
process reminder when the
cannabis regulation Act was
adopted by the legislature just
a few short years ago. It was a
very conscious policy decision
to make sure that juveniles in
possession, juveniles who are
just in an establishment that
sells a dispensary.
um, would not face a delinquency
proceeding, there is a previous
folks have mentioned the um
potential consequences. I
recognize that most judges would
probably not want to commit a
child for this offense, but it
does happen before cannabis was
legalized. We had juveniles who
were getting two-year juvenile
commitments, uh, for cannabis
possession, and so we don't want
to see a return to that. And if
we do need to have better access
to CYFD services, we would
recommend amending the current
civil
scheme that we have to add the
possibility of referral to CYFD
for services, but not
delinquency proceedings.
Is there anyone else in
opposition?
That like to speak.
OK, we'll go to um Zoom.
Is there anyone on in
opposition, OK, we'll go to the
audience now and those in. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, and New Mexico
State Police Department, uh,
public safety, uh, strongly
supports this bill. Thank you
for your time, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you. Anyone on Zoom in.
Support.
Did you have anything else you'd
like to add?
No, I'll stand for questions,
Madam Chair. OK.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative.
This bill is quite interesting
to me, Madam Chair,
Representative, I find it to be.
concerning right now, at least
from what I'm reading about this
legislation regarding Madam
Chair.
Oh, cannabis.
Is exempted, it seems like,
whereas.
If a child had alcohol, for
example.
That individual would be able
to.
some kind of penalty. So can you
just go a little bit into the
differences between alcohol and
cannabis, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair represented, yeah,
I, I try to compare it as to my,
it's kind of the same thing, but
cannabis, it is a civil penalty
is all in and it was stated, I
believe in comments that
basically you attend a 4 hour
evidence-based drug education
class.
Um, at no cost and for hours of
community service, um.
And you don't go through the
juvenile system or anything like
that, um, or get services, so,
but if you let's say you're
caught drinking at school, um,
they can call the police and the
police can, you know, cite you,
and you'd be referred into um.
The juvenile probation office
where they would meet if this is
something that they can provide
services to you and then if it's
something that I guess is maybe
you maybe you're, you possess
marijuana and you've had 6
referrals for something else
that could take you into the
juvenile system to where you
might actually have a petition
filed on you, but for someone
who's just possessing marijuana,
the intent of the bills to treat
it as a delinquent act so that
we can have a little bit of
teeth in it and protect our kids
and try to get them.
the help that they need through
the juvenile probation office
and the CYFD system, and then if
this is somebody who's, you
know, really, you know, has an
issue, it gives us the ability
then to also file a petition and
we can send them to treatment or
do whatever we needed to do to
help them, um, to where they
actually don't go into the adult
system right now there's just
nothing really that happens to
him to really make this
something that works and so I'm
just trying to make it a
delinquent act again, uh, Madam
Chair.
represent these records are
sealed, um, I in a sense
disagree with um the expert uh
from Public Defender. I've never
seen somebody go to to jail for
possession of marijuana only,
um, it's never even referred up
generally to the DA's office
unless there's a long history of
crime. If that answers your
question.
It does. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative, and
I appreciate that. And I also
heard a comment earlier and it
kind of disturbed me, to be
honest with you. They claim that
children of color.
Or disproportionately affected
by this, you know, some kind of
racist bill. Madame Chair
Representative of this state is
majority minority.
That's my
Pop that out there, Madam Chair.
So could you just address some
of that for me,
Madam Chair
or anything to to help deal with
the problem that we're seeing
with our youth now that cannabis
has been legalized, and this is,
that's as simple as it is.
Thank you, Madam Chair. No, I, I
appreciate that and kids can't
legally obtain cannabis
currently in the state. So
That could be any kind of kid
from any kind of culture or
ethnic background or anything
and not allowed to use I think
everybody on this committee
would agree it's not safe for
someone, you know, under the age
of 21 to be using cannabis or in
this case under 17 and under
what which is what this bill
actually addresses, um, so it it
really also is to protect our
kids, which is what the juvenile
system is for. It's for
rehabilitation, um, and that's
what we're, you know, trying to
do with.
this pill, madam.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
think that's a good, that's a
good goal. I think that's great.
I think that this would actually
Probably help from what I've
read. I do have some more
concerns and questions. So I'm,
I'm not an attorney. I just
always say that because I'm not.
So, I just want to make sure
that I'm understanding. So on
page 2, line 7, I see that the
bill strikes the previously
listed buying a tempting
By receiving, processing, or
being served any alcohol.
Alcoholic liquor.
As a delinquent act, however, on
page 3,
Pardon me, on page 3 line 2, the
bill adds language that
essentially reintroduces these
activities under a different
subsection. Uh, so,
Could you clarify what
substantive difference this
restructuring makes and does
this have an impact on
enforcement or penalties or how
juvenile cases are handled,
Madam Chair, Representative.
Sure, I was just wondering if it
changed anything when it comes
to enforcement, but if you're
saying that it's just moved over
to another page, then I, I would
assume that.
Doesn't make, OK.
No, that, that helps,
but doesn't change anything
about the alcohol.
OK, sounds good. And then on
page 3, I see on line 21, it
talks about.
Revisions about cannabis
processing, purchasing, but
there's an exception for minors
who are using cannabis pursued
to the Linn and Aaron
compassionate Youth Act, and
would you just be able to
elaborate on how verification of
medical use will be handled in
the in in practical terms, like
non.
Lawyerly terms and
Madam Chair and um
representative, uh, it, it would
be no different than it is now
if if a child has a a legal, you
know, reason to have cannabis or
a prescription for it or medical
cannabis, I believe now it, it
goes to the nurse and it's
distributed, you know how it's
needed to be distributed, so it
wouldn't affect anybody who
legally has a prescription, a
child for cannabis, and that's
what that act is.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. And
so I guess if a, if a kid was
stopped with cannabis.
do they have to say in the
enforcement of this, so they
have to say, oh, are you legally
carrying this cannabis? Or is
there some kind of revision to
to start that. Uh, Madam Chair
representative, they would just
say I have a legal prescription
for it and.
And they would basically.
Investigate that, I don't
believe an officer would ever
arrest somebody for that, they
might actually go investigate,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
whether that is true or if it's
if they're carrying the
prescription on them, um, it
should actually have, you know,
that it's uh legally prescribed
um cannabis, I'm sure.
Cool. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, cause I'm pretty sure the
doctors aren't prescribing.
Alcohol, but they are probably
prescribing cannabis, so.
That, that would make sense. So
they can't be like, oh, I got
legally prescribed alcohol and
it couldn't happen, right,
man? I'm sure I've never seen
a minor be legally prescribed
alcohol. Very,
very good for everybody around
the table here, Madam Chair. So
next here on page 4, line 17, we
have a definition of a
delinquent child as someone.
Who commits a delinquent act,
uh, can you just tell me a
little bit about where we got
this, this verbiage and how we
can
Verify that. Maybe it's
somewhere else in the law, madam
chair.
Madam representative block,
that's the, the definition
that's in the delay when a child
commits anything that would be a
crime, um.
As an adult, it's considered a
delinquent act and so that
that's already in statute.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK. So I know
that we've heard some
Some studies or not studies
rather, it's been
It's been evidence, I'd say,
from news reports where kids
brought cannabis to school, and
they
gummies, for example, and they
gave that out to one of their
classmates. And so Madam Chair
Representative.
In that instance.
If it was not legally obtained
because of course it's a child.
It's not within that act that
was excluded.
What would this new edition due
to change that, Madam Chair,
Representative, how would that
be responded to?
I believe, uh, well, there's a
couple of things, Madam Chair
and representatives, they're
still the page 3,
trafficking cannabis, um.
So that's in there already, if
you're trafficking cannabis or
giving it to somebody, um, under
this, this is buying attempting
to buy receiving that gives it
to you possessing it, um.
Would be what this would pertain
to.
So, um, if you're selling it,
Madam Chair and Representative
trafficking, cannabis.
Under 262C 28, Madam Chair
representative applies to
quantities extract or 6 g of but
this uh so basically refers to
be 15 ounces.
your question? It does. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, so I guess
trafficking is different than
just possessing. So if a kid
just brought it to school,
didn't tell anybody, had it in
his backpack or something, then
that would constitute
What would be changed in this
legislation, sir.
Perfect. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, and I
guess I had another question. I
know you, you mentioned the
words.
The acronym CYFD and I kind of
get.
ETSD from CYFD because met him,
it's just we have so many
problems at CYFD. So Madam Chair
Representative, I haven't been
able to look at the CYFD
analysis, and you just go over
uh what, what they would have to
do in terms of
Any kind of reporting when it
comes to this legislation
manager. Madam Chair, and
representative without like
looking at the analysis just
from my understanding of how the
system works, so juvenile
probation is under children,
youth and families so what what
happens is um when let's say a
child is sighted in for
possession of marijuana, as I
stated, the probation officer
again under CYFD, but the
juvenile probation office and
then they'll talk to the family
and they'll decide how they're
gonna handle the matter.
Um, whether it's gonna be, you
might just do community service,
it might be we need to send you
some outpatient assistance, um,
and so they do that first and
then um they decide if they're
going to refer it up to the
district attorney's office or
just handle it unofficially once
it's uh referred, if it's
referred to the district
attorney's office, the district
attorney's office can still, uh,
reject that and say handle that
unofficially and do the services
through through them and that's
generally what happens is most
DA's offices don't have.
the time to prosecute possession
of marijuana cases, um.
Madam Chair and represented.
OK. Sounds good, Madam Chair
Representative. It sounds like
they're already part of the
The process. So we're just
adding it to be equal to the
rest of the statues and, yes,
it's just the whole way the
system works, they're already
juvenile probation already falls
under children and families. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and then I'm, I
have another question here on
page 4.
I'm on line 12. We're talking
about being present in a
licensed retail cannabis
establishment. So currently,
Madam Chair, could a kid go to a
licensed retail cannabis
establishment since we don't
have that explicitly in statute.
Madam Chair, um, it would, and
representative it there would be
just a civil penalty, nothing
would happen, um, as and as you
can see, so what we're we don't
want children in licensed
cannabis establishments without
their parent and so and you can
see there's online 13 except in
the presence of the child's
parent guardian and so and so
spouse, um, so they can go with
their parent in there, is they
can't go in there by themselves
because it's it's not allowed
that they.
or by cannabis unless you're 21
years of age.
OK, that makes sense, Madam
Chair, Representative. I just
want to make sure it's not
currently OK to just
15 year old walk in and start
talking to a cannabis shop
owner.
Which would
Leave them susceptible to the
product, etc. So,
but you said it's civil.
Got it. OK. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
Representative. So I
To talk in numbers, but I guess
I will. I'm looking on the fur,
and it talks about CYFD PD LOPD
Office of Public Defender, and
then I don't think AOC had any
issues, but the public
defenders, they said that they
need a few.
few more dollars for this and
then CYFD said that they were
requesting some more money if
this was put into statue, and
you just go over that with what
that might mean, and it seems to
me like since it's not very
Large and it would pretty much
just be similar to the, the
alcohol provisions that it
wouldn't entail much more, but
could you just address that for
me. And just talk a little more
about it.
Thank you so much I do disagree
with that analysis, um, just
with my background in
prosecution and knowing what
gets filed in these types of
cases, they, they generally are
handled under unofficially, and
I, I, I disagree that they would
need a ton of money or attorneys
to to handle this, this issue.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. And I guess
that's just all across the
whole, the whole justice system.
They're all, they're always
needing more people to help. So
I think that that's not really a
A big concern of mine. I think
that they could.
Certainly continue their job.
Because they do it anyway,
right, Madam Chair
representatives. So I mean, it's
not like,
There would be a million new
cases on the first day of this
enactment is not what we're
looking at, Madam Chair, is that
correct, Madam Chair, I mean,
again, I would.
equivalent equivalent to a minor
possession of alcohol, um, you
rarely see those filed in uh
juvenile court.
Got it. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, and it looks like CYFD
claims that there's 828 to 900
additional cannabis-related
juvenile referrals, that seems
kind of high, Madam Chair
Representative. I mean, I guess
technically with cannabis
legalized now.
Maybe, but I've only seen a few
news reports on on stuff like
this. And it usually does hit
the news if a kid brings.
Annaist at school or something.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm just wondering,
I just want to make sure that
this, this actually would affect
Some people, but it wouldn't
necessarily put an undue burden
on anybody.
Madam chair and represent a
black guy, it it's kind of like
twofold, I I think those numbers
are very high, but if those
numbers are accurate, then we do
have a really big problem and
so.
That's, I guess how I would
answer that question back here.
No, I think you're right, madam
Chair. If you reverse, you
reverse it.
Reverse engineer it, I suppose,
yeah. If it is that high.
Totally, Madam Chair, we need,
you know, it's concerning. We,
we need this legislation to be
put on the books as soon as
humanly possible, and we should
probably put a in an emergency
clause on this thing or
something. So,
That, that does help me, man. I
won't suggest that though, by
the way, I won't suggest it as a
very unfriendly amendment, I'm
sure, but Madam Chair,
representative, I'll continue
here.
Um
So I, I know the public
defenders, of course, they said
that they'll be required more.
They'll need more defenders.
For the more charges, whereas
current law only employees,
imposes civil fines. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I, I don't
know much about
The children's code when it
comes to how that proceeding
would go, how would a proceeding
go for like a
A minor delinquent offense
versus something that is not as
currently, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair and
Representative, it's uh it's a
very fast process, and there's
time limits on it, so if you're
not in detention, it has to be
completed within 120 days, I
believe that's still the rule,
um, haven't been in children's,
that's what the rule has been,
and it's a basically two
hearings if you do a first
appearance, um, where it's
similar to what you would
consider an arraignment.
Um, but that the child entered
as a denim back for an
adjudicatory hearing if um
ordered and then basically that
what generally happens is a plea
of some sort where they're
placed on probation and and
given treatment, sometimes they
don't even have the second
hearing if you actually are
going to get to a court level,
it's it's called a time waiver,
and if the child just does
what's ordered in the time
waiver for 6 months, what to
skip treatment or whatever it
might be, in the case just goes
away and you don't even have to
go to court for that, you just
sign some paperwork, so
basically.
You're talking 2 extra 2 heroes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. That helps me a
lot. So to, probably 2 hearings
regarding this and
You know, probably enough time
just to get a case.
get the supporting documents,
any kind of discovery might,
might come up, so.
If you're the, you were a
district attorney, you know how
these go. So you think probably
22 hearings, and that would be
adequate,
Madam Chair hearings and
they are simple, simple cases,
and that's why juvenile court
with this type of stuff
generally goes to your brand new
prosecutors because that is how
simple these these matters are.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, yeah, you're
right, you're right. It sounds
simple because it's not
trafficking, for example, so,
unless, could you add this to a
trafficking charge, possession
to a trafficking charge to
increase it in some way, Madam
Chair Representative. It'd be
enhanced, I guess, madam, I
understand, I guess.
The trafficking is if they're
selling it.
Um, that is listed.
In here, at least if there's.
Page 3, but it would just be
simple possession. OK,
OK
what whatever is decided. So OK,
Madam Chair, so it's not based
upon the outage though.
OK, so mad I'm sure someone
could have like
25 blunts or something in their
backpack. Like, I literally got
a blunt delivered to my office
the other day, and I thought
that was very interesting. But
so if they had like a whole
backpack full of weed, edibles,
blunts, all kinds of crazy
stuff. It would just be with the
one charge that they'd be.
So it wouldn't be like
incarcerating kids for like
years and crap, or pardon me,
years and stuff.
It would just be one charge per
occurrence. Is that kind of what
I'm understanding
where you're gonna get yourself
in a little bit more trouble,
um, but this is just.
Possession, there's no amount in
their amount of chair
representative, it could be,
it's, it's not gonna.
Be charged very like, oh, you've
got 25 unless it, unless you're
distributing them and it equals
that amount in statute. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair
representative. OK, so that kind
of kills the argument that, oh,
it's gonna incarcerate kids and
be a lifetime of, of.
Be a delinquent individual and
stuff, so that kind of deletes
that I'm gone yeah, Madam Chair
and representative, it's just,
it's also just a huge problem
with the vaping of it and, you
know, we're constantly just
going to the schools and
collecting vapes with cannabis
in them and then this police
department destroys them and
then it's just this constant
problem that never. Well, thank
you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. And then another
question I had about this was
regarding the
The detainment
Madam Chair, Representative
detention facilities, where
would the child be detained
under the Children's code with
with this new change in statute.
Madam Chair Representative,
that, that's just the standard
language that's in the
delinquent detention facility
is, um, again, this would not be
a crime I would anticipate
anybody going to detention on.
I've seen that ever, so that
it's just standard language,
it's already in there.
Cool. OK, thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Representative
that, that helps. So currently
is in the Children's code,
you're not changing that, but I
know you're moving things
around, so the new language has
been copied and maybe not
copied, but
dam to where it flows better.
Cool. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. OK. I
mean, I guess I don't
necessarily see anything that
stands out to me in the bill
that would be like, oh, you
better not vote for this cause
It sounds like it makes it very
similar to the alcohol.
It makes it sound very
Non-punitive since it's only.
He occurrence and so if there is
a
Probably 3 or 4 different
occurrences of this.
It probably would be partnered
with some kind of trafficking or
some other kind of charges,
cause I'm sure a kid wouldn't
just be stopped repeatedly,
just.
Having him and I'm sure I mean,
the hope is that if they can get
them the services they need, um,
but yeah, if they do it 4 or 5
that a petition is filed so that
we can order them into some type
of treatment, um, but it, it's a
case, it is, I do like under the
age of 18, but when you're 18 to
21, you go through magistrate
court and there are just certain
things you have to do very soon
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but these, you
said that these would be sealed.
Except if you want to buy a
firearm if that bill gets
passed. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I think that that helps me a
lot. I think that that clears it
up for me. I think it just makes
it simple.
Makes it very equal. And I think
if this is a problem in schools,
as actually by the analysis is
said, about 900 kids would be
affected a year. Seems like a
lot of kids and a lot of people
that we could actually help not
go into the justice system for
the rest of their life and just
stop it now and nip it in, nip
it now, and I think that that
would be very.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the answers I, and I
might, might have a question
later if if something pops up
during the rest of the
discussion, but I reserved that
right. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Hopefully, I didn't make too
many statements.
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So
Representative Block asked a
whole bunch of my questions, but
I want to ask a little bit about
the diversion process because in
my district in Torrance County
because we had those illegal
grow houses. The biggest problem
that they had Maur
representative that was reported
to me from teachers and people
that work at the school is that
those people who are working in
the farms were selling marijuana
to the kids, so we have a lot of
children that are using
marijuana, which was, you know,
was.
sentimental to a child's brain.
There's tons of research.
To my chair and representative,
but what I'm trying to get at
is.
When somebody's picked up on
this in a possession or buying.
Well, because I know the
children's code is very how does
a diversion work and as you
said, it was a case by case or
is it mandatory or how does it
work for a kid to make sure that
we stop them at age 1112, 30
for.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
it would be case by case, I
wouldn't even say they'd be
picked up, they would be
sighted, um, and then, and then
summoned into the juvenile
probation office, and then
that's where they'll make the
determination of where they're
gonna try to get the help and,
and so it would be generally a
diversion type thing through
juvenile probation, so they're
gonna say, hey, you know, let's
do some outpatient counseling or
let's, what do you need to try
to fix this problem and then um
if that can be done, that's what
we would consider diversion, and
then if.
actually let's say have a
petition filed, um, then we
would try to divert them also
into treatment or whatever might
be needed, uh, for their thank
you Madam Chair representative.
I appreciate your expertise on
that because
Somehow there seems to be this
illusion that Gail for the rest
of her life and.
Understand that there is that
diversion process because we
have somebody like that.
Matures and they've seen a huge
uptick in kids smoking pot since
they put on all those illegal
grow houses there. So it wasn't
that kids were going out and
getting.
Before that, it's that that was
offered to him because it's
there.
I mean, they're everywhere. It
should be very hard to cut a,
well, one was heavily guarded
with AK-47s, so maybe that might
be, but a lot of these grow
houses right by the street,
they're easily accessible.
Some representatives, so.
The reason I'm asking about this
is because of what the statement
I just made about.
The illusion that these kids are
being.
Yanked other families, see
what's involved in this other
stuff, which isn't the case. Is
that correct, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, and representative, I
don't believe that's the case at
all. I mean, as I stated, I
mean.
I use myself as an example when
I was young, I had a minor in
possession of alcohol, and what
they did is they called me into
the JPO's office. They talked to
me, you know, I had to do some
community service and I turned
out fine, um, I think it's just
one of those things that it's a
case by case thing and and we're
trying to help the kids cause
it's a rehabilitative system,
especially when we're dealing
with things like this, um, the
ones that go to detention and
are arrested and that we keep in
detention are the violent
offenders. We don't even have a
detention center in my
jurisdiction.
you have to drive to Farmington
Lee County, somewhere like that,
so they're sure not gonna be
driving a kid for possession of
marijuana and detaining them,
um.
Uh, in in my jurisdiction
anyway, right? Me
representative, especially
because I'm part of Albuquerque
and.
Shortage of law enforcement is
and we have other things going
on I think.
child that they catch in
possession or buying and take
that.
Yeah, I would imagine it'd be
more maybe the person selling
and that was one of the
questions I wanted to clarify
with you.
And I think Rivers have blocked
it, so if you can answer that
briefly. So there wouldn't be,
well, I guess it's gonna be case
by case so it's not really a
question, because this doesn't
address traffic, Madam Chair
Representative, no, it's just
possession because uh again on
page 3, trafficking cannabis is
is added, um, is in that
already, I mean I'm sure
representative is.
Trafficking.
Hope is trafficking, if, if a
child is trafficking.
Marijuana
We've been selling bootleg
moonshine, which we have in
towards County.
Um, is that already a crime for
mine.
Well, for sure, for.
That that is one of the uh
what's listed, um, madam chairs
That that is one of the uh
what's listed, um, madam chair
sorry madam chair, um, on page 2
to 3, so there's a list of
crimes
that
and that is the trafficking
cannabis, so um.
That is already a crime that is
already a delinquent act.
Um, it's just the possession is
not.
Can you show me it's on page 2.
You just said something
which line is that
1, page 3, sorry sorry, started
3, so trafficking.
It's already an offense.
So what you're trying to do in
terms and if I understand this
correctly, you're trying to
make.
Now possession of alcohol, which
in every, I mean, sorry,
possession of cannabis.
Because we already have
possession of alcohol for a
minor, which is really crime. Is
that correct? So you're just
trying to match it up
delinquent.
Trying to get madam chair just
trying to match that electrical
thinking of possession of
cannabis by a minor.
Yeah, in mentor representative
in California they do throw.
OK,
I'm grown out of that.
So man representative, so we
already have trafficking.
Cannabis is.
Illegal and under the delinquent
Act we have.
Alcohol
For a minor
Is illegal. So you're saying
that the next logical step is do
cannabis since we deregulated
state. Is that correct, ma'am?
Madam Chair, um, treat it like
we treat our.
OK, and this is one of the
questions I had, um,
Madam Chap representative, so
when.
It would have to be something
really egregious that child was
in possession of a large amount,
which would indicate
trafficking.
Or maybe be
Have multiple counts.
Where there may be an issue
where CYFD is even involved in.
Is that correct, Madam Chair,
um, representative in my
experience, yes. OK.
Dementors and you're just
looking at somebody who is a
minor.
Which should not
In possession of alcohol. I
mean, sorry, same.
I
I like the word pot.
Call it reefer, I guess, but um
they're in possession of THC.
Related products. So what you're
doing is just making an equal
to.
To the fact that they can't have
alcohol when they're minor
either. So you're trying to
match it up.
I'm sure anything that else that
you wanted to add to this cause
I think rips a block and I went
through this.
Quite diligently and it, it just
makes sense.
Can't be a minor in possession.
Cannabis.
And, and that's it you're you're
not allowed to do it now, we
have said it's civil, but it is
such a detriment to.
Like you said, child's brain
development, what they're having
to deal with in the schools
we're just trying to give also
the the schools a tool to um.
Help deal with the problem
they're dealing with it, maybe
it's a family member that's
giving it to the child and
that's all the stuff juvenile
probation will help figure out
and and how to make that
situation better and so that's
what we're trying to do.
Madam represent kind of wrapping
this up. Have you seen any
studies that show that marijuana
is good for kids under 18.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
haven't like I, I know it's not
good for kids under the age of
18, and I assume that's it's
under the age of 21 to be in
possession of it, right? And
that's my point, my chair
representative, all the studies
I've read, it's extremely
different.
detrimental to a child's brain
and does a lot of huge changes,
um.
Things you can't come back from.
So I understand. I mean, it's
just like we wouldn't want kids
to.
Fentanyl, heroin, anything else.
We don't want, because I think
at the end of the day as a New
Mexicans, we want to protect our
children. We want to make sure
That they're not smoking
cannabis. They're not in
possession.
We want to at least with the
word juvenile system is set up
to give them a diversion or help
them or try to get them on the
situation, do more investigation
of what is going on with this
kid, why are they now?
In possession of marijuana.
Leading towards
Worst things in the future and,
and how much marijuana they're
smoking because in Torres
County, I'm being told these
kids are smoking marijuana all
day.
Manager, um, that that and
representative I've heard that
and I've heard they're using it
in an elementary school.
And Medicare groups in my last
question, uh, it.
I know we had somebody from the
state police here say they were
supporting it, EPS so there are
other justice, there's other
people that are supporting Madam
Chair representative um I've
talked to DPS, um, they're in
support of it, obviously I'll
talk to a lot of law
enforcement, they feel that will
give them the tools to also
assist the schools, you have
school resource officers, so
I've gotten a lot of positive
feed our, our schools, our
communities, um and especially
for kids.
I'm a representative whether the
things that comes to mind is if
we do nothing, if we don't pass
this, then that means kids know
they can be smoking pot all day.
There's no repercussions,
correct, Madam Chair,
represented, they, they will
have to go to a 4 hour class
civilly and um.
Madam Chair, they have to attend
the 4 hour evidence-based drug
education and legal rights
program at no cost and 4 hours
of community service currently,
so there's and then if they do
it again, I'm assuming they just
would go to the class again,
yeah, that's that this gonna be
my next question, which, as you
know, as kids are probably
gonna.
I was a kid, I probably would
have smoked pot before I went to
the thing and watched the stupid
video and done my stupid uni
surface, which I wouldn't have
cared about at all because I
would have just gone right back
to what I'm doing. What I see is
what you're trying to do, state
police agree and DPS agrees, and
other law enforcements to agree.
This is just another tool to get
people into a system where we
can get them the most help.
Hopefully get them into a
diversion. It's actually
something real and try to
Stop someone in my er and this
going down.
lead to something much bigger
than that.
Madam Chair Representative, yes
like the comments that were
made, we're trying to do the
opposite of that.
Keep them out of the system and
help them. Right. And that's
what I see our juvenile system
is about.
At least not.
Brush the kids, but instead look
at their life, look at their
household, look at what's going
on, look at, you know, I like to
think in an altruistic world
that some magical person would
come in a superhero and say,
wow, your parents are problem
and they need parental help and,
you know, you need this, you
need that, but it doesn't at
least this is something.
To hopefully get the kid of a
path of
doing drugs, doing so cannabis
that I'm jealous of something
else you want to add.
Anyone else.
Madam Chair, move do pass
substitute motion to table.
OK.
Motion to table, um, proceeds.
Take roll.
Representative B block.
No to table.
Representative Lord, not the
table for an explanation.
Representative Romero.
Yes, to table. Representative
Thompson. Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes to table, Madam Chair, yes,
to table.
Represented
Um, blocked explained or no
representative Lord to explain
her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative boy, we just sent
a big old message to kids, just
keep smoking pot cause ain't
nothing gonna happen to you.
Wow, what a message to send our
kids. You cannot be in
possession of alcohol, but smoke
all the pot you want.
That's all I gotta say on that.
Stand school don't do drugs.
you
You have a, um, 4 to 24 in favor
to oppose.
Um, to, um,
I'm sorry, uh to table House
Bill 1608.
What 63.
That's OK.
Next we have House Bill 190
victims of Crime Act changes
representative Hochman B. Hill
to present.
Anytime you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, pleasure to
see you guys again, and you guys
put in some long hours.
That's all up to you.
Um, we are here to discuss House
Bill 190, um, and so what House
Bill 190 does is it makes some
uh key changes to the New Mexico
victims of Crime Act. So first
I'm going to go into what the
New Mexico Victims of Crime Act
does it protects the rights of
crime victims and helps them
navigate the criminal justice
system. The act also provides
financial assistance to victims
of violent crime.
Um, it also requires them to be
treated with respect and
fairness, to have their case
handled in a timely manner.
To be protected from their
accused to be informed about
case proceedings to attend court
proceedings and to.
Um, this bill adds 2 additional
crimes within the purview of the
victim's Rights Act, I'm just
gonna abbreviate it as VRA one
battery upon a healthcare worker
and 2 human trafficking.
Uh, the bill also authorizes
attorneys to appear on behalf of
victims in proceedings occurring
under the Act and to make
statements. It prohibits
notification of less than 7 days
of.
It prohibits notification of
less than 7 days of proceedings
occurring under the Act except
for an exceptional
circumstances.
Allows the victims to appeal a
court's decision to hold a
hearing under the Act with less
finally, it creates a private
right of action and way of
sovereign immunity for
violations of duties or
deprivations under the rights of
the Act.
Um, Madam Chair, at this time I
want to introduce the two
experts at the table with me to
my right. Um, so, sorry, one
expert.
That you're gonna have to. This
is, um.
We have two experts. First
expert is Althea Allen. She's
from the, um, New Mexico
Department of Justice, and we
also have Linda Atkinson, who's
the executive director of the
New Mexico Victims' Rights
Project and with that we stand
for questions.
Thank you. Did you want your
experts to say anything or just
to take questions. If you want
to make a statement,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, my name is Alicia Allen. I'm
the solicitor general for the
New Mexico Department of
Justice. I'm here today to, in
support of this act.
Um, the New Mexico Department of
Justice is grateful to
Representative Hochman V. Hill
for her sponsorship of such
important legislation, it takes
a prior work that this
legislature did in codifying the
victims' rights guaranteed by
our Constitution and just
provides enforcement mechanisms.
Ultimately, the bill provides
for more effective and more
efficient paths to ensure
victims' rights are protected.
The amendments set forth in the
generally expand the crimes to
include crimes that were added
to our laws since this act was
last amendment amended. Uh, it
allows victims to have an actual
voice in court proceedings that
are covered by the BCA. It gives
force to the minimal time frames
already established in the act,
for notice to victims to
participate in the proceedings,
a clarifies the existing right
to speak during court
proceedings, and it provides for
accountability to all of us. We
should be ensuring that victims'
rights are honored.
Thank you for your time and
consideration today.
Thank you.
And, um, Miss Atkinson, OK.
May I
Oh, yes, with the mic. Can you
hear me? It's right there.
That way you don't have to bend.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Uh, working in victims' rights
enforcement for the past 30
years after the constitutional
amendment was passed, we see
violations.
Continually in every
jurisdiction around the state.
And the harm it does to victims
is in a sense a chilling effect
where they don't want to come
forward when they know they're
going to be treated so poorly
through the system. Any
protections we can offer them
and help make these laws
meaningful is important.
So, I just wanted to quickly go
over the purpose of the act,
which is what we're talking
about, which
I hold for just a second? OK, we
got the zoom back on. I mean the
webcast.
OK. Go ahead. Sorry. So having
these enshrined in the New
Mexico Constitution, they have
been merely words on paper and I
just want to reiterate the
purpose of the act, which is
one, to bring the full impact of
a crime brought to the attention
of the court.
Victims of violent crimes are
treated with dignity, respect,
and sensitivity at all stages of
the criminal justice process
that victims' rights are
protected by law enforcement
agencies, prosecutors, and
judges as vigorously as are the
rights of criminal defendants.
These rights, like I said, have
been silent and to see some
protections in this bill are
what we need to see, make them
more meaningful.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition to this spill.
Would you like to thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Kim Chapezook with
the Offices of the Public
Defender. We certainly don't
oppose, uh, beefing up
enforcement of existing rights
that exist in the Victims'
Rights Act, but we do have some
concern about the expansive
scope of HB 190. It's important
to remember that victims are not
actually parties to a criminal
case and prosecutors do not
represent them as a client under
the American Bar Association's
Criminal justice standards, the
prosecutor serves the public and
not a particular witness or
victim.
This basically makes victims a
party to what is a two-party
adversarial case, which really
kind of turns upside down how
the criminal justice litigation
process works. So, we do have
some practical concerns about
that, although we do think that
we do understand the motivation
to make sure that the existing
rights are enforced. We don't
think this is the way to do it.
And we also have concern that
the legislature making such
sweeping changes to how
litigation happens is going to
present a separation of powers
problems. So
We look forward to during the
interim, perhaps working with
folks on a way to do this that
would not present those
problems. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else? OK, is
there anyone in
Opposition on Zoom.
OK, one person.
Harry Bucalo.
OK. Then we will go, um,
Uh, people who are in the
audience and support.
Raise your hand.
OK. And you're witness.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Frank
Zubia, director for the New
Mexico Crime Victims Reparation
Commission in 2015, New Mexico
passed the human trafficking
where we could provide
compensation to victims of human
trafficking. This is just, it's
taken us now 9 years to make
sure that we can address the
issue where they are treated as
victims of crime.
When the crime Victims Act. So
there's a lot of ketchup that we
need to do, unfortunately, when
we change laws, sometimes we
don't look at both the
reparation commission and then
also the Crime Victims Act
because they're totally
independent, but I, I stand here
in support of this bill. I think
it's long overdue, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you. Anyone else?
One person, go ahead.
Carry Bucolo.
Hello, Madam Chair and committee
members. My name is Kerri
Bucalo. I'm an army wife, a
mother, an author, a speaker,
and an artist from Albuquerque,
New Mexico. I'm also a survivor
of violent crimes as a child in
the state of New Mexico.
And I feel that I've had a
horrible experience in the court
systems over the last 22 years
of facing my rapist in court.
Um, he was convicted, uh, tried,
convicted and sentenced to a 18
years in prison back in 2015. 5
years later, he went to the
appellate court and had all his
accounts repealed um and I was
not notified. I didn't know
anything about it. Um, I was not
able to uh make preparations or
get help or anything. And so I
felt like my rights as a victim
were severely neglected, and
um, I would really like to be
treated as a person, and I would
like my rights as a victim to be
safeguarded, and I feel like
the, the statements in this
particular bill would really
help a lot of people, children,
um, vulnerable persons are just
victims of crimes who really
need these laws to be
strengthened so that we have a
voice. So, um, I would really
appreciate you all taking into
consideration, passing this so
that victims can have a voice
and we can be present and also
be notified.
When our perpetrators are going
to court for any reason. Thank
you so much.
Thank you.
And one more, OK.
Go ahead, you have one minute.
Enrique now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Enrique Ellen. I'm here
today on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We do support House Bill 190 and
the efforts by the sponsors to
help victims of crime by
expanding the scope of crimes,
ensuring participation and court
proceedings and making it much
easier to obtain assistance, uh,
to obtain assistance through the
victims of Crime Act. Uh, first
of all, we do agree with
Attorney General Raul Torres
when he says the victims should
be at the forefront.
of our judicial system. He says
that it's been far too long that
our system is focused on the
rights of the accused, while
victims and their families have
been left behind. We're also
especially supportive of adding
healthcare workers to the group
of workers protected by the act,
as well as victims of human
trafficking. Both both are
groups of people that we should
zealously protect. We stand in
support of House Bill 190, and
we respectfully ask for a due
pass. Thank you.
Anything else?
OK. We'll go to the committee,
um, representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Madam Whip, good to see you
here. Thank you all for being
here. A few questions to start
out, of course, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, I'm looking
on page 3 of your bill.
And dissected it.
Takes out the word armed.
And I'm just wondering if uh
This could be clarified on what
the change would mean sentencing
wise regarding enhancements, and
especially where cases are using
a deadly weapon where that's
involved. Could you just give me
some information about that,
madam Chair, Madam Whip.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, um, I will
defer to my expert on that. Yes,
madam Chair Representative.
If I understand your
Question correctly, the, the
impact of removing armed from
the statute is is to expand the
crimes that are covered under
that, so that robbery is also
would have victims' rights under
the statute.
Um, if it's perpetrated against
them.
And I think you asked a second
question, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you so
much. No, I was just asking
regarding sentencing, Madam
Chair, and how would, how would
that change it? But it seems
like it's currently not.
In this statute, when it comes
to just regular robberies. So if
it's not armed, it's just
Regular robbery, I suppose it
would not fall under this, but
we're trying to expand that to
just add robbery, that kind of
what I'm understanding on that
word. I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
so, um, the change essentially
is where armed robbery used to
just be the only uh crime under
the purview of the act would not
just, it would now be robbery.
Change anything to do with
sentencing and only that would
be within the within the purview
of this.
OK, got it. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Representative.
And then
That helps me, I think we made
another change. A battery upon a
healthcare worker has provided
in section 30-3.99.2, and I'm
just wondering, Madam Chair, of
that changes this. Are they
currently not included?
Adam.
Madam Chair Representative
Lo
exactly so currently neither
battery upon healthcare worker
nor human trafficking are um
crimes.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and are these
based upon like statistics of
just people that that have
needed this and it's not been
included or have we talked to
advocates or why is this
changed? I mean, I support it.
I'm just wondering if it's
something that's a large problem
in our statement, I'm sure.
Thank you Madam Chair,
Representative Block, um.
So firstly, it's my
understanding that the
legislature has taken action and
either changed definitions
within battery and healthcare
worker or created the crimes of
battery on a healthcare worker
and human trafficking
definitions and crimes, so this
is just um.
Making the victim's Rights Act
current to the.
New Mexico Criminal Code as it
stands today as it is getting
anything else.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
that's, that is correct, and,
and I would add that, um, as the
Department of Health has noted,
there have been a lot of
increase, um, crimes against
healthcare workers and so I
think that is a concern for
people and of course human
trafficking now that it is a
crime on our books um to make
sure that that's included in the
victims Against Crimes Act.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair.
Representative, expert, so on
the same page we're talking
about the word victim.
being modified by the word.
person instead of an individual.
I mean, it, it seems like a
really small change. Can you
tell me legally why, why we
changed that verbage.
Ma.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I, I believe I've seen this
actually in a lot of legislation
this year, um, I, I believe it
is just a shift to recognize, I
think it's just for consistency.
I, I don't think there's any
legal impact that's intended by
that change.
Madam Chair, representative, I
think it's a drafting, it's for
consistency and drafting and
stuff.
OK, that helps with that. I just
was wondering cause I've seen
that too in a couple of bills
and I was wondering, OK, is
there a big legal difference
between a.
Person in an individual. I mean,
it could be an individual like
can't charge anyone but humans,
so I, I don't know. So.
Sorry, we're getting on a
tangent there. So on page 5,
Madam Chair, representative, uh,
the bill strikes the language
that limited the victim's
representative to only
individuals.
I think it replaced it with.
Person as well. So, I guess.
Was that just a similar change
or was that just
To keep consistency. That can be
a yes or no.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK. Sounds good, madam Chair,
thank you. And then I see that
we're updating like gendered
language here in the statue
later in that page on page 5,
Madam Chair.
Representative
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I see on page 6,
on the top of page 6, it says a
victim designates.
Or a court order points the
victim's representative who is
the attorney authorized to
practice in New Mexico, they may
file a pleading or appear or
otherwise speak on behalf of the
victim in the court proceedings.
So Madam Chair Representative,
so I know that this bill is
giving them the right to face
their
The person that did this to
them, this would just waive that
right to give it to an attorney
if if they still are inclined,
are so inclined, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair Representative
Locketman, to be clear that the
the right has always been there
to face, um, the, the
perpetrator, all this is doing
is making it clear that if the
victim were to so choose, they
could, uh, engage a
representative, be it an
attorney or someone else to.
Um, to also.
Step in and um utilize.
Their rights on
If they don't want to do it
themselves. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. So
currently they couldn't get an
attorney to represent them to do
this.
Madam chair Representative, I, I
don't think it was expressly
prohibited, I think it's more
that we're making it this law
that that it is.
OK. OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
Good to hear that we're just
clarifying on there. I'm gonna
go down to line 10 on page 6.
Where it says a clerk of court.
We're adding a clerk of a court.
Can you just tell me a little
bit why we've changed that since
I, it would be on my
understanding that you are
filing something with the court,
it would be the court.
Not necessarily a person at the
court. So is, is that just
You just go into that for me,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Represented the
block, so um this kind of gets
more into the meat or the
substance of this bill, so
we're, we're talking about, you
know, requirements that courts
have to meet in order to um.
adequately give victims the
ability to face their
perpetrators as stated in the
VRA right so clerks are
typically the people in a court
who are given the responsibility
as part of their job of making
these notifications and making
them on time and so because
we're, we are creating a private
um cause of action in this bill,
we want to make sure that the
scope is narrow and that the
person who, whose job it is.
to make these notifications if
they are not doing their job
that they.
That person is the who would be
targeted for a private right of
action, not an entire court.
It's not gonna be a judge. We
don't want to be suing the
clerk, the judge, the bailiff,
it's just a clerk.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So I'm just
wondering currently,
In the state, has that happened?
Have we had cases where the
victim sued the entire building
of folks who work at the court
or or multiple people and
wouldn't this be restricting
that victim's right if an
individual did indeed have some
something pertaining to the
judge or or the bailiff, for
example, and wouldn't this
actually be Madam Chair, uh,
representative Block, it's an
interesting point, but again,
going back to the, you know, the
purpose and the scope of the
bill, especially as it relates
to notice.
So allowing victims the
opportunity and the notice to
appear.
Um, you know, again, that is a
responsibility of the clerk of
the court, whether or not other.
causes of action arise.
During those responsibilities
that others could be held
accountable for, I don't know
and I don't, I don't I have any
specific cases I can think of,
but I will defer to my expert if
she, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for your question, um,
there currently is no cause of
action for victims and so when
they're their rights are
violated violated under this
act, they haven't, and I don't
believe they they feel that they
can bring a cause of action, so
there is no cause of action
against the clerk, the whole
court, a judge, except for there
have been
a couple of instances, um,
including, uh, most recent, uh,
couple of instances recently in
Las Cruces, where um a judge.
Scheduled a probation release
hearing for a sex offender, um,
the victims were not informed,
it was it was under the seven
days and the way that that was
handled at that time was, um, an
extraordinary writ was brought
against the judge to the Supreme
Court and so right now, that's,
that's the only known option,
that's the only, I should say
option that's written on the in
the law for victims to exercise
their rights, and it's supposed
to be an extraordinary petition
and extraordinary writ and.
enforcing a victim's rights
should, um, in that case, the
judge himself was named Judge
Riggers, um, but.
The whole court was not in that
case named.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair.
Representative, OK, that makes
sense. And you, you said an
extraordinary writ, and you, and
you go into that a little bit
regarding, I think it's the word
extraordinary or exceptional
circumstances, this is
pertaining to something else in
this section, but I think it
could maybe, I don't know, I'm
not an attorney. I apologize. So
it could maybe be something
connected. Can you just tell me
a little bit about what that
would entail for the victim.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
can you give us a page and I'm
so sorry, on page 6, starts on
line 20. It's in section 3B.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Bloch.
I'm gonna defer to my extra
exceptional circumstances is not
here, so, um, I think it would
be on the discretion of the
court as to what extraordinary
circumstances would be.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you for
your question, um, the
extraordinary writ and these
exceptional circumstances are
distinct things, so an
extraordinary writ is a way that
you can apply to one of the
appellate courts, um, if you are
seeking uh a rid of
superintending control, for
example, to say that one of the
lower courts is not doing what
it's supposed to be doing,
that's considered an
extraordinary writ, and that's
just a way to try to ask one of
the higher courts to address
issues that might be happening
in one.
The lower courts where there
isn't a cause of action or there
isn't something on the books
that lets you know how you can
do that otherwise, um, the
exceptional circumstances in the
bill um online 20 is addressing
when a um.
When for some reason, the court
doesn't feel like it can give
the victim 7 days or really the
district attorney's office 7
days who will then turn around
and tell the victim within a
reasonable amount of time, um,
the 7 days before a scheduled
court hearing, um, this bill is
saying that that should only
happen under exceptional
circumstances and uh
representative is right that
that it's not defined and that
that is generally to the
discretion of the court.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So, OK,
regarding the exceptional
circumstances later in that
section or later in that.
Paragraph, it says on page.
6:39 24.
An appeal shall be taken de
novo, and if that appellate
court finds that
Exceptional circumstances did
not exist, and I noticed.
Period shorter than 7 work days
was not required.
Court proceeding below.
And the outcome of the court
proceedings shall be vacated,
and a court shall be ordered to
reschedule the court proceeding
with at least 7 days.
Working days notice. So Madam
Chair Representative, I guess
I'm wondering, since they have
to start new.
No vote. They have to start new
in the case with the appeal.
I'm wondering, could this be
used as a
tactic to delay.
Kind of what I'm understanding
from what I'm reading, Madam
Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative
block, so, um, again, we have to
remember that we're within a
very narrow scope here the
spill, so the thing that we
would be delaying is whatever
hearing that notice that notice
requirement adheres to, right,
so, um, you know, an appeal, we
would not be doing an appeal de
novo on whether or not, um, that
defendant is guilty. We would
not be doing an appeal de novo
on whether or not other criminal
proceedings were mad or were not
met, we're only.
appealed de novo on whether or
not exceptional that court.
Believes exceptional
circumstances existed that led
to the waiver of the seven-day
notice requirement.
So that's the only thing that
would be reexamined anew.
All right. That, that does help
clear that up for me. Thank you
so much.
Madam Chair, Representative.
OK.
Sorry, I'm just trying to find
my notes here.
I'm sure, OK. So,
As we were looking at that
section, Madam Chair.
Representative, so we're doing,
we're going down to the next
section in section 4 on page 7.
And this talks a little bit
about the crime to be or the the
ability to be present.
At the proceedings. So, I'm just
wondering that previous section
where it said,
They could have someone stand in
for them.
I'm wondering how this affects
that with this new section.
The language in the section page
7 line 10 to 15.
Just, can you just give me a
little more information on how
that may affect.
previous section that we just
went over.
Madam Chair Representative
Black, um, I'm not sure I
understand your question. I
mean, so looking at the
language, the victim has a right
to be present and make a
statement personally or through
the victim's representative. And
so what we just established in
the previous section is that
they may a victim may have a
representative, so all this is
stay there representative has a
right to be present and make a
statement.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, and I, I don't.
I just don't understand. I mean,
I get it. Like they have both,
but why not just say that in one
section? Because, I mean, it
just
Seems a little
Like it's copying itself, you
know, it's kind of saying the
same thing over again. This is
victims representative and then
previously it says.
The victim designates.
They can have a representative.
So why not just say they have a
representative and not put on
page 5 and 6 that they can get
a, I, I don't know, I guess.
Just
Reading the bill forward, it
just seems a little
Like it's duplicative, but
That's interesting. So, OK,
Madam Chair Representative, it
says a victim requires language
interpretation services or other
services necessary. So Madam
Chair Representative, what, what
requirements does the court have
to meet to be allowing that in
the court? Is it just whatever
is on the books regarding ADA
accessibility, or is there some
other kind of legal standard for
inclusion of folks who may need
a special.
circumstances to
Have that voice be heard, Madam
Chair and.
Madam Chair, representative, so,
um, I mean, I think the language
here is brought by design and
that any anything necessary to
allow the victim or the victim's
representative to be there at
the court to make their
statement is the standard that
has to be met, right, so if that
person, um, you know, requires
um interpret interpretation,
interpreter services, or let's
say they are visually or hearing
impaired, um, those measures
would need to be taken.
So that so that that victim is
allowed to deliver their
statement.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative that.
That helps a lot. And then down
at the bottom of the page, then
we're talking about scheduled
court proceeding.
How does this affect the current
proceeding.
Since, of course, all
proceedings are scheduled.
Madam Chair representative, can
you give me a page and a line?
Oh, I'm sorry, page 7, next
page, or it's the same page,
page 7, line 22 to 23.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
Representative, can you repeat
the question? Yeah, so I'm just
wondering why we're putting the
word scheduled court proceeding
in there because in the in the
actual.
Paragraph, it says
But at any scheduled court
proceeding at the top line 16,
so I'm wondering why we're
repeating a scheduled court
proceeding since we've already
established it was scheduled.
Uh, Madam Cher, I'm gonna defer
to my expert on that one, I
don't know.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for your question. Um,
I think that that's just for
clarity to make sure that that
it's clear on the books that is
for scheduled court proceedings,
although almost all of them are
scheduled. It's this is making
sure that since there is a cause
of action as a part of this
bill, it is clear what the cause
of action, Madam Chair
represented exactly right, so,
you know, we're requiring, we're
talking about uh uh a required
amount of time.
For notification, can't really
have.
Prove that you've met that
required amount of time unless
it is scheduled here and I want
to make that. No, that clears it
up for me. I just, I just wonder
why it's in its current statute.
scheduled court proceeding in
that same paragraph, and it's
not.
On the bottom, but that, that's
just good that we're cleaning it
up. Next on page 7, line 25, it
says the court shall or the
court may instead of shall. So
I'm guessing that gives a little
leeway to the court regarding
the proceeding and continuing
with the proceeding.
But it also reserves rulings
until the victim has been
notified. So, uh, Madam Chair
Representative does that.
How does that strengthen
The victims' rights when it
comes to.
The ability to have a little
more.
I guess scheduling help instead
of a very strict shall, it turns
into a May. What, what does that
do? What does that change, Madam
Chair, and representative.
Madam Chair representative
block, that is a textual
question I'm,
thank you for your question, um,
I think you're exactly right
that it, it provides the court
with a little bit more
flexibility. If you look at the
bill as a whole, um, it requires
the court to do certain things.
It requires a district attorney
to do certain things and in this
case, the district attorney is,
is the office that is required
to inform the victim of these,
um, hearings and so the court
may proceed even if the district
attorney hasn't complied with
its obligations, but
Um, then the court may order the
district attorney to make sure
that the victim has been fully
informed and provide the victim
with its options under the act.
OK, that does help and that
makes sense that we're giving a
little bit more clarity and
flexibility. And then down at
the bottom, I guess this is
probably the big, the big
question, big elephant in the
room.
I think this is taking away
sovereign immunity.
Can you tell me a little bit
about that on section 5.
Starting on line 17.
23, since it says nothing.
And the victims of Crime Act
creates a cause of action on
behalf of a person against a
public employer, etc. So,
Can you tell me a little bit
about why we've taken that out
and then what will that do at
least on the state level or the
public level.
Municipality, etc. How will that
change it? I don't check.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Block, and thus
is really the crux of the entire
bill and and the issues, so, um,
what I'm gonna talk a little bit
about what's happening
currently.
And that, you know, we have the
the this law that says that
victims have these rights to
make statements and appear at
these proceedings and um when
they are not receiving.
adequate notification and they
lose out on the opportunity to
Let their voice be heard at
these proceedings.
There's, there's nothing's
happening.
They have no recourse, they,
there, there's there's no
ability for them to hold anyone
accountable other than just
saying like, hey, you didn't
allow me to do that and I have a
right to do, we pass the law
says I have a right to do that,
so, um, what we were doing in
section 5 is, you know, the
sovereign immunity is kind of
the the de facto position
governmental agencies unless we
make an exception in the law,
right? So what we're first doing
is taking away the sovereign
immunity in the.
were saying that a victim may
bring an action against the
state or political subdivision
because they both hold hearings,
right? Um, for violation of the
VRA. And so I, I think it's
really important to talk about
what that looks like, um, in
reality.
I know that we heard a little
bit before about how this
disrupts the the civil procedure
of how these cases are usually
handled, I would vehemently
disagree and that all that we're
doing here is we are giving
victims a cause of action and
ability to probably seek what we
call an injunction, right? Or
something, a piece of paper that
tells the court or a court
clerk.
Hey, you have to do this. You
have to meet the notification
requirements of the VRA or you
have to do this over again
because the notification
requirements of the VRA weren't
met, and so that's, that is the
crux of section 5, that's
exactly what we are trying to do
here is this is giving teeth.
An ability to do something if
that right.
If the victim
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, and then
I'm, I'm looking on here.
Last page, page 9.
Regarding the filing of a
petition against the state.
And it seems like really low
amounts of money for.
Penalty, like 500 bucks.
Will this even affect anybody if
it's such a low amount, will it
even deter?
State agencies or whatever,
whoever it is, from violating
again, Madam Chair
representative.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and um, you
know, going back to what I
stated previously, I mean no
$500 penalty is not a lot, but I
don't think.
That I don't think the main.
The purpose of this law is to
impose a fine or, you know, make
a monitor monetary uh
reparation, I think really the
main purpose is to give victims
an ability to do something if
they're rights are violated or
they're not getting the
opportunity to be heard and so
really again it's giving them
that action, that ability to
file for an injunction, remember
injunctions tell courts or
parties to do something or not
to do something.
Um, that is really uh.
Really kind of the the meat on
the bone.
here.
Cool. OK, thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
Representative, OK, I get it. I
understand. I just want to make
sure if it was intended that
way, then it would need to be
substantial, right? So, that
helps me a lot.
And then I guess I'll just leave
the analysis for other members
to ask about, but I think that
that kind of covered the bill
and I thank you for your, your
questions and I was a little
confused in the middle there, we
kind of, I was like, OK, why is
it a little duplicative, but I
think it's, it helped me a
little bit and I'll continue to
listen to the debate before I
make a decision, but thank you
so much, Madam Chair.
Representative.
Our representative Lord.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative expert. Um,
I do have a few questions. Um,
was there a reason why we were
removed?
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
uh, we took out armed robbery to
um just make robbery be within
the purview of the act so that
actually expanded the scope of
the crimes that are um under the
party chair so I want to go to
the AOC reports.
There was a technical issue and
I was trying to find it. It was
one that a block and I wanted to
ask again on this one.
The AOC.
Can't find it now.
They had a technical issue still
with the person.
Yeah
Before I'll come back to that,
let me go ask.
So the AOC had.
There was some fiscal
implications and then they go on
to the significant issues.
Um, it looks like 3rd page.
So it says Madam Chair and
representative and what I'll do
is I'll just go through this and
you can answer the questions.
That the AOC had HP 190 changes
the notice provisions under
section 31-26-10.
Crime Victims Act already
requires support to provide 7
working days' notice prior to
the scheduled court proceeding,
attendant to a criminal offense,
legislation carves out a limited
exception to court finding, and
exceptional circumstances and
determines that a shorter notice
is reasonable court finds
accepts seeing with less than 7
days' notice and holds a hearing
without a victim present. Victim
can't appeal. You want to
address this from the AOC.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Lord, I cannot stand in the
shoes of AOC, so I, I mean I
can.
Pontificate on what I think
they're concerned if you're
comfortable with that or if
that's, you know, the scope of
it.
Question, I'm not sure.
To address the concern because
for me to make a decision on
this is a very technical bill
beyond my pay grade, which is a
legislator 0,
so.
So yes, if you can answer that,
some of the questions that they
have this issue is with because
they have quite a few
significant issues.
Pages of significant issues.
Madam Chair.
This concern, these concerns are
true in their context, so
an intercutary appeal basically
means that you were able to stop
whatever the proceedings are
happening within that trial and
appeal a very particular issue
up to an an appellate court and
the appeal, the the the trial or
the matter at the lower court
stops until you get an answer
from that higher court on the
issue that you appealed, right?
So I think what AOC is saying.
is because this creates a a
right of.
private right of action right of
action, right? That a party may
be able to um.
try to appeal the court's
decision that um extraordinary
circumstances.
Existed to the fact that a
victim's rights to notice were
waived, that that might.
slow things down.
Create and require judges to
look at.
Moorish.
OK, so because I'm not a lawyer.
So.
We have these specific, so
there's a case, but then they
can appeal within.
There's something within that
thing that can appeal.
Madam Chair Representative, so
yeah, it's usually on an issue
of law, right, and
interpretation of an issue of
law, and so if you have a judge,
you're in the middle of of a
trial or a matter or a hearing,
Judge makes a ruling on that
issue of law, and let's say one
of the parties disagrees with
that ruling, they can then
appeal that particular issue
as an intercu.
appeal up.
I'm not, we'll just call it a an
an IA, let's call my mouth is
not working today either, uh,
um, that that one of the parties
can take an IA up to an
appellate court to have them
make a decision on that
particular issue that's being
appealed.
I understand. Thank you for
clarifying that. So ma'am.
So this creates a new appeal,
right?
Is this gonna be brand new with
this, if the spills passed, this
is now.
Because that's what they have in
here in section.
F3B creates a new appeal of
right.
There's something new that's
being added that they're trying
to say.
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
take a stab at it, and then I'll
I'll defer the expert, but
again, remember right now
there's no mechanism of
enforcement, so we have this law
that says that you have a right
to do this thing, but if you
don't get.
You, you lose that right,
nothing happens. There's no
mechanism for accountability,
so, um, I would say yeah, we are
creating the ability to take an
appeal on the the court's
decision as to whether or not.
Those circumstances existed to.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, that's
exactly right, so with, with
this type of appeal, it's an an
added right, a direct right of
appeal of interlocutory nature
so that interlock just basically
means we're in the middle of a
case.
Um, but it is a right, so, so
the AOC was right that normally
interlocutory appeals are.
Um
Optional, the, the appellate
courts can choose whether or not
to take those this law would
would not make it optional. They
have a right to appeal, but only
in those circumstances when the
district court has found that
there were extraordinary
circumstances such that they
couldn't provide the victim with
7 days' notice of a scheduled
court proceeding. So it is a new
appellate right that's being
added, um, but it's for this
very limited thing that that
occurs in in very limited
circumstances.
In terms I'm trying to wrap my
brain about that one specific
thing.
Because I know that that was one
of their.
Concerns in there.
This is kind of um
representative and section C.
OK, it says right that the
appeal shall be taken. OK, I'm
gonna ask a dumb question. What
is de novo mean? I'm gonna be a
lawyer, but I'm finished with 10
years of this.
Madam Chair, Representative de
novo means like.
From the beginning, so, um, they
will hear the issue, that you
get it, it's a second stab. You
get a second stab at presenting
your case.
To whatever it let's say the
appellate court.
As to whether or not that
exceptional circumstance.
Should or not, I'm gonna ask
her.
Question
You brought this bill forward
because there was a need, Madam
Chair Representative, this bill
came forward because we were
seeing a systemic.
Um, violation of victims rights
as spelled out in the VRA to
make statements and to face
their acute face the uh
perpetrator.
At the time, this is a problem
that keeps happening. Notice was
not going out, people were not.
People didn't know that these
hearings were happening, so
they're missing their chance,
right? And again, we passed this
law that says that they have a
right.
To make these statements, but if
they're never getting
notification.
Um, that these hearings are
occurring, we, you know, we're,
it's unfortunate we're here
today.
And that we have to consider a
law.
To do this, but it's, it's kind
of where we are with this right
now, yeah.
I'm sorry. I had to sneeze, hold
on.
OK, it's gone.
Um, representative, so when you
go down to E says HP 180 does
not specify a time period for a
victim to bring such an appeal.
So
This thing moves forward and now
you're trying to get back.
Madame Chair Representative, um,
I'll defer to my expert. I, I
know how I would like to answer
it, but I'm gonna defer to my
experience.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for your question, um,
no, it won't create that kind of
a problem. The, the law
regarding appeals both in the
statutes and the rules are
already set, and so this creates
a right of appeal, but then you
would look to the laws regarding
appeals to figure out how to
proceed with your European, so
it doesn't specify a time
period, but the law says a
direct right of of appeal unless
otherwise stated. You have 30
days. And Madam Chair
representative, that's also in
our rules, you know, appellate
rules in the state of New
Mexico.
As well.
Madam Chair on the next page
from AOC.
I'm not gonna go through all
this, but in section 3, you're
talking about section 4 unit
victim.
And
They list
The following rights, and then
there's a part that's
highlighted, which I assume
they're trying to say is they're
having an issue with it.
To make a statement in the court
sentencing and any
post-sentencing hearing for the
accused.
You know why this would have
been highlighted, why they would
have an issue with this as
pertains to your bill.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I am taking a gander that, um,
this is highlighted because post
sentencing hearings can mean
probation and.
Man,
I, I, I'll add that I think that
they're also highlighting that
that which already exists in our
law, this is part of the rights
that are identified for victims,
um, they're saying that it, it
seems like the right is just for
sentencing and post sentencing,
and that this new edition is to
say for any scheduled court
hearing, but that's not
completely accurate because um
the section to which they're
trying to add the any scheduled
court hearing already does.
recognize that right as well so
that there already is an
expansion of that right in the
bill.
As of 2003.
Are there other states that do?
Madam Chair, uh, representative.
my other experts, I'm Lynn,
they're probably right now about
30 statute and there.
Provisions they're dealing with
is a certain protect these
rights. It's sort of like a
first to protect them.
That's what these do. It isn't a
party, as I heard public
defenders, they are interested
participants.
as such
And
I just have a few more
questions. My voice is going.
Make sure they have lots of.
Or
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um.
There was one other
from the
OK, they just had some issues.
OK, it looks like I can't.
I'm sorry, I cannot figure out
what they're trying to say in
this one because it looks like
they're trying to support it but
not support it at the same time.
So I'm just gonna kind of.
Man, so I'm just gonna say real
quick, I, I have a very you've
been far for I have a very firm.
Um
My strong nose.
Maybe one time I did vote on a
bill that I didn't know every
detail my voters let me.
So this one I was hoping that I
could get a hold of my friends
that's in courts right now to
talk with them about some
issues.
Might be a yes when it moves
forward, but right now just
because I there's a lot.
They need to understand more
about it, but I do, I very much
care about victim I'm gonna, I'm
gonna pass on this until I get.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative, um,
and experts are bringing this
forward.
Um, I think most of the bill is
pretty clear and really
appreciate the updates to I
think the majority of um a
process that um I don't know
when the last time this statute
was updated, but it, I mean,
even the way it reads
grammatically happy to um make
those changes. I think the
majority of the question that I
have um is regarding this, um,
and then we've heard about it,
but I would just love to.
Try to understand cause it, it's
unclear to me how this appeal
works when a victim is unable to
act or their third party agent,
whether it be a lawyer or
another attendant appear on
their behalf.
What is the vision for how this
appeal is meant to, um,
Work because it references the
appellate court, but it's not
actually the proceeding itself
in this criminal context. It's a
separate appeal, what happens to
it?
Um, and, you know,
Yeah, first, what happens to it?
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, that's actually an
excellent question, and I'm
going to defer to my expert who
can maybe break it down
procedure.
Thank you.
Um, when you file this kind of
appeal.
Um
It would
Pause the proceedings, the Court
of Appeals, which is where this
would go first, um, handles
interlocutory appeals more
quickly than other appeals, it's
a priority type appeal,
precisely because of that,
because it does pause the
proceedings and they move
quickly on um determining how it
should be handled. The the
courts, both appellate courts
are very aware that there are
real people involved in these
cases and they try to do
whatever they can to address
that whenever possible. um, so
in this case.
A notice of appeal would be
filed and um depending on the
judicial district because
there's a pilot project
currently pending in the Court
of Appeals, there might be a
brief filed docketing statement,
but the issue would be raised,
um, to the degree, uh, different
process should be considered
that that's something I think
that could be considered either
uh in statute or in rule, um, to
streamline this process, uh, and
so that the time frames could be
a little bit more quickly moved
along, um, but the way that
This had been brought up in a
lot of cases recently is in um
postconviction proceedings, not
habeas per se, but, uh, for
example, lifting probation for
the sex offender, that kind of
situation, um, and so the timing
wasn't as much of an issue in
that context.
Um, so I'm not sure if I fully
answered your question as far as
the process is concerned. And
and I guess I'm just curious,
Madam Chair, representative, why
we didn't put that process in
the bill as far as just being
able to understand what that
would look like, since it's, uh,
what we're hearing from a lot of
the different analyses is that.
And and taking a step backward
is first, how do we qualify the
victims, um, representative. I
think that's the first question
I should have asked that first
in the process. And then
following that is how does that
inter interlocutor, uh.
It
that the interlocking appeal
interlocutory appeal, how would
that, um, how would that
proceed? So let's go back first
to on the
Talking about having a um.
A victim, um, represented in
court proceedings, um,
How
Mhm
We don't have any specificity
about how that.
Um, representative would
determined and where in the
process they could step in, um,
And certainly what kind of um
motion that they might be able
to bring in to to that court or
not motion, but rather what
information they could bring
into that or proceeding. Um.
Can you talk about what, how
that would work, and I'm just
reading from the FIR um.
On page 4,
the second to last full
paragraph on just trying to
understand.
What we're supposed to do in the
criminal context for how
Um
The victim's attorney or their
representative would be able to
appear in court.
Um
You guys
Mare representative, I'll just
give a quick caveat before I
hand it over to the expert, but
I mean, I, we just.
Um,
Procedure or proceedings are,
you know, one of those things
that we definitely flesh out and
rule.
Um, you know, we have rules for
procedure, we have rules for
appellate procedure and so, um,
I could not even begin to speak
as an expert on what is
appropriately flushed out in
statute versus what.
You know, AOC and and the rules
of of procedure should, what
they should contain, but um.
Extra analysis, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you for
your question. I think that as
far as the question of how and
when a representative is brought
into the whole proceeding that
would be when a victim feels the
need to have a rep it's one sets
one into place so it could be at
any point in the proceedings,
um, and I think that that you're
right, it's not clarified in the
bill intentionally, um, to, to
allow that to happen at any
point where a victim may feel
that they need representation,
um, as far as the specific
process of how these.
proceed, I think that the
expectation was that, um, to the
degree, something is not
expressly laid out in the bill,
then you would just go back and
defer to the basic law on how
these things proceed. So how an
appeal proceeds you would look
at statute 3933, or you might
look at, you know, Rule 212201,
depending on on what you need as
far as the question of how
victims and the representatives
could file pleadings in the
cases and and what kind of
documents that they would
insert, uh.
It, it, the intention is, and I
think that the bill states those
that are covered by the Act. So
it's not just anything they feel
like it's it's when their rights
have been violated under the
act, then they may say something
within the proceedings.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um.
Expert
Um
I think when we're talking about
the limitations on how expansive
this could go when we're talking
about the proceedings themselves
in the.
I think the guardrails that
we're looking for on.
Referencing, I think those that
same procedural law, at least
helps us sort of understand the,
the confines of what that can
that representative do or not do
in that proceeding, especially
in the criminal context, which.
I think
We just, we need to know our
referencing that point and I'm,
I'm, I, I'm sharing the concern
with the LOPD on on that part.
Um, just the
You know, what is the, what are
those pleadings look like? And
what are the contexts with which
we're allowing or disallowing.
Um, certain information to come
and, and at what time and, and
just so we are following, I
think a consistent procedure for
each of those.
Um, situations, um, and then
thinking about
We and, and when and how those
um.
Uh
Different motions may come in.
I think we need to just be
really clear about
How um
How that process would take
place, because right now what
I'm understanding is that we
don't know if the victim's
attorney could cross-examine
witnesses during a hearing or
trial as that representative, as
the victim advocate, and I think
those guardrails on, you know,
when we're talking about when.
The victim has that um.
You know, the, the check and
balance through the process.
I'm, I'm not clear on the
process at this point with, with
the bill. So, um, is there a
willingness, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, um, as per what
we heard from.
LOPD and and some of the other
folks wanting to clarify the
separation of powers situation
and look at what um.
We might be able to clarify
within the context of what that
procedure might be.
Um, is there a willingness to
work with them on helping.
At least on balance work
together to understand with
clarity what that looks like,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, I actually think you
raised an excellent point.
Um, I think that there could be
some language added to the bill
that um that clarifies exactly
what statutes and, you know,
procedural rules that we are,
uh, referencing so that
There is this fear that it's an
overly expansive application is
um assuaged so um I as a sponsor
them more than happy and willing
to work on an amendment to add
that language to make crystal
cable, so, um, it's it's a, it's
a welcome suggestion, um.
We procedurally Ma. I'm not sure
how you would like to proceed on
that if you want us to work
first we can all come back or we
could.
I think it would be um more
assurance for us to vote if you
um roll it for now and go ahead
and um see what, you know, uh.
Amendment or uh uh committee
substitute, whichever, you know,
works out to be the best and,
and then we'll schedule you back
in.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you we'll do that.
Thank you.
Hey, next we have um.
House Bill 197 expands silver
alert definition of
representative Sanchez.
Madam Chair, are you ready?
Yes, go ahead.
I'd like to uh introduce my
expert witness, Mr. Tommy
Hernandez, he's with the
Alzheimer's Association.
Uh, about 4 or 5 years ago, I
passed the silver alert bill for
those of you that aren't
familiar with it, uh, it's
similar to a number alert. I'm
sure everybody knows what that
is, uh, a child goes missing.
Or uh his kidnapped, they put
out this alert.
Uh, we did a similar bill for uh
people with uh cognitive issues
like Alzheimer's or dementia if
they go missing.
Uh
But this bill intends to do is
uh further improve and expand
the bill.
Actually it was 2019 and this
was passed since its enactment,
uh, most individuals who went
missing were able to rejoin
their loved ones because of the
expanded eligibility proposed in
the 2019 bill.
It's a lifeline that has been a
matter of life or death.
Today, uh, there's a need to
improve the bill more, um.
This uh fix, madam chair comes
from a.
Uh, some issues that have
arisen, uh, particularly with
people I know.
I know, uh, one friend in
particular had a a grandparent
that went missing.
For over 15 hours, they, uh.
We in Albuquerque and they were
found in Van, New Mexico, the
next day.
Uh, they called in the silver
Alert and they would not put out
the alert because uh the person
wasn't medically diagnosed.
With, uh, a cognitive issue like
dementia or um.
Alzheimer's
So the language that we are
proposing, uh, it clears this up
by saying they show signs of
cognitive decline.
That we, uh, uh, this doesn't
prevent someone from being
found.
Uh, the concern with that case
is uh that person uh shouldn't
have been driving, um.
Also they their life was in
jeopardy for for that that day
they were went missing.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'd like to
hand this off to my expert to
see if he wants to add.
Madam Jar members of the
committee, thank you so much for
agreeing to hear this bill
today. We feel on behalf of the
Alzheimer's Association and, and
all of the families impacted by
some form of dementia, even if
not Alzheimer's disease, which
is the most common form, we feel
that there certainly is a
critical need and this bill
brings forward a simple solution
we feel I'd be ready to stand
for questions, Madam Chan. OK.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition
anyone?
On
OK. Um, is there anyone here in
support? It looks like we can
take a minute from each person.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Oambaumi,
advocacy director for AARP New
Mexico, uh, we represent 240,000
members statewide and we have a
certain interest in protecting
and ensuring the safety of our
older New Mexicans, especially
veterans with PTSD and other
elderly individuals and so uh
this bill being able to broaden
the scope of, of inclusivity to
really allow uh folks who who
need it and to protect their
safety, we really think this is
an essential.
and we, we certainly support and
ask you to pass the bill. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Anastasia Martin and I'm
general counsel for the aging
Long-term Services Department
encompasses adult protective
services, Aging does support
this bill, as it does expand the
definitions related to the
silver alert, and ultimately
will likely help keep seniors
safe. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm with
the New Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living. We
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this legislation forward. We
support
Any legislation that helps
ensure the safety of seniors in
New Mexico, and we urge you to
pass this legislation. Thank
you.
OK. Anyone on Zoom?
One person, go ahead.
Admin
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee,
sponsors, members of the
audience. My name is Nat Dean.
I'm a disability advocate and a
person with multiple
disabilities also happen to be a
senior, um, I think that
anything that we can do to help
locate a loved one who's gone
missing it's very important and
I think that this added feature
will help with uh missing elder,
but I have a concern a little
bit on the fence of if
We have so many different
variabilities within the alerts.
Does the alert then become
unnoticed or unresponded to, and
that is my only concern, but in,
in other aspects of this, I
support the bill. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair, members of
the committee sponsors and
audience.
OK, thank you. Is there anything
else?
Representative
Sorry, uh, not sure.
You're days like the rest of us.
Is there anything else you'd
like to add before we go to the
committee, not right now, Madam.
OK, thank you. Um,
Representative block.
Madam Chair, I move with you
pass a second.
Uh, is there any opposition?
Seeing none
You have a due pass.
Really,
I know
my favorite 197 on a vote to
nothing
you do classes for other folks
on how to get their bills in and
out, please.
Next we have um House Bill 204
refusal of certain pretrial
statements.
And um just to let everyone
know, um, since.
It's almost um.
Well, close to 5 and
most likely will take an hour,
um, this will be our last bill
for today.
And the others will be rolled
Um, it
It means till the next time we
can um.
Put it in agenda or, you know,
when not be tomorrow.
Right.
So
Yeah, so I'm sorry, you'll have
to watch for it on the um.
Yeah, the committee agenda.
I was trying to think of the
Goldenrod, that's it. Yes.
0, 204. Yes.
Madam Chair, let me, uh,
whenever you'd like.
You can turn your mic on.
Is that better? Yes.
They don't move, you have to
just.
No, because everybody was making
so much noise, so you just have
to the mic you can.
OK. All right. Go ahead. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
I am here today
to present House Bill 204, which
addresses a critical gap in our
criminal justice system's
treatment of crime victims.
Today, victims of violent crime
face not only the trauma of the
original crime.
But also the very real risk of
re-traumatization through our
criminal justice process.
Under current law, victims,
including children,
Can be compelled to undergo
multiple pretrial interviews,
often having to account their
Traumatic experiences repeatedly
before.
Before
Ever stepping foot in a
courtroom.
This repeated questioning
doesn't just cause emotional
distress. It can trigger severe
psychological consequences,
including increased anxiety,
depression, and post-traumatic
stress disorder that, uh,
persists long after their case
concludes.
For child victims, research has
consistently shown.
That multiple investigative
interviews are particularly
harmful.
During their interaction with
the justice system.
House Bill 204 offers a
thoughtful solution to this
problem.
While carefully balancing the
rights of the defendants.
The bill would first grant child
victims and child witnesses, the
fundamental right to refuse
pretrial interviews, protecting
our most vulnerable victims from
unnecessary trauma.
Second, insure adult victims
have the right to refuse
pretrial interviews, while
providing an alternative process
for court approved written
interrogatories.
Third, established clear
protocols for cases where
victims do choose to participate
in interviews, including the
right to have an advocate
present.
And the ability to terminate
interviews if needed.
This bill represents a carefully
crafted balance between
protecting victims from
unnecessary trauma and
preserving the integrity of our
criminal justice system.
Similar protections have been
successfully implemented in
other states.
In fact, 47.
Leaving New Mexico, just one of
3.
Improving the reliability of
criminal proceedings while
protecting victims from
secondary trauma.
The state has a compelling
interest in protecting the
health, privacy, and dignity of
crime victims throughout the
criminal justice process.
At this point in time, what I'd
like to do is to have my expert
witnesses.
Make some introductory remarks,
particularly about how this
Proposal is constitutional and
how it does not violate the
rights of the defendants.
Um, so I'd like to pass it first
to Mister Sean Sullivan with the
New Mexico Department of
Justice, and then to Savannah,
Brandenburg, Coke.
Uh, with the 2nd judicial
district attorney's office.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Dixon. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Sean Sullivan.
I'm a special counsel with the
New Mexico Department of
Justice.
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to be here to speak
with you all on what I think.
As one of the most important
obligations that we have.
Electively as public servants.
As to be a voice for and fight
for.
Those that find themselves in
vulnerable circumstances and
those that cannot fight for
themselves.
And that's what victims of crime
are.
They're individuals who didn't
choose to be put in the
situation they were put in.
Someone chose forth and then
their task with navigating a
complex world of law
enforcement, medical
professionals, attorneys.
courts
All while having to relive
incredibly traumatic experiences
over and over.
over
Uh, Representative Dixon.
Uh, did a great job of, of
laying out some of the specifics
of the bill and I'm sure we'll
have an opportunity to speak
more about that, but I think
it's important that we start.
I sort of level setting and
being clear on the terminology
here.
Uh, it's, it's very important
that we do not think of pretrial
interviews as a right.
of a criminal defendant.
They are not.
Rights are fundamental
entitlements that individuals
have by virtue of some supreme
authority, such as the
Constitution.
Defendants clearly have
constitutional rights in
exercising.
The defense, right, they can
compel witnesses, they have a
right against double jeopardy.
They have a right not to be
subject to unreasonable searches
and seizures.
That's uncontroverted.
This does not touch that.
What's less well known, I think,
in what you've heard a little
bit today in an earlier bill is
that victims of crime.
Have constitutional rights as
well.
They have the right to be
treated with dignity.
be treated with respect.
Have their privacy considered.
Those constitutional rights of
victims are under our state
constitution, and neither the
defendant nor the victim's
rights are supreme to the other.
A common refrain that I hear and
and I'm sure that some of you
all have read, uh, in analysis
is that uh this bill may
infringe.
On the right to confront
witnesses against the defendant.
That is untrue.
New Mexico's Supreme Court has
been incredibly clear on this
point.
The right to confront witnesses.
Under the Sixth Amendment to the
United States Constitution.
And the New Mexico Constitution.
Only applies at trial.
Where guilt or innocence is at
issue.
It does not cover pretrial
proceedings.
And that's what PTIs are.
They're pretrial.
That's not my opinion. That's
not an attorney arguing to you,
that's the New Mexico Supreme
Court from 2013.
There is no constitutional issue
at stake here.
This comes down to a policy
question.
When you weigh the
constitutional rights and the
privacy and the dignity of crime
victims on one hand.
And the discretionary privilege
that is pre-trial interviews on
the other.
I feel very confident that.
Our communities would come down
on the side of protecting
victims of crime.
HB 204 strikes the appropriate
balance. It allows us to support
victims
while not sacrificing those well
established constitutional
rights of defendants.
On behalf of the countless crime
victims.
We've advocated for while at the
New Mexico Department of
Justice.
And as well as the district
attorney's office, we humbly ask
you to support this bill.
Thank you.
Chair representatives. My name
is Savannah Brandenburg Coke.
I'm a deputy district attorney
here in this.
In the second judicial district.
I am the supervisor of our major
crimes division, specifically
our special victims unit.
I have been in that position now
for 4 years and have been
practicing with special victims
for 8 years.
Best practices when it comes to
interviewing children is that
their interviewed by.
People that are trained,
specifically trained.
And what we see time and time
again is that even before they
reach that trained professional
is that they have spoken to 7 to
10 people prior to even getting
there.
That is, after they have
disclosed sex abuse.
Physical abuse, anything else.
That they are then questioned by
a teacher, possibly a principle,
a nurse, law enforcement, or
resource officer. CYSD.
Family members.
They're non abusing parents or
none of.
Parents that are are helpful.
That's more than the people that
should be asking them questions
that then put them in these
traumatic.
Places where they they then
cannot continue through the
justice system or setting them
up to fail instead of protecting
them.
Supporters of pretrial
interviews would say that.
This is a way to pro victims to
get a story from them or to
prepare their defense.
And I will tell you in my
experience.
That is
Not the truth.
That they use that time.
To embarrass them.
to mislead them and to ask them
developmentally inappropriate
questions.
They rarely
They rarely ever even ask about
the crime charged.
They never ask about.
What they have to defend
against.
They usually ask.
To get that victim to not
cooperate.
To be scared
And to be confused.
situations I have witnessed
firsthand of this process.
A defendant who was charged with
multiple counts of criminal
sexual penetration where the
child was under 13 years of age.
After
Having countless interviews,
statements that the defendant
had to prepare his defense.
She then started to engage in
self harm.
And when asked if she could not
do her pretrial in her in which
she was made to do her pretrial
interview. She then.
Attempted suicide and ended up
in the hospital for months.
Which resulted in a dismissal of
the case.
Because of her mental health
because of this process.
That's just one time. I can talk
about several times where kids
were.
Self-harming because of this
process ended up in the
hospital.
Not just self harming because of
this process.
Throwing themselves to the floor
during the pretrial interview,
having to escort defense
attorneys out of pretrial
interviews.
Because their safety was at
issue because of the traumatic
events going on and the only
thing that the pretrial
interviews do.
is embarrassed the victims. It
hurt the victims.
They're not a helpful tool, and
they're rarely a truth seeking
tool or defendants.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, we
would stand for questions.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
in um.
Opposition
OK.
You like to
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook with the Law Offices of the
Public Defender.
I
I'm a little bit um.
At a loss for words, but I, I
want to make clear that I don't
deny or doubt.
The veracity of statements that
these, these bad actors exist,
that there are attorneys who,
um, abuse the opportunity of a
pretrial interview. But please
let me make clear that that is
not the general rule. That is
not the standard of practice,
and that is not how anyone I
know was trained to do pre-trial
interviews. If that is the harm
that we are seeking to address,
then we need to enact a law.
That provides for a structure
for these interviews that
doesn't allow that to happen,
and provides for remedies to
address it when it does, but
taking away the rights of all of
the clients of all of the
lawyers in the entire state of
New Mexico to an interview.
Because of a handful of bad
actors is wildly overcorrecting
the problem.
And I really want to push back
on the idea that this, that
they're not constitutional
rights at issue.
They're absolutely are, and we
have case law that says that
denial of a pretrial interview
as a denial of due process.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone else?
OK.
Madam Chair and committee
members. The ACLU, I'm sorry, my
name is Deanna Warren. I'm a
staff attorney with the ACLU of
New Mexico.
The ACLU respectfully stands in
opposition to HB 204, the
criminal legal system is
incredibly taxing and
traumatizing for all of those
involved. The ACLU supports
measures that mitigate the harm
of these systems for both crime
victims and the accused.
However, this bill represents
the wrong approach in attempting
to minimize the harm of, of the
process of criminal prosecution
on the crime victim. This bill
creates and further harms.
To crime victims and defendants.
The bill presents serious
constitutional concerns for
people accused of crimes. New
Mexicans accused of a crime have
a constitutional right to mount
a defense to those charges, and
in New Mexico, the, the
pre-trial interview process is
an integral part of executing
that constitutional right.
Additionally, the bill will
result in significantly more
criminal trials, requiring the
crime victim's first experience
with the defense attorney in the
case to be in the public and in
an adversarial setting.
While the ACLU supports
strengthening reasonable
protections, um,
To the conditions of pre-jail
interviews, um, the wholesale
prohibition of these interviews
is inappropriate and
Is there anyone on Zoom.
Is there anyone on Zoom against?
in opposition.
Diane McCash.
Um, good afternoon, committee.
Um, I'm Diane McCash.
And of course, people who are
victimized by crime need care
and consideration, but as I
thought more deeply about this
bill, I tried to imagine what
could happen if my son, who's a
black man with a few drug
convictions in his past, was
accused of a new crime and was
as many black men are confused
with another person. How could
his defense attorney mount a
robust defense if they are
barred from potentially critical
pretrial interviews, and how
could any defense attorney do
the due diligence that's
required of them for their
clients to.
And what if I were a victim of
crime and said no to a pretrial
interview, and the first time I
had to answer those questions.
was in the courtroom without a
support person or someone to
keep things civil or stop
questioning if it got too
intense. I don't think this
would help my future victim self
if that should happen, and I
fear this could be extremely
harmful to people accused of
crimes and their ability to
build a robust criminal defense
to which they are
constitutionally entitled. Thank
you. Please vote no.
Alright, then we'll go to um
those in support in the
audience.
Good evening after 5. good
evening, Madam Chair Al Park
registered lobbyist on behalf of
the city of Albuquerque, um, we
stand in strong support of the
legislation, we certainly are
aware of some of the concerns of
the opponents, but I think that
the uh the experts articulated
very well why it's important to
protect a particularly
vulnerable to ensure that they
have an opportunity not to be
re-victimized as a result of a
crime. So we stand in support
and we urge this committee to
pass this legislation. Thank
you.
you.
Thank you. Anyone else? OK, is
there any
Carry
Bucalo.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Carrie Bucalo, and I am a victim
of violent sexual crimes as a
child in the state of New
Mexico. My first interviews
began when I was 13 years old,
and um my dad's trial and cases
continued, um, for the last 22
years, so I'm now 42 years old,
and I'm still fighting my dad in
court because the laws in the
state of New Mexico uh defend
him.
Much more than they have ever
defended me as a victim, and I
just want to share with the
courts that I have been
subjected to so many pretrial
interviews throughout my life. I
can't even count them on both
hands. It's in the dozens. Every
time the defendant thought of
something new, I was called back
in for, for questioning. And um
just as, um, just as was
mentioned earlier, I have, I
suffer from anxiety, from
stress, from post-traumatic
stress, and
Every time I re-traumatized by
these pretrial interviews. I um
am not available for my husband,
for my children, um, and it
really takes a lot out of me.
And I've, I've always wondered
why I've never been protected,
and why it seems the criminal is
always has so many more rights
than children do in the state of
New Mexico and I just wanna to
hit home that I am like Victoria
Martin's, except I lived.
And I truly feel that
If she lived and survived what
she went through, she wouldn't
be able to survive the courts in
the state of New Mexico, because
of how hard it is for children
to fight for justice, even when
they grow up and become adults.
So I just want to share that
with you. I represent a lot of
children in the state of New
Mexico who just want
Help and loss that will protect
us. Thank you.
Thank you. Yeah.
Carla Santag.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. It's
actually Larry Sontag here,
speaking as a better Together
New Mexico advocate and a
retired law enforcement officer.
There's not a lot I can add. I
wanna thank the bill sponsors,
Representative Reed and
Representative Dixon, and
Representative Dixon did a great
job of describing why this bill
is important and especially for
juveniles to be opted out of the
pretrial procedures. Uh, when I
was with Albuquerque Police
Department, I interacted with
many victims, the stories that
you've heard from victims
tonight are real. It is
definitely a problem at this.
bill would fix. I encourage you
to listen to the expert witness
from the New Mexico Department
of Justice who clearly
articulated that the
Constitutional right to
challenge a witness applies to a
court hearing.
Not pretrial.
I urge you to support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Admin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, sponsors, uh,
members of the committee, um,
advocates. My name is Nat Dean.
I would change it, but the
system is not letting me, um,
not change my name, but change
the identification of myself on
Zoom. I'm a person with multiple
disabilities. I'm also
disability advocate and in
trying to assist people in
making their pretrial statements
or their statements. Often when
requesting a reasonable
accommodation.
through the administrative
office of the courts, the
accommodation is denied or
declined or reduced to a minimum
of support, and that creates a
communication barrier, which
diminishes the ability of the
person to communicate either the
impact of a situation, the
impact of a crime or for anyone
else to participate in a fair
and equitable manner. So I'm not
necessarily in favor and I'm not
necessarily opposed, but I think
that we really need to
Examine how do we provide the
accommodation and if someone
utilizes a therapist or a
mediator to support them in
that. They should not be accused
by the administrative offices of
courts as that person is
attempting to practice law
without a license. There's
medical providers and then
there's legal licensure and they
may be two distinctly different
areas, but they both can provide
support. Thank you very much.
Thank you now.
said everyone.
One minute, please.
Go ahead.
Rebecca
You just muted, there you go.
No, you're back to being muted.
OK, go ahead.
Rebecca, can you hear us? OK.
There you go.
OK, we'll have to um go on, but
thank you.
Can you hear me?
Yes, now we can go ahead.
OK, Rebecca, there's something
wrong we hear you once and then
you go off, so we're gonna go to
the next person. Can you hear me
now? Yes. OK. May I, may I
proceed?
Yes, go ahead.
Good afternoon. My name is
Rebecca Rez. I'm a deputy
district attorney in the Special
Victims Unit in Albuquerque. I
also testified before you all on
Saturday and listen to concerns
about criminal defendants being
subjected to harsher penalties
and concerns regarding
victimization in jail and
prisons. So I'd be remiss not to
point out the hypocrisy of
having concern for the treatment
of people convicted of crimes,
but not to pass this bill that
protects the most vulnerable
victims from the most heinous
crimes. I've been doing this
work now for 8 years.
And can tell you that subjecting
victims to PTIs is nothing short
of cruel, especially victims
from an already marginalized
community. For victims of the
LGBT community, a community of
which I am a member.
They may not be ready to come
out. So in a PTI they are
inevitably asked.
About their sexuality, and then
they have to make a choice. lie
about their sexuality after
being told over and over the
importance of telling the truth
or tell the truth and risk
someone they know harming them
for coming out.
The same applies for immigrants,
especially today where the fear
of deportation is very real.
I can't object in a PTI. In the
past, we have tried to file
motions ahead of time to put
protections in place before a
PTI and those requests have been
categorically denied by the
trial courts.
Last year when a teenage rape
victim in a case I was
prosecuting asked, was asked by
the defense attorney to provide
her therapist's cell phone
number. That child asked if she
had to provide that number. I
told her that she did not have
to provide the number, but could
if she wanted to. I was informed
by the court that my telling
that child victim that she was
not required to provide her
therapist's cell phone number
was something that I was not
allowed to do during that
interview.
The judge told me it was
improper to tell that child she
did not have to provide the
number.
In several cases, the victim,
including young children have
attempted suicide after their
PTIs due to the way they were
treated. In one such instance,
my 5 year old victim tried to
strangle herself.
This resulted in me having to
give that child rapist a plea of
probation.
I invite those of you who don't
believe us when we tell you
these things that are happening
during pre-trial interviews.
And that there are no
protections in place from the
court to come visit us, and we
will be happy to show you. I
stand in strong support of this
bill. Thank you.
Santa Maria El Mirador.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good, good evening.
Uh, I'm saying eating cause it's
getting late. This is Patsy
Romero. I'm the, I'm an advocate
for the National Alliance on
Mental Illness for New Mexico,
and not be stands in strong
support of this legislation. We
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward, but I cannot begin
to tell you how many individuals
with severe mental illness, or
young children and adolescents
who have been
of the sault and victims of
crimes cannot continue to tell
their stories over and over and
over again, because it is
traumatic and too many of them
end up committing suicide. So
with because of all of the uh
reasons given to you this
afternoon. The National Alliance
on Mental Illness dances in
strong support of this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and members of the
committee.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Is there anything else you,
Madam Chair. Uh, I think we're
good to stand for questions.
OK.
Go to the committee, uh,
representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives,
experts, appreciate you for
sticking with us here. So, Madam
Chair, Representative, I, I do
have a few questions about the
bill.
Just for my own understanding, I
like to and what I vote on
before I, before I do. So I
think that should be a policy of
everybody, but Madam Chair
Representative, um,
Page 2
I'm gonna start on line 2,
talking about if an adult victim
declines an interview.
It says, it places limits on the
scope of questioning during the
interview.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering what, what does that
look like with an adult victim
versus a victim that is not.
And.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block.
Um, with the child victim
subsection A states that they
shall not be compelled to give a
pretrial statement with
subsection B does is carve out
adult victims and recognizes
that they have the opportunity
to either decline or agree to a
pretrial interview, um, should
they agree to a pretrial
interview, they are able to
place limits on that pretrial
interview, for example, uh, some
of the things that you had heard
earlier, uh, questions asking
about sexual.
orientation when it has nothing
to do with the underlying
incident, um, the time and
manner oftentimes we get PTI
requests for
4:30 on a on a Friday, things of
that nature and so we're talking
about putting restrictions on
that. Um, we're really trying to
ensure that those adult victims
who have no less trauma but are
participating in this process, I
have an opportunity to take
some.
OK, sounds good. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair
Representative. So yeah, so the,
the child victim would in no way
be compelled.
To testify. What if the they
Said that they wanted to in
certain cases, would it be
dependent on the case, or would
it just be not appropriate
pursuant to this new change in
the statute, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
the language of them not being
compelled to means that if the
defense is requesting that
interview, they certainly do not
have to um to give that
interview should they feel that
there is some reason to, uh, I
I imagine that would be a
conversation with the
prosecution with their family,
uh, as to whether or not they
want to undergo that, right?
Because one of the things that
we see is pre trial interviews
are not the first time that
victims speak.
Um, as Ms. Brandenburg said,
it's often the 5th, the 6th, the
7th, and it's very traumatizing.
So our experience suggests that
that's likely not what would
happen in practice, but
certainly I think there'd be a
conversation should that.
Should that be the case.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So then, an
attorney requesting an
interview.
Would that be seen as harassment
of that child victim in any way.
I mean, could that case be made
under this new statute, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, so
ordinarily uh requests for
pretrial interviews, uh, come
through the prosecutor's office.
However, there are instances
where a defendants and counsel
will reach out to victims
themselves. I believe it's uh
subsection C.
Uh, states that the defendant
shall not initiate contact with
the victim except through the
prosecutor's office, uh, and so
if there was a request for a
pretrial interview, uh, the
defense attorney would reach out
to the prosecutor's office and
if it was an adult victim, there
would be that conversation about
whether they like to
participate.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, and I
actually, I did have that
highlighted as the next question
I had. Who does that include?
Cause
Someone's
I should say somebody who's
included in that case and they
have like a brother, an uncle.
What if they try to contact?
The victim. Is there some kind
of remedy to ensure that these
folks are not harassing the
victim. That's kind of what I
want to make sure it's
happening, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
That is something that of course
we have seen and, and when we do
see it, we raise it with the
court very quickly, um, because
as you know, there's, there's
instances where the defendant,
although they are under
conditions of release by the
court to not contact the
defendant. The court has no
personal jurisdiction over other
family members and so oftentimes
the work around for them is
they'll reach out to their
family and say, hey, please
contact the victim, um, when
that happens, um, and Miss
Brandenburg can correct me if
I'm wrong, but.
I'm almost certain that we
almost always immediately
contact the court to rectify
that situation.
OK, sounds good. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. I just wanted
to make sure that there was some
kind of mechanism to make sure
that the victim was not getting
re-victimized.
Again, and so, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you for
the bill, and I, I also really
do think that the public comment
today about, about this really
Really personal things,
especially regarding a kid, for
example, like sexual orientation
and stuff, that is just.
Super inappropriate to even have
to subject that kid to,
especially when it comes to
these kinds of very
Horrendous cases in some cases.
So, I think that that is
helpful, and I've read the bill,
I think it, it makes sense to
me.
We're just making sure that
victims don't have to continue
to live through additional
trauma, especially as they're
suffering through what, what
they've already had to endure.
So, thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all I had.
Hey, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Thank you, experts, I only have
a few questions on this. Can you
just
We have
child
That was raped.
And law enforcement shows up.
First step. Is that correct in
law enforcement does some
interviewing, is that correct?
It is correct, uh, and if I
might, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord asked Miss
Brandenburg to to answer that
question. She's been prosecuting
these cases on the ground very
recently and so I think she can
give you a good explanation.
I just want to know how many
people are in contact.
child, they go through before we
even get.
Madam Chair Representative,
typically depends how the kid
discloses. So for example, if a
child discloses at school.
They first tell their teacher,
their teacher tells their
principal.
So the kid is talking to the
teacher, the principal, the
nurse, the resource officer who
then typically one of them will
call law enforcement.
Law enforcement comes, they talk
to law enforcement, CYD is also
called out typically, they will
talk to CYFD as well.
And then they will go talk to a
forensic interviewer, hopefully
medical personnel, so it's
saying PLN.
Possibly cart at UNMH.
Possibly a detective.
And then possibly family
members, um, which typically
happens once something like this
comes out, family members often
question the kids about why and
what happened.
So usually 7 to 10.
people before it ever even gets
to a pretrial interview.
So Sharon representative.
On page 2,
18. The defendant shall not
initiate contradict him except
for the prosecutor's office.
So the defendant
person being accused has the
right.
That
In terms of
Explain this portion to me.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
Although it can, it can change
case by case ordinarily in
instances where there's a
victim, one of the conditions of
release that the court will set
will be that that defendant not
have contact with the victim,
um, it may not surprise you to
know that that oftentimes that
condition of release is not, is
not followed, um.
And defendants do very
frequently have contact with
victims, um.
In the ordinary situation, uh,
we've heard instances, of
course, where, where there's
that contact we will file a
motion with the court in this
instance what this is suggesting
that pretrial interviews, um.
There is no situation where the
defendant needs to contact the
victim. It needs to be done
through counsel.
And that's what this is
requiring.
on the pretrial.
The interview. Who's who's the
one that's asking the victim
question.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, as it currently exists.
Um, defense attorneys, uh.
Seem to think that it is their
interview and they are the ones
that are asking the questions
and there's been multiple times
where we've had to seek court
intervention when the prosecutor
seeks to ask questions. Um,
Currently, the way that this
would happen.
Uh, is in a small conference
room.
The second judicial district
attorney's office, for example,
um, there would be a prosecutor.
Uh, there should be a victim
advocate, which is another thing
that this legislation calls for.
There would be a defense
attorney.
Uh, and sometimes there will be
an investigator for the defense
attorney.
And these pretrial interviews
can last. I've seen them last
anywhere from.
10 minutes to multiple hours to
where they cut it short and have
to ask for another session, uh,
and so those are generally the
participants.
Um, but the, the tenor and the
length of those pre-trial
interviews.
varies greatly.
Minor represent experts does the
victim any time say.
They can get up and leave,
however, they are then required
to come back.
And finish their interview.
It's amanitarian represent so
it's up to the person that's
interviewing in depth.
They want to go.
So I would imagine in hours.
Anybody having to sit through
that who's been raped.
have to sit through that for
hours and relive what we were
doing, what were you wearing?
How did this happen? Are you
sure this happened?
Depending on the age.
different things it could be.
Your sexuality, who you with
terrorism are people.
Human nature is to want to win
the case and that could lead to
an opportunity of somebody
pressuring so much.
To confuse them, especially in
that long.
Have you seen that happen
anytime where somebody comes in,
they're just asking so many
questions. It's almost like
they're berating.
Madam, so best practices is that
the child is interviewed one
time by forensic interviewers by
a trained interviewer, and that
should be the only time the kid
gives a statement.
About what has happened to them.
To answer
Your question
They get to ask whatever they
want in a pretrial interview.
It can last 10 minutes, it can
last 6 hours. I've had a
pretrial interview last 6 hours.
So 12 hours.
They can ask anything, not even
pertaining to the case.
And they have to
Answer this question.
And if I may, Madam Chair
Representative, I think that's a
really good question because
One of the things that was
discussed during public comment
is that by passing this bill, it
may lead to more trials which
will ultimately victimize.
Uh, victims worse, um, what that
misunderstands is that in a
trial setting, there are rules
of evidence.
There's a judge.
Uh, there are guard rails to
suggest these are questions that
you cannot ask.
Those guardrails do not exist in
a pretrial interview.
And so even if the 2nd time,
assuming there was a safe house,
the second time that that child
has to testify should the case
proceed to trial is at that
trial, it's still.
Uh, less of a victimization
because there's guardrails in
place that just simply don't
exist with pretrial interviews.
Madam Chair, sometimes you learn
some things in the state.
re-victimized for hours on end,
no guardrails. They could ask
any question.
Any question you, I mean that
If you're an unscrupulous
person, you could.
Ask that person questions and
put them in such fear that they
would.
Or as you said, try to kill
themselves.
I think it was
Rebecca Reyes, was she the one?
Somebody said about a 5 year
old.
What world do we live in that
we, I mean, you're already a
victim.
And then there's no guardrails
for somebody.
To ask
All the questions in the world.
With no disregard, with
absolutely no regard to this
person's life.
And they
personally, anything.
Pushing somebody to the point.
Of suicide is, I don't even know
what word.
gone beyond egregious, it's just
disgusting.
So
I understand because that's the
core of your bill.
So Madam Chair, the only thing I
wanna say is uh.
Rebecca Reya said that she
wanted to show us some more
stuff you can.
Is there anything else, um?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Lord. I
think one of the things that uh
that I would add is, you know.
47 have a
have a process that has been
refined that.
Protects victims.
In a better way.
And for child victims, um, you
know, as, as the district
nationally recognized best how
to handle it, you know how to
have that discussion to get to
the details and the truth.
About what has happened.
Sorry you can't. I'm sorry,
ma'am.
Um, and
Those, you know, the forensic
interviews.
Are done by who know how to ask.
Appropriately sensitive,
unbiased, age-appropriate
questions that elicit the truth
and stayed.
by both sides.
Statements are
Given gents and to the
prosecutor to review and they
have access to them to watch.
They have access to all the
statements the child had to give
to as well.
So yes, they get, they get to
hear those excuse me,
Representative Thompson.
I think you met him, chair, um,
and.
But the stories are
heartbreaking, but I'm wondering
why you are adding adults. I
mean, most of the discussion has
been around children and in full
disclosure, my sons and were
sexually assaulted and.
Well, the one with autism didn't
have to go through this. They
tried and it didn't work so
well.
But, um, so I, so I'm just and
then the other thing is what you
said was um that if a child
discloses at school, then it's
the teacher and the nurse and
the this and the that and the
that and the that.
Isn't that somewhere we should
be looking at.
At um
Lessing the trauma on the, I
mean, why did, why does everyone
in the school have to.
And can we do something so that
they don't.
Representative Thompson, uh,
that's a, that's a wonderful
question, um, and you actually,
there, there were two questions.
One is about adults and then one
is about the disclosure process,
um, you know, with the teacher
or nurse, um, there is a.
You know, as, um, is a
difference when a child
discloses a teacher or a nurse,
and that discussion and the
questions that are asked.
are, I think fair to say
fundamentally different than the
questions that are asked in a
forensic interview, um, or in a
pretrial interview, um, and so
they may not.
They may not be to the same
level, at the same depth.
Um, but obviously, you know, it
is very important and and, you
know, we have wonderful child
advocacy centers here, I think
get the word out and train
people on um.
Sensitivity and and how we could
do a better job, including, you
know.
and others, but I would let um.
I think our experts speak to.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, my simple answer would be
that that they experience trauma
as well. I mean, uh, when, when
an adult is a victim of a crime,
whether it be sexual in nature,
violent in nature, that's
oftentimes the worst day of
their life.
And I think that, you know, they
didn't choose that they
understand that the justice
system requires.
Some statements, you know, law
enforcement will respond.
They'll have to give a statement
to law enforcement.
I think they intuitively know at
some point it may go to trial
and that's a difficult
conversation to have, but what's
particularly difficult as a
prosecutors to have a
conversation with someone who's
been victimized.
Where they say, well, why do I
have to do this?
It's not a constitutional right.
Um, it's not even in statute in
the state of New Mexico. It's a
judicial creation.
Uh, and so for them to sit in
the room and be subjected to
questions, um, it's no less
traumatizing.
Um, many of them may, you know,
are, are developmentally
disabled. It's no, it's no
better to ask them about their
sexual orientation.
It's no better to ask an adult.
About their sexual history.
It's no better to ask an adult
questions for 6 hours until you
wear them down until they
finally agree with you just to
end the interview.
Um, the concerns exist.
Uh, because they're victims and
there are special considerations
for for child victims and I
think that's why you see child
victims treated differently in
this legislation.
Um, but trauma is trauma in
adults experience it and we're
trying to protect. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and just, um.
Admittedly this was some time
ago, but.
A a a child student I was
working with elementary age
nonverbal, and we suspected
sexual abuse.
She couldn't tell us anything,
so we called our special ed
director and his response was,
did you check for pen? No, we
didn't.
Representative Romero, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I just
First, I want to acknowledge,
uh, the victims and victims
advocates, um, that are
proponents of this bill and
Um
I think just want to recognize
that there are so many problems
with the PTI or pretrial and um
interview system that I think
This bill seeks to address, and
I want to acknowledge that all
of that intent I agree with.
Um
Uh, but Madam Chair,
Representative, I think this
bill is is quite different than
what we think we've seen in the
past, which is really focused on
children, um, and perhaps, um,
The most vulnerable, um, and
not, that's not to say that all
victims have had and, you know,
through the justice system
process, um, and unfortunate,
um, you know,
Having to recount of, of any of
any traumatic situation, um.
Is, is, and of course the any of
the trauma itself is just an
awful, awful horrible situation,
and I just want to acknowledge
that.
Um, generally, um.
That said, the, the bill itself.
Because it not only includes
children, but this component of
adults that takes um the ability
to have the pretrial, um.
System work in the sense of.
Opting in to having the
conversation, um, which is this
is now sort of like a, you have
to opt in to the to the
interview versus opt out.
I think in in many ways, um.
And it really does without
putting in the guardrails in
place for having that
conversation, um, with what
could potentially be a better
fix for guiding the process
right now, and I think it was
brought up.
Um, that when we're talking
about children, if we were just
talking about children that we
could have a judge impose
sanctions on any sort of um
A lawyer who could be berating a
victim, um, look at how we might
be able to intercede on a
process, um, with teeth that
could actually help um move the
pretrial discussion in a
different way, um.
They're in a number of ways. I
think in these analyses, look at
a number of different um.
Alternatives that could help
with moving this process, but
the process that is proposed
here is quite sweeping, um, in,
in the pretrial, um, discussion,
I guess, is there any um
Opportunity to look at how we
might revisit this without sort
of thinking through.
The broad, um,
Changes to both adult and
children pretrial interviews
that.
is an interim step that would be
favorable to.
The sponsors of the bill, madam
chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
You know, I
I think those are uh.
Good questions about the
approach that this particular
bill has taken.
Um, you have, uh, Madam Chair
and Representatives seeing
different versions, uh, trying
to address the same problem. Um.
You know
I don't know that there is an
unwillingness to discuss that,
uh, risk, you know, limiting it
to children, um, I would
reiterate in most jurisdictions.
pre-trials, they are not a
fundamental constitutional
right, either in the US or the
New Mexico Constitution.
They are not a guaranteed right.
The right is to have that
interview and to confort.
And we are continuing to subject
and sexual assaults.
Of all ages.
To a practice.
That
Goes against the amendment in
our Constitution, um.
If, you know, a number of states
have um set particular uh
restrictions and parameters
around dealing with child
victims and that.
Um
is certainly something that the
state could.
could adopt.
So I don't think that it's um.
I don't think that your
question.
Uh, is an unreasonable question.
And I think it's.
Certainly something that
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the willingness to
to think that through, I think.
Um, just on the questions of how
we're being targeted about this
because what it sort of.
I think the
Um
Possible, uh.
You know, if enacted.
Sort of gets rid of the pretrial
like it did sort of diminishes
the value of a pretrial system,
um,
If there was one. And I'm
hearing right now that there's
not a lot of value in what we
have currently from what we've
heard from um.
Whether it's not 6th Amendment
6th Amendment protected, um, is
one question. The other is
whether or not we could improve
the process at all, um, for why
we have it at all. Um, and
that's unfortunately what
I'm lacking in sort of
understanding that connect for
if it's targeted and we're
talking about children, we're
talking about forensic
interviews for a specific
purpose, um, then I think
there's a, a broader sort of um
interest in looking at how we
might adjust.
Um, but the way that this reads
currently is that we're just
saying the entire process needs
to be eliminated and all.
pretrial situations with which
we have.
In any interview whatsoever is a
forensic interview, and I think
that.
And what's, if we're gonna
dismantle it.
What, what are we putting in
place of that as well, and I
think at this point, if we're
and and then certainly based on
the testimony that there's this
very broad interest in focusing
on children, focusing on the
most vulnerable and being able
to clarify a process that makes
more sense. Um, and I think
we've voted yes on that in this
committee, um, numerous times
and have gotten it to the floor
when it's focused that way, but
um.
Yeah, my, my, um, unfortunate
sort of reservations certainly
in how this
Sort of derails an entire
process, I think, um, or and
puts it into another direction
based on the.
Concerns, um, I, I tend to agree
with some of the concerns with
Um, the bill and if there is an
opportunity, I think to
be a bit more narrow in its
scope, um, I would be willing to
vote for it, but in its current
form, madam.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
also have um reservations about,
you know, just a
Swipe
way of all of these, this
procedure, um, sometimes when
they have pretrials that um a
person might discover that
they're um.
It
They're accusing the wrong
person or sometimes that um.
Uh
Someone decides not to go to
trial, so the pretrial could
also help avoid.
Going to trial in certain cases,
um, and so.
If you would
Think about adding more guard
rails and you know, making sure
that there are things that the
public defender, um, would have
to abide by in certain um
questioning or how the uh
prosecutor, um, well,
The prosecutor would also be
able to have guidelines for how
to protect the person during the
interview process, um.
That wasn't discussed, I guess,
because everything was just um
going to be eliminated. So at
this point.
Um, would you like us to roll
the bill and give you a chance
to do.
Um, you know, I think that the,
I think the discussion um.
I think it's a helpful
discussion. Um, however, I would
go back to the fact that.
Um
Delineating that there is a
difference between a 16 year old
victim, an 18-year-old victim,
and a 24 year old victim.
And
pretrial interviews are not.
Constitutionally guaranteed.
Um, and they are not
Used at all in the federal
system or in many other states.
Um, I think that for us, um.
We would like to, we would like
to protect our victims and
ensure that they have the same
rights and those rights are
upheld.
Um
And we know that the.
Accused and the
Do we have a motion on the
floor, Madam Chair move do pass.
I second that.
Um, Madam Chair, I unfortunately
in the current form I would talk
to the motion to table um
supersedes the motion or do pass
so you please take role.
Note a table
with an explanation,
not a table.
Representative Romero.
Ah, yes, to table Representative
Thompson, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes the table.
Me, I'm sure. Yes.
OK, on a vote of 4 to 2 on your
um bill has been HB 204 has been
taken.
Oh, to explain your vote,
representative.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representatives, and I'm, I'm so
sorry that that the spill ended
up.
dead
I'm sorry victims.
I'm sorry. You know, I'm, I'm
sorry that this body didn't,
didn't help you not get
re-victimized and.
And I really feel bad for her.
For those folks and
It's a shame and maybe we can
bring it back in another year
and maybe it'll go to a maybe
where it actually can pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Lord.
I keep man of chair, um, it's
really hard to sit up here
sometimes cause some things
happen.
You see, this is just gonna be
continuation of children being
the same thing and just say I'm
sorry that.
This is horrifying.
I just can't believe that we're
just going to go ahead and
re-victimize our children over
and over and over again until
another 12 years, 3 years, 5
years.
Until what?
When more children kill
themselves, so.
Sorry
With that, um, the, um,
committee is now adjourned.
