Thank you for yes Representative
thank you madam chair I'm Liz
Thomson house district twenty
four north these types of
Albuquerque including with rock
and uptown and the reason we
were laughing I turn to the bill
and it's got this thing that
makes things buzzing and I said
why I am I having a stroke and
she turned the pages I'm not
having a strong.
Only two weeks there's.
Thank you.
Hi good afternoon everyone I'm
and that will be all and I
represent district thirty five
which is the city of Los crucis
all of the downtown historical
district in the city thank you
for being here.
You and Representative costs it
makes you feel better I did that
the other day.
I think goes extreme.
Representative Lord.
Sorry Representative Lord
district twenty two east
mountains Torrance County and
now all little bit of
Albuquerque thank you have a
yesterday that a shattering need
Dennis **** on my yes ma'am so
thank you for following through
the exciting process of our
please and thank you.
And representative John black
house district fifty one and.
It's entirely Juan County we
keep these we have a beautiful
beautiful district and I'm so
blessed Representative thank.
Thank you and I'm here
Representative joined Ferrari
from.
But lost this district thirty
seven.
So Representative would you like
to go ahead and introduce your
bill house bill fifty seven yes
madam chair I'm Representative
bill removed from district
thirty one immediately south of
our deal with the Representative
Lujan was since district so our
house bill fifty seven
We had a hearing with the
courts and corrections this
would be a year ago last summer.
And the presenters for Walmart
and home depot.
And one of the things that store
owners are complaining about in
current law they have the
ability or the authority to go
ahead and stop shop lifters and
detain them.
One of the reasons why they're
not confronting them is some of
them are are.
And they're worried about their
store employees being injured or
killed.
The second reason is that
if they get in the scuffle with
these shoplifters many of them
are cleaning and injury and then
suing the store for damages.
So what this legislation does is
the address those who want to
the store for an injury.
And I've placed in here of a
measure that they must use
reasonable grounds reasonable
methods to go ahead and detain
someone I think that's important
I I don't want to authorize
excessive force I just want to
authorize that the reasonable
apprehension of a shoplifter
should not result in you having
to pay damages if they allege
their insure.
of course it isn't unreasonable
then this legislation does not
protect them.
And with that madam chair stand
for questions.
Thank.
We will go to the audience of
those who are in of.
Support of the bill.
Raise your hand if you like and
those were in opposition.
Okay
go ahead and go with those
support first.
If anyone would like to speak.
This.
Colors.
Are you getting.
When else in support like to
speak K. those in opposition.
yes I'm sorry to have students.
What.
Opposition okay so.
Back to that in just a minute
okay those who were in
opposition like to speak yes
Sir.
Sure.
My is the lot of you have this
is this bill as prices.
We're all Mexico I practice
almost years.
Representative for retailers
many years ago specifically
These kinds of points but I'm
also for the last twenty two
years Representative
Comment on.
Very hard contacts and this
year.
Representative we trying to
accomplish with this bill
there's certainly.
Ration shop within that.
We help our state.
Large.
Areas but I believe this is a
solution that is
disproportionate to the problem
it is also inconsistent system
Madam what do you use there are
focused upon retailers were.
There are many reasons why
individuals shop one of that
range from
yes in two.
Yes Representative the mentally.
At the bottom retail was still
sure.
Help the standards here the
industry standard CPAP.
It was including shoplifters in
their detention I personally.
Chase's shoplifters have lost
their lives due to recitation
methods employed by retail
policy personnel were not
properly trained or not properly
supervised so an act of
desperation why shop with your
whether or not should not be
forced optional permanent life
altering injury that person's
death sentence.
The standards here officer for
the Thomas law.
The staff responding industry
itself experts I think that we
deal with are protected this is
not a good part of those.
Thank you I forgot to mention we
have two minute limit on
comments and we yeah your great
thank you within that limit okay
yes.
Members of the committee.
For example.
New Mexico and we is from so.
Picture
retailers for use people shop
for.
One person on scene.
Meet.
Go ahead media.
Yep two minutes.
You
My name is needed to shave I am
the trial lawyer in Albuquerque
New Mexico I am close to this
bill first
it's unnecessary the statute
thirty sixteen at twenty three
already
gives a merchant.
immunity from civil or criminal
liability if they detain a
suspected shoplifter the
reasonable man R. forty
reasonable time.
Yes on this provision is
unnecessary would be do you put
duplicative of what is already
in the statute
also as other speakers have
already said.
Yes put us accused.
Shoplifters and employees truly
employees at risk of harm and
death under Representative the
state of a young man who was
killed as a result of an alleged
petty misdemeanor crime he
received a death sentence
running shoes to shop in that
yes.
Propose legislation is dangerous
and will the people that would
be it potentially injured as a
result of this are the employees
and this is suspected
shoplifters thank you.
Thank you.
Okay do you have any other
comments when we go to the
committee.
Chair thank you and I hear the
individuals who were killed
that is the unreasonable amount
of force the news so this
legislation does not protect
them.
Okay thank you
Senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm so I have
some questions I want to make
sure I understand this on this
bill.
So this is basically protecting
the merchants from the liability
who detain and interrogate
suspected shoplifters that
correct.
madam chair and representative
war for detention of them yes as
long as they are reusable map
that shipped a new thank you
madam chair this was
understanding.
And we presented a bill I think
it was in two thousand.
Twenty two.
And it's interesting that was
house bill twenty nine.
And they said they would
definitely miss the opportunity
for the smashing Graham so I was
thinking about this bill that
you presented
Since here January twenty six
Albuquerque news media reported
on interested twenty three
member retail theft primary as
huge as a member seeing them
every time I go look at anything
in the news about the smash and
grab that we have going on in
Albuquerque which is now my
district so it's very
unfortunate so Hector Balderas
said that it is more profitable
now to go and steal from your
local retailer Senate is to sell
drugs and guns in New Mexico I
found that very very interesting
night I think this need a high
priority because it is become
such a lucrative industry to be
able to go in and do a lot of
submission drugs isn't happy a
lot of reach out that but I
didn't know that it was more
profitable than selling drugs
and guns and extremely
interesting.
So question I have.
So your goal is to have.
As little as possible when they
are detained these individuals
that correct.
Madam chair Representative Lord
correct I don't want them using
excessive force and the we're in
this legislation does that allow
or.
Sanction excessive force correct
so Madam chair representative so
if the in game it's to to have
an opportunity because I know
that when you feel that you're
going to be sued or if there's
any some sort of lawsuit
every video I watch securing
everybody does this and they
just want to walk right out the
door I see nothing there's no
incentive to stop them so is
this something that would give
more the way to the store to say
Hey we need to stop and question
the stop and talk to that kind
of the goal with this bill.
Madam chair and representative
lord yes and you have to
remember that almost every store
if you go into now you're on
video so they have documented
that staffed in the failure to
pay for the property that you're
that the shoplifters leaving
with.
Yeah Madam chair representative
of what I've seen is yes.
Ladies they're walking into
stores to school wrapping stuff.
Walking.
That's what I can see most of
it's not even that the meeting
Cameron they're just literally
just grabbing things off the
shelf one cannot stores
extremely frustrating because we
end up having to pay for that
everything that somebody does
the cost goes somewhere down the
line so I support this I totally
missed every doing I like the
fact that it's it's a minute but
leases something right is some
sort of deterrent I can't just
walk in to a store any longer
and not expect to be possibly
stopped a we need to stop and
talk to you gonna hold on to for
minute to law enforcement gets
here because it is frustrating
that all these people are
turning this into a business
basically which I I again I have
no idea those more lucrative
than selling drugs and guns it's
huge it's a huge amount of loss
for our city so I think anything
to try to make this more of a
deterrent I definitely support
and I think you mean this thank
you.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
wondering
why is this necessary when we
already have the shopkeepers
privilege log it did some of the
analysis stated it actually
narrows what's in it at the
definition of merchants or
wondering why why you think this
is necessary on top of that.
Madam chair and representative
Thompson I noted that in the FY
are and I think that we need to
go it you know if it passes in
the next committee and make the
definition of merchants of
exactly the same
but when I talk to merchants
they don't feel that they have
the protection.
And they're saying that they're
involved in these lawsuits.
Whether successful or not
this is to discourage the
lawsuits were reasonable
detention was stuck.
And to protect them from having
to pay for that.
Madam chair I I just think it's
redundant thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank.
You know I I think this is a
huge problem and the the other
day actually here in town I went
to a store and I I want to see
which one it is at the mall I
talked to a lady that was a
cashier there and she said just
that week she spoke to someone
that order shoplifter G. so that
person run out of that store in
the mall can take thousands of
dollars for the merchandise and
you know that really hurts
consumers like me who went to
the store to pay for those
things right and it it really is
angering to the people that work
there and deal with this kind of
pandemic I would say of
shoplifting so in your bill here
and I'm reading it.
This is reasonable means and you
know I I know that's a very you
could probably.
Determined that reasonable means
could mean many things but for
instance would stop instantly
physically from leaving the
store and holding them out from
taking that person dies without
any kind of aggression would
that be reasonable means.
madam chair and representative
walking yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and so if you
wanted to teams individual madam
chair and you had to let's just
say use handcuffs if there if
there were a security guard.
And let's just see the handcuffs
were kind of tight.
But they weren't like bleeding
or anything would that be
excessive in anyway madam chair
Madam chair representative
blocked from what you've said
that is a little difficult but.
Generally what you've said is
not unreasonable
and you know if any of the.
If they were to collect damages
generally the stores going to
have to recover that and they're
going to do that through our
increase price probably and I'm
not sure that all the members
saw it but there was an
individual in Albuquerque who
was in the guitar store any
grabbed an expensive guitar and
was running out and then began
fighting with store employees we
were trying to detain him and
they finally got the guitar and
held him down for the police and
so that that is the incident or
the type of incident that the
shop owners are using as an
example where they get to use
the state well I got I got heard
and wrestle.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative bye to so
that video and I guess on the
topic of that video you know the
guy he was being very aggressive
and he was fighting rooms
punching different employees I
know was pretty aggressive the
way that they removed him from
that store but the guy was also
being aggressive aggressive so
I'm wondering is there any kind
of the way there to the trial
attorney use that as because
with this bill if it does pass
is not being reasonable madam
chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
blocked the this doesn't
preclude them from filing a
lawsuit and then the court with
the jury have our first goes
determine whether reasonable
methods were used or not use
okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative so I'm
writing an article here it's the
Albuquerque journal editorial
board article it talks about
former Attorney General copied
or I'm sorry.
My apologies that I think about
that as and he formed a task
force to mitigate some of this
retail crime and all these
different things that are
plaguing these or businesses
that are really hurting right
now so have you spoken to the
former Attorney General that
this bill has he got any input
on this Madam chair
representative madam chair and
representative walked no I have
not spoken to him about this
bill thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I think that.
From what I'm reading it looks
like he probably would be
supportive of this and
So I think that's a very good
thing so going forward here in
my questioning I would like to
talk about the actual lawsuits
I'm sure that it can get very
costly madam chair
representative to the retailer
to have to defend themselves and
even if they are found not
guilty of any misconduct or
anything.
Do you know in a general
ballpark what something like
that could potentially cost
these businesses madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
walked no but it's going to be
in the to tens of thousands of
dollars thank you madam chair
thank you Representative yes I I
agree with you I think these
businesses they they would be
the ones that take the brunt of
any kind of litigation even if
they're not found guilty
whatsoever because hiring
attorney having to go to court
having to do the all the
different steps I think the only
people who will benefit from
this bill are trial attorneys
who want to take advantage of
these poor businesses that are
really hurting so thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative by Dennis Ross
party bill.
Thank you Representative Romero.
I just have to.
Thank you for helping me with
more studies today on reasonable
that's detention and
Also president and what's
already on the books
Madam chair representative the
work that I think are
legislature's done
Since the sixties which this is
been on the books for that long
date.
We have reasonable means to be
able to detain an individual in
a shopping.
situation for somebody to.
to make sure that they did not
take anything and I think what's
on the books today.
Very much covers what you're
proposing I think it's a great
conversation to talk about what
we've seen throughout the state
what are the tools that we have
available to us to ensure that
people are safe in the settings
what is the responsibility of
shopkeepers and what is their
privilege in which case I think
this is very much what we see
across the state and big box
stores very commonly
and I just I don't see the
necessity for introducing new
language that I think confuses
what is very reasonable very
much best practice on the books
not just here in New Mexico but
nationwide
for for how to detain an
individual in that circumstance
and like you said we see people
in that practice the guitar
shops and.
Electronics stores and our home
depot it secretary of so I'm.
Just to to try to figure out
where this goes other than a
great conversation about the for
the privilege that does exist
and if people are going to go
into a shop to steal that they
will be apprehended and they
will be questions and they will
be held until whether or not the
police need to arrive for that
to be let go because they didn't
steal anything
very reasonable without probable
cause chair and tables.
Thank.
Of the I just like to make a
comment before we move on that.
Representative Reese this ill I
see is something that could
incentivize
shopkeepers to the more I.
how do you respond to that.
Madam chair the way I would
respond is they still have to be
reasonable and if you go beyond
the the reasonable notice then
you're not protected by this.
And
Representative Rehm.
Because there's not really a
clear definition of
reasonableness that could be
something that goes above and
beyond because person would be
held accountable so I think
that's the problem that I have
with you this bill we have a
motion for a do pass in the
second table to table I'm sorry
I could manager.
Thank you a motion to table.
Second yeah thank you I would
rather have the other motion.
Thank you.
Is there any objection.
Yes would you please take roll
call.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Lord no to table.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Rubio yes to
table Representative yes.
Chair we have a motion to table
forty two.
Thank you Representative you
have.
Four two.
Thank you madam chair.
So it will continue please wait
house bill fifty eight.
And I believe we do have
handouts for this madam chair
yes I have a handout while
they're handing that out as
we've all seen we have some of
students from UNM shadowing some
of us legislators
I have one that's going to
introduce herself and she wants
to see this process and so I
said well I think you are
participated.
So with that great energy sure
self explain what you're doing.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Holly downs
I'm a senior at UNM I am
currently studying political
science and economics at to
graduate this December with my
bachelor's degree so I'm very
excited about that
I have been interested in
legislative work since I was in
high school and so that's a
passion that stuck with me for
quite some years now so I'm
happy to be here grateful for
the opportunity thank you for
having me welcome.
Okay I think everyone's got
handout yeah like to go ahead.
Share this legislation when we
look at our what's commonly
referred to as three strikes has
been on the books since nineteen
ninety four.
And no one has been prosecuted
on direct.
Why is that the crimes that are
in the current law.
Are all fifteen to thirty year
crimes with the exception of
one.
And so consequently
a person's life doesn't last
long enough to be prosecuted
under this under under the
current law.
What I've done is tried and
tried to expand the that key but
narrow enough that all we're
going to deal with his violent
criminals I would repeat
offenders so if you have the
injured I great bodily harm.
For kids on three different
occasions then you can be
prosecuted under this
legislation.
In particular why we have this
other hand out of side would
like to take you to.
It's a tache met one so it's
going to be after.
Eight five and on this
attachment if you'll note this
is the New Mexico sentencing
commission.
They worked at a fifteen year
of.
Window of inmates at the bottom
you'll see that three times or
more.
Is a total of twenty seven
inmates so there would be in a
fifteen year period only be
twenty seven inmates who would
be subject to.
The prosecution under my
legislation.
We've all seen the you know like
California did where was any
three felonies and they over ran
their presence and that's why I
got this very narrow just
injury by great bodily harm or.
Death for three different
occasions now I played for Holly
to speak thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
As a student in Albuquerque I
need not reiterate the dangers
of living alone and of going to
school specially
again as a young person
with the knowledge that there
are violent criminals who are
not sentenced to life that is
quite a concern for me and I
know several of my colleagues as
well students and otherwise
I believe that a three strike
system is more than enough room
for someone to avoid.
The lessons
if someone is committing violent
crimes that the bill it details
more often than not and I think
that.
It's a completely reasonable
sentence and should be
considered so I'm in support of
this bill.
At the end of chair with that
will stand for questions.
Thank you I will go to the
audience those in support of
this bill.
And those in opposition.
Okay we'll go to those in
support first gentleman again.
As well.
In less.
This.
The.
What about this is that we're
covering the world.
Representative.
Product that go ahead.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Brenda Carreiro Garcia I am
the mother of four year old
Billy Garcia who was shot and
killed in a road rage in twenty
fifteen here in Albuquerque we
have tried to do this
legislation for quite some time
and I truly support and thank
Representative bring on
narrowing
the violent crimes down
as an example shooting and for a
motor vehicle is violent enough
I believe New Mexico has lost
enough children under the age of
eighteen through this and again
it's not everybody in jail each
offender has to be.
charge three separate times so
they do have their trial or they
do a plea agreement three
separate times I think this is
an opportunity and I think
It's your it's your again your
opportunity here to show that
you know.
The dems do matter and we need
to show that New Mexico you
can't come to New Mexico to hurt
anybody else again if somebody
is violent and continues to show
that have it what are we going
to do to change that they're
obviously not gonna change and I
would please please encourage
all of you and again this is
your opportunity to passes thank
you so much for your time.
Thank you anyone else.
Two more in support.
Okay this call.
No I think she's opposition.
Our.
Go ahead Carla.
Good afternoon madam chairman
it's Leri Sonntag here a small
business owner in Bernalillo
county and a member of the New
Mexico business coalition as we
all know crime is a significant
problem for individuals and
businesses in the state of
public support any effort to
increase penalties for repeat
violent offenders and appreciate
response from bringing this bill
forward banker Jesus park realty
thank.
Thank you.
I will go down to the audience
in opposition.
Table start this yes ma'am.
Good afternoon please vote no on
this three strikes bill it not
only expanded expensive it is
already in statute that by the
time we might be convicted of a
third felony is outlined here
there are years that could be
added to their sentences has a
visual offender for the type of
violence effective outlined in
the bill the faces are on their
phone years long thank you know
Gaby had testified for the
emotional appeal of this for you
this time when people are
running scared.
I believe that data and critical
effect thank you for that the
state for that responded that
elimination of these that are
fine but that more active
forces.
Thank you.
X..
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is Austin the
state of New Mexico we stand in
opposition of this bill today
because we know that that
creation of stronger penalties
is actually not a sufficient
deterrent to crime in the goal
here is to actually have a safer
community we actually know that
these have the opposite effect
that people who don't have that
opportunity rehabilitation an
opportunity for folks are more
likely to commit crimes and that
the pop of those kind of the
teachers so we know that this is
not a deterrent and that we can
see that from the data but thank
you ma'am.
Thank.
Anyone else on the side.
North of the
Senator
for some of our we are already.
More movies we are challenged
with substance use and
dependency and we know that
these people would be
disproportionately affected
wages on
We are.
Well as we know that New Mexico
judges have the training to take
all into separation K. five K.
and so we ask for.
Thank you okay we'll move to the
side anyone in opposition I
would like to speak.
so we have and using yes thank
you.
I had can't.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
this is Kim Chavez Cook I am
with the law offices of the
public defender and state and
also speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association there are
definitely valid concerns about
the continued utility of this
existing statute but expanding
it is not is just a solution in
search of a problem we have a
lot of sentencing options
already in place for these
scenarios there are firearm
enhances enhancements which have
recently been expanded we have
aggravation of basic sentence
which can be used to increase
the basic sentence without using
this enhancement and we can
classify these the crimes that
are in this bill as a serious
violent offenses in order to
limit a person's ability to get
out early from prison and most
importantly as was mentioned by
a previous committee we have had
Vigil offender act which imposes
mandatory enhancement time onto
a sentence for someone who has a
prior history of felonies so in
my view the life sentence three
strikes law is just redundant of
all of our other complex
sentencing schemes and hello the
reason it's not being utilized
as because it's unnecessary and
people in these situations are
already getting equivalent
sentences through these other
mechanisms so I also want to
make the committee aware that
while the titles of many of
these crimes can sound very
grievous the actual conduct
underlying them can be committed
in a huge variety of ways and so
it does not actually narrowly
target the worst of the worst
that it is intended to so we do
ask the committee to oppose this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Okay we'll go to the committee.
Everybody I'm trying to table I.
Let's have some discussion that
will come back to that question
yes.
Well.
Okay so.
Madam chair representative I
have some questions on my
computer but it just crashed and
it's going to be some questions
for you because it was almost
like someone to control my mouse
and was freaking out my mouse is
moving or my screen so that's a
little scary and that okay so I
do have some questions on this
I'm.
So madam chair representative I
know that we have the three
strikes and it's been on there
since nineteen nineteen ninety
four.
And you said there's only twenty
seven inmates that would be
eligible for this is that what
you to try to catch them.
So madam chair what speeds
specific about what we're doing
if we have all these incentives
currently.
Why do we have twenty seven
inmates who have killed or
injured by great bodily harm
three people so what we're gonna
see a not for is enough.
We say well when you've killed
or injured six times is it not
this is a problem we're going to
have to address this is the most
violent in this study was done
from the year of two thousand
twenty fourteen so fifteen years
of data to go ahead and look at
it determined that only twenty
seven inmates would fit into
that category.
But.
We're talking about the most
violent you know if we look back
over our history or bush's would
again we think that we can
rehabilitate Jeffrey Dahmer.
There's no way to rehabilitate
that type of person.
You know you just multiple we
killed people and of course as
you all know we ate up but
You know there are individuals
in our society who are so
violent you will never
rehabilitate and that's what I'm
trying to target.
Thank you madam chairman I I
fully agree with that because
I've.
Of course they want some
documentaries on different
programs and it's for fine but
some people do I'm so horrifying
and there's no.
Four two there's no
rehabilitation them sick with
kind of files at the exact same
thing peta files once they get
out they will immediately go out
look for another child to molest
or rape and it's unfortunate but
there's no cure for them either
and I'm all about trying to keep
certain people.
For responding our most innocent
especially with the children
which leads me some questions
Madam chair representative about
half of the bill.
Okay so we go to the she.
Go to page.
Three.
We start with number two what we
going to define violent felony.
So we have B. C. D. E. that's
the new language is that correct
yeah we have murder in the first
degree voluntary manslaughter
involuntary manslaughter
aggravated battery and shooting
at a dwelling or occupied
buildings and mentor
Representative that would be
like somebody committed a drive
by shooting.
Yes the last chair and
representative lord yes the last
one is a drive by shooting.
So if we go on to page four.
let's see a page and then I so
we have abuse of a child the
results of great bodily harm to
a child with that I don't want
to be graphic would that be
somebody doing something
horrific to in child.
in a sexual manner.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord yes.
Unfortunately it Representative
been reading a lot of.
Autopsy reports with some deaths
of children in our state and
It's been very difficult I am
right now let's see what bills
session.
So that would be our worst of
the worst peta files the
collector piece but child abuse
results of the job that would be
there so many insistence and
that CYFD to bring me to tears
I'm not touch that one because.
It's very heartbreaking for me
and intentional abuse of a
child.
I really commend you on adding
these words because I really
feel in New Mexico we have a
huge problem with missing and
indigenous children we have a
huge problem people being
trafficked children being
trafficked huge problem.
with the abuse.
Kind of tapped out with reading
about these and children right
now it's been very very
difficult so I commend you for
adding that in there because.
These type of people of the
people that are going to be our.
Repeat offenders.
On Madam chair representative on
page five.
You've added aggravated battery
to a police officer.
And then I also like the added
entry to pregnant women via
call.
I actually ran into somebody the
other day who their best friend
one of my friends in California
can visit and.
One of her friends is in a
wheelchair because he was hit by
a intoxicated under the
marijuana driver I think that's
a very important that if you're
going to.
Yes down in for she we don't
know how high is too high to
drive that there need some
repercussions.
Madam chair representative.
I don't think I have any more
questions on this because I
understand what it is trying to
trying to say we have this that
already passed we're trying to
put some of these people who
need to be separated and the
biggest problem I see in New
Mexico you can call me on this
one is that we are not enough
money and time and energy into
mental health especially
rehabilitation very disappointed
in the past amendment marijuana
bill we should earmark some of
that money towards RigCount
because we're going to say we
shouldn't pass this are gonna
move to table this that we
should have an alternative would
be that these people get the
mental health or get locked up
like the different conversation
not be roaming around our
streets so.
That's the important part of New
Mexico we're not putting money
where it needs to go for our
mental health or rehabilitation
I cannot tell you I mean I know
how may we help centers we've
how many left I think we had one
with the private one.
So let's we're gonna do with all
these other things this is an
excellent alternative so thank
you for bringing us our thank
you madam chair and thank you
next we have Representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative and so I'm
reading this bill here and it
says.
That.
They would have life
imprisonment.
If they had three violent felony
convictions except for if
their geriatric medical parole.
Can you explain that to me a
little more Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative block
we recognize that individuals
who.
Older individuals who have
dementia or are critically ill
are not going to reinvent and so
they should be released to their
to their family to spend the
last few days of their life
that's what that is okay thank
you madam chair thank
Representative are there any new
posts to that like if the person
was convicted of I think it's a
convicted pedophile file for
instance and let's just say they
the abuse multiple children over
the course of a decade or
something and they got three
violent felonies and they claim
that they have dementia for
instance with that violent peta
files to be able to get out on
parole with this bill Madam
chair representative.
Your Representative walked they
can claim that it must be
medically determined that they
have a but yes thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
so with life threatening
illnesses including cancer for
instance madam chair
representative.
you madam chair Representative
city blocked correct cancer is
one of them with a short
lifespan orders short projection
of like spam the corrections
department already has rules on
chairman Jerry actor release and
this just falls says this will
apply to this legislation okay
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I agree with
Representative Lord on that
Activated battery upon a police
officer I think especially right
now is we're trying to make sure
our streets are safer and we
need to protect our law
enforcers who are keeping the
peace be to make sure that they
have that protection so I I
really commend that part of this
Madam chair representative we
heard earlier with certain
individuals saying that this
would disproportionately affect
folks who are people of color
can you please just tell me more
about where you think that is
coming from madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
walked no we're in this bill
does it say it's got a target
group for another group.
The only group it's got a target
are I want criminals and it's
blind to color.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
So I see some of these horrific
things that are in this bill
such as negligence and abuse of
children things like that do you
think that these kinds of people
who are hardened criminals who
who have done this repeatedly
and
many children many individuals
do you think these people have.
Hope for rehabilitation in
certain in certain circumstances
madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
walk in my law enforcement
career is I'm retired police
officer I had the privilege of
attending a class from the FBI
in Quantico Virginia on criminal
profiling.
And in that class we learned a
lot not only how to profile but
that these individuals
are repeat offenders and they
are not a person who will be
receptive to treatment and
rehabilitation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I I
definitely concur with you I
think that the experts we should
certainly listen to the science
and the experts in by passing
this bill we would be listening
and voting for the science so I
agree with you on that so
talking about the twenty seven
individuals that were they were
charged with this three strikes
previously until twenty
fourteen.
Do you think that the absence of
language which is basically has
kept many of these violent
offenders out on the streets
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and Representative
walked yes please twenty seven
individuals that they have
identified here L. some of them
could be serving a life sentence
for murder but others could be
not serving a life sentence and
consequently be returned to the
public.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you know I
certainly agree with you there
and I think there's a lot of
talk around the round trips
lately about crime there has
been for the last couple years
and we talk about how we we need
to get together and we need to
work on crime and we need to
make sure that people feel safe
in our communities but every
year that we come here and we
don't pass bills like this one.
allowing these psychopathic
violent offenders back on the
streets to hurt the most
vulnerable to hurt people of
color to her children and so for
that reason I I stand in strong
support of your bill and I think
if we were serious about crime
we would pass this bill thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative.
You madam chair up my expert has
one comment.
Just like to make one more
comment madam chair members of
the committee I urge you each
ask yourself the following
questions.
Are each of you proud of New
Mexico status as a violent
State.
We are notoriously known as a
state that.
You know we we have a lot of
violence going on in your state
and each of you are in a very
very unique position to make
that change.
I like I said earlier I'm a
young person with several young
friends who are worried daily
for the safety of our selves in
Albuquerque and in other areas
of the state and I'm not proud
of that I'm not proud of
introducing myself to a person
who is not from New Mexico and
having questions asked me about
the violence of the state I'm
not proud of that and I urge you
each to consider that consider
that from the perspective of me
as a resident a native resident
who's lived here for twenty
years of my life thank you.
Thank you for your comment.
we have a.
That motion on the table for a
motion to table we have a
second.
Second.
Sure we have a motion to table
Representative what.
No to table.
Representative Lord no to table
Representative Romero.
Yes you may like to explain.
I'm sorry yes to table and like
to explain more about.
Representative Thomson yes and
I'd like to.
What might.
Representative Rubio yes to
table I don't need to explain.
And Representative.
Table.
Madam chair we have a vote.
Four two two and we have.
Do you like to explain thank you
madam chair is issuing highly
alley I just want to say thank
you for joining us today and for
your passion about justice in
our state I I was also really
saying students so I share the
interest in government and truly
the reason why this bill is
uncomfortable for me and why our
constituency is not interested
is because we really believe
that judges are the past judge
crimes that are committed I want
to keep that those versions of
government you know where the
legislature we have that the
court to make those really
important decisions on what the
crimes that have been what
violence means but what it is
we're trying to keep from our
streets what we want in the
public and what who needs to
stay in jail and remain there.
So keeping that power within the
judge's decision to do that is
really important to me and I
just wanted to take the time to
say thank you so much for
participating today and for your
passion and stick with it
congratulations on graduating
next year.
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair so I would say do
you know I I think that the
judge if we need to leave some.
judgment to the judges because
every case is very different and
in on our FY are it says
research shows the certainty of
being caught is a more powerful
deterrent to crime than severity
of punishment as a result
increasing penalties for crimes
is unlikely to produce a
significant impact on crimes
committed incarceration and
length of incarceration has also
been shown to happen have a
criminal genic affect meaning
time in jail for present and
make people more likely to
commit crimes and thank you
madam chair thank you.
With that you're spills sixty
I'm sorry fifty eight has been
tabled provoke that.
Fourteen.
Representative every with house
bill fifty nine.
Local fire arms trafficking.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee what we're seeing
in drug deals is that
individuals are armed with a
firearm in the violence
escalates when one of them
pulled a gun.
This law kind of mirrors a
federal law which is
referred to is nine twenty four
C..
We're bringing to you the
firearm is used to go ahead and
protect the drugs.
So this makes it a crime to go
ahead and bring a firearm to a
drug deal.
and
the violence that escalates out
of that.
And so that is the purpose of
this legislation and with that
of state for questions.
Thank you let's go to the
audience those in favor of this
bill please raise your hand.
Okay and those in opposition.
Okay we'll go with those in
favor if anyone would like to
speak.
Yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
committee my name associated
with that and I'm speaking to
you today we have the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
with sports house bill fifty
nine in New Mexico our crime
problem years substantially
defined by drug trafficking and
the use of firearms guns and we
have seen elements and other
states come here to New Mexico
and one criminal was caught and
made the famous quote on video
that it's easy for us to be us
here so we have some
shortcomings in our criminal
justice system and those people
who traffics and all and those
people who illegally possessed
guns and use those guns as part
of the violent crimes they
should be behind bars so the
chamber supports this
legislation we think it's
necessary we're also encourages
the the bipartisan support this
bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in support
yes Sir that.
Madam chairman members of the
committee job offers yeah.
The state was stronger support
of this bill yeah and.
will say this though.
but some commenters.
leave it up to the judges.
This body I just love judge.
Thank you.
Anyone else yes Sir your and.
Yes my name is David Burke as
an.
Why do the victims have rights
which are well point victims and
families have rights
distributors a drug deal gone
bad with firearms some is
walking by get shot.
What what is when the victims
have right.
Suffering from losing their
families and all seven news in
their family to the stress that
being peddled these does that.
And all these people who bring
these guns to
do do do these drug deals out at
some point victims and people
who suffer from this have to
have some kind of right as well.
Okay anyone wants to support.
Sean.
Go ahead John.
Hi Sean will be president of the
Albuquerque police officers
association we support this
legislation we have an epidemic
affecting all going on in our
communities right now to the
pool Caroline is actually hard
to come by I'm the son of a drug
addict that died at thirty nine
I'm the brother of a sister who
is a fat no user on the streets
of Albuquerque right now looking
for her next victim we have
legislation in front of this
body to require me a law abiding
citizen to lock up the weapons
that I that I cool but we
hesitate when it comes to
increasing penalties to drug
traffickers that use weapons it
is absolutely common sense
legislation New Mexico in the
people that are in this
committee or listening to this
statement if you've ever had a
loved one that is addicted to
these types of narcotics you
realize real quick that New
Mexico really doesn't do a good
job at providing services the
ability for services and or
treatments for these individuals
and one thing is for sure this
is a crime and we have these
people that are getting abused
and robbed and shot on a daily
basis with one nexus involved
and that is drugs.
We use this opportunity to make
some common sense impact of the
state of New Mexico and provide
victims of justice you shouldn't
be dealing drugs to begin with
you sure should should be
dealing with with drug dealers
that have guns because they're
most of the work.
Thank you so much I'm sorry
because on the record have a
great day.
Thank you John and there's
another person.
Okay go ahead.
Go ahead part but it's not par
with somebody else but.
Good afternoon madam chairman
it's Leri Sonntag here and hi
part of the.
Network across New Mexico called
better together New Mexico and
there are thousands of people
all over the state that have the
passion that was just displayed
by the president.
Of the Albuquerque police
officers association I want to
thank you for saying that
bringing that level of passion
and reality to the decisions
that are for you and other
members of this legislative body
there's all kinds of bills being
floated around as he mentioned
that are addressing law by law
abiding citizens and the ability
to carry a weapon this bill is
the exact opposite it's
targeting people who are
committing felony crimes drug
crimes that it only gets worse
when there's a kind of all.
I encourage you to listen to
what you just heard from a law
enforcement professional I am a
retired law enforcement.
Officer myself and this is an
opportunity that should be taken
to a house health committee for
criminals to bring it down to a.
Transaction.
Thank you for your service and
for listen to my comments.
Thank you anyone else.
Okay thank you go to those who
are in opposition.
K. we'll start on the side
Casebier.
in the end we can't good
afternoon I've been respectful
opposition they to be fifty nine
I highly doubt this bill people
for bringing firearms Committee
the crime of trafficking I don't
think they care about.
Already lawful for someone who
was previously convicted of a
crime to have a fire or there
are penalties already in place
for them yes it is possible that
person might be arrested and
charged with trafficking with no
prior felony convictions on
their record but I'm pretty sure
that the state can have this
profession the firemen are
already in place for people with
felony convictions would apply
to many if not most of
trafficking cases in which your
conviction not the economic
years in perspiration that has
been shown to be a deterrent to
crime the adding of years
distance well for most people
make them more not less likely
to be a danger to us on
everything.
They're not functioning to help
people become healthier offices
were like to do for the phone
number thank you.
Thank you.
This site gets.
Representative yeah my name is
Dan Williams committees New
Mexico where we work on issues
like this in partnership with
our coalition New Mexico state
which is excellent.
Thirty organization thing all
rights organization service
providers.
We also oppose the spells
Representative toxins just
remind us of the research on
matters like this thing the
correlation is that sentences
like this are not what interests
practices not eligible change
their lives we know what does it
is investing in our.
So we we always your reserves a
lot of the session that we don't
believe that further investing
in the perspiration that.
The more present for longer it's
going to help our communities
what we.
Do is to invest in the things
that help us all trying I live.
Additionally as you just heard
we do believe that.
Existing statute takes care of
issue as well we we are talking.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition yes.
Members of the same on both.
A lot of New Mexicans across the
state which removed and then we
also know that you know parent
personal
substances can you get charged
with trafficking New Mexico
which is part of my friends.
Hello and this does not address.
Grandparents Marcus's.
address thank you madam chair
simply fact of cherry.
so we are pretty okay.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition yes I.
The other sizers on opposition.
Okay are there people on.
Okay.
For.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and
representing today's wealth New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association I wanted to just
make a couple of comments about
this we do oppose this
legislation because a likely
significant number of drug
traffickers are going to possess
weapons this bill would likely
to frequent add on charges any
time a person accused of
trafficking is arrested and
happens to be in possession of a
firearm I understand this is
precisely the the the point the
Sanchez trying to get to but I
don't see any realistic
deterrence value in this
approach by separately
criminalizing the firearm itself
because trafficking is already
illegal and clearly has not
deterred the underlying conduct
and we're I think we all know
that the presence of a firearm
is often quote unquote necessary
for these these folks in the
situations to protect themselves
because it is an inherently
dangerous environment to be
involved in a drug transaction I
do understand it turns is not
the only consideration but we
should also punish drug
traffickers for drug trafficking
and we should punish violent
crimes for being violent well
the use of a firearm during the
commission of any felony is
already punished with sentencing
enhancements and gets prison
time up to five years under
section thirty one eighteen
sixteen and those enhancements I
would know we were just
increase last year separately
the crime of being a felon in
possession is also already a
standalone crime whose sentence
was just increased last year and
so I don't think that creating
yet another stacking crime to
target the junior presence of a
firearm when it's not even being
used is an effective use of
incarceration dollars and I
would ask this committee to
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else.
That would you like to say
anything else before we go to
the committee.
Madam chair I think one thing
was that was that is that in
opposition it's necessary for
the drug transaction.
And.
What I'm really trying to get
that is I'm going after
criminal use of firearms lawful
gun and that's what we need to
alright and is she criminal use
of firearms not lawful
possession thank you madam
chair.
Thanks committee Representative
Lord block the.
I think it's just her payment
names down right beforehand.
so madam chair.
Representative I learned so much
about all the bills that come
through I did not know this was
in Albuquerque journal somewhere
between forty to sixty percent
of illegal drug use United
States come through cartels in
New Mexico I did not know that
much drug trafficking what's
happening in New Mexico I'm not
gonna mention cartels and want
to come back to be mad at me but
there's another cartel that also
means here with methamphetamine
cocaine marijuana coming up I
want to do this to yourself well
maybe I don't know and also get
through Mexico so that was one
thing that I learned on here and
there's a.
There's so much in here this
articles amazing articles all
the time set.
That trafficking in guns used to
prop that here in New Mexico.
The main thing that I want to
dress.
Chair and representative and I
don't want to stay supported
condemned three objects and
the bill on the table so I'm not
gonna say anything about the
L. as in the state.
What I find interesting and the
opposition.
I feel like in this bill guns
are good.
It's very interesting to see
share words like it's not a
deterrent yes every want to go
after legal gun owners the gun
is the tool that got us a
problem except in this instance.
And I also find interesting that
we have a gun safe storage bill
coming that is a felony.
And I didn't hear anything from
the ACLU state that that we
don't want eighteen months of
putting people in prison that
one's okay this bill is not okay
and we don't want to use it as a
deterrent because deterrence
don't work everyone of us in the
community yet the gun safe store
just gonna put eighteen months
program who actually
disincentive for the gun out I
just find that a very
interesting person that.
Criminals don't care about the
law this one and they don't care
but as a deterrent they do when
it comes to going after the vote
honors and that was the main
point had to be done thank you
madam chair representative.
Thank you Representative walked.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative did you have
any comments on that point Madam
before I get madam chair I think
it was on point I think that we
need to
Go after the criminal use of
firearms I'm gonna tell you that
as a police officer when I
arrested individuals
particularly those who had a
lengthy history they could tell
me what the crime was.
What the penalty was.
What the plea bargains would be
and what the sentence would be.
So yeah there.
They will move the system.
And
why they don't want to go to
federal court.
Is because the penalty is
stiffer.
So I disagree with the reserves
that the that longer jail
sentences if you ask any
criminal they want to go the
state court they don't want to
go to federal court.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think that's
very cogent point.
Most certainly get on it isn't
tier deterrent to people who do
want to do this.
From going to jail you know I
would rather not go to jail for
thirty years and do something to
go to state court twenty five
years and then I get out and
three.
You know there you go is made a
point so on your bill you
receive FIR to copy the average.
Yeah okay.
Okay so I see here is
significant issues.
On page three.
It is research shows that the
certainty of being caught is a
more powerful deterrent to crime
and severity of.
How do you.
Make certain that criminal is
caught.
Without having a lawyer that
they would be defined Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair and Representative
locked you are correct that a
lot of drug deals most of our.
Go.
Undetected but those that are
detected
you know what then be prosecuted
so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I just thought
that was an interesting point in
FY are when I was reading that
how do you make it certain that
someone is caught for a crime
it's not like we have a little
bugs going everywhere looking
for crimes and not having weird
surveillance I guess maybe
certain federal agencies might
be doing that but you never know
so would you say that the people
that would benefit most from the
lack of this bill would be.
Representative rings cartels.
And firearm traffickers Madam
chair representative
madam chair in Representative
walked you're correct and also
the public benefits from this
many times when the drug deal
goes that there is a
spraying of bullets and you know
civilians get caught you know in
the in the crossfire.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and also in this
FIR is stupid there's a comment
from the I think it's the
district attorney's AODA and
they said that good thing that
you might want to think about
this defining the term caring
Madam chair representative have
you considered that.
You madam chair and
Representative walked I did see
that I think it would be good to
we could further define it but
caring traditionally is within
close proximity so within hands
reach on your person or within a
hand's reach thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
all right and so I just want to
talk about some statistics I was
reading the for this bill came
forward and the department of
justice they found that forty
three percent of criminals that
that did crimes.
They got the firearm from the
black market at six percent of
criminals more than five yes.
So you know a vast minority
actually acquired the via actual
retail purchase so I think this
bill really is targeted toward
those legal criminals were
getting those guns weekly I
really want to stress and
appreciate you working with
democratic Rep Garrett on this
bill I think that you posted a
great job on this and it's very
it's a very interesting it's
good to see both sides working
together on something so I
appreciate that thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Any other.
Sen Thompson thank you madam
chair I'm I'm looking at an
analysis that says H. B. fifty
nine conflicts with section
thirty one dash eighteen dash
sixteen.
For what sentence enhancements
when our firearms used during
the commission of a non capital
felony including in hand with
firearm use granted for
discharge in relation to a drug
transaction presumably a fire
are must be care read in order
to use brandished for
discharging.
The penalties are different so
it makes it unclear which
statute would apply in which
penalty would apply.
Do you have a.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I think that would be
up to the
the district attorney and the
judge as to which one would
apply in this is that situation
so madam chair the.
The one that's already on on
the.
And I believe one to three years
and the one year I'm reading is
three years so it just seems
kind of redundant that the judge
can already do that three years
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Any other.
I like to move to table.
Hey spending have seconded to
table Qualcomm.
Madam chair.
HM to table Representative long.
No to table.
Senator of course absolutely no
to table.
Romero.
Yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative.
Yes to table Representative yes.
This is good news.
Representative three.
Tabling of house bill fifty
nine.
Thank you madam chair you move
on.
Bill sixty and madam chair you
have a some handouts for that
one yes thank you for money.
Madam chair all begin because
there's a lot of data that shows
how deadly that mall is
basically of a green of table
salt is equal to two milligrams
for the pencil tip.
Is to mail a grams and that is
a lethal dose each other.
Sentinel is being manufactured
in Mexico and brought up here
into the United States.
At all is
Basically a one to five dollar
tablet.
D. A. has noted that.
One in four step and all users.
Will have and will overdose and
die.
Week before our session began I
went to one for training on
Arcadian.
And speaking with the officers
out on the street.
they're doing R. T. in.
And and administering it like
candy they're they're using that
so much.
The first page
That you have on them handouts I
you can see that it's talking
about that no is a hundred times
more potent than morphine.
it talks about the increase of
nationwide of the deaths.
The second page has what it's
increased here in New Mexico.
Actually on the first page
there's.
The second page talks about the
data.
From New Mexico about the
increase.
We are the level the highest in
the nation for overdose.
That in twenty nineteen.
There were four hundred ninety
two overdoses and twenty twenty
two it was
one thousand one hundred forty
six.
Next when we see that D. A. is
noting that six out of ten
federal appeals have a lethal
dose of federal.
What you continue through all
the data showing now deadly
fennel is.
The purpose of this bill.
Is to cause a discussion.
I don't I I am not stuck on the
number of pills and I'm not
stuck on the enhancement.
What I want this legislature to
do.
Is to go ahead and discuss what
that number should be what the
enhancement should be.
Why do I say that.
If we're killing.
One out of every four seven all
users.
We have a choice we either take
some type of action to
disincentive far as the
distribution of fat and all.
Or I hate to say it this way we
increase the line item.
At the MRI for body bags.
One of the articles that's in
this packet is from Seattle.
And Seattle have so many federal
overdoses that the OMIM office
does not have adequate
refrigeration to store that.
And madam chair I am amenable to
changing any number.
Of this legislation bills or
separates but we've got to sit
down and take a strong position.
At otherwise we're going to lose
a lot of citizens.
With that madam chair I stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative we'll
go to the audience and those in
support of the bill.
Hey.
For and those in opposition.
Out the state so with those in
opposition first.
Okay.
Yes sure you want to achieve
this policy alliance
also was workers nationwide
since she broke.
We talk.
All that our students will
choose this option.
But it doesn't it doesn't take
win
this election because I had to.
This is.
This.
So that they would.
Please.
That is a reality I'll see.
Unfortunately that reality also
is the result.
This bill would impact was
packed with selling drugs in the
help.
L..
One of the tribes of the others
supply bills all the time for
the closing.
This is our doctor.
For the two years.
All of them all also for for
this
As proving that incarceration.
Hi
this
matters
is yes plot Representative
reinforce this chart session on
that oil prices because it is a
crisis everybody again to talk
to fight in the state.
One one of the.
Unfortunately this bill would
just officer to exacerbate the
problem like criminalizing
conduct what where this fall
constitutional hello but I see
on.
It probably will be because of.
I don't think it's reduces the
state might not or maybe that
not the problem go away would
make much of a difference I
believe that after the fact
everybody creaking prison time
will stay myself one person in
person and someone else will
take their place in a heartbeat
help on their present whether or
not to get out years later for
tomorrow somebody else is going
to be out there using
distributing that not.
What is happening before the
pills distracted to the point
the New Hampshire Mexico we did
use it at night permit what I'm
more interested in this kind not
the I Ching or somewhere close
closest source of possible
without that desperate addicted
people and greeting and caring
people will continue to do what
they're already doing the photo
in millions of dollars for your
tier perspiration isn't going to
save my son from the federal
budget waiting for him on the
street right now.
Thank you.
I thank you madam chair
committee members asking us the
city of New Mexico I want to go
the same thing that that for
that the two were if we can
start with the issue.
Mexico but we also understand
that this is not a solution to
the problem we know that this is
a continuation of failed efforts
from the drug drug one thousand
thirty years we understand that
the issue that we have really is
substance reliance and that
punishment is not the way to get
there we know that putting this
issue in the hands of people who
were not properly equipped to
deal with it has already left
the failures of nineteen people
right in the care of one of our
facilities and the C. U. twenty
twenty and half of those being
attributed to
substance at issues either
overdoses more withdrawals and
we know that this is not a
sufficient issue are sufficient
solution to the issue of
substance the ones.
Thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
Future.
I we strongly oppose.
I grew up in New.
The.
I know what.
December tenth twenty.
The stuff already
that's probably what the offer
please the personalization.
We don't feel that this bill is
going to get at the root path of
services that we think that our
communities really need real
solutions sure.
Both come from housing
opportunities employment for
medical care we have factored in
this program which is not yeah
the so called thank you for
money real solutions public
safety I always enrollment.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition.
This site.
Okay do we have anyone on this
and.
We are.
Actually go ahead.
Thank you my name is Ashley
charters ich I'm the executive
director of New Mexico harm
reduction collaborative and they
work every day on the streets of
Albuquerque with people who use
fun all hold in pill form in
powder form and sometimes other
forms I think that my comments
at this point are just going to
mirror the comments that have
already been made this is not
the way to work with what's
happening you know with fennel
currently here in New Mexico
normally it's my experience of
people carrying a hundred pills
are less are going to be
carrying it for personal use or
to just maintain their own habit
and if we continue to
incarcerate people on Sentinel
we are actually ignoring people
up in the higher supply chains
that are supplying Sentinel it's
going to create more problems
within the drug supply it will
become a stronger and more
dangerous thank you.
Thank you.
Next person in this.
Go ahead and just go.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender in the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association for many of
the reasons already stated we do
oppose this legislation I do
think it's important to
emphasize that this bill is very
specifically targeting suggests
the end user possession and it
does not in any way address
traffickers are distributors
it's specific to subsection a of
of the relevant statute which is
just possession not possession
with intent to distribute none
of that I also also think it's
important and it's been
mentioned that the crime of drug
possession maybe this part
hasn't actually that the crime
of drug possession in New Mexico
law does not require a person to
actually know what drugs they're
possessing the way it's written
in with that a jury has to
provide to convict is that they
knew it was that drug for they
believed it to be some other
illegal drugs and that's really
important in this context
because fentanyl is very often
possessed unknowingly so the
bill is consciously punishing
the possession of funding all
based on how much is in there
without any showing that the
person knew that there what they
thought was some other drug
actually it was tainted with
fentanyl which is extremely
common the CDC has acknowledged
that this is a very common
situation it's routinely added
to other drugs to make it look
specifically like other drugs
and packed into panels to make
it look like other drugs and so
likewise it's also well
established that increasing
punishment for drug use and
possession is ineffective for
reducing drug related problems I
know many people have already
spoken to this but there are
very well established research
data points on this this fact so
I do very much want to also
address the present no problem
in the state of New Mexico my
clients are very directly
affected by it but unfortunately
I do not believe that
incarceration is the solution
and criminalization so we do
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Thank you.
That's all.
That's in addition.
Yes okay now we go to support
those and supported HB sixty.
Okay we'll start on the side yes
we.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Jennifer on Perkins executive
director at a treatment center
and out of the house for the
second we provide substance use
treatment services.
Support of this bill for a
number of different reasons I
work with young people every day
who were to do that all I lost
my son to an overdose of these
years also want to get in the
game and I I talked to the young
people that we work with and I
have a huge for twenty two that
does work I see every single day
I see people struggling and I
also see them know that they're
not going to be eligible to go
back out
on the streets so they know they
don't know that.
He can still drive and nothing's
gonna happen to them and then
you regardless of their own
sobriety we can become sober and
still sell drugs or they might
sell drugs they know they're
gonna make a lot of money we
continue to do that and some of
them do it to support their
habit but regardless you know
there's not going to be any
consequence for their actions
this last week there was an
article in Albuquerque journal
or a woman was arrested on
Central Avenue which is on
federal appeals child with her
she had been forty and off field
and the thousand dollars in cash
and the judge sensor to date two
days in jail.
Thank you and I'm sorry for
your.
Yes.
My name is David Burke and
The right answer any music is
recovery center a lot of kids
that we get
to make it we lost seven kids
last year to fend all over those
under the age of twenty one.
Are the kids that we get a
fourteen fifteen years old who
are now dead to defend all.
There's four bills for I built
in the entire legislature this
year that those options.
We say that this isn't gonna
work but there's nothing to do
to to talk about mental health
and substance abuse treatment
something's got to change more
people died last year in one
year guiding the entire ten year
warranty on.
That's crazy over a hundred
twenty some thousand Americans
die we would use part of part we
refuse to go after that drop
into the contents of the
struggle or to go through all
this stuff.
Senator green really sad doesn't
matter about the number make it
two thousand you get three
thousand what we gotta do
something.
Something has to be done to save
our kids and our council of
states.
Women are in our lives.
Something has to be done there's
nothing about substance abuse
we're the only due to concerns
in New Mexico.
We can do detox we have to send
the kids opportune and we're
trying to find we do detox
there's nothing for built I
built the entire legislature
that you'll substance use
issues.
Something has to be done and it
just happened how something
happened.
Thank you.
Yes Katie thank you madam chair
members the committee JT what
went and speaking to you today
on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
well there's certainly one thing
we can agree on that now is an
indiscriminate killers.
It's a leading cause of death in
on season seniors in the United
States and share that we all can
agree on that we just have to
figure out what to do.
We all know where much of the
panels coming from it's coming
from outside the country it's
Powdell here and it's going a
lot of our family and friends so
the chamber feels like it's way
beyond time to enact a law that
forces these drug peddling these
death penalty for a non dealers
off the streets and that's the
key operative word here it
forces these people off the
streets it's pretty difficult to
argue that a law is ineffective
if it forces that that the
level dealers off the streets
thank you.
Thank you anyone else's.
Yes Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee Joe Culberson thank
you Harding County.
Representative Rehm.
Indicated the one this bill.
Argue that the details are but
the starting number station.
It is that.
And that's what previous
speakers discuss or sand some
Senator.
We need to do something.
But the other side just once.
But this that is not getting
anything done.
Our our job that will.
A lot of these users are getting
hello I don't know.
I think it feels that someone is
not supposed.
Thank you with the sugar mills
or whatever thank you.
Are we going to do all get those
these kind of pills
of the pharmacy the.
Okay so what why are they out
there so of these bills I.
They could have thank you Mr
Jones.
Yeah when one of the solution is
are requests that comes one of
the solutions that that that.
Thank.
Anyone else in support.
Go ahead John.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity strong will be up a
creek police officers
association again we rely on
common sense we support.
I believe that you were faced
with a lot of truth on both
sides I do not prescribe to the
ideology that incarceration does
not solve these problems but
incarceration is not the only
fall for a problem like this
we're I mean this legislature's
not going to control the border
we're not going to be able to
prevent that North coming into
this country we we have to deal
with this problem because this
problem is dealing with us
personally right now we don't
provide substance abuse we don't
provide the ability for these
folks that are on the streets
and addicted to fend all to get
the help that they need I'm I'm
a family member of a fence that
no addicted person I'm a family
member of the brother that deed
from opioid I pray for her
incarceration every day I hope
he goes to jail because at least
I know she state that night
right so this is a very complex
conversation I give credit to
Representative Rehm for bringing
it up and in the topic when he
first brought this bill up that
we need to have a conversation
like I said my grandmother
always said if you don't deal
with the problem it'll deal with
you and this is dealing with
every single new Mexican and
it's not going to be just these
folks that we see on the street
it's our sons or daughters
there's a lot of truth there is
a lot of fit and all that are in
other narcotics and these kids
don't even know they're doing it
at all but this is a very
serious problem and we need to
have both enforcement pool and
we need to have a rehabilitation
tool we need to give these
people the help that they need
and all the way around this
topic we failed New Mexico is
failing at Sentinel on all
spectrums and I pray that you
look into this you fix it and
you try to address these
problems thank you so much.
Thank you anyone else yes.
Ahead.
Good afternoon madam chairman
it's Leri Sonntag here and once
again it's a pleasure to follow
the Albuquerque police officers
association representative John
Willoughby because he brings you
the truth from a ground level
perspective anybody that's been
through downtown Albuquerque or
other parts of the state should
well be aware of that and all.
A shot said if we don't deal
with it it is dealing with our
community and Representative I
fully support.
Representative brings bill to
try to increase penalties that
have to do with the session
affecting all.
I just want to digress some here
we just went through election
season where I was one of the
top issues and many include you
know those those in this room.
Talk about how they would focus
on crime.
There is just a press conference
the governor talking about how
there would be a new show we
know by partisan effort to
address crime.
I just hope that what I'm saying
what I'm hearing from this
committee so far it is not
aligned with any of that I would
encouraging you to focus on the
elements of the bill and crime
and not other agendas.
Thank you for listening to my
comments.
Thank you.
Yeah okay right anything else
Representative argued in yeah
madam chair and.
Committee members and the public
I'm.
I'm sorry for the
misunderstanding I am not going
after the end user.
That's why I've tried to pick a
number of kills that's why I
said let's pick let's sit down
and figure out what that number
of bills is.
As the example they had eight
hundred pills and eight thousand
dollars that's not the end user
I want this legislation to be
only targeting the traffickers.
We've got to go after the
trafficker to cut off the supply
chain.
The other thing this legislature
passed if you want to be a smart
trafficker them you take the
pills she bought we give free
that not test strips you could
test yield.
But they're not going to do that
they don't care.
All are caring about is money.
But this is not for that I would
like to have a discussion either
with this committee or better
with the Judiciary Committee in
this committee for us to sit
down and figure out what number
we need in here at what in here
Smith.
For the trafficking of
that no all.
This legislature would like to
to place to make a strong
statement against Benton all
dealers thank you madam chair.
Here let's start with
Representative block.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative you know I
think this issue is very complex
and it does affect every single
person in this room and in the
state.
All know somebody has died from
a fentanyl overdose or at least
someone who's been involved or
is secondhand to that and so
it's very concerning to me so
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for having
this conversation start off with
and so first of all I would like
to also corrected F. I. R. in
this bill page two.
It looks like whoever is doing
this FIR six copy pasted from
the last one because this is
right on.
Research shows the certainty of
the car the more powerful
deterrent to crime severity of
punishment that is verbatim from
HB fifty nine need to be sixty.
So I I really don't think this
is a copy paste kind of issue.
Madam chair representative.
We're dying on our state and and
it's really horrific so I I I
take department we've heard
today from the the testimony
madam chair and representative.
About what.
What's going on and we heard
today someone so that they know
they can sell drugs and
nothing's going to happen to
them Madam chair representative.
I think that is something
totally horrific if you just go
out there and peddle drugs and
know with certainty that nothing
is going to happen to you in the
state that is something that's
wrong and that's probably why
we're number eleven on the
highest drug overdoses in the
nation I'm sure that are a week
laws are contributing to this
kind of death upon our populace
across the nation and especially
right here Madam chair
representative so Representative
lot of districts about.
The analysts work economy if we
can avoid.
I thank you madam chair I I
apologize I just thought it was
an interesting point I I
apologize to whoever may have
gotten funded by that.
going forward.
We heard today that someone set
in opposition this bill that
this bill would affect those
trafficking drugs that don't
know they are peddling this
stuff.
First of all these people are
peddling drops.
And I think that there is a
very.
Common knowledge at least here
at if you're peddling drugs
those can get dangerous Madam
chair representative would you
agree with that.
Madam chair and representative
block it's a very known fact
that if you bought a oxycontin
tablets on the street
and.
Go to this hand out that's what
D. A. showing you.
It's probably waste with
federal.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and would you
say that most people who are
peddling these drugs.
Would probably know that they
are doing something dangerous
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and Representative
walked totally many drugs.
And in particular something you
to make you know is dangerous
as I said R. Fenton all problems
coming out of Mexico out of the
drug cartel and
the it's not they are not making
these tablets by a pharmacist.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative night I agree
with that and I think that
there's are there's already risk
and I think this really just
targets fentanyl because it is
so deadly in this for fine and I
see national statistics here.
Yes.
According to the CDC fitness
remained the leading cause of
death for Americans aged
eighteen to forty five since two
thousand nineteen and this is
surpassing suicides car
accidents COVID nineteen and
cancer and so we see the deadly
effects of this I appreciate the
conversation because this is
deadly this is killing more
people than most of these
horrific things that I just
mentioned Madam chair
representative.
So
You know we heard today some
folks talk about we have centers
and I think that is necessary we
need to.
Make sure that we have those
rehab centers for people who can
become rehabilitated however
unfortunately what we're seeing
is also deadly there are now we
have Centers for corpses Madam
chair representative and we need
to take that to heart especially
with this legislation so I'm not
sure what the number of pills
could be or how many we need to
put to to placate whatever side
but whatever it is I certainly
hope that we come through this
committee with some kind of
consensus because I'm I'm here
to work with both sides of the
island we need to make sure that
people are not dying on our
streets we spent all and so I I
will close with this Madam chair
represent their national
attention going to this issue
democratic representative David
trone he put out a lot of
information about Sentinel and
he's from he's in Congress and
she said far too many Americans
have lost loved ones to opioid
overdoses and millions more are
currently suffering from
substance use disorders.
Working together we must do
everything we can do to stem the
flow of illicit fentanyl into
our communities madam chair I
would submit that this is
exactly what we're doing today
this committee with this we're
still so I certainly hope that
we can come with some kind of
consensus out of this committee
to keep deadly fentanyl out of
our streets killing our family
members killing children and
making sure that crime is
exploding in the state we need
to really hone in on it so I
appreciate that madam chair
Representative I don't give any
comments on.
Madam chair and Representative
block all just reiterate I've
willing to work with any one of
those sides of the aisle we need
to figure out what the number is
and what the enhanced penalty is
thank you.
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Rehm is good to
see you again.
so interesting I'm on the F. B.
I. dot gov website.
September twelfth two thousand
twenty two.
In Albuquerque.
The FBI seized one million
Sentinel fills.
One million that's all.
By the way they also had hundred
forty pounds methamphetamine and
one point eight million in cash
and the pictures to will
Ferrell's in case anybody wants
to know what one twenty.
Million dollars in cash thirty
seven firearms
six vehicles stolen the kind to
create also there.
I want to start reading us and
the staff of the worst and worst
madam chair and representative
and I completely understand what
you're doing and I also agree
with some of the people say.
To have a very serious
discussion no.
Mexicans are aware that would no
messing around on this just
Republicans and Democrats
sitting down and saying what the
heck we do about this because
this is absurd one million total
bills is that the.
Insurers and then up to kill
everybody here in the whole
state of New Mexico.
we're state madam chair and.
Representative Lord we need to
look at the D. A. data about
twenty five percent of those who
would take that tablet are gonna
die.
Madam chair and representative
and it goes back again I'm not
going to mention the cartel by
name but at all times back to
the cartels and.
Gang related homicides and
violence and it goes back to
this bill that breaks my heart
needs to be fifty nine with
bipartisan support.
I look at everything it's all
interconnected right it's like a
a wheel with spokes Senate at
this HB fifty nine would have
taken those people off the
streets going up to the drug
dealers doing more hands
penalties because.
They were using a tool.
That they should have.
And this bill interstate we're
doing is we're trying to say Hey
you know what this federal
issues problem these dealers
need to be taken off the streets
I mean they do I mean this this
is a whole.
Part of this whole vicious.
So we have a New Mexico where
we're not doing what we need to
do to stop it and I'm
embarrassed I'm literally
embarrassed.
I'm frustrated I cannot go back
to Albuquerque because they're
gonna say Hey what happened all
those.
Bills that Representative don't
run for the work site bills
bills bills.
At about to save every single
one got squashed I'm sorry.
You know I have to go back and
explain it to my constituents.
And they're going to want to
know why spent two days fifty
nine why that one didn't go
through that's especially
disappointing so.
I hope that nothing else because
I assume I know what's got to
happen to this I can almost
guarantee a place of twenty
dollars that we'd like to know
what's about to happen to your
bill.
But the sad part of this is that
we're the worst and worst of the
worst and everything and federal
coming over the border is
serious and it needs serious
actions to stop it immediately.
Stop it.
Stop it fifty issues to fix the
issue so why this is coming up.
Made in China and then coming
right over the border it's a
huge issue in its use of the
cartels and.
That's not to say about this I'm
very sorry to my constituency
realizing that HB fifty nine and
some of the bills for.
Stop today and the top state
thank you.
It was more of.
I I absolutely appreciate the
discussion about Sentinel and
how it's ravaged our communities
our state.
my community in particular we
deal with it every single day
discussion the collective grief
about overdoses.
Loss of life.
And how it.
Affects everyone across every
aspect around education sector
age groups I mean it's just so.
It's very impactful so I really
absolutely I'm grateful to have
a conversation here all.
That said with many it's thank
you included in the information
about Sentinel because I think
there's a lot of information
about the impact what it's doing
to our communities how it's
ravaging the United States where
it comes from in it how it's
applied
I don't see how the nexus
between your proposal about
picking these arbitrary numbers
on how to criminalize Spence and
all and how that relates to what
we can do to.
Reduce the harm that is caused
by.
And from the committee from that
house is that is objective about
what it is that we're trying to
do
To address this issue.
All the station this perception
to me does that in any of the
analyses that we received about
how to get rid of this problem
time lesson and how to address
it this is and how to do that.
Have a way to to be able to tell
me where the data is on reducing
that harm to our community based
on this proposal and maybe Mr.
we're in we're in the analyses
or where the data here what
you're finding is been.
Shows us that if we introduce
this panel and we start
criminalizing people with
possession as we seem to.
For eons of the war on drugs.
However how are we reducing from
because now we have fentanyl
before the seventies when we had
I mean.
That we've criminalized.
We're we're we now all right
twenty twenty three with funds
and all perhaps the worst we've
ever seen.
How has the impact of
criminalizing the substances
made it better and I.
Maybe it question and maybe
something that we.
Go back and forth on this
specifically how can we how can
I show that how can I go back to
my constituents that this is the
thanks for that.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero.
As I testified earlier.
Many of the criminals that I
would come across police officer
do the penalty.
And I hate to say it this way so
what we're let's use the person
that the public just gave us an
example of a two hundred pills.
Eight hundred pills is not the
user ID R. Pirtle says is a drug
dealer.
So if we went ahead and said
let's just take eight hundred
and eight hundred pills is equal
to women aunt sevens up at.
What we've told them is.
If you're going to deal and
set an all or federal lookalikes
you're gonna end up strung.
In jail.
Well I hate to say this I would
rather push the fed known dealer
back distributing.
Which is what S.
deadly that defect and all.
Hey everyone is deadly but
Sentinel is much more deadly.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think you just.
I hear what you're saying the
amount and the copy cats which
also now makes the best from the
analyses many of these pills
contain a variety of substances
that dealers in fact I don't
even know what's in.
and so when folks are processing
these.
Whatever's.
We can't even describe it at
this point we're now of course
reading these folks for things
that we don't even know about
and and so many of.
This is what it is that we are
trying to do to understand this
public health crisis that we're
in is that.
Thank it keeps changing keep
criminalizing keeps changing
and.
From the data that I am looking
at is saying what can we do and
I think many members of the
audience brought this up is that
harm reduction works that the
treatment facilities that we put
to put it we have had to rebuild
as a state and re appropriate as
a state that went away during
the Martinez administration that
we worked really hard to try to
come back up again are working.
And the treatment of these.
Problem is is how we address it
and that's the objective
analysis that I'm reading as
well.
What our communities are
fighting so hard to.
To provide the facilities to
treat these problems but the
families that have had to deal
with incarceration because of
addiction have only made it
worse and they have many victims
of that drug use
and perhaps getting a handle on
the substance that they may not
even she wanted to have a handle
on I know our family dealt with
recently and overdose were
sixteen year old girl was at a
party didn't know what she was
but trying and my cousin lost
his girlfriend.
From just.
Curiosity.
The criminalization of these
types of things we have this
kind of loss just for me
exacerbates the problem it makes
it worse and now we're creating
generations of people who not
only have to deal with substance
abuse but perhaps.
Incarceration as well so I look
forward to working with you on
how we can where where can we do
this I see many states have
tried this type of legislation
thank you for sharing that but
madam chair representative it
just doesn't address the root of
the problem for me and I know
that our our community has
charged me with looking at
reduction opportunities and
options I'd love to be able to
work with you on how to do that
and what we can do to get
Sentinel to the off the streets
and and really truly up and this
epidemic across our communities
it is so critical and I'm
grateful for the conversation
I'm grateful to to look at how
we do this and thank you for
trying
you know and and and trying
something
and the way that we've been
trying for the audience as well
looks at our budget right I
implore you to look at how we
purpose our health budget on
behavioral health services on
Insure that folks to our city
for these types of crimes that
they're already being
criminalized for.
so that's that I'm not sure if I
just I'm grateful for the
conversation and and thank you
for your concern and I hope that
we can work together to to truly
at thank you.
Madam chair I would just add
this is not a treatment bill
this is directed at the supply
chain we've got to cut the
supply chain thank you.
You representative Thompson.
You madam chair I could say
ditto to what colleagues that
but a couple of other things we
I mean we can we have to learn
this or we should have learned
this through the years that we
cut off one supplier and there's
always something else so it it's
way past time for us to really
invest in treatment so that
people are so desperate and and
if you look at what what drives
people to to use illicit
substances.
We have to decrease the demand
poverty behavioral health
untreated.
Disabilities.
Adverse childhood experiences
that things that happen to a kid
when they're two years old can
to set them up to be up to have
substance abuse issues when they
get older that just the trauma
we we need to get at the root
costs because what we're trying
to do now is like well you know
the trees grown this big let's
cut off this that this branch up
here when the roots are where
the problem is so I would just
point you to
the FIR on page four
it is well established
increasing punishment for drugs
and possession is ineffective.
Drug related problems.
District with a large body of.
That Representative.
Not deter drug misuse
distribution or other job drug
law violations indeed specialist
recognize that punishing
possession and use as opposed to
treating addiction as a public
health crisis tends to
stigmatize drug use and thereby
prevents people from seeking
treatment for their addiction.
And then the next paragraph
increasing penalties has little
deterrent effect and is
particularly true for crime
driven by addiction in
furtherance of the present goal
of reducing the prevalence of it
now and I'm recommended market
targeting individual users who
have no control over the
contents of contaminated drops
and who are driven to the market
by their substance use disorder
we're seeing of limited
effectiveness so I agree with
Representative Romero that we
need to do something I'm just
not sure that making people who
come to this through bad
childhood experiences that
throwing them in jail for longer
is going to make any difference
thank you madam chair.
you like to respond to.
Again I'm not going after madam
chair I'm not going after the
user.
After the supply chain.
That's where we had.
Okay the further to our second
round I just like to add that
on.
At.
Representative walk when you're
talking about you know that not
being one of the highest
Yes alcohol related deaths are
highest in the nation in New
Mexico and that's more than all
the drugs
combined.
So
that's one thing but it still
doesn't me to minimize any of
the tax that we have that
dollars the others illegal drugs
but also the gentleman who said
well what about all the facts
but
We have seen a decline.
since March of twenty twenty two
because of the programs like you
were mentioning that that not
strips being legalized and
promoted through the department
of health and also in in chance
overdose prevention education
and also the new the locks and
distribution to those who are
most at risk so if with those
prevention programs if we could
drive down the demand I think
that would be more effective and
then just having harsher
penalties for those who are
trafficking because studies
don't show that there's no.
Just say there's no correlation
between increased imprisonment
for Dr related crimes and
substance use so we need to do
what we can on that prevention
and
Education side of.
This problem.
I don't know if you wanted to
respond.
No I couldn't madam chair I can
just say from experience that.
Individuals who got out of
prison for long sentences.
Didn't want to go back.
And that's from just be
communicating with the guy that
had been in prison for a long
time and and particularly
distributing drugs.
But distributing drugs is so
profitable.
That's that's why they go into
it.
But I do agree we have an
alcohol problem.
That's another discussion some
have but yes driving down the to
be and I think it's.
Going to do to yes
Representative blocked chair on
the deep Madam chair
substitution table.
Okay the motion to table
supersedes a motion to do pass
so we will take a motion I mean
take a roll call on.
Motion to table.
Madam chair roll call on motion
to table Representative what no
and I'd like to explain my.
Representative Lord no to table
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Thomson yes
Representative yes the table
Representative for our yes madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and up real
quickly I just.
You like to set a date in New
Mexico where we cannot come
together and say that sentinels
that.
And we were not willing to do
anything possible to fix this
problem is to do with eight
hundred pills thousand million
pills and so madam chair
representative I'm very
disheartened by this I would
reaffirm that fentanyl has
remained the leading cause of
death American eighteen forty
five above alcohol enter thank
you.
Representative Thomson you have
a table of your house bill six
Representative Thomson I'm
sorry.
Excuse me.
And forty two to table.
Madam chair on house bill sixty
one you should have an amendment
down here.
Committee substitute thank you.
And it and if I could get a copy
of that she.
Representative.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We should have that.
Yeah.
This.
To.
do I have a motion to if the
substitute.
Actually first session so.
Thank you madam chair and let me
explain there was a couple
provisions that I put in the
substitute that weren't in the
original bill so house bill
sixty one is to deal with are
convicted felons who possess or
use firearms in the commission
of crimes.
So if you are convicted felons.
And you are in possession of a
firearm the sentence will be
five years.
If you were a convicted felon.
Thank you used a firearm in the
commission of a crime your
sentence will be seven years.
So we're going after the
unlawful use now let me explain
what you find on page three one
five.
That is what is referred to as a
straw purchase.
So what is a straw purchase when
you return to purchase a firearm
it **** the first question are
you buying this gun for
yourself.
Straw purchases an individual
who cannot.
Own a firearm illegally they're
convicted felon domestic
violence whatever.
And they get someone else to
purchase give or provide a
firearm to the
And that makes this four degree
felony to do that act.
That's what a straw purchasers.
And with that madam chair all
stand for questions.
Questions on the committee said.
The motion to accept.
After.
It's been moved and seconded to
adopt the committee substitute
for house bill sixty one.
book do you have any further.
You know madam chair all stand
for questions thank you we'll go
to the audience those in support
of a committee substitute
stated.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the GT and speaking on the
operator this chamber of
commerce in the short survey on.
Felons committing crimes.
Our tribe primary.
I I in the state and when they
are hot.
You see what this committee the.
Done thank you.
And.
Okay go ahead Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
And the.
We.
By.
And the a lot of.
Our.
These are.
Eight of these about.
I'm sorry I missed a procedure
we need to take a vote on the
adoption thing is we've
dissected yeah and then we need
to we need to take a vote on the
drive is there any opposition to
adopt committee substitute thank
you.
This what that program.
anyone in else in support of the
bill.
Okay we'll go to.
At the end of this year okay
those who are in opposition.
Okay the staff.
Sorry in.
And I know that we all are.
But I oppose this bill because
it increases the chances that
are already in place.
The more than two million dollar
cost of the first three.
The military is.
Thank you and I.
Can we take some of these this
proposed billions of dollars we
have with some of these things
together and take care community
treatment
Making people healthier and
Community saver in those ways I
don't know if you think we could
work together and we like that
and sorry Representative
The state is that.
Anyone else in opposition yes
Sir.
Hi my name is doing on the
ceiling New York Avenue messing
around.
We certainly involve us based on
all of us and all of our
communities one one of the best
for our community water can be
provided the one.
Some service here Sir everyone
has.
As we have that to use the new
we believe strongly that way to
make our communities state that
last policy was all try.
For us meeting the needs of all
of our.
And so we always urge that and
we're.
But resources not indicating and
I.
We need more people or
our religion or whatever.
House.
I have used all of that.
This call for longer.
So we're.
Certainly.
But we would urge you not to
look at the.
At the end of our rules are
rather.
Yes.
Mexico and for the many reasons.
This opposition of the committee
as well.
Thank you for.
Thank you.
Anyone else on this side.
In opposition.
Members of the committee my.
The income I'm leaning towards
opposing.
Because of the personal
experience I have any family and
friends to constituted by
parties happened.
Because of that decisions on
nights of heartbreak I'm not
saying that it is used for the
remaining years however.
I do have an incident of my best
friend was wrongly incarcerated
would be considered renewable
energy because he was in
position session about and if
not for that you would be dead.
And so I would like for this
bill to consider some of the
best cases I would also like to
express my opposition for
inviting
or penalties in order to turn
preservation or crime statistics
background in research but it
does not lower primaries just
try to recidivism rates are like
to commend of the representative
madam these recurring recidivism
rates more in the and of course
I understand absolutely and I am
and I want to see lower lower
rates of prime listening into
the I am because of that however
I do not think that this is the
way to go about it we have
decades of data research that
does not support this measure
and I would very much like need
right here and members of the
committee to please consider
this.
Thank you anyone else in
officers.
K. to have anyone on the.
Okay.
Go ahead can.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association I do think
it's important to note that
unlike sentencing enhancements
for using a firearm the the five
year penalty and haven't seen
the committee substitute but the
way I understand it the five
year penalty increase that was
in the original bill still would
apply to just possession of the
bill
of the of the firearm and this
would the statute as it is a
felony possession representative
policy determination that phones
should not possess firearms but
doing so does not present the
same level of risk or danger
associated with using one in the
commission of a felony or some
other crime so while felon in
possession is a felony now and
is punished by three years in
prison for six years if the
person's Valentin was already a
violent one that that got them
of that status
The the we do have a firearm
enhancement scheme however as as
I believe that the sponsor was
was made reference to for when
one is used brandished or
discharge that's handled by a
completely different statute so
I'm not really sure how the
committee so harmonizes with the
existence of the enhancement
statute if it's also addressing
a seven year penalty for use
because that does seem to
duplicate the effort of the
existing law
but I would just want to also
emphasize that this particular
statue just felon in possession
has seen a penalty increased
three times in as many years
every year since twenty twenty
the penalty for felon in
possession has been increased if
we have not seen progress or
results from those efforts
already I'm not sure why we
think that doing it again is
going to permit is going to
resolve any issues or have any
impact now and I think that we
want to try and turn our
attention to a better path
forward that will actually be
effective in reducing gun
violence I'm not sure that the
felon in possession statute is
the most effective way to do
that I do ask the committee to
oppose thank you.
Thank you perfect timing.
Okay
Anyone else on to number five
okay we'll go to the committee.
Representative Lord.
It's a madam chair committees
more on that list of chair
representative so
I do have a question
Representative I thought maybe I
am wrong I looked up the US code
nine three two business drop
purchase are ready.
And only electricity federally.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord you are correct.
It is a ten year felony and a
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollar fine.
We don't provide the Feds
prosecuting it very often.
we have a lot of complete at the
legislature about individuals to
obtain guns who cannot lawfully
obtained a firearm.
And there's been discussion that
we need to figure out who they
are and prosecutors.
And that's what this paragraph
does thank you mentor to yeah I
was just confused on them like
could this formula is ready ten
years and is reading fall but if
that's the issue if that's a
problem I now understand it's
that.
We have so many laws that don't
get enforced it's always
incredibly frustrating to me
with past up all the time.
Like I'll go check on something
we passed two years ago like the
students.
I'm.
So Madam chair representative.
The substitute was not the only
portion there was adding the
stock purchase I was trying to
write notes while you're talking
to Madam chair representative
floor two things yet of the
straw purchases and then if you
use it in the commission of a
crime seven years.
So if I'm understanding
correctly Madam chair
representative so right now as
it stands.
It's three years is that
correct.
Of madam chair and
representative lord yes.
Someone in possession right so.
Madam chair representative
Every gun bill that goes
through.
Where we seem to go out to legal
gun owners it always seems
apparently or no region that
that that that the gun safe
storage that's making a filling
out of a grandma that
accidentally leaves that out got
on the counter she's getting
eighteen months in prison losing
everything losing the kids kids
are going to see wiki.
But then I look at this one and
I see okay that makes sense of
everyone's in agreement that the
guns are evil and that the pool
I don't understand why this
would be any kind of problem
because I look at it as this is
a legit thing alleged bill we
have a person doing a crime with
a tool.
Question is me I put any tool in
there to the settlement to
tulis.
So we have a Phil.
Who is intentionally doing
something to harm another person
to threaten and scare them
whatever it is and they're using
this tool.
It seems like a logical
conclusion that we would jump to
say they're not supposed to have
in the first place so we're
gonna enhanced penalties.
I keep hearing a lot of it
doesn't deter doesn't deter
apparently will deter with the
counting storage magically and
that one.
But not for this.
So I don't look at as a
deterrent I look is these people
have made choices bad choices
and I would like to not see them
on the street running around
like to not seek the settlement
fail I would not just like to
see them.
Re offending because every time
I look at something.
I just.
For this long I mean that's a
mile long record of stuff and
we're not keeping them when they
need to be which is away from
our society.
We do all the other great ideas
of rehabilitation yes Heber
health yes it to get this back
to all the spokes in the wheel
this thing to do something about
it right now and I know governor
Martinez gets a whole lot of
flak but it's been four years.
I don't see any improvements in
and where we're going so I I I
get tired of hearing she's going
for everything I don't know.
Anyways.
So madam chair representative
I absolutely agree.
That if a person is doing a bad
thing we need to take them off
the street to the also beginning
rehab and prison that's a
totally different also be
getting life skills and how they
get out they can have a degree
in welding or something
absolutely agree with that but
this is one part of the we are
we can't just talk everybody and
say we're sorry had that job is
a lot of us with that childhood
turned a life around.
So I see that is this is one of
the spokes of putting these
people behind bars and then
hopefully we can all work
together even right now dropped
another bill to pay their and
they're going to get him all the
tools they need it when they get
out they can be a function of
our society but those are two
separate things is not tied in
this is just the tool for judges
and law enforcement so I totally
understand we're doing.
I totally agree with that
because in New Mexico we have a
huge problem with crime and
cartels and drugs and people
using tools that they should not
have.
It also banned from having
knives or any other tools or
campers are using their fists.
But with this I appreciate this
bill and
Your existing bills bills and
madam chair act finished thank
you.
Thank you madam thank you
Representative.
Questions for you I see here on
page two the committee sept I
think it's also on the first
bill this is a felon and
possession of a firearm or
destructive device could you
just tell me what a destructive
device madam chair.
Madam chair and three steps of
the block just realized the copy
I got is not two sided but I
think with your side what you're
siding is current law the
definition on a farm is that it.
I believe.
One of the bills on page two.
Line sixteen.
The commission.
Madam chair representative I
think it's that new language
your line I believe so yes okay.
Madam chair and Representative
city block the the
new language they're just reform
she backed to the section is
what it's doing.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative you
know I I.
I would make a comment about
saying I just publicly opposed
the election so that thank you
madam chair you.
You any other questions of the
committee.
Chair of the past madam chair
table.
at move to table are at welcome
if you do not passed on house
bill sixty one.
And a table of committee
substitute for house bill sixty
nine.
Yeah they're second younger you
second
piece okay thank you.
Yes I'm sure we have a motion to
table.
Representative what no to table.
Representative Lord no to table.
Representative Romero.
Yes table.
Representative Thomson yes.
To review yes to table
Representative Ferrary yes to
take off Madam chair we have to
table.
To.
I
green you have to have a table.
Do not pass.
Sixty one.
Motion to table on your
substitute for house bill sixty
one.
Thank you chair.
Forty two thousand I'm sorry
you're going to have that.
That's
pretty.
And.
And there's anything else of it
will continue.
One.
Thank you.
Is.
She was.
Do not.
