Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum. Please rise for today's
invocation led by the gentleman
from South Valley USA
representative de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let us
bow our heads and clear our
minds.
Our Father who is in heaven,
holy be your name, your kingdom
come, your will be done on earth
as it is in heaven. Father, let
us remember who our neighbor is
so that we too are the good
Samaritan and live out the
creed, do unto others as we
would have done to us, Father,
let us remember that your son,
our savior.
Meet the lame walk, the blind
see.
The deaf here and the dead to
live and for our sakes laid down
his life that we might have
everlasting life in union with.
beside you, Lord clear our minds
so that we might reflect from
our hearts your words, your
deeds, so that we might be
worthy of your son, our Savior
sacrifice on that wretched hill.
And Lord
Let each of us remember who our
neighbor is as we work in these
chambers of the people and for
the people in the name of the
Father.
son
men.
Gentlemen from gentle lady from
Sandoval Representative Cullen
with the Pledge of Allegiance.
And the gen the the amazing
gentle lady from all those
counties.
With the pledge of the New
Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
ago
The symbol of perfect friendship
among united cultures.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning members.
Good morning members.
It's good to see all of you.
Welcome to Legislative Day 10.
We're stuck in legislative
detent since yesterday. Maybe
we'll roll the clock again today
and go to 11. That would be
nice.
Are there announcements, gentle
lady from Lee Representative
Senna Cortez. Thank you so much
Mr. Speaker. I would love to
introduce my esteemed guests on
the rostrum today. Mr. Speaker,
they are 5th graders from
Junction Christian Academy in
Hobbs, which is my hometown and
district 62, and today they're
visiting the capital to learn
how this beautiful democratic
process works. Mr. Speaker, my
guests are Raylynn Richards,
would you?
stand and remain standing.
Cheyenne couples.
Javier Hinojos.
Zela May.
Juliana Marta.
And the parents are accompanying
them, my dear friends, Shawna
Richards and Ashley Overby.
Mr. Speaker, let's give one more
big round of applause to my dear
friends and welcome them to
their House of Representatives.
Welcome to the House.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I
wanted to.
Take a moment to thank um United
Supermarkets for this great bag
that they provided us with a
whole bunch of New Mexico
products, um, Pino and coffee,
Sadie's chips, um, United
Supermarkets is in their 109th
year of operation, um, or as we
probably more know the Market
Street, Albertson's Market, and
a whole slew of other ones. Um,
they also have a bunch of
convenience stores across our
states, uh, they employ over
3600 people in New Mexico and
they're opening a new market
street.
just a couple blocks away from
my house in Rio Rancho, um, in
April with another 350 jobs and
then they will be um opening
another Market Street in
Lovington, uh, in 2026, um.
I have a couple of the uh people
from Albertson's here on the
rostrum next to you, uh, Sydney
Hopper, the president.
Shannon Miller, the EVP of
talent management.
Uh, Abby Ray, the director of
public relations.
And Jeremy Miller, the store
director of the Santa Fe store
just a couple blocks from here.
Welcome to the house.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you guys for everything you do
for the state and for the
wonderful um food that I'm
looking forward to enjoy. Thank
you guys.
Thank you for being here.
gentle lady from Katherine
Tierras Coto Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted
to talk a little bit about the
cap and the stress ball and the,
the really awesome fan, if
you're my age, uh, that you get
in, in on your desk today, um,
this is from the ranches, uh,
which is in my district, which
uh a little bit about the
ranches, the goal of the ranches
program is to keep families
together whenever possible and
to reunite families when you
have experienced se.
for a period of time. The
program is based on Christian
principles and strives to
install values, instill values
that will provide the children
with the skills they and
qualities they need to have a
successful life. So I wanted to
talk a little bit about that and
thank them for those gifts. I
also wanted to tell a story, Mr.
Speaker, really quickly about my
grandson who attends ACA's
leadership academy in
Albuquerque on his way driving,
if you can believe that, 15
years old, driving to school.
saw a man unconscious on the
side of the road, a lady waving
my grandson down. He pulls over.
And stops. The man is
unresponsive, does CPR
qualified, he is certified CPR.
He wants to be a firefighter
when he grows up and he's
already gotten all these
qualifications and, uh, saved
the man's life this morning at
15 years old, so get, get
certified in CPR. His name is uh
JD Kersey, and he is my oldest
grandson, and uh he can run any
piece of heavy equipment, Mr.
Speaker, that you put him on,
uh, just a, just a servant.
Uh, person already and just
really, really proud of him. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker. What a
wonderful story. Thank goodness
for your grandson.
And A's leadership is in House
District 11.
Go pirates.
I made that mascot up. I don't
know if that's the mascot.
General lady from Burnley Vienna
Borego. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and Representatives, I also
wanted to acknowledge the bag
that's on our table with uh
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
um, I just wanted to mention
also the United family operates
100 retail grocery stores under
4 unique banners United
Supermarkets, Market Street,
Amigos, and Albertson's Market.
It also operates 40 convenience
stores under 3 unique banners.
It employs 18,000.
754 team members and 3,644
employed in New Mexico alone. I
just wanted to recognize the
stores that are in my district
as well. I have two Albertsons
and uh thank you Mr. Speaker, I
appreciate the time.
gentle lady from Berle
Representative Little, are you
ready on your announcement?
Gentlemen from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
would like to recognize the bag
that everyone received today.
Yesterday was the groundbreaking
in Lovington, New Mexico on a 14
plus year effort.
From our
Economic development group which
I had the pleasure of serving as
president for, for over 7 years
in pushing this initiative to
get united in Albertson's there.
Mr. Speaker, and, and
The rest of the house, I will
guarantee you if we do a bag
next year.
It'll have something from Lee
County in there.
With respect to pecans or beef
or something, um, I am looking
so forward to the efforts that
we put with uh farm to market
with uh meat inspections this
year.
We have 270 days of construction
before that market's in place,
so I expect to see that by the
end of this year, Mr. Speaker
and, and, and, um, house. I'm
just very thankful for the
investment that Albertson's and
United continues to invest in
New Mexico, our corporate, while
some of our
Taxes, Mr. Speaker, and, and
Uh, house, um, well, some of our
taxes may not be completely
friendly. Our corporate income
tax makes up for it, and I'm
very thankful that we have them
in Lovington.
Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen gentlemen
from San Juan, are you ready to
introduce your guests.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh, before I introduce
my guest, I first want to again,
uh, say good morning to the
members and uh and to, to the
public that's here, um, years
ago, Mr. Speaker, I
Lived in uh Albuquerque's west
side, and I wanted to stay
connected to my Navajo Nation
government.
And I couldn't attend my local
chapter house meetings, so Mr.
Speaker, I went to the community
of Tohajali and I attended their
chapter meetings and I changed
my voter registration with the
Navajo Nation from Carriaja
Tokon chapter to Tohajali
chapters. So so far small point
of time, I was a registered
voter uh in Tohadjuri and I
wanna, uh, on the table, Mr.
Speaker, is a um cookie from the
Condocito band.
of Navajo Healthcare Centers
Incorporated. This cookie has
our, Mr. Speaker, our um
ceremonial Navajo basket. This
is a ceremonial basket because
uh it's also referred to as a
wedding basket, but we use this
basket for our uh ceremonies and
um.
Mr. Speaker, the, uh
Um, the concept of ban.
Um, of Navajo's health center,
uh, they, they, uh, uh, are
giving us a small token of their
appreciation and
Um, and they are just more than
just a healthcare center. They
are a lifeline for many Navajo
and tribal members in New
Mexico. The commitment to mental
health service, dental, vision
care, and traditional healing
practices ensured that uh
individuals and families have
access to comprehensive
culturally competent health care
regardless of where they live.
Additionally, um, they operate a
pharmacy within 80, within a 40
mile radius feeling a critical
gap for those who might
otherwise struggle to access
essential medications. Their
dedication to bring medical
professionals to rural areas
help bridge the divide in health
care accessibility, uh, that no,
no New Mexican is left behind
and Mr. Speaker, I, I just want
to conclude.
That and I, I wanna also uh
acknowledge that this is uh a
district in representative
Beta's area, so I, I, I, I
appreciate her allowing me to do
this, uh, and, and Mr. Speaker,
the guests are, are in the
gallery, so I'm gonna hand it
back to you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you. Sounds like you stole
representative Beta's thunder,
so you need to buy her lunch.
Or it's actual capital days so
10% of your capital outlay will
go to House District 69.
For the honor of introducing our
guests right folks in the
gallery we've got Canocitoban in
Navajo's health center, uh,
please rise to be recognized. We
have the board chair Kimberly
Bruce.
Vice chair Harrison Plao, the
CEO Derek Watchman. Behavioral
health prevention specialist
Sarah Bitsui and Charleston
White contractor. Welcome to the
house.
While I'm introducing guests in
the gallery, there are guests of
Representative Rubio's from the
family and youth innovations
plus, this is an organization
doing uh work with youth and
young organizers on mental
health issues in Las Cruces and
Donana County Family and youth
innovations plus.
Uh, organizers include Keith
Francisco Burres, Ana Juarez,
Jay Guerrero, Deandra Rodriguez,
Tarsa Valencia, and Alexis
Benavides. Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from San Juan, Ria
Riba Sandoval, Representative
Linte.
Mr. Speaker, good morning. Good
morning, members. Uh, this is a
friendly reminder in the last
reminder that I'll provide to
this body that your capital
outlay forms are due today to
Legislative council service by 5
p.m. so please do fill those out
and get those to them timely,
uh, also keep in mind that in
regards to Capitol LA there are
projects that you may wanna give
maybe 5000 or minimal amounts
to, but if you don't give
enough, that's gonna complete a
project. It tends to add up and
right now we we're about 6.
something billion dollars of
unspent capital.
loudly that's sitting there that
we have to begin to figure out
what we're gonna do about the
process differently, so, uh,
please, if you can give the
projects that are about to
complete or maybe your pro your
money will help to complete
those this year. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman or Mr. Speaker, not
gentle lady from Donana Hidalgo
Luna, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members,
yesterday you received a
delicious bottle of wine from
Lescombe Winey, um, and it was
appropriately flavored either
green or red chili, um, as a new
legislator, I remember I was
always bragging and I still am
about my district being the
heartbeat of the New Mexico wine
industry and I'll never forget
an unnamed senator, uh, noted
that he said you may grow the,
the grapes, but we drank the
wine. He was from Bernalillo, by
the way. So anyway, I'm glad.
to give you all, um, I'm glad
that the Lecom wineries from my
district gives you all another
opportunity to drink the wine
and I'd like to say a few words
about them, um, the Lescon
family began in New Mexico in
1981. They arrived from France,
and they're in the 8th
generation of of um wine, a
winemaking now, um, they, they
are, um, they have a huge
economic impact in New Mexico
they employed 350 people over 5
restaurants, a winery and
a vineyard there in all New
Mexico counties, 15 states and
Taiwan and uh they flavor their
uh wine, wine that you received
yesterday with chili from Hatch,
of course, also from my
district. So anyway, members
enjoy. Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker.
the generous gift from DH
Lacoma, um, also in District 11.
In downtown Albuquerque.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, it's
that time of year again, and
they might not be on your desk
yet, but um Sun Country golf
house has um donated um 3 or 4
different chances to go golfing
and your card should be with you
soon, um, but, um, the Sun
Country Golf House was created
several years ago by the Allied
partners in Gulf from New Mexico
and West Texas with the express
mission to grow and support the
game.
of golf in our area and
specifically the Sun Country
section of the PGA of America
and the Sun Country amateur Golf
Association have many objections
objectives, excuse me, that
include growing the game in our
area, providing a quality of
life benefit to our golfing
public in helping our members
build and shape an industry that
plays a vital role in New
Mexico's labor force and economy
and just to give you, um, I'd
like to introduce in the
gallery, um, we
should have Corey Armstrong,
who'sun Country executive
director
Zach Hofe had
uh pro at Twin Warriors and aloe
brasy head pro at Santa Fe
Country Club and uh many thanks
to Dave Kimball who helped
organize this, um, so that those
of us who do golf or if you want
to try it, can go to these
wonderful courses in New Mexico.
Thank you, gentle lady. Gentle
lady from Bert Leo,
Representative Borego. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker, um,
I just wanted to follow up on
the Lacombes uh winery. They
just opened a new location in my
district, um, district 17, it's
right on the edge of um
Albuquerque and and Rio Rancho,
and it's beautiful if you
haven't been there, please come,
um, you can see the whole city
from uh their balconies and
their patio, so I invite you
there. Thank you.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Donana Socorro and Sierra
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and just if you
guys didn't know, lets combs has
a location right here in Santa
Fe. I'm sure you all have been
here this session at El Rey. So
they are the owners and
operators of IV, um, also today
I have a guest on the rostrum.
If you would please stand, uh,
Jonathan Macias, he was hired as
the assistant manager for Donana
in 22. He oversees and supports
Fleet Community Development.
Jet port and government
relations, he began his career
at UTEP where he oversaw
millions of dollars in research
for the Office of Research and
Sponsored Projects, and before
he joined the county, he served
as the president of Insight
constituency where he created
and implemented external funding
strategies for local governments
and organizations across the
country. So he is overseeing
more than 16 million, uh, he has
overseen over 16 million
emergency rental.
assistance funds and 42 million
in American rescue Planning Act
funds, and he is with me today
and if you're wondering why,
it's because he's an
enthusiastic and supportive of
the growing agriculture industry
that plays a vital role in
economic development in Southern
New Mexico. He likes the prize
green chili of hatch and
recognizes the seeds planted
today will yield far-reaching
benefits for the future. Um, OK,
thank you so much for being here
today. That's a big.
long resume. Thank you, sir.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Burton Lee or
Representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would
like, I appreciate the moment to
acknowledge a team of
individuals from the Native
American suicide prevention
Clearing House and specifically
the honoring native life
program.
These individuals, there were 4
individuals honored today
receive certificates earlier to
acknowledge their work in in
their suicide prevention efforts
and across the state.
Uh, they were Teresa Gomez,
Jennifer Nanez, Ryan Sanchez,
and Caroline Bonham. These
individuals have done amazing.
work
In suicide prevent in the area
of suicide prevention uh for
which so many families
communities and individuals who
have been affected by this have
benefited from so I just
appreciate the moment to
acknowledge them publicly, uh,
and the team that works with
them to provide this incredible
service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady and uh.
To introduce your guests in the
gallery, we've got, if you're
here, please rise, uh, Teresa
Gomez, lecturer division of
Community Behavioral Health at
the University of New Mexico.
Jennifer Nanez, Masters of
social work, lecturer division
of Community Behavioral Health
at UNM. Ryan Sanchez, a program
specialist honoring native life
Caroline and Caroline Boneman.
MD co-director of the Division
of Community Behavioral Health
at UNM. Um, I don't see you, but
if you're here, please rise to
be recognized.
Well, either way, this webcast
lives forever, so we will
recognize you. Welcome to the
house.
Gentlemen from Sandovalerio
Martinez, do you have an
announcement?
So.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Donana Notero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. um, I
just want to make an
announcement that
Uh, yesterday, the US House of
Representatives passed a budget
that um significantly increases
taxes on low and middle income
Americans in order to give huge
tax cuts to those making more
than 36 $914,000 a year in the
US we're cutting snap, um, by
230 billion and cuts to Medicaid
are 880 billion. We, as the
Representatives in New Mexico
are gonna have to answer to our
constituents for this we're
gonna have questions. People are
gonna lose their health care
coverage. They're going to be
hungrier, um, so that we can
give $1.1 trillion in tax cuts
to the very, very wealthy, um,
and I'm very upset about this,
so thank you Mr. Speaker.
Members take note.
gentle lady from Burleo. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I just wanna take a
moment to wish um my district
legislative aide Michael
Plantenberg, a happy birthday.
Today is Mike's birthday.
Mr. Speaker, he's known as
Starboy, and many of you know
Mike, he's been a staple around
um these halls for many years.
He's worked in various
capacities. He has an affinity
for space, um, and that's one of
the reasons why I imagine he
wanted to come work for me, but
um he is known as Starboy to me
and we often fight over, um,
who's Starboy, you know, is, is
he, is he your star star boy? Is
he my star boy? We never know,
but it belongs to all of us.
He's a treasure and
And um we will have ice cream
cake in the majority office and
please, um, come get a piece and
wish him a happy birthday to
sing.
Nobody help her.
Happy birthday too.
Happy birthday too.
you
Happy birthday.
day
Dear
have
Happy birth
to
you
Happy birthday to Mike
Plattenberg.
Any other announcements?
And the lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and we would go to
that order of business Committee
reports.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to whom has been referred House
Bill 61 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass.
But that House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 61 do
pass and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Doreen Y Gallego's
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in house
we're on adoption on favorable
community important House Bill
61, but a favorable committee
report in House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 61.
All those in favor in ababaina.
Opposed name.
The ISR committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 64 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallego's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable committee report of
House Bill 64. All those in
favor signified by say I.
For the supposed name.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 99 as amended, has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
during why Gallego's chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
committee report of House Bill
99 as amended. All those in
favor and if I would say no.
I suppose,
yes I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
and water resources Committee to
has been referred House Bill 431
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Christina Ortez, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption favor
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
favorable report of House Bill
431. All those in favors and if
I say I.
All Bosna, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 468, has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Patricia Royal
Caballero chair.
The
Speaker
I move, uh, the committee report
on adoption of a favorable
committee report of House Bill
468. All those in favor and if I
say 9.
All those Bosna,
the committee reported up.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 405
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 405. All those in
favor and I.
Popona, the eyes have it be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 532
has had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the education
committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption.
of House Bill 532, all those in
favor and if I say a.
Also Bosna, the Isabic report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 199 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted, Derek Day J Linder.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
199. All those in favor and if I
say I.
Albosna,
the committee report adopted.
Gentle lady from Burnley or
Presentative Homan Hill.
Mr. Speaker, I now we go to the
next order of business,
introduction of legislation.
You know objection. It is so
ordered.
Senate Bill 13 introduced by
Senator Schendo, an act relating
to public education, enacting
the state tribal education
compact Schools Act, providing
authorization to the public
education department to enter
into state tribal education
compacts providing for the
application process of becoming
a state tribal education compact
school providing rulemaking
authority, providing
requirements for the operation
of state tribal education
compact schools exempting state
Education compact schools from
certain state statues and rules,
providing reporting
requirements, allowing state
tribal education compact schools
to receive state and federal
funding, allowing for employment
preferences and, and admissions
prioritization, including state
tribal education compact schools
in the public school capital
outlay Act.
Senate Bill 13. Senate Bill 13
have been read twice by title is
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 92 introduced by
Senator Padilla.
An act relating to horse racing,
creating the horse racing
integrity and Safety Authority
and jockey and exercise riders
insurance fund.
Providing a process for paying
the costs of jockey and exercise
rider insurance and complying
with state and federal law,
making an appropriation. Senate
Bill 9292 haven't been read to
as my title is referred to the
House of Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 48 as amended
introduced by Senator Stewart,
an act relating to public
finance, creating the community
benefit fund, making a transfer
from the general fund to the
community benefit fund, Senate
Bill 48 as amended.
Cenel 48 as amended, having been
read twice by title.
is referred to the house energy
environment and natural
resources Committee, thence the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 220 as amended,
introduced by Senator Woods for
the Legislative Finance
Committee.
An act relating to risk
management, requiring the
publication of terms of legal
settlement agreements providing
for loss prevention review teams
requiring reports. Senate Bill
220 as amended.
Senate bill 220 as amended have
been read twice by title is
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, thence the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Memorial 44 introduced by
Representative Lauda.
A memorial requesting the
legislative education Study
Committee to convene a working
group to study the rising cost
of insurance premiums for school
employees and the group
insurance contributions provided
for in the public school
Insurance Authority Act during
the 2025 legislative interim.
House Memorial 44.
How's Memorial 44 have been read
twice by Tidal is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee.
House Memorial 45 introduced by
Representatives of Andrea
Romero, Rubio Sapanski Chandler,
and Lente.
A memorial requesting the
legislative finance Committee to
investigate the effects of
federal actions on residents of
New Mexico and on the state
requesting a report of
investigative findings and
recommendations. House Memorial
4545 have been read to us by
Charles or printed and referred
to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
Are we done for the day?
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business. It is so ordered.
Announcements, any other
announcements? We are going to
do some 3rd reading, but before
we go to that, we're gonna go to
the gentle lady from Donana
Sierra and Socorro
Representative Doll. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just real quick
in your office when you go back
to your office today, there's
one more gift and this is from
Tiller Diory. That is Chris is
the maker of the gift that is on
your desk in your office today,
and it is infused with green
chili. Thank you.
Green chili jam is in
everybody's offices.
Bring your extra green chili jam
to my office if you are not a
consumer of green chili jam.
gentle lady from
Los Alamo Santa Fe and Sandoval
Representative Chandler. Oh
thank you, Mr. Speaker, just a
reminder that your House
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting this afternoon, 15
minutes after the close of the 4
session. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
from Donana. Mr. Speaker, your
house preparations and Finance
Committee will be meeting 15
minutes after the floor session
concludes.
In room 307, sorry. lady from
Berlio.
Your commerce and economic
development Committee will be
meeting 15 minutes after the
floor.
announcements.
See none. The young lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation. It is so
ordered.
lady from Santa Fe, are you
ready on item number 13.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point? the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
129 as amended on final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This
bill shortens the state employee
probationary period from 1 year
to 6 months, uh, and with that I
would stand for questions.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, I
move that House Bill 129 as
amended do pass. We passage of
House Bill 129 as amended, the
vote is now open.
Nor running in the chambers
please.
What's about the clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 50 in the affirmative, 9 in
the negative. House Bill 129 as
amended has duly passed this
House.
Young lady from Burn Leo
Representative Garrett, are you
ready on item number 17. Yes,
please take me to that point,
Mr.
Speaker that placing House Bill
69 and final passage has been
taken and is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
generally need to explain the
bill. Yes, Mr. Speaker, House
Bill 69 loan forgiveness
multiplier Act is identical to
2023, which passed this house
and was at the Senate when they
when they ended, um, it simply
is a federal program that will.
Allow our uh
Uh, adjunct people to get credit
for their teaching and with this
I stand for questions.
Mr. Speaker, I ask for a due
pass for House Bill 69. We're on
final passage of House Bill 69.
The vote is now open.
Vote's about to close.
The border is not closed by
border 58 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative.
House Bill 69 has duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Torrance and
San Miguel, are you ready? And
item number 37.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point that all action
necessary for replacing House
Bill 297 as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the general
lady to explain the bill.
Um, House Bill 297 essentially
um opens up the pathways for
computer science endorsement for
our teachers, um, expanding the
pathways and also expanding the
licensure types eligible for
this endorsement.
See no debate generally to
close.
Um, thank you all. I just ask
that you for do pass motion on
House Bill 297. passage of House
Bill 297 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Well, it's about to close.
No running in the chambers.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. House bill.
297 is amended has duly passed
this house.
General lady, oh.
Congratulations on your first
bill.
And because you already sang a
song when you did the memorial.
I think the gentleman from
Sandoval and Santa Fe would beg
to differ.
He has a point of personal
privilege and he would kindly
ask you to sing a song.
OK, no, he just gave me the
death stare, so don't sing
another song.
lady from Brindley or
representative.
Thompson, are you ready on item
number 7.
I am Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point? The record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
2 with an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken. It
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
general lady to explain the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
This is another compact bill.
This is the physical therapist,
but I do want to point out that
according to RLD and data from
the state, physical therapy
shows a nearly equal workforce
deficit as nursing based on
professional to resident ratio.
Seem no debate, you of course
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 82 with an emergency clause
do not pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 82 with an
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Houses related to
with an emergency class has duly
passed this house.
Gentle lady from Donana Sierra
and Socorro Representative Doo,
are you ready on item number 3.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 172 on final passage
has been taken. It is not
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. This is an act
declaring August as New Mexico
red and green chili month and
with that, I'll stand for
questions.
Eddie Lee, Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady be so kind as to
yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and, um, colleagues in
the house.
I carry pretty serious
legislation typically, but I had
one son, Bill.
In my time in the legislature
and that was a bill to get a
chili pepper license plate for
the state of New Mexico and the
year was 2017.
And I had tried a kind of a
collection of plates emblematic
of New Mexico and I, I didn't
succeed on that one, but the
very next year I brought in, I
picked what I thought was the
best one and that was the chili
pepper license plate.
At that time, Mr. Speaker, we
found out that a woman
legislator in Colorado exact
same time frame was trying to
pass a bill in her state.
for the Pueblo Chile.
And I thought that would be such
an injustice if Colorado beat us
to the punch. So Mr. Speaker, I
was so pleased.
To sponsor this bill. It's
received a very good reception
in the house because we're
competitive people and we wanted
to win this one.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, it was a wonderful
presentation and as we were
moving through the process, um,
one of our representatives
suggested in committee that we
put an emergency clause on the
bill.
To get it in the law as quickly
as we could and so we did that.
And I'm gonna tell you a little
trivia, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady.
So we got the bill through, we
got it through the Senate as
well.
And, uh, found out the governor
wasn't going to sign the bill.
And I was kind of mystified as
to why.
She ended up vetoing the bill.
But it was the best veto ever,
Mr. Speaker, because I had
proposed.
That the license plate fee, it
would be an additional fee to
have this very special plate.
And the revenue from it would go
to the farm and ranch Heritage
Museum in Las Cruces to help
with educational programs.
But the governor at the time had
a different idea. She wanted to
make it a standard license
plate.
So the cost would be lower and
every New Mexican who wanted one
could have one.
And fast forward to today, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it is now
the best selling plate in New
Mexico.
And I thank all of you for that.
It was a fun bill for me.
I remember running over to um
Connie Market to get a basket of
little chilies to put on the
table as I was presenting the
bill and they didn't have any.
So I was chasing all over Santa
Fe to get some chili peppers and
finally found a few.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, I just want to add to a
little bright spot.
In 2017 later that year we won.
The award for the best license
plate in the country, and
that's, I think a credit to to
all of us.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
am concerned because as I follow
the statistics on chili
production.
The Anchorage underproduction is
actually going down and um I'm
really truly concerned about
that because I love chili.
And gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, if
you could just tell us what's
happening there? Why are we
seeing less production, um,
well, thank you for the
question, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Uh, we, there's a couple
of things that the statistics
are pretty staggering because
just as recently as the 90s we
had over 30,000 acres of chili,
and now we're right around 8000.
So we've, we're down to less
than 1/3 of what we had only a
few decades ago. And you know,
it's, we are, we still need the
nation in chili production in
the United States.
And, um,
There was 46,000 tons of chili
produced in New Mexico last year
and 41, that was processed in
New Mexico 41,000 tons of green
chili were produced in 5600 tons
of green chili were produced 9
tons of green chili were
harvested per acre, um, and they
were sold for processing for
value added, and it represents
41.5 million is the value of the
New Mexico chili production. So
it's a really important, it's a
an important product. There are
a
a lot of competing industries
outside of the state and so the
hatch chili brand is a
geographical location and they
have a competitive edge. So
there's very, very high demand
for the niche that is the
trademarked area of hatch green
chili, but everybody in this
body probably almost everybody
in this body has a producer or
processor in their district and
a lot of the chili that's being
used is no longer produced in
New Mexico. It's produced
southern, you know, below our
border. And so that's part of
it.
Also, the aging population of
our, our farmers, which is why
so many in this body are working
hard to connect new farmers to
resources and to connect small
farmers to resources so that
they have a supply chain in
place.
Thank you for that, um,
information, gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, so I understand that
there's, and I, I don't remember
the exact name of the company or
the family in the southern part
of the state, the younger
generation is stepping up.
To uh make sure we have uh
chili. Do you know anything
about that, uh, company or
operation, uh, Mr. Speaker
Speaker and gentle lady, I don't
know about the specific name,
but most of our chili producers
are 3rd and 4th generation
farmers, and they typically
harvest other crops outside of
chili season to help subsidize
their farming productions. A lot
of times it's onion, there's
cotton, other products as well.
And Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady,
Uh, New Mexico State University,
I believe, has had a hand in
producing some of the varieties
of chili we have. Could you tell
the body a little bit about that
please thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, the, the Chili
Pepper Institute is housed at
New Mexico State University.
It's a nonprofit, um, it's the
world's only international
nonprofit organization dedicated
to research and education. Um,
it's, it's an amazing institute
if you haven't been. The founder
was Fabian Garcia, and he is the
father of New Mexico chili
pepper industry.
It's a great, it's great. And so
they hold the heritage sees and
they do a lot of research and
development around chili crop.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle ladies,
so it's my understanding that
chili chilies are sort of like
wine in that they take on the
characteristics of the soil in
which they're grown, the
climate, the temperature,
there's so many factors to that.
Do you, uh, know anything about
why New Mexico Chile is so
special, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and thank you,
gentle lady. I mean, you, you
pretty much nailed it. We have
a, we have, we have the right
soil, we have the like right
climate, we have the live.
the right, um, altitude and, and
we've just our farmers and and
with the help of, of experts
and, and folks from the Mexico
Department of Ag have just
mastered it. We just got it
right. People are always, I
mean, when you've got 4th
generation family, that's
perfecting a crop. They've
they've figured it out.
Thank you very much and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
New Mexico has lots of wonderful
crops, uh, we're known for.
Cotton, uh, the Germans love to
come by our cotton here because
it's so good.
We also are known for pecans and
I believe.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, um, we
have a worldwide market for our
pecans. It's considered a really
great source of protein.
And, um, healthy fats so we're
proud of that as well, um,
gentle lady, could you tell us
some of the other crops we grow
in New Mexico just to give us
some context, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady, I
mean, I wish I had the, the AG
report, the annual AG report,
cotton and alfalfa, you know,
uh especially in uh
Representative Chatfield and
Zamora's corner of the world, we
produce a lot of, of the wheat
and rye and alfalfa that's used
to feed the cattle and the
dairy, um.
And we've got
Gosh, they're wine. We're about
to hit the 400th year
anniversary of wine production
in New Mexico, which is why
we've been celebrating with jams
in your office. Um, but yes, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
What are some more crops
Chatfield, help me here. I mean,
there's a lot of crops. Onion is
a big crop, corn, cotton, pinto
beans, lettuce, watermelon,
pumpkin.
Beans, corn, OK. All right, I'm
getting help from my members
here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
Generallani.
Gentle lady, that's perfectly
fine. I think we could all chime
in on this one. We know what's
grown in our districts. I
remember seeing photographs of
trucks from Cibola County, uh,
just to the top with carrots,
and I never thought of New
Mexico as a place for uh carrot
production, but indeed it is so
gentle lady, I'm kind of setting
you up for my next question
here. And I, I will add that
alfalfa, Mr. Speaker, is also
highly valued here in our state.
It has also a very high uh
nutrient content and um ranchers
and uh uh those who raise
livestock oftentimes come to New
Mexico to to buy alfalfa, but
gentle lady, here's my, my
question, what crop are we most
famous for, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
sure hope the answer is New
Mexico chili.
You are right about that and um
you know we have a national
reputation and I remember after
we passed this license plate
bill and we started seeing these
beautiful plates produced. One
of my daughters who lived in
California at the time.
Called me one day and said, Mom,
I saw one of your chili pepper
license plates here in
California, and I thought the
word is spreading the word is
getting out, so.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I appreciate and I stand in
strong support of your, your
bill. I think we need to do
everything we can to promote
this um agriculture and um I
think choosing August is
probably good timing for the
bill, Mr. Speaker, um, when the
chili crops are available, my
husband goes to our Albertson's
Market in Carlsbad and buys a
box of roasted chili.
The, the hard part for me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is.
He gets tired of cleaning the
chili and I end up doing it for
hours on end, but it ends up in
our freezer and it lasts us for
a good, good half year at least,
and it's just, it's just amazing
to have uh these wonderful
chilies.
So I, I wanna really um thank
you and I ask that everyone
would support this bill, vote in
favor of it, um, we do need to
keep the title as the world's
chili capital.
So Mr. Speaker, um, thank you
for the time, gentle lady. Thank
you so much.
The gentleman from Colfax, Curry
Harding Quay, San Miguel, and
Union, Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield? Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I yield to my
gentleman friend from all those
counties.
Gent lady, I, I think the second
question should be flat or
rolled.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Both
please.
I grew up in southern New
Mexico. We had our enchiladas
flat with an egg on top.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Excuse me? Eggs are expensive
though.
I got chickens.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do you
have any ducks?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I had
some ducks, but the bobcat
has ducks now. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, my eggs are in New
Mexico eggs, a homegrown farm to
table.
Fresh.
I lived in that southern New
Mexico,
had an enchiladas flat with an
egg on top, moved to northern
New Mexico.
They serve them roll up there
where I live now, except for me.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
you go to Texas and order a
burrito, you might get a soft
taco.
Which to me is not a taco
because uh tacos in a corn
tortilla for me.
Soft corn tortilla.
I recently went down to, well,
not that recently, a few years
ago, went down to Costa Rica.
I was just
Licking my chops for the best
chili that I was gonna find down
there in South America. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady in Costa
Rica, they don't have chili.
They don't have salt and pepper.
They just eat, uh, allo Pinto,
that's rice and beans with no
seasoning
would be delicious with some
chili on it.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
think what I have learned is
that there is a little small
area.
Northern Mexico.
New Mexico, Colorado, West Texas
that even have chili.
And within those areas, there
are many different cultures.
That serve it differently so.
Uh
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, which
is your favorite, red or green?
Oh, Mr. Speaker, if it's
chicken, it's green, if it's
beef, it's red.
You got it right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Members take notes, gentle lady
from Bern Leo representing
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from all those
counties down South Yield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernal Leo. um,
Mr. Speaker, I have enjoyed
listening to the beautiful
ladies talk about their chili in
the southern part of the state
and I often go down to uh hatch
and get my chili, uh, my big
Johns as they're referred to,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, um, and also.
So, uh, I just wanted to mention
that there's Chile in the
northern part of the state as
well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, and um it's often comes
from Chimayo, New Mexico, where
my mother was born, by the way,
and, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies sometimes we compete with
the chili from down south in
price and um I will just mention
that sometimes the chili from uh
Chimayo is a little bit smaller
chili, but it is a little bit.
Potter as well and um Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I just
wanted to ask both of the gentle
ladies, uh, if they preferred or
green or Christmas.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I have a, I don't like
Christmas. I don't know what's
up with that. What is your
favorite? I like, if it's, if
it's chicken.
Or fish, I like green. If it's
beef or pork, I like bread. What
about you?
Um, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, um, I prefer green chili,
um, but you know, sometimes we
go up to Rancho de Chimayo and
we have the good red molito,
which is really a very it's,
it's the green after it's after
it, uh, ages and then it becomes
a powder and then it's uh it's
pretty good with a little bit of
pork in it. Thank you, gentle
ladies for bringing this bill
forward to support you.
There's for the debate, the
gentle lady from Ber Leo
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Oh, thank you Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
Sierra and Socorro.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
yield to the lady from Bernal
Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want
to follow up with that
conversation about Chimayo.
Chimayo red is my favorite and
sweetest and most famous in the
world, in my opinion, but did
you know that it's also famous
in outer space. It was the first
chili, the first plant to travel
into outer space came from our
very own farms in Chimayo and
that was the Martinez farm Fidel
and Wao Martinez. So I just
wanted to make sure that we knew
about that farm.
as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. And if you
visit Fort Selden, uh, one of
our, uh, museums, one of our,
uh, state parks, you will see a
display about the chili that
they're growing in space and the
children get to do a hands-on
activity with that, and they can
replicate it in their classroom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Seeing no further debate, the
gentle lady to close. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and I, I appreciate
the kind words. This is our
bill. I would note that nearly
half the body has signed on to
the bill, and I hope that you
guys will embrace the
opportunity to promote chili
small restaurants, our
businesses, the folks who are
selling New Mexico True
District, uh, products
throughout your district in the
month of August, and with that,
Mr. Speaker.
House bill, uh, 172 do not pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 172. The vote is now open.
Mr. Speaker, I'm voting red for
red Chile.
Me too.
Well, it's about to close.
The void's now closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 172 has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to whom
has been referred House Bill 343
has had it under consideration.
Reports same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
health health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 343 due pass and thence
referred to the government
elections and Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We're an
adoption of a.
We are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report
housed with 343 but a favorable
committee report on how Health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 343.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
All the supposed nay, the ice
habit committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 344
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 344 do pass and this
referred to the taxation and
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, move adoption We're on
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report of house with
344, but a favorable committee
report on health house health
and human Services Committee
substitute for house with 344.
in favor signified by say I.
Although suppose name, the IA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 402 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
thence referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, move adoption. We're an
adoption of a favorable
committee report of House Bill
402. All those in favor signify
by saying a.
Although suppose nay, the I have
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 404
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair. Move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
community report of housing 404.
All those in favor send up by
saying and I.
All those supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 407
has had it under consideration,
reports with recommendation that
it do pass and then refer to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Move
adoption. We're on adoption of a
favorable committee report of
house 407. All those in favor of
seeing by saying 9.
Alpone, yeah, Sait committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 413
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Speaker,
adoption. We're on adoption of a
favorable committee report of
housing of 413. All those in
favor signified by say I.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, thanks for a very
productive day, um, committees
will be meeting here shortly.
Gentlemen from Donana, sorry,
Mr. Speaker, your house
appropriation and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:30, not
15 minutes after the floor since
we're done early,
Mr gentlemen from Sandoval.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, in
everyone's office, uh, Chris
from Safe Housestilling was nice
enough to bring everyone in the
body, including yourself, a
bottle of their uh teller green
chili vodka for everyone to try.
Oh, I thought it was green chili
jam.
That too.
There's a package.
OK, members take note.
Gentlemen from.
Alright
See none.
Wait.
lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I need to amend my
previous announcement since 3rd
reading went so fast, we will
not be meeting 15 minutes on the
floor. We, we will be meeting at
1:30 in the usual room commerce
and economic development.
Members take note. I'm gonna
assume the same applies to all
committees.
OK, well, we'll make that
assumption, gentlemen from
Sandoma. Sorry, uh, to make up
for his awful joke yesterday, I
have a joke for you.
Gentlemen from Sandoval with a
shots fired.
What do you call an old snowman.
Why are you looking at him when
you're asking the question.
Fair, Mr. Speaker, what do you
call an old snowman? What? A
glass of water.
Well, let's see, gentlemen from
San Juan, can you?
Top that one.
Mr. Speaker, this joke is egg
specific.
How did the egg get up to the
top of the mountain?
How gentlemen?
He scrambled up
I think you keep the title of
official joke teller.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I agree.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
Get your capital outlay done
everybody deadline is today. The
House of sending in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
