One minute remaining for roll
call.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Here Representative alkaline is
here Representative Gail
Armstrong Representative Gail
Armstrong is here Representative
bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative bone grafts.
Here Representative when guys
here Representative can then
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative.
You get a Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
Here Representative that day is
here Representative Lord.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid is here
Representative Matthews.
Here Representative Matthews is
here Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Ears Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Here Representative G. Andrés
Romero is here Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Trujillo.
I'm here Representative Trujillo
is here Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here.
Representative black
Representative black is here.
Roll call this because we have a
quorum with the members please
rise for an indication by the
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you madam speaker.
Body as we come today some of
the file final days.
Of our legislative session has a
simple prayer.
Be at peace in your heart remain
open do you awaken to the light
of your own true nature.
May you be healed me very source
of healing for all beings.
In.
Will Representative within
gentleman from.
Chavis the and that Roosevelt
please leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Will the gentle lady from
Bernalillo please let us and the
Salute.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico Z. as symbol of
perfect friendship among United
cultures.
Gentleman from Bernalillo good
morning madam speaker good
morning members and we go to
Exeter business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
Other announcements.
Gentlelady from Travis.
Madam speaker I think I. am a
lady but anyway.
Madam speaker I move that house
memorial number forty one not be
printed not referred to the
committee and that it be read
for the third time in full
preparatory to its final
passage.
Consent that house memorial
forty one
be removed from the speakers
table and being made the next
order of business.
Madam speaker thank you very
much this is proclaiming
February the fifteenth two
thousand and two New Mexico
state firefighters association
day and celebrate the
association's one hundred years
of service madam speaker I ask
the clerk to please read the
memorial.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial for the one on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution gentle
to explain the memorial.
And the clerk to right.
House memorial forty one
introduced by Representative
these L..
Brown black clean and a memorial
proclaiming February fifteenth
twenty twenty to New Mexico
state firefighters association
day and celebrating the
association's one hundred years
of service for as the New Mexico
state firefighters association
has a long and value tradition
of public service and whereas in
nineteen twenty three Ludwig
failed call the first meeting of
the New Mexico state
firefighters association to
order in Los Vegas and whereas
seventy local government County
and volunteer fire departments
were present at the initial
meeting and expressed a need to
formalize the organization to
present fire departments
legislative policy and propane
fire prevention issues
statewide.
And whereas the mission of the
New Mexico state firefighters
association is to support
municipal county and volunteer
fire departments and to expand
the number of fire districts to
enhance fire protection and
response time to the needs of
the residents and public lands
of New Mexico and we're as
additional goals of the New
Mexico state firefighters
association or to provide fire
prevention emergency medical
services and training and
whereas the New Mexico state
firefighters association also
encourages and maintain
statewide standards of training
performance education response
time safety and equipment.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico the
February fifteenth two thousand
twenty to be proclaimed Mexico
state firefighters association
day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that the the
New Mexico state firefighters
association be commended for
celebrating one hundred years of
service to the people and public
lands of New Mexico and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the president of the New Mexico
state firefighters association.
Madam speaker.
I will stand for questions.
Is there debate on the memorial.
The gentle lady.
From Graham.
Thank you madam speaker religion
lady yield madam speaker I yield
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I just wanna
thank you for giving all of us
the opportunity to sign on and
opportunities stand in support
of this and and the and a
hundred year anniversary of our
firefighters association.
But also to acknowledge the
volunteer firefighters all of
across to rural New Mexico.
There's not a lot of paid
firefighters in our state some
of the metropolitan areas have
it in the rural areas their
volunteers and these volunteers
have to go through all the same
training made all the same.
Competencies demonstrate all the
same competencies and in many
times are also the EMT and so
these guys volunteer their time
to get a small stipend for going
out on a call and it is
literally life and death at
someone's home it's their
personal property it's all of
their life to their memories and
these folks live in every rural
community across the state and
go out and volunteer their time
their weekends to to make sure
they're current on their
training center certifications
and and they respond to calls at
any time day or night and so
it's just it's such an honor to
be able to stand up and to
support you in this memorial and
just to say thank you to the
firefighters all across the
state we know what to do what it
means even on our personal
insurance property tax I mean
what we pay for insurance is to
depend upon how qualified and
how companies and these folks
are and for us in rural New
Mexico we realize what a
sacrifice you're making and I
just want to say thank you to
our volunteer firefighters
throughout the state.
I recognize the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
The gentle lady please zero.
Madam speaker I yield.
The lady I stand today to also
thank you very much for
presenting this a memorial I
also wanted to know that it is
really important that we have
more more firefighters as was
just stated what we're trying to
do since of central New Mexico
university is to get more women
to become firefighters so they
are hosting a trades women's day
on March eighteenth one of the
main focus is trying to get more
women I firefighters so thank
you for this memorial it will
highlight the importance of the
work that they will be doing and
getting more women interested in
this position thank you gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker thank
you thank you for that chair
recognizes the gentle lady from
Eddie.
You very much madam speaker good
morning everyone will the gentle
lady from Chavis please yield
most certainly yield.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady so I I think you for
the opportunity to sign on to
this for Morial I think it's
really fitting and important
that we recognize the
firefighters of New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
in addition to just convey my
profound thanks for the work
that they do and all the lives
they save in the land they help
preserve I just want to mention
that in mice talks with local
firefighters if you agree with
all in tears I'm told that we
have an old and aging group of
people in the firefighter court
in that we need to get young
people to step up and be
interested in doing this this
kind of work and Madam speaker
gentle lady.
I have I feel for firefighters
in my area because we need we
just need somebody more and
they're tired a lot of the time
because a responding especially
to brush fires in our area so
it's very important that we that
we grow this group Madam speaker
gentle lady when you ask a
school child what do you want to
be when you grow up often times
you'll hear firefighter fireman
and I hope they can keep that
vision going because we really
do need the thank you again for
this memorial Madam speaker
thank you so much.
Thank you.
The chair recognizes the the
gentle lady from.
Captions the current balance
here.
Thank you madam speaker although
kindly the yield I'm a certainly
yield I to rise and support of
the memorial you know I
represent catching County which
is all volunteer fire department
and the work that they do the
MTV from EMT firefighters all
everything across the board in
rural New Mexico is volunteer
and and you are correct madam
speaker and gentle lady when you
make a statement that we are
held to the same standards as
the other fire departments that
are paid and so I A. I'll hold
all of them in high regard and I
appreciate you bringing this
memorial thank you madam speaker
thank you.
The gentle lady sent from Santa.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentle lady.
From Travis yield madam speaker
I yield to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe County.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I just want to join
everyone else and the
recognition.
Of firefighters until you have a
fire.
And your home you have no idea.
As to the real impact problem
most of us see these guys on the
fire trucks running up and down
the road with their lights
flashing off and on.
And
I know and and the Albuquerque
area of when you get a fire of
call or the let's call they both
come.
Together.
In another life I worked with
the YWCA to recruit and train
women.
Through the physical agility
course to become firefighters
and is not an easy task.
And so
I would like to join lady from
Bernalillo and saying that we
need to recruit more young women
it's it's a great opportunity
and add to to move up in the
ranks and they're great group of
guys to work with.
And and Carell it's where I live
it is also volunteer.
And
The fire station lucky for me is
right around the corner from
where I live so when I have the
fire at my house they just kind
of ran around the block but
they're thorough and we we need
to have them and we need to
really appreciate.
What they bring what they really
bring to the community so again
thank you for this memorial is
for this recognition.
Thank you.
I too would like to at my
support for the for the gentle
lady from Chavis my son as a
firefighter at the Los Alamos.
Fire department and when she you
brought that around for me to
sign I thought oh my gosh I
should have thought of this so
thank you very much for taking
care of all of this to the
gentle lady from Chavis and
seeing no for the debate of the
gentle lady to close Madam
speaker thank you very much I do
want to point out to this group
that
Our firefighters are more often
than not.
Not even thought of it until
there is an emergency situation
and madam speaker members of the
House our volunteers are just
that they are volunteers
we do have in response to
Representative Herman Herndon's
comments more often than not out
in a rural areas the women are
volunteer firefighters is will
of whenever I was in my previous
life I was a volunteer
firefighter and because of the
job many jobs that women out
there of rural areas do have to
take care of they are often the
first ones that hear that plug
drawn go off stating there is a
fire hall volunteer firefighters
please respond and of.
I was part of a group of women
out on cotton wood and we
participated in the state
volunteer fire to firefighters
games and we were good.
I never division that we we
entered we won first place so
I'm still proud of that the
trophies are still down of the
cotton would volunteer
firefighters.
Out of cotton wood and madam
speaker.
The comments that were made
about we need to start
recruiting do sugar people men
and women.
It's necessary because these
firefighters are the ones that
protect our home protect our
property in the case of a grass
fire that is rolling when
whenever the winds are forty
miles per hour and on the with
the threat to homes.
Outbuildings.
Livestock and wildlife it's
imperative that these measures
are taken care of by our
firefighters and so madam
speaker at this time I request
unanimous consent of the house
the records show that about.
The roll is called on the final
passage of house memorial forty
one and that all members present
voted in the affirmative.
There has been a motion to show
that all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered we are now on
final passage of house memorial
forty one the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed but the
seventy in the affirmative and
zero in the negative house
memorial forty one has duly
passed.
The gentle lady from caption
sako and Balenciaga thank you
madam speaker I just wanted to
wish my one of my grandchildren
canyon Lee Kern happy eleventh
birthday.
Happy birthday.
The gentle lady from Montana
thank you madam speaker I just
want to rise to the point of
personal privilege this morning
to share with the body I was
reading a headline this morning
that said half of the state's
mass spandex had ended in the
past three weeks demanding in
California Connecticut expires
today.
I just want to share with you
all that I think New Mexico we
really need to get with the
program and we need to unmask
and most definitely I mask for
children thank you madam
speaker.
Are there further announcements
of the lady
from grand.
Thank you madam speaker I would
just also like to rise and just
to reiterate that we are down in
just last week three states that
are continuing mass mandates and
I was really happy to see
secretaries graze on the house
floor I don't know how long it's
been since he was here with us
in person but I was happy to see
him and I approach my said why
are we still us children any
told me that there is these
critical points of of that of
progress that we needed to make
and we can go to the department
of health website and I can see
that and when I went to the
department of health website I
was a little taken back by the
fact that.
If you guys put the website
right now the only content on
that home page is about COVID
where to get yes where to get
vaccinated where to go a what
the numbers are but how many
people tested positive day how
many people have died here today
it is it is the entire page and
all the the the the buttons that
you can click on are all related
to comment I saw nothing about
where to sign up for the will
New Mexico nothing about a some
a suicide hotline nothing about
dealing with depression nothing
about getting outdoors
exercising the entire page
scroll up and down left and
right is about COVID and so I
mean I think we're so narrowly
focused that we're missing the
big picture here our children
are being harmed by the
continued closure and the
including continued isolation
and continue mask wearing my
background is early childhood
children learn eighty percent of
what they learn in their lives
before the first day of
kindergarten we have children of
essential workers who were born
after March eleventh.
is required child care in order
to work or go to school these
children have only been cared
for by a person with a mask on.
We have no idea what this is
doing we as humans we are eighty
percent of our communication is
nonverbal.
We learn a language by watching
and observing articulation we re
body cues facial expressions and
these children if their parents
are working an eight hour shift
and less they don't pick him up
for lunch and they have no
travel time are in a child care
center for nine to ten hours a
day with someone who has gone
most of their waking.
And the research shows that
there's so very little risk for
children being being harmed by
COVID and so I we have got to
take the mask off of our
children our students are
wearing masks when they it's
it's not statistically necessary
the states that have the
mandates have no different
outcomes statistical outcomes
and in COVID risks and deaths
and exposures in those states
without it but what we have
different than other states it's
children who are sicker than
they've ever been more depressed
than they've ever been.
Higher rates of suicide self
harm this isolation more time on
computer screens less social
interaction they're confused and
uncertain about their futures
these are the secondary impacts
of COVID that we are not
measuring and we are not
acknowledging it is time to end
the mask mandates.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker move the
next order of business messages.
I see no objections so ordered.
Three.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
hundred thousand ended and
request the current concurrence
of the house respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk.
Mrs Williams.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker move the
next order of business committee
reports.
I see no objections so ordered.
Click to read.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted on
helical move your chair that
option.
We are on adoption of the
the Senate bill of a verbal
Committee report on Senate
Judiciary Committee and
substitute us at eighty four.
All those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
Although supposedly.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to has
been referred Senate bill one
seventy four as amended has had
it under consideration for the
with recommendation that a do
pass respectfully submitted and
how good Rubio chair move
adoption.
We are an adoption of favorable
committee report for Senate bill
one seventy four as amended.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All those opposed nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Madam speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you thank you madam
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation.
No objections so ordered.
Members the the list has been
emailed out to this body we're
going to start with
item fourteen Senate bill two as
amended.
Is the gentle lady from
Bernalillo already.
We could give me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
actions necessary for placing a
Senate bill two as amended on
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Gentlelady to explain the bill
thank you very much madam
speaker Senate bill two does
three things it sets our Supreme
Court justice salaries in line
with that of federal court
magistrate judges and since the
funding formula for salaries on
their under it also
Sorry madam chair.
I also do couples the magistrate
of salary funding formula from
that judicial formula as well
just setting it as an
appropriation made by the
legislature each year and
that'll stand for questions.
The gentleman the gentleman from
Chavis city and atento.
Thank you madam speaker will the
June gentlelady yields I yield
to the gentleman from all of the
all those counties.
Thank you gentle lady I have a
few questions
If they read through this.
The synopsis of this bill.
Currently the New Mexico Supreme
Court salaries are set at a
hundred feet hundred fifty three
thousand four hundred is that
correct.
Madam speaker gentleman without
looking at myself I believe that
is correct.
And this bill would be a.
Thirty percent increase of forty
seven thousand dollar increase
annually would take them to.
Two hundred and one thousand is
that correct.
Speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
In gentlelady.
This the couple's that's the
right word the process of
historical salary control for
the New Mexico Chief Justice and
and sets a new standard can you
tell me how the standard would
work thank you madam speaker
gentleman so are currently the
standard is and and might be
called the coupling is because
there's a funding formula
codified in statute that tells
us that but since the Supreme
Court justices salary and then
any other state court judge
meeting appellate judge or a
state court judge of any that
apologize is then a percentage
of whatever that top amount
would be what this and
magistrates than as a percentage
of of that percentage so what
we're doing and Senate bill two
is we are decoupling magistrate
judges from not formula and
simply giving them the autonomy
of requesting salaries through
the appropriation process set
forth by the legislature.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady
Is that the coupling of
supported by the magistrate
judge's.
Madam speaker gentlemen I
believe that the head of the
magistrate judge association has
come out in favor of this bill
correct.
The gentle lady and Madam
speaker yesterday the Chief
Justice came by and we talked a
little bit about this I had not.
Been any time trying to.
Figure out who is supporting and
who sent but I will tell you
the.
Currently there's there's a
little bit of disconnected in
within that organization.
There is the committee on our
analysis said we should watch
carefully for pension spiking.
That may occur by such a drastic
increase in salaries are you
aware of that.
Madam speaker German no this is
the first time I've heard of
that issue.
Pension spiking occurs any time
there's a dramatic increase in
the salary in the short time
rather than a series of gradual
increases.
If an employee receives
significant salary increases in
the years before retirement.
Their monthly retirement benefit
may exceed their contributions.
that would be expected to to
fund this of.
It is likely.
That a single salary increase of
over thirty percent.
Will create a spiking of that.
Gentlelady has para looked at
this and are they supportive do
you know.
Madam speaker gentleman I don't
believe the pair has has given
an analysis is part of this bill
I do now do know that separate
and apart from Senate Bill to
there were there wasn't
appropriation made to both the
magistrate and state court judge
of judges retirement funds and
part of what this bill does also
the as with the decoupling it is
taking the magistrate retirement
fund and that's transferring
those my district judges into
the P. E. R. a proper so P. R.
A. will be getting that extra in
fusion.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you're aware as I am that the
pair a.
Fund.
Has.
Issues it is
I don't know what the most
recent to.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
but I if my memory Friday it was
in the border of magnitude about
ten billion dollars.
Under funded is that correct or
what is your understanding of
that madam speaker government
while I don't have direct
knowledge as to the total
underfunding of P. R. A. I do
know that with regards to the
state court judge fund they were
one of the most severely
underfunded.
Generally that I think you're
right madam speaker and gently I
think you're right and now.
Although I.
Completely understand.
The problems of the state
personnel office.
In keeping our employees.
Adequately compensated against
competitive.
Issues whether they're in
private practice.
For in the joining States.
This report is troubling to me
that it might.
It might add on to the problem.
Of that stress on that phone.
Madam speaker German if I could
I just received information that
peer I did indeed stand in
support of this bill yesterday
committee.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm wondering I would they do
that if they.
If they believe this will
continue to stress the fund
or did I misunderstand you.
Madam speaker gentleman again I
I want to draw your attention to
be infusion of money that went
into both the judicial and
magistrates funds that is kept
under P. ERA through house bill
two to levy levy it some of that
stress and the get the fund into
a better state.
Well I appreciate the madam
speaker and gentle lady what was
that infusion into those funds
transfer gentleman it was twenty
million dollars.
So we have madam speaker and
gentle lady
A fund that's ten billion
dollars under funded or
something of that in that
magnitude and we put twenty
billion dollar twenty million
dollars into it seems like the
pistons.
Of addressing the issue.
I
I have no problems with making
our judges more competitive.
I certainly have no problem with
them being.
paid appropriately.
But I continue to have been an
issue.
With the process where we never
address our debt.
The.
We thank you bye income is more
than our budget we have a
reserve but we never address the
death that's on New Mexico.
I
I don't know how I'm going to
vote on this yet I
If there's more debate I'll I'll
certainly listen to a.
I
I think we have to address and
take measures to to address the
and the adequacy of the pair of
and.
Although as you mentioned we put
twenty million dollars into it
this year.
It's just a drop in the bucket
of the issues around Paris so
thank you ladies thank you madam
speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Madam speaker will the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield.
Speaker I yield my time from
from Bernalillo county.
Speaker and gentle lady and then
I appreciate the conversation
that we had about
the disconnecting.
The magistrates from the
district judges and your
willingness to try to find a
compromise in between.
And I'm upset at the A. O. C.
for their unwillingness to go
ahead and sit down and talk
about it.
With the AOC what they've done
is they want to disconnect the
magistrates from the
The if you will the licensed
attorney judges.
And what I proposed is take
their proposed salary.
Take a percentage of it so that
the magistrates are currently at
about a hundred thousand and we
would make that.
Set in statute colonel like it
is now.
But rather than do that what
they want to do it is detach
them.
And make them their own
independent.
And unfortunately to me what it
seems to me that they're doing
is for a fraternity.
And we all have a lot of law
degree and for that reason we're
going to detach the magistrates
now it's also important to
understand there are magistrates
to have.
Law degrees.
I see the magistrates as part of
the court system.
So I don't see why we should
detach of.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo I appreciate the
conversation we've had it's more
of a COVID I don't know if you
have a response or not but I'm
I'm upset over that I agree that
we do need to increase judge
salaries and and I'm talking
about on the.
District Court in above side I
think the magistrates are
fighting where they are and
they're also happy where they're
currently out.
But I think detachment
Just a Lillian aids that court
system from the overall point
system thank you.
Gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker.
Madam speaker religion lady from
Bernalillo kindly old.
Speaker I yield to the
councilman from San Juan thank
you madam speaker thank you
Julie from Bernalillo Madam
speaker
the way I understand this bill
and the way that I look at it.
Is this bill is designed to
accomplish recruitment and
retention of judges.
And madam speaker unfortunately
it's it's a real issue in our
state and I speak from the from
the land of a practicing
attorney in a rural area I I
serve our our practice in the
eleventh judicial district and
we're fortunate to have a number
of of qualified and very good
judges but I'll tell you I've
said on on a couple of of the
nominating committee's.
And the list of private
practitioners who are willing to
put their name in the ring for
judges is dwindling and it
should concern all of us.
Of because unfortunately with
the current pay rate of our
district judges in particular
you know there's a certain
amount of prestige that goes
with the appellate and Supreme
Court justices.
The same procedure doesn't
always attached to the district
judge levels.
In my opinion that's where the
sausages really made in terms in
terms of of doing justice for
our citizens and and litigating
cases and I I think that were
coming up to a point where those
positions that are are really
the most vital
we're running the risk of not
having confidence.
and highly qualified judge
applicants.
So in my mind madam speaker one
of the ways that I think we can
tackle that is to in fact
address the salary issue because
when you look at the salary of a
District Court judge frankly
it's it's a cut in pay for a
good and competent private
practicing attorney to go on the
bench and so what we're left
with is is the system currently
where you either have an
applicant who is always wanted
to be a judge their whole life
they don't care about the salary
and those are great I wish we
had lots of those applicants but
unfortunately few and far
between.
Or we get public sector journeys
and I think we need a portion of
those as well whether that's
dust PED's whatever the case may
be
or we get sort of the leftover
pulls and in my opinion what
this bill does by raising the
chief justice's salary equal to
a federal magistrate and then
it's is that the body
understands then tear down from
there then you go down the court
of appeals and then we get down
to for the sausages made at the
District Court level and so by
bringing that salary level up I
think that will help us in terms
of recruitment and retention I
think it's very important now I
I understand there's some
concerns about decoupling the
magistrate judge's so madam
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo mask a couple
questions around that I think
it'll help maybe flush the
south.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
in your experience do we does
New Mexico have a hard time
recruiting good measure judges
Madam speaker John from San Juan
and no we do not.
And madam speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo if this if this
bill passes in the measures are
decoupled will they receive a
pay increase under house bill
two.
Madam speaker and gentlemen they
will not receive a pay increase
state however will see receive a
contribution to their retirement
fund.
Mr gently from Bernalillo will
they not be considered part of
the seven percent of the all
state employees will receive
Madam speaker John then forgive
me your correct they will be
receiving the seven percent
across the board raise I
apologies master gentle lady
from Bernalillo and so currently
in statute the measures are
attached to this sort of this
permitting and this will take
them from that and then if this
bill passes from this day
forward then the legislature
through the appropriations
process will have direct
authority to increase those
measured sellers that correct
Madam speaker gentleman that is
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you speak about
the difference for the
magistrates in terms of changing
the retirement so what is moving
them into the pair of tier three
how does that affect
administrative judges.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
it won't for the most part it
simply moves their fund to the
general to the generalized ERA
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so this doesn't
somehow lessen the contribution
factor or the number of years
that they would have to remain
employed in order to to of
qualified under the pair of tier
three is that correct Madam
speaker gentleman there is no
change.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so I can understand
the heartburn around.
Decoupling measure judges but
for me the the rationale for
this bill is about recruitment
and retention thankfully we
don't have that problem with
master judges that I've seen at
least my County there's usually
a number of people that sign up
on the ballot to run for those
races we have some good measure
judges so I don't see the same
issue
if at some point I think of this
body sees that issue then we can
obviously attacked those sellers
directly like we're doing here
today and so Mister speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo I
think this is a much needed
update to our sellers going to
schedule for for judges and
justices because the reality is
as lawmakers we can ride the
best laws on the books but we
have to have a competent and
capable and high quality we call
fide judiciary to carry out what
those laws say thank you Mr
speaker.
Thanks to the gentleman from
the.
Thank you Mr speaker and with
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
pleasure Mr speaker I yield to
the kind gentleman from Lee
County.
Mr speaker gentle lady I rise in
opposition against us this bill
I
I've spent a significant amount
of time over the last three
weeks talking to different
groups of people and and
decoupling of our magistrate
judges.
Is
Does not well looked upon by by
the majority of the people that
I talked to.
And I to.
Free state would one of my
fellow representatives talked
about plans for you Mr speaker
and gentle lady
it's almost like we're creating
in the the leaders on with
respect to that.
Our our magistrate judges Mr
speaker and gentle lady are
workhorses are.
They're they're the beginning
line and to.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
separate them from the system.
Is is an insult to too many of
the ones that I've talked to and
so I'm not going to debate the
points of the bill I'm just
going to share you with you what
I I insured with over the last
three weeks and and
cannot support your legislation
thank you.
Next to the gentleman from
Chavis the end result.
This you Representative Anderson
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker
For some time.
Mr speaker will gentle lady
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Chavis Lee
and Roosevelt counties
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Gentle lady.
Of.
Does.
The bill that we have before us
change of.
Has it gone through the house
without any changes from the
Senate version that passed to us
from the Senate.
Mr speaker lady question.
Mr speaker and I don't believe I
follow your question can you
rephrase it.
This bill Senate bill two.
as amended.
arrived in the house.
has it.
Was it amended in the process of
moving through the house with
the house amendments that's my
question generally Mr speaker
gentleman thank you no no
amendments have been made to
this bill on the house side
thank you well with that a point
Mr speaker if I could I would
introduce house floor amendment
number one to Senate Bill number
two as amended and if I could
I'm not planning Mr speaker on
spending a great deal of time on
this but if I could I would like
to explain the amendment please
do it has been passed out and
just to double check.
In general in the two oh two
number is triple to seven fifty
point one
that's correct the gentleman to
move the floor amendment Mr
speaker then I move the the
floor amendment gentleman to
explain.
Gentle lady Mr speaker members
of the house.
For some time.
For many years I have been
concerned about the management
of the oversight of the eighteen
point two billion dollars which
lies within the pair a family of
pension funds.
This parable ward was created by
this body seventy five years ago
with the unanimous vote.
And there were no
qualifications whatsoever to
serve on that board.
Those seven then.
The best they could to start
these pension funds that now
serves.
In the retirement of many New
Mexicans yes Mr speaker this
please address the chair well
yes Mr speaker I'd be happy to.
These pension funds serve.
Many retired New Mexicans who
are members of peril and many
members of pair of who are still
active in soon to be members of
para.
Board membership on pera does
not require any qualifications.
That has always concerns me
because in the beginning seventy
five years ago the board only
dealt with which the US
government bonds.
They would buy and what the
majority of those US government
bonds would be.
Today investment.
Decisions.
Instruments financial
instruments are bound and then
once are created H. I think
there are thousands of different
financial instruments some are
extremely complicated.
For that reason I believe we
will be better to have a board
that is qualified qualified in
the having investment finance
pension experience in their
background.
That is a requirement in my mind
to be on payroll so what does
that do Representative.
The amendment in a rather.
Complicated way.
Strikes all we were first of all
the bill was introduced in the
Senate finance committee
substitution changed the bill in
a dramatic way.
Came down to the floor past came
to us this ammendment.
Lames if you have system in but
all of the Senate changes that
came to us will be the same.
Difference is the pera board
will be
of different thank you.
So what happens.
There were seven people in the
beginning three of them were
secretary of state the state
treasurer and the state auditor.
The auditor dropped off some
time ago this bill will drop the
secretary of state off leaving
only the state treasurer and the
remaining members those
remaining members one will be
appointed by the governor.
Will be reported by the
Legislative Council Service.
Good to retiree members will
remain exactly the state they
will be elected by the retirees
for those to the board
positions.
The other members are going to
be appointed by the.
Membership.
And that will include the labor
unions.
In which does act in place
currently work.
In addition there will be one
member who is.
Unaffiliated.
Lately.
Mr speaker I'm gonna be shorten
the point I'm gonna finish up.
I believe we should change the
parable ward and have qualified
members managing the eighteen
point two billion dollars.
Pera opposes this concept.
They would say.
We had a twenty four percent
return last year.
That the board members are
doing.
Our our qualified.
In the sense they are getting
continuing education once they
become a board member.
Why are we here today bailing
out this pension fund we have
done so three out of the last
four years this is the third
hash General Fund bailout that
we have considered.
Simply put.
What we must do is have superior
performance from para.
Going forward.
The legislative finance
committee did a study.
A couple of years ago presented
to the LFC and New Mexico ranks
in the bottom quartile fund
performance for the ten year
period ten year period.
I don't think that's good
enough.
We elect good New Mexicans
honest New Mexicans to the pera
board they do they're dead level
best and I will not criticize
them for the job they do.
I'm here to tell you we could do
better.
And if we pass this amendment
that is what we're trying to do
so if you do this know that the
unions are opposed what the hell
that para is opposed to what
they like the status quo I
believe the best time Mr speaker
to affect change.
Is when you have the wind at
your back and you're not in a
hurricane so.
Please consider joining today in
supporting the amendment with
that Mr speaker.
I stand for questions.
First of the generals really a
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Is this a.
I'm asking you if the gentleman
is friendly because we all know
the answer to that question.
Is the floor amendment friendly.
Thank you Mr speaker well I'm
I'm certainly sympathetic to
some of the issues that the
gentleman from Travis a result
has raised here today
I I have several concerns one
being Mr speaker that this would
the proposed to be a fairly
large change to P. R. A. and the
the composition of the board
this amendment has not been
vetted through the legislative
process would have not gone
through any committee or
received any feedback from the
public so for of firstly that
would be my concern and secondly
of on Mr speaker I'm afraid that
that would take take that side
the purview of the bill as it
was accepted and through the
legislative process is a thirty
day session Mr speaker and there
are very specific requirements
as to which bills can be heard
in a thirty day session so with
those two concerns I Mr speaker
I I would say that this is not a
friendly amendment.
There is debate on his there
debate on the amendment
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt deal.
Yes Mr speaker I will.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
We have seen of several bills.
Dealing with the issue of the
make up of the airboard and the.
Authority.
That it has with respect to the
decisions that are made
concerning the.
Billions of dollars that is the
best have we not.
Yes we have a gentleman.
And madam speaker and gentleman.
Can you let me explain briefly
how.
Your proposed amendments.
Differs with some of the
legislation that we may have
previously been familiar with in
this body.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
as you know
as you might recall I had a bill
of last year that
was designed to address the
governance issues of para and
specifically calling on the need
for a qualified board.
Of that bill was not passed.
And today we're here with a
smaller board.
Of that bill took off both his
treasure and the secretary of
state this bill only drops the
secretary of state.
That bill had more.
Designated a mean of.
The what's were designated.
had individuals representing the
various labor unions and within
the pair of family of funds that
is reduced representation in the
bill before you give the
amendment before you.
And.
That's it we drop to last year
this is a contemplation of only
making the board.
The state so Madam speaker and
and gentleman the people who
would serve on this board.
If I read your amendment
correctly.
Begin on page nine of June is
that the is that correct.
Yes that's correct.
So let's a let's look Madam
speaker and and gentleman.
Tell us how you are electing
this particular board.
Under your proposed amendments.
gentleman.
The first would be the state
treasurer who currently serves
on the board has for the last
seventy five years.
To retired members who have
skills knowledge and experience
in financial matters.
To be elected by the retired
members.
And that reflects the same to
retired members that currently
serve on this board seven
members to be appointed as
follows.
One active member of the
municipal coverage planned to be
appointed.
For the first term by the labor
organization representing the
largest.
Number of police member coverage
plan members.
For the second term by a labor
organization representing
municipal fire member plan
members.
And what of let's see.
We're gonna have one active
member of the municipal coverage
plan who has the skills
knowledge and experience in
financial matters to be
appointed.
One active member of the
municipal coverage plan who has
the skills knowledge in
financial matters one active
member.
The state general member
coverage plan to be appointed by
the labor organization
representing the largest number
of those members.
Two active members of the state
plan have experience.
In financial actuarial or
fiduciary aspects of pension or
investment fund management to be
appointed by the New Mexico
Legislative Council.
One I have it's on the back.
Well apparently it's not.
Gentleman.
If I could.
Mr speaker digress for just a
moment.
One of the problems impaired
today is nobody votes.
The state of New Mexico has put
more money in the pair of them
the employees have in their
contributions and yet we do not.
Have direct representation on
the board except for the
treasure.
Less than ten percent of the
qualified voters typically
invest elective vote in the
elections.
This is a.
Situation that invites trouble.
So I hope that.
By appointing the members.
We will see the qualifications.
To allow the board to be better
at managing the funds there is
research and evidence showing a
qualified board will get better
results.
I didn't make that up.
That is a research based concept
if one in the bottom quartile I
suggest that you should be in a
we should be above that.
And above that means this body
will not be bailing out.
The insolvent pension funds
every year for the foreseeable
future in my opinion I'm sorry
Mr speaker gentle but I may have
gotten off an attention.
Madam speaker and gentleman
We've had some significant
discussions on this issue and
and madam speaker and gentleman
I certainly agree.
That the billions of dollars
that is overseen by the parole
board.
Which represents the monies from
which the retirees in the state
are dependent for their
continued
of retirement benefits.
That it does need to be managed
by.
Thanks for.
It does need to be managed by
people who have
tremendous deaths at the in
financial matters and so when I
look at this list.
I see the appointment of people
who.
Have the skills knowledge and
experience in financial matters.
Their elected by.
Various groups.
And so how can we assure
ourselves Madam speaker and
gentleman.
That.
The.
Those who could be allowed to
are going to bring that.
Tremendous expertise to the
table.
Thank you for that comment
gentleman Mr speaker that is not
my impression of what the
amendment does.
The amendment contemplates the
election of the retiree members
of para.
By the membership by those
retirees voters who actually
vote about three times more than
the other membership qualified
to vote in the member in the in
the elections.
So we leave that alone.
And I believe you're going to
see that the others are
appointed.
Two retired elected one ex
officio state treasurer and
seven members appointed.
that would be on whatever pages.
Page tunes.
So I think that your point
although it is a good one and
certainly suggests.
Mr speaker and gentleman a short
coming in the in the but in
additional short coming in the
current.
Make up of the pera board I
think this goes around it by
saying.
These appointments will be for
qualified members by the
various.
Entities making those
appointments.
Thank you and matters Madam
speaker and gentleman the.
Full of folks that can be
appointed.
For members of para we're not
reaching outside for expertise
that would exist within our
state.
With respect to these things and
and I am confident that New
Mexico has a fair number of
people who.
Have tremendous depth and
expertise in investing in
funds impact there's people in
the state who have been charged
with and have overseen billions
and billions of dollars of of
clients that the may fit that
profile of being the next for
but those people would not be
qualified for appointment under
your amendment with the.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe the answer might lie on
page eleven of the top item F..
In that we talked to the one
public member who is not a
member of any coverage plan who
has experience in financial
actuarial fiduciary aspects of
pension or investment fund
management to be appointed by
the governor provided that the
member shall certified noted for
notarized affidavit that the
member has not had any
professional or contractual
relationship relating to the
administration.
Four investment of the fund for
ten years immediately preceding
appointment.
I think that perhaps suggests
that that appointment would
have.
Would not be a member of para.
And madam speaker gentleman's so
one member out of the board that
would consist of how many
members.
Seven appointed.
To elected by the retirees and
one ex officio.
That would be a ten member
board.
Madam speaker and gentleman of
you know I I certainly.
Echo.
Your desire to bring expertise.
To this arena.
I agree with you that being in
the bottom twenty five percent.
Is not where we need to be
particularly considering the
size of the investment.
And that if we are ever going to
succeeded in.
Not having the taxpayers.
Add money to that account.
I think you said two or three
out of the last four years
We need to have a better return
on that investment.
Hopefully moving it into at
least the top half of the top.
Or tomorrow.
My concern.
And I certainly support your
efforts the my concern is.
When I look at this ten member
board.
I'm not sure we get the
expertise that would drive us to
that point and so I I I continue
to raise that concern I raised
it every time these types of
bills the legislature come
before us.
But I think it is critically
important for this body to
recognize we have to do
something and I appreciate the
gentleman from Travis Lee and
Roosevelt bringing this again
before us and causing us to
focus on it.
because it's critical that we do
something we can continue to do
what we've done for the last
four years.
This is certainly one way of
doing that and the.
Personally I like to see a
little bit more what I consider
creating world class expertise
on this board
but you know we Chavis there's
seventy people on here would
probably have seventy different
ideas as to how to do it this is
one and it takes a stab.
In my opinion in the right
direction and the people in this
body auto on to consider your
amendment carefully before
a deciding vote with that madam
speaker gentleman thank you for
bringing this to your attention
thank you for bringing this
ammendment and considering how
this affects not just the judges
that are
the advancing.
there compensation with this
bill but also the retirees that
the the all those
compensation schemes.
Ultimately
derided for their long term
benefits so thank you madam
speaker and leader gentleman
thank you.
Discussion on the amendment.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
county Representative Scott
thank you to ensure occur the
gentleman from
Chavis.
Please madam chairman I will.
Speaker.
Joan Boue for her
Representative.
Earlier in the day to day or
raise the retirement fund is
under water.
I assume eighteen billion
dollars.
Senator.
No Sir that is the madam speaker
gentleman's that is incorrect
the current fund has grown to
eighteen point two billion
dollars I believe the current
year actuarial is talking in
terms of a seventy plus percent
funded right showing dramatic
improvement from where we were.
Just a few years ago.
But.
Gentleman Madam speaker that's
that's not the purpose of of
what I'm trying to do today.
Gentleman I can pressure to can
to end dollars perhaps.
Much.
Reform to the pension fund is
currently.
I believe gentleman that would
be six billion dollars in round
numbers.
Madam speaker.
Chairman session.
Designed to improve.
The qualifications of the
oversight board for by.
Proving the performance of the
fund is that occurred that is
exactly accurate and there is
evidence suggesting that are
qualified board will achieve
higher results gentleman Madam
speaker.
So.
Speaker and gentleman is it also
true that this board doesn't to.
Actual management.
Of these dollars this.
If you will is handed off to
professional.
Money managers paid for their
expertise is that accurate
gentleman.
M. speaker that is exactly
accurate they do however right
the investment policy upon which
all further decisions are based.
Madam speaker gentle.
In general and so the investment
policy currently which press for
something along the lines of a
servant quarter percent return
on investment would be
approximately correct.
Of madam speaker gentleman that
is exactly correct.
So madam speaker and gentleman.
To.
This important work you.
A significant increase in the
toward the right of return.
In order to balance the.
One for sure but if you will.
Gentleman the madam speaker I
understand your point however to
limit that to simply turn data
points.
Of of rate of return and
Of the time.
Is is I think misleading and nor
will time allow us today to get
into that but I think other
factors which include a very
difficult one to measure we need
their Klay call risk would not
be.
We would need to integrate more
data more assumptions into that
madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker and gentleman so
is part question is whether
shuffling the deck chairs to
really goes a long way toward
solving the problem given what
we already have professional
money managers in place to make
actual decisions based on
overarching policy Madam speaker
and gentleman I submit.
Will more.
Choose the right of return to
planet Senator tree without
question the level of risk.
Will.
When.
Would be acceptable to those
retirees.
If the risk is the wrong
direction.
Have much less important to very
little in those accounts I
appreciate the here for.
The.
This.
Madam speaker gentle.
I just have some serious
questions about whether it
actually solves the problem
thank you madam speaker thank
you John for your answers.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative.
Public Martinus thank you madam
speaker I move to table house
floor amendment number one.
The motion before the body is to
table house floor amendment
number one to Senate bill to a
vote of yes the amendment will
be tabled a vote of no and
amendment will not be tabled.
Favor.
Of tabling the amendment to
indicate by saying hi.
All propose indicate by saying
no.
The eyes have it thank you we're
back on the.
We're back on the debate of the
bill yes I get.
Madam speaker I do get one final
word on the this I appreciate
very much the body giving this
ammendment the attention that I
believe it deserves I believe it
was not the last time we were
going to talk about by the
rearranging the deck chairs or
meaningful reform on the pera
board I believe we must have a
qualified board and I urge you
to consider that it is more
complicated than you think so
good luck thank you madam chair.
Thank you one.
Representative.
Do you have a for the comment on
the bill.
Thank you madam speaker.
Those on board to ask for gentle
lady just a couple of questions
gentleman from Bernalillo will.
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Lee County.
Under the system that we're
working with today before this
bill passes through the
appropriations process does the
judiciary the entire judiciary
in the state come on your.
One review if you will.
Madam speaker gentleman can I
get some further clarity on your
question what kind of review
review during appropriations
process or what type of review
referring to.
Welcome gentle lady yes one
appropriations review.
Madam speaker gentlemen there
are several different agencies
with different process sees it
that get reviewed in the
appropriate and the building of
the budget process is
administrative office of the
courts each day judicial
district has its own assigned of
the entity number and we will
consider those budgets and that
as part of the probation review
in each session yes.
Engine ladies passes with those
magistrates charged.
Some of the overarching.
To review.
Mr domino the magistrates would
become their own entity for
review.
The lady I can see I think one
of the magistrates or showing
some concern.
Over this now being left out on
our own.
Disconnected from the rest of
the judicial system were
Senators treatment madam speaker
on the no that's not accurate so
there are different HSD codes
each one of them submits a
budget for review as part of the
budget building process and so
for instance the ministry of
office of the courts has their
own agency code the first
initial District Court has its
own agency code and so now after
the passage of this bill it the
magistrate courts would have
their own agency code.
Speaker gentle lady us
now with respect to the
significant increases in the.
Raises.
Virtual and one time.
Remove this regime judges
salaries.
For a number of years now record
this substantial adjustment.
Madam speaker gentleman I I
wouldn't go as far as that we've
been remiss we have made
incremental increases and and
judicial salaries however we
found ourselves in a position
this year were we had the
ability to take a large step
increases those salaries so that
we can music community the
problem that we've been seeing
with attracting.
Qualified candidates to sit on
the bench which is a problem
that has persisted for quite
some time.
Thank you for your interest.
Thank you very much is a further
debate on the bill.
Six.
Representative Crowder the
gentleman from Kerr.
No further debate on the bill
the lady to close thank you
madam speaker I now move that
Senate bill two as amended do
now pass.
In final passage of Senate bill
two the vote is now.
Now open.
Electronic portion of the vote
it's close the clerk to call the
members without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Blue Cross.
Yes Representative will gobble
yes Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield votes
no Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder votes no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Harper.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herndon votes yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lord.
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews yes
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo both
yes Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora votes no.
Roger Montoya votes yes
and Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes thank you.
By a vote.
Of fifty eight in the
affirmative and six in the
negative Senate bill two is
amendment as amended has duly
passed the house.
Now on to the right now on to
the next item on the agenda item
number fifteen.
Tax the Senate joint committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty five is a dental lady.
From Dona Ana ready.
Yes miss madam speaker would you
get me to that point.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate joint committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty five on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady to explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker in the
twenty twenty one regular
legislative session H. B. two
thirty four created the working
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders
otherwise known as wings which
included a broad range of
guardianship experts
policymakers and individuals
affected by the guardianship
system and one of the primary
purposes of wings is to propose
legislation for guardianship
reform and this bill is the
first legislative work of wings
and the important changes that
the Senate Judiciary substitute
for Senate bill thirty five will
bring to the guardianship
program it will help us to
better protect the interests.
And desires of some of our most
vulnerable AT and to ensure the
courts take the path of least
restrictive options.
And it limits in nearly Taylor's
the use of temporary
guardianship proceedings to only
true emergency situations.
Where there is serious immediate
and irreparable harm to a
person's health safety or
welfare and I'd like to
recognize my experts justice
bacon.
And judge.
And co sponsor Daymon Ely who
have all been champions for the
guardianship reform of our
state.
With that I stand for questions.
Gentleman from recognizing the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln County representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will
gentle lady from Dona ana county
yield.
Yes madam speaker I will yield
to the gentleman from Chavis
and.
We're not already
from Lincoln County thank you.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady just a
couple of questions.
The
Changes that are made apparently
were made because of some
experience experience with the
courts and the glass water two
years since we did a pretty
major overhaul of the
guardianship statute is that the
correct madam speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
that is and also I believe when
they did a lot of the
guardianship reforms part of the
temporary guardianship reform
was not always included.
Madam speaker gentle lady LA
guardium.
Where can a temporary guardian.
Also be appointed as a temporary
conservator for the same person
at the same time Madam speaker
and gentleman yes they can.
The.
Madam speaker gentle lady that.
That may be the only weak spot
that that I see in this it's a
temporary situation and if the
vents are such that people were
this condo in with the
principles of valuables.
Then.
It does seem to me that maybe to
address our criticism Mr speaker
and gentle lady that
The.
Duties of the two individuals
maybe should be made separately
and not by just one individual
they have a response to my
concern.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes the
Reese the new guidelines are
pretty much the same for the
guardianship as well as a
conservative and they are
prohibited from selling or
disposing of any property or
changing the housing replacement
of the
A. I. P. which is an alleged
incapacitated person.
Without specific authorization
from the court.
And often Mr speaker and
gentleman often not enough money
for separate guardian and and
the conservative ship.
Mr speaker gentle lady but under
the existing law.
A conservator and guardian.
Cannot legally of Scotland with
the principles of property
anyway but apparently they were
cause for having this ammendment
the only difference is they have
to have a hearing and from a
court we get report permission
but
having to individuals serve
particularly for people that
have some accumulated wealth.
Right may address that situation
it's just an observation on my
point I I I support the
legislation but it just saying
that we were trying to deal
with.
Instances where people were of
starting with the principles
property you would want to
guardian to oversee the
physical well being of the
principal than you'd want a
separate conservative
overseeing the well being of the
person's stated their assets and
since it's a temporary measure
it does seem to do that two
people may be doing that instead
of one and then the court would
have time to determine whether
permanent guardianship for a
permanent conservatorship or
both is needed to care for that
principle but again I I support
the legislation is just the more
observation that may be the one
to people serving those two
roles because they are separate
and distinct from one another.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady thank you just for
the debate the gentle lady from
Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady from down
here in the you'll please yes Mr
speaker I'll yield to the gentle
lady from Travis county Mr
speaker thank you very much
gentlelady on page two of the
bill online twenty it really
starts on that line nineteen is
states the duration of the
temporary guardianship shall not
exceed thirty days can you tell
me why that was dropped from the
total of sixty days.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
because a lot of times there
wasn't accountability within
that sixty days so if we shorten
it up to thirty
and then it would also be able
to be extended
Another sixty days if necessary
only one time.
Okay so Mister speaker if in
fact I'm understanding you
correctly and I think I am the
first thirty days just to make
sure that everything is going
like it's supposed to be going
and then after after that it's
an additional sixty days if
everything is.
Following guidelines and
everything but then after the
sixty days is the can you tell
me what the procedure is then.
Mr speaker and gentle lady then
it would go on to a permanent
guardianship.
If needed.
Is needed Mr speaker and gentle
lady that is the key right there
if needed Mr speaker which
brings me to my next question Mr
speaker and gentle lady of I
haven't had a chance to read
the.
Entire tea of this particular
bill I'd I'd pretty sure I
understand what we're trying to
get accomplished here the
diseases a Landel.
That person to not be under the
constraints of a guardianship or
conservatorship in anyway.
Mr speaker gentle lady are under
temporary guardianship.
That Mr speaker gentle lady can
they get out from under the
constraints of that Mr speaker
gentle lady yes Mr speaker
gentle lady to get that
accomplished with this person
have to go before the courts
again.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you for your answers
senior for the debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr I really has your
closing would you please answer
of question that is really been
burning on top of my mind.
Yes Mr speaker is it true that
everything's better with bacon.
Yes actually wanted justice.
Mr speaker I move that
descended.
The substitute.
the.
Senate judicial committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty I do now pass we are
final passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill thirty five the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative will cost.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
both yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew votes
yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative
Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
There is a close by a vote of
sixty seven in the affirmative
zero negative Senate Judiciary
Committee September Senate bill
thirty five has passed the house
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you miss when we go to the next
order of business concurrence no
objections order members kindly
turn your attention to the
concurrence calendar found on
your yellow floor calendar.
We will go to item.
Number one the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan to make a
motion.
Thank you Mr speaker the motion
is to concur however urged the
body to vote no.
Very well the gentleman for San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from McKinley County
yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you're asking the body not to
concur could you talk to us
about the reasons why we're
looking to not concur sure thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen there is some language
in the bill specifically that we
need to correct consist
contingency language we'd like
to look at we also
I understand that we may have
eliminated a big a big piece we
thought was going to be picked
up on the other side regarding
rural health care affordability
which is not anywhere.
And will court of course was a
big issue when we were here of
during the special set session
particularly for one particular
hospital here in New Mexico
there's some other some other
issues that we just feel that we
need to have some time to work
out.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady this is kind of our
one shot at this for the body if
it goes to conference committee
then it'll just be a couple of
members sitting in there so if
we could just have a little bit
more discussion about the
specifics that way I can feel
more comfortable and voting one
way or the other Mr speaker
gently.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen certainly we're also
interested in supporting the
work of the P. three legislation
that moved off of this this
floor
would like to see some funding
put into that
possibly even looking out
establishing a program within
the New Mexico finance
authority.
Not specifically for hydrogen
everybody's so hold on to your
shorts it's a
just in general
public private partnerships
And there's a couple of other
things but I I just think it's
important when we're looking at
development Mr speaker gentleman
that we do have that tool
available to us throughout New
Mexico thank you madam speaker
Mr speaker and gently I did do
have my house my pockets but I
guarantee you I do not have all
of my shorts.
TMI General.
Thank you for sharing Matt and
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
so I I really hadn't even I know
we've got the entire packet
before us and I hadn't even
started looking into the package
now it wasn't expecting even if
if we were to come over
concurrence that there wouldn't
be a of a massive amount of
debate but since we're looking
at at not concurring than that
that's my concern I I haven't
had a chance to look through
this I hope that others who
maybe have through this have
some questions that can be
answered more directly because I
I'm not exactly sure full full
what is in there that is
that differences that we would
not concur so I thank you
Mr speaker thank you gently
thanks the gentleman from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan yield Mister
speaker gentleman I'd I yield.
Thank you Mr and and gentle lady
I'm just interested in in a
couple changes here if you could
help me understands I I think
it's fascinating here so Mr
speaker and gentle lady a looks
like.
That.
released for FY twenty two the
changes the Senate made
actually decreased spending out
of the reserves a little bit the
version that came out the house
was three hundred fifty million
Senator reserves.
But the Senate version is three
hundred thirty eight first one
is thirty nine million centers
are so if you ten percent less
essentially
disparagingly Mexico do you.
Do you know what kind of what
the the items are that to meet
in the plus or minuses that
affects the FY twenty two.
In that way.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen basically what we've
allowed to with FY two twenty
two there were some in there
that we love for with
compensation the recall we may
have we increase that so we
could bring everybody up that's
the that is the issue that
sticks in my mind but I can I
can tell you Mr speaker
and gentleman on some of the
decreases that we saw for things
like
money to the lottery tuition
Fund.
Of the New Mexico department of
agriculture for soil and water
conservation districts some was
reduced from the venture capital
program fund
Some from the tribal
infrastructure project fund so
there they did take some
decreases but the added things
and did stay within their
framework but I just think
there's some other things that
we need to work on.
You have a Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I appreciate that and I
know this is kind of a back and
forth process so I will support
you and and a motion that you'll
you'll make I just to that
really jumped out to me and I
don't know if you know any the
detailed office asked Mr speaker
gentle lady there was roughly
one point nine million
subtracted from higher education
institutions are you familiar
with those changes and what
those are Mr speaker gentleman I
do know about that I do not have
all the detail in front of the.
Okay Mister gradually thank you
and the other one was that looks
like a million was subtracted
from the department of
corrections due to a declining
number of inmates speaker gentle
lady are you familiar with this
Mr speaker gentleman I am that
has been an ongoing issue with
the LFC hearings of the number
of inmates and how they are a
classified
which directly relates to cost
has been a major discussion so
it doesn't surprise me that that
money has been reduced.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I
Hi I know that this is really
just a philosophical difference
between you know.
folks on the side the offices
that side but I I just I think
it's interesting that we see a
decrease in the number of
inmates
we've seen this century since we
had that constitutional
amendment change regarding
parole and and we've since seen
of inflection point increase in
slope on crime and some
spiritually I think this is just
another point that shows what
we're doing here has a direct
impact on what folks are feeling
outside when it comes to their
safety and crime.
Mr usually the the last thing I
wanted to just ask a quick
question on although they are
spending the changes the Senate
made means they're dipping a
little bit less reserves.
In FY twenty three.
they're spending more it looks
like
The the house passed version
would have added one hundred
seventy four million dollars
reserves in fiscal year twenty
three.
For the Senate only with changes
role adding fifty eight million
so I spent another hundred
twenty issue million out of FY
twenty three.
And do you know what.
What those particular items are
there were associate with that
expand.
Thank you Mr speaker thank
you'll need thank you gentlemen
and as you're correct brings a
reserve down I think was twenty
eight point two in there
Primarily the amendments Senate
amendments included
increases for evidence based
criminal justice reform some
four cost over runs for state
government capital outlay
projects there's one in there
for destination based sourcing I
understand that is a quite a big
deal for Hobbs and Carlsbad
there is funding in there for
additional assistance for
homeless persons hold I guess
it's homeless housing
money in there for cyber
security.
There was funds in there a
little bit more for the
secretary of state five million
more for tourism this things
like that there wasn't massive
well a new a new projects Mr
speaker gentleman was twenty
million to the Economic
Development Department for a
film school that would have been
a new a new addition something
that we all hadn't talked about
here.
The spiritually thank you that
that really helped me understand
kind of what happened over the
Senate
and again I appreciate that you
know there's a little bit of
back and forth the needs to
happen here so happy to support
the the waiting her motion thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady.
Thanks to the General Lynn from
San Juan Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
will the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan county
yield I'd be happy to yield
Mister speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
joining from San Juan McKinley.
Mr speaker Jordi from San Juan
McKinley as I remember as we
shipped HB two out of this house
side of this chamber I believe
the reserves are roughly around
thirty percent is that right.
Mr speaker gentleman it is and
Mr speaker generated from San
Juan McKinley the way I
understand the the break down
now is the reserves would be
more around twenty eight and a
half percent is that right.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
San Juan McKinley
there is a slight increase looks
like in recurring spending of
about eleven million is that
right.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
San Juan McKinley and and the
the nonrecurring I think is it
is a touch more though I I think
it's around a hundred forty one
million is that right.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from San
Juan there's a couple of items I
think that that give me a little
bit of pause specifically
in the areas of education as I
understand it there were there's
reductions in both the higher ed
as well as the the K. through
twelve public schools support is
that correct.
Mr speaker gentlemen I'm looking
at the blue handout now and even
if we could we would get a
better sense of exactly what
those items are but my quick
review Mr speaker gentleman is
yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from San
Juan McKinley County thank you
for that.
and then I the on the non non
recurring side I guess switching
gears it's my understanding that
the the travel infrastructure
water projects all of that money
that had been earmarked is now
gone is that correct.
It is the two if program Mr
speaker gentleman.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley in San Juan and those
those monies have been removed
is that correct Mr speaker
gentleman my understanding
though I'm just reading this of
this document is that the
funding went into a tribal
package that was I believe is
thirty five million but I've got
David here and I can ask him.
Mr speaker gentleman it was
thirty million excuse me.
Mr speaker generated from San
Juan McKinley.
It's it's my understanding that
there was originally ten million
into the soil and water
conservation districts and five
of that has been pulled out is
that correct Mr speaker
gentleman that is correct.
And Mr speaker generated from
San Juan the the last sort of a
line item that that I'm
interested us about to to
confirm is the the arc of funds
that went into the lottery
scholarships
it's my understanding there was
about ten million that were that
were subtract is that correct Mr
speaker gentleman that is
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
from McKinley county in San Juan
I appreciate clarifications I
think there's enough items there
and there's more potentially the
that we could talk about but
there's enough items that give
me some pause based on on how we
formulated the budget and and
HFC how we voted out on the side
I I think it's worth going to
committee and so for that reason
Mr speaker gentle lady from San
Juan McKinley County I support
your recommendation.
Next to the gentle lady from
grant Hidalgo in Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady yield I'll yield
Mister speaker thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady I just have a couple of
questions on this form and and I
also will support you going to
concurrence but I just noticed
that four million dollars was
restricted from the game and
fish department that was to be
used to refer to acquire private
land how much is still left in
that fund.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am
looking for that now.
Mr speaker gentle lady it was
eliminated.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and is there any
other appropriation in any other
fund outside of game and fish
department that would be using
taxpayer dollars to acquire
public lands Mr speaker gentle
lady I'd have to go through this
with a fine tooth comb but I am
not sure let me ask.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am
being told that the yes there's
a five million dollar of the
appropriation in the DFA a
column but we're looking for
that now.
Mr speaker gentle lady you might
want to start with in the for
this blue handout.
On the page.
thirteen and you'll see what
those changes are.
Thank thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady and water what
is when DFA gets those funds is
DFA what's the it is it for the
same purpose and why did it move
out of game and fish invited me
to DFA.
Mr speaker this was a Senate
rule of action I can't speak for
the.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady I'm
I'm very very concerned about us
using taxpayer dollars to
purchase public land private
land for multiple reasons
there's no way that our ag
producers our farmers and
ranchers can compete with
taxpayer dollars in purchasing.
Are property again there's one
one example of a ranch that was
that.
There is a estimation that we
were going contribute some funds
and in that process of saying
Hey the state's going to
purchase this the value of the
ranch climbed immediately and so
I had asked to get some evidence
on that which I was never given
side I want to give a right but
it was far far far more than a
fifty percent increase on the
right of the the the the sale of
the property what they wanted
and so for.
Okay.
So thank you thank you for
directing me to this Mr speaker
and gentle lady and it is for
conservation ask actions for
specific and greatest
conservation need including
improvements to properties
statewide and I you know I I
think our farmers and ranchers
have proven themselves to be the
greatest conservationists in the
state and I think that our soil
and water conservation and and
various initiatives when
properly funded are doing the
work that needs to be done and
so I hope that when you guys go
when you talk about this will
continue the conversation and
and won't Star spending state
dollars taxpayer dollars to
purchase private property and
put it in a conservation
easement those can never be used
again for farming and ranching
and food is essential to our
survival and so Mr speaker and
gentle lady I also noticed that
there's a it's not in a summary
here but it is and I think it's
page fifteen there's a new line
item of twenty million dollars
that do it has requested for
broadband and cybersecurity.
It's very vague and so it
doesn't say what it's going to
be doing so I called to ask you
know we asked around and and
found out that do it did ask for
that and it is for public
education department and also
for some of the needs of the
agency but but also to help our
schools secured with
cybersecurity issues but the
languages and there and since
you have the expert there with
you could you find out because
I've been told that if if the if
the language for public
education department as an added
there that that could be used as
a penalty or against the formula
they used for formulating no it
doesn't have to be specific to
PED Mr speaker gentle lady money
expert is shaking his head no.
So we just we just wanna make
sure that the schools do not get
penalized through the offset
match if the language isn't
specific to PED.
Already Mr speaker gentle lady
my understanding is is that this
funding would allow do it to
help any agency that needs help
with cyber cybersecurity thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady and because it's vague then
it won't be counted as an offset
even though the intention
according to do it is to help
PED Mr speaker the answer's no
thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady and
then you know I notice that
there's a million dollars
subtracted from the department
of corrections due to the
climbing number of inmates that
I it was it was interesting
because throughout the process
of the introduction of bills.
A lot around detaining all the
criminals with violent crimes
folks who are in correction
started calling and saying we're
understaffed we're working
overtime.
And so I'm just wondering how it
was determined that we could
just subtract that rather than
re directed to other needs of
corrections.
Mr speaker gentle lady it was a
ten million dollar a ten million
dollar bar that was done in
December.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady thank you
for your diligent effort on this
and and nice to see you Mr
Abbey.
Thanks to the gentleman from
Chavis Leanne Roosevelt.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
a gentle lady I'll be sure do
you yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
in this budget of eight billion
four hundred and eighty million
dollars.
There's an item in there for the
Legislative Council.
And.
I almost want to simply make a
statement and I believe you
might agree with that or have a
comment gentle lady.
I noticed occasionally we we
look to cash balances in the
Legislative Council council for
sort of last minute spend.
And in that it became clear to
me that the Legislative Council
who we rely on as a citizen
legislature for what I might
refer to is full service full
services to each member of the
legislature.
That we must be prudent in not
assigning a son of funding
source.
That may or may not be
sufficient and the net result is
you might be in fact punishing
an agency that's doing an
exceptional job by kind of.
This convenience so madam of
could you comment specifically
on on cash balance perhaps not
just for the important
Legislative Council but other.
Ways in which this citizen
legislature.
Looks to for expertise and
assistance question.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
it's true we do have a full
report on cash balances for
every agency in New Mexico.
The Legislative Council as part
of that.
And in some cases when there's
cash balances available and you
see the use of other state funds
there's an opportunity for us to
use those other state funds what
appropriate one we're building
our budget.
in some cases you've seen and
serving on the HFC Committee Mr
speaker and gentleman for we've
actually use cash balances from
Legislative Council Service for
what we particularly see as a
legislative issue or legislative
piece of work we had Mr speaker
gentlemen so something
specifically for fixing statutes
I can't remember exactly what
that was but was along that line
but it is something that we
monitor and in some cases are
very large cash balances some of
the state agencies
Through federal funds that
haven't been moved out through
the new federal funds that are
coming in they will acquire very
large cash balances.
Thank you the gentle lady Mr
speaker.
Gentle lady I I to rise and
support you in your effort I
think it is a compliment to your
leadership of the appropriations
and finance committee in that we
sent them a budget for a eight
billion four hundred and eighty
million dollars and they sent it
back for the same amount with.
To my measure remarkably few
changes thank you Mr speaker.
Next year the gentleman from
curry.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from McKinley County please
yield I'll yield Mister speaker
thank you delayed delivery are
to rise and support of your
recommendation to concur
my first notice was that the
reserves went down a little bit.
Current spending I think one of
just to hear but
that that was my first
indication that maybe we need to
look I do have just two or three
little questions curiosities I
think Mr speaker gentle lady I
noticed that there is one point
nine million subtracted from
higher ed yet there was one
million added to do any of you
for instruction.
And I I don't know that I fully
understand what took place or
for the motive behind those
changes I think it was to right
size the formula for interview
because they were.
For student receiving less than
everyone else in there may have
been in addition for that to
right size the formula.
But I wasn't sure so can you
speak to that.
Mr speaker gentleman is as
you've heard throughout the LFC
hearings that comes of the
comprehensive institutions
there's a major discrepancy
between three of them one up
here in the north western and
eastern so what we've tried to
do is without completely
disrupting our work with the
higher ed subcommittee we wanted
to make sure that we're starting
to move in that direction of
allowing more funding into
Easter I thank you madam chair
appreciate that I just the the
notes that I'm looking at are
the changes that the Senate made
that they did after it came out
of the house so I wonder about
that than the four point two
million it was added to provide
the pay raises I know there were
discussions on our side about
thirteen fifty an hour for
minimum wage the other side of
fifteen dollars an hour for
minimum wage I don't know if
this four point two million is
related to that for what it's
exactly related to so I'm
curious what the four point two
million that was added what is
that related to gentle lady Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen entity look at the FY
twenty three general fund high
level summary and look online
forty five here right you see
the four point two million that
was for specific funding for
high level occupations such as
lawyers and scientists that we
have employed by the state New
Mexico.
Thank you gentle lady out of
from back and look at the high
level I did not plan to the
catch that so gentlelady the
only other question I had Mr
speaker had to do with the.
Order a million or two and fifty
thousand was added to the state
engineer for that for a specific
project was is something that we
didn't we overlooked on the
house side or something Mr
speaker and gentleman I believe
is four nine FTE it was
something that apparently we
didn't pick up on on the in an
HFC at the time and and it's not
unusual Mr speaker gentleman
that what we miss that's the
beauty of to chambers as you
know we had some things that
slip through the cracks we asked
them to fix and this is
something that they fixed on our
behalf.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I like I said I do stand in
support of your decision to not
concur thank you thank you Mr
speaker.
Next to the gentle lady from
Eddie.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan please yield Mister
speaker all yield.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr
speaker I always find it
interesting the interplay
between the house and the Senate
when it comes to the budget
building in and we're we end up
and it's it's I think a bit
revealing what the Senate cares
about compared to what we do and
so I read with great interest Mr
speaker gentle lady the
this we have a detailed with
some of the changes ended up at
least with the Senate wants to
see.
Mr speaker gentle lady I just
have a couple questions and I
like to look again at the four
point two million added in
recurring spending for pay
raises for public employees Mr
speaker gentle lady I I think I
appreciate this because I've
heard from a number of people of
my constituents who saw what was
being proposed for teacher
raises and thought the state
employees in general should be
treated somewhat similarly on
that so I appreciate that very
much Mr speaker gentle lady
could you this is this is for
professional employees
could you just give us a quick
definition of what a
professional employees compared
to any other type of employee.
Mr speaker of the gentle lady
will look specifically for this
I mean just my initial response
to that a couple of things is
hard to fill positions because
there's not a competitive salary
Mr speaker gentle lady when
we're looking at trying to hire
high level tech technical
science science folks or doctors
or lawyers nurses folks like
that we have major vacancies in
those kinds of positions.
That's just that's not a spoke
kind of definition but I think
the intent is is that we want to
have a higher competitive salary
for those needed positions.
Mr speaker.
The gentle lady what we do have
here it's just a general term
is called occupational.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much that's a that's a
helpful answer
Mr speaker generally they want
to talk a little bit about the
additional funding for the state
engineer it's two hundred fifty
thousand dollars of this again
would be recurring Mr speaker
gentle lady could you just give
us kind of a ballpark figure of
how much we have increased the
state engineer offices budget of
for fiscal year twenty twenty
three.
Mr speaker gentle lady of first
on the two hundred fifty
thousand that is specifically a
request of the new engineer for
helping with Indian Water Rights
issues and and some are and some
of those other things but Mr
speaker gentle lady the total is
twenty one point two percent
increase for that department.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much look like a pretty
good increase to begin with and
little bit added so Mister
speaker gentle lady now I'd like
to turn to some nonrecurring
spending.
And in particular at ten million
those Senate added ten million
dollars from the public school
reform Fund for a charter school
revolving fund and that is
contingent on the passage of
house bill forty three.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I was
just wondering why that it in
you know if you have any sense
of why the house didn't build
that funding and and we left it
to the Senate.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm I
don't I feel like we had a full
plate in HFC many many hearings
of this may have been something
that could've easily have
slipped through the cracks and
fortunately they picked up on
it.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
just a couple other questions.
the Senate added ten million
simply like the number ten
million for some reason but ten
million for development of
nursing programs and Mr speaker
generator fully support anything
we can do for nursing programs
it says that this is coming out
of other state funds and Mr
speaker generally I'm just
wonder if you would give us a
definition of other state funds
we hear general fund we here
federal funds what is
encompassed under the heading of
other state funds.
Mr speaker gentle lady this of
started as arpa funds goes into
the of appropriation contingency
fund and then into this into
this program.
Thank you very much appreciate
that and then finally I did want
to ask about of the ten million
added from the former or the
funds for the destination based
sourcing safety net fund and
that's related to Senate bill
Senate bill one thirty seven
Mr speaker generally are just I
don't know if this is something
that concerns you at this point
and why you are recommending
against concurrence at this time
but speaking for
For my area of the state and
others as well the destination
based sourcing change that
occurred through house bill six
and twenty nineteen did create a
lot of issues lower funding for
a lot of municipalities and so I
hope that will stay in there and
just wanted to get that out
there that I guess finally
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
think I heard you say you that
the detailed a few things that
as to why you don't want to see
concurrence just yet and you
said there were some other
things.
Do you want to elaborate on that
gentle lady Mr speaker or just
let that with that go for just a
bit Mr speaker gentle lady I
think I'd like to let that go
for right now because we are
still under major review of
everything that we've got here
I'm not super critical the any
means I know that they've got a
lot of work to do Mr speaker
gentle lady but I think at this
time we just before start
getting into detail because it
leads to more detail and I I
prefer to wait till I have a
spreadsheet I can hundred.
I appreciate that answer very
much Mr speaker gentle lady so.
Right respect for you for the
job you do if your leadership in
the house Appropriations
Committee and we'll certainly
take your recommendation
regarding not getting
concurrence at this time thank
you so much.
Next generation Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady yield please
Mr speaker I will yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I have
a couple questions and on the
recurring part of it.
Five hundred thousand dollars
was added to PED for out outdoor
classroom is that a do
appropriation.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is a
new program.
Okay and Mister speaker.
The gentle lady kinda confused
to how this is money going to
be.
Appropriated is there grants or
have how's that gonna work and
to what ends purpose is this.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
generally happens with new
programs is that had will invite
applications for very school
districts to apply.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady what I'm hearing you is if
somebody is interested in an
outdoor lacked classroom they do
make applications to PED and
this is of understanding this
correctly for them to be able to
explore.
Doing their work outdoors is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady yes.
Okay Mister thank you for that
Mr speaker and gentle lady also
under recurring just a couple of
lines down this is one million
dollars is added to ENMU for
instruction I know that there
was a concern that that was put
forth by ENMU to bring their
students up to the level that
are other university this is
completely put them in parity
with other colleges.
Mr speaker gentle lady it does
not it starts it starts the
process but in the interim we do
have a higher ed subcommittee.
By the end of next interim we
will have a funding formula
recommendation at that time
we'll know exactly where we
should be with those
comprehensive schools.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that explanation I know that
there was some concerns there
and I had a concern as well so
I'm I'm glad to hear that
explanation Mr speaker gentle
lady under nonrecurring.
Of the.
Hello halfway on that page down
is is a ten million dollars was
added from important are the
funds to provide housing
assistance to the homeless can
you tell me for that money.
Is going to be to to use.
Mr speaker gentle lady most of
the housing money runs through
the mortgage finance authority.
And this on this particular
funding source will run through
DFA.
and they will invite
applications okay that was my
question there I didn't know if
those one for one specific area
or if applications could be made
to to obtain that money Mr
speaker.
I am concerned about on the non
recurring on the last page the
five million dollars was
subtracted from the regional ten
million for the soil and water
conservation districts that
gives me concern Mr speaker
gentle lady mainly because we
know how precious water is the
state of New Mexico and these
measures especially since now we
have lots of applicants for the
recreational cannabis and I know
that there's I have been
receiving lots of concerns
regarding waters and how that
application will be made even
though it might be grown inside
a greenhouse is still has to be
an agricultural.
Excuse me occur food that they
will fund over the case may be
there and that does give me
concerns because it is going to
be.
Why us I do believe for.
In M. D. A. and our environment
department to get all these
questions that'll so madam
speaker Mr speaker gentle lady I
do appreciate the effort that
went into this and I agree that
we.
Of with your decision not to
concur thank you very much the
motion for the body is to concur
in the Senate amendments to
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two is amended the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
has urged the body to vote no
all those in favor of concurring
signify by saying hi.
All those opposed.
This is filled to concur in the
Senate amendments to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three.
I will appoint to the conference
committee the gentle lady from
can the handle on the San Juan
Representative Lundstrom the
gentleman from you
Representative small and the
gentle lady from Sapporo
Representative Gail Armstrong
are the house conferees.
And even the Senate fails to
receive from their budget.
It's probably going to happen.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move and
go to the next order of business
third reading of legislation.
Since ordered.
Next one item number sixteen.
Senate bill thirty six.
The jelly for newly risen
Figueroa for the record reflect
on action necessary for places
Senate bill thirty six on final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thirty six raises the employer
contribution to the E. R. B. one
percent in fiscal year twenty
three and one more percent in
fiscal year twenty four and what
that I stand for questions.
The gentleman percent of all for
one question.
Thank you Mr speaker does that
come gentlelady yields.
I yield Mister speaker that was
the germs question seeing no
further debate thank you to.
Mr speaker and generally from
from Bernalillo can you just a.
It from the body what this cost
will be next year and the
following year for those
percentage increases to the
general fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
will be about twenty point seven
million dollars.
In fiscal year twenty three and
then another twenty point seven
in fiscal year twenty four for
the total of forty forty one.
This was bigger generally this
is gonna be when it's fully
phased in forty one million
dollars recurring expense is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
Next German fully.
Mr speaker I yield.
Subscribe.
Total assets currently
the phone.
Total of both to use please.
As of June Mr speaker as of June
thirty twenty twenty one they
are being held assets of sixteen
point three billion dollars in
it would need an estimated
twenty three billion.
The
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Six point six dollars.
Liabilities over assets isn't
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Santa Cruz actually solve the
problem of the pending cancel
them to respond.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
make substantial inroads
without this bill it would be a
forty two years.
Would the current trajectory to
one hundred percent funding of
the E. R. B. and with the
passage of this bill It is down
to thirty three years.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
transient change would prevent
calculation thanks.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe it's seven percent but
there's a little time lag on the
webcast and the director of the
air B. David R. to lead to is
texting me and he'll give me the
precise answer.
Speaker gentle lady wore the
could you describe.
The last to last for a few.
Well averages of road returns
turn those turn the phone.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
will get that information for
you.
Madam speaker and gentleman I'm
going to again share this
information from David Archuleta
the director of the A. R. B.
Madam speaker the five year
return is ten point six percent.
And the ten year rate of return
was eight point six percent.
This kind of meshed encouraging.
The.
Point.
Percent projections going
forward long term may actually
be able to be a true.
One of the core disciplines
treasures.
Thank.
From Reuters.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam speaker will
gentle lady from.
The yield.
Thank you madam speaker I will
yield to the gentleman to the
north.
Madam speaker and gentle lady to
the south.
I just really what I want to do
is I want to I want the P. E. R.
eight members to listen in.
This.
These retirement funds are not
guaranteed it is their
retirement and P. R. A. and many
of its plans has a shortfall.
And those employees need to go
ahead and place more money and
so what I want to do is commend
the E. R. B. members for taking
the initiative to increase their
contributions to make the fund
solvent.
I'm worried that with our para.
That certain funds are gonna
become insolvent or plans will
become insolvent.
And for some reason some of the
members and terrible leave they
can borrow from the others more
solvent implants so I think that
an overall strategy is both P.
R. A. of New York the need to in
current employees need to make
sure their retirement is there
by increase in contributions and
thank you madam chair.
As for the debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
Maestas thank you madam speaker
with the gentleman from
Bernalillo you.
Yes madam speaker I yield thank
you madam speaker gentle from
Bernalillo delay from Bernalillo
the
So this includes the
contributions from both the
employee and the employer and
and if so by how much percent.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
increases the contribution only
from the employee here and by
one percent in fiscal year
twenty three and another percent
in fiscal year twenty four thank
you madam speaker the delay from
Bernalillo and is it simply a
two year.
One percent contribution and
then it and then this provision
would end.
Madam speaker and gentleman had
two year at the fiscal year
twenty four the percentage will
be eighteen point five and that
percentage contribution will
continue.
Okay thank you madam speaker
delay from below some of the
words it's increase of one
percent forever.
Just two years Madam speaker and
gentleman it is an increase of
two percent by fiscal year
twenty four that will continue
forever I understand thank you
Mr delay the Senate just a
couple quick points and I'm sure
if I looked at the map I played
the supportive but in the short
our I just want to make the
point I made a couple years back
is that a hundred percent
solvency is unnecessary it's
it's a Roose it's a patient go
system console eighty percent
solvency is fantastic seventy is
problematic and I was awesome a
hundred percent is unnecessary
call it does is take money from
taxpayers into the hands of Wall
Street America so when you say
employer that means the
taxpayers so the taxpayers and
sentiment screen you would we
take more money from taxpayers
put into retirement system to
get to hundreds of the solvency
that is unnecessary number one
it's government is not gonna go
out of business not gonna go
belly up number two
Representative solvency is
unnecessary because you don't
have to pay out today it's a
pleasure to go system service
very.
as we as we move on to the
future of disk mass of massive
contributions into the
retirement system
that don't affect the pay out
the chairman system gets more
than seven we more and then we
take more from the taxpayers for
for this future benefit has
opposed to increasing salaries
in the short term increasing
quality of life in the short
term which will ultimately
benefit future generations in
the long term so thank you Mr
Goodell even though you're
trying to do the right things
were great recommendations about
this notion of a hundred percent
solvency in forty two years or
thirty three years specifically
on necessary to have a hundred
percent solvency in a patient go
system particularly when it
comes to a government pension
thank you madam speaker.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that Senate bill thirty six do
now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill thirty six the vote
is now open.
For.
Electronic portion of the vote
is about to close.
The name of those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative will go.
Yes.
Representative bunga votes yes
Representative Cook.
No.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Eli yes
Representative Ely votes yes
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Harry Garcia
this.
Is.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative vented.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lord.
Representative Lord votes yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews
votes yes I had a great.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Representative Pettigrew those
no.
And Representative roads.
Five hundred fifty two in the
affirmative twelve in the
negative Senate bill thirty six
has now passed the house.
On item number seventeen
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe ready I am Madam speaker we
give me that point.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
Senate bill forty on final
passage has been taken that it
is now subject of debate
amendment or substitution
gentleman to explain the bill
repealing the repeal if we don't
repeal the repeal of cost is
eighty six million dollars
you're welcome.
There is debate.
The gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from Santa Amberley
we'll madam speaker I will yield
to the gentleman.
So Mr speaker and gentleman.
That was a great introduction to
the legislation I I really
appreciated that thanks for your
job and.
But this is actually a bill that
we spent a good amount of time
talking about the tax committee
and I want to just a little bit
of time discussing it here
because.
I see this kind of legislation
should inform other things that
this body does.
And and there are some things as
bodies on this year that I think
have not been so good that we
can learn from this legislation
from so Mister speaker the
massacre gentleman can you
that's going to just a little
bit of the history how this
started and what it is so I
think madam speaker and
gentleman so what happened was
in two thousand nineteen and by
the way on the phone just so the
body knows what expert on
dealing with time physicians
carrier me host the deputy
secretary
so in two thousand nineteen we
pass this to access these
Medicaid dollars Medicare
dollars to help our nursing
homes with quality control
quality bonuses and what happens
is it's mostly matching federal
funds if we don't continue with
this program we're gonna lose
about eighty six million dollars
and apparently it's a very
credibly innovative and very
popular program that is working
in its sun setting on in January
twenty twenty three and so
that's why we're repealing the
repeal.
Yeah madam speaker and gentleman
from us it'll really thank you
for that and then perhaps a
little bit more background.
Speaker and gentleman so with
correct we passes in two
thousand nineteen.
And I believe it was with the
prior administration and there
were many discussions about
this.
But my recollection is.
madam speaker gentleman's.
I'm being Bill this over.
The speaker and gentleman
understood.
Okay we are on item number
nineteen
gentleman from Bernalillo are
you ready on that bill.
Thank you madam speaker can give
me that point.
For the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
of three.
He hasn't taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution gentleman to
explain the bill thank you madam
speaker I'm pleased to introduce
my expert witness this afternoon
Sir Senator Michael Padilla well
you could say.
Thank
you madam speaker the purpose of
this bill is to mandate that the
workforce solutions department
conduct certain background
checks for employees and
subcontractors who handled.
federal income tax information.
madam speaker as a result of an
audit by the US department of
labor New Mexico was found to be
out of compliance and our
department of workforce
solutions.
The funding was related to
approximately two I'm sorry the
finding was related to
approximately twenty five
employees that have access to
iris data and information of
their clients this legislation
brings New Mexico into
compliance.
By requiring background checks
for the twenty five employees
background checks required the
New Mexico department of public
safety to obtain employee
history for your prints and
other information.
Well it is then provided to the
FBI for background checks and
information is provided to the
department of workforce
solutions.
Department then makes the
decision to hire for current
employees I'm sorry to hire or
for current glories ongoing
employment for possible
separation.
The substitute bill introduced
by Senator Padilla in the Senate
judiciary is a clarified process
how the department will
interpret the results from the
check and what our current or
prospective employee can do if
they wish to dispute the hiring
decision.
The department has stated that
the will absorb the cost of the
background checks in their
current budget which should be
in fiscal year twenty to twenty
three approximately a thousand
one hundred dollars and their
after starting in twenty four to
be about three hundred and five
dollars.
This legislation will protect
federal workforce solutions
funding of about a hundred
million dollars.
Annually and placed in Mexico in
compliance with federal
requirements Madam speaker I
stand for questions.
There is been a bill the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt counties
Representative Anderson thank
you madam speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield.
Madam speaker I yield.
Gentleman I appreciate your
Introduction to this Senate bill
one oh three and I was wanted to
ask you Sir if you could repeat
the the dollar impact amounts
again that I believe I heard
for.
This the cost of these
background checks.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman the.
It's a it's a large number so
I'm glad that you asked that
question it's the tops program
and it represents a hundred
million dollars that we would
potentially lose gentleman madam
madam speaker.
Thank you thank you for that
then of moving to the background
checks themselves
Madam speaker gentleman
often in the rural part of New
Mexico we provide background
check checks.
To be both a worthy undertaking
and a rather cumbersome.
Butchofsky.
have the are you satisfied that
Senate bill one oh three.
Isn't.
Putting undue burden on the
background checks that were
asking a workforce solutions to
perform question.
Thank you madam speaker German
I know I don't think it's an
burden some of we're talking
about approximately twenty five
employees and the it is
something that is necessary
requested actually by I work for
solutions so far mentoring
question correctly gentleman
madam speaker
I think it be correct.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman of for your answers
that was very helpful thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
yield.
Thank you madam speaker I yield.
Madam speaker and gentleman
This is about the fifth piece of
legislation that I keep seeing
the words.
Criminal history background
check and I asked in committee
whether or not that's a defined
term or not and I'm not sure
I've gotten a satisfactory
answers so I will ask of you the
those criminal history
background check have a defined
definition that limits the scope
of that check.
Thank you madam speaker German
the definition is is in regards
to this legislation is a
extension of the definition that
is used both by the federal
government as well as GPS.
Madam speaker and madam speaker
and gentleman does that.
Type of check only in compass
the criminal history of the
person who is being checked.
Madam speaker German yes.
And so madam speaker and and
gentleman the the concern I
raised in another context was
the same to me that we wanted to
capture a broader net we wanted
to capture more information that
may be captured in just a
criminal history background
check and and so I raise the the
concern with other legislation
but I'm glad that you now
provided a definition that I can
deal with elsewhere so it's
limited the criminal history and
a bank and other contacts that's
a concern it may not be here but
I do see that the in this
legislation it also has a second
background check and that's
called the legal residency
background checks so that's why
I raise the issue on the first
instance because in the other
legislation I just saw the one
word now we see two words so my
my question Madam speaker and
gentleman.
With respect to this particular
job performance do we need.
Okay broader background check
them provided in either one of
those to
the find words.
Thank thank you Mr thank you
madam speaker and gentleman so
this is mandated by the federal
labor department and it is only
limited to those individuals are
handling iris data.
Madam speaker and gentleman so.
We're confident that people
handling that type of data which
in which would include our tax
ID numbers which for most of us
is going to be our social
security number as well as other
information that one kid going
there from the they're satisfied
that a criminal history
background check would be
sufficient and maybe not a
broader background check that
may reveal things that did not
rise to the level of a criminal
investigation.
Madam speaker gentleman yes.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
that does concern me a little
bit because I think there's a
lot of information help there on
each of us that may reflect the.
Information concerning our
ability to keep things
confidential that may not the be
captured in a criminal history
background check and I would
think that the department would
want to conduct.
Broader background check to
ensure that the people there
employing.
Are not only.
Have not only had a criminal
history that with the eliminate
them but also don't have an
employment history or other
history that with evidence that
they are incapable of handling
sensitive information and so
madam speaker and gentleman
thank you for for bringing that
I would hope that we would maybe
broadened some of those terms as
we see of those words employed
him now I think about five
pieces of legislation that I've
read diss terms of thank you
madam speaker thank the
gentleman thank you madam
speaker thank you gentleman.
Westford the to of all folks to
remove their coats is there
objection.
It is so ordered.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Travis county
Representative Ezzell.
Madam speaker thank you very
much for the gentleman yield
please.
Madam speaker I yield.
Madam speaker thank you very
much of whenever you're talking
about the singer print part of
it what if there is already.
The fingerprints are already on
file plugged in.
Madam speaker maybe I just need
to clarify that a little bit
more let's say for instance an
attorney their fingerprints are
already on file will they have
to go through that process
again.
Thank you madam speaker kind
lady it's a very defined process
and if if they're already
fingerprints in place the ones
will have to be done again thank
you madam.
Madam speaker I'm sorry I could
not hear that.
Madam speaker gentle lady they
will have to be re fingerprinted
if even if they're already
someone I.
And madam speaker gentleman for
the is the work force loosening
going to.
Just for a finger prints or
digital fingerprints and and
I'll tell you why after I hear
your response to that madam
speaker.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Okay and madam speaker and
gentleman that might.
The problem and our rural areas
the only place you can get that
done with the fingerprints is
that a sheriff's department or
police station of most.
Most fingerprints now are done
digitally.
And whenever I'm talking about
somebody that has already been
fingerprinted and had the
background of.
Six in place.
Is it going to be cumbersome to
the person that might be make an
application to have to go
through that process again.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady fortunately most of our
local police departments as well
as sheriff's departments have
the ability to do the work in
coordination with the PSI I
suspect it'll be fairly a fairly
easy process and and very
convenience gentle lady.
Speaker okay.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
guess my question there
regarding the fingerprints the
digital verses the in.
Any time that I have to be
fingerprinted is not for being
arrested or anything like that
so nobody just go crazy on me
right here.
But I do have to be
fingerprinted to have a racing
license in the state of New
Mexico and only fingerprints
said internationally is accepted
is to date digital type
fingerprints so that I have a
concern there of Mr Madam
speaker gentle gentleman.
I'm also.
Just reading some of the now
this is on this particular bill
is states of felony or other
conviction may only be used to
deny employment if the crime has
a direct impact on the
prospective employees duties can
you explain that to me.
So that it Madam.
She went from a brunette to
applaud madam speaker.
Gentleman
I'm kind of confused here so if
they have a felony or other
conviction that can still make
application.
As an.
The only way they can be denied
employment employment is if it
is not in direct impact on the
duties of the prospective
employer.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady the fingerprinting and this
requirements specifically for
the work full solution employees
that will be looking at federal
iris data.
And and there is actually a list
of crimes that would that would
disqualify individuals.
but we need to remember Madam
speaker gentle lady that is only
for those employees in that
particular work force component.
Madam speaker.
Okay of madam speaker and
gentleman.
Is also saying that the triple a
County he shall conduct the
background checks whenever
you're saying talking about that
years.
I'm assuming that your local law
enforcement.
Would be doing that and I
understand that correctly madam
speaker gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady are
the local jurisdictions will
work with GPS and collecting
information for their use.
Hey I got a little bit of
concern right there I know that
our local law enforcement such
as our sheriff's department is
these these people that we do
work for sheriff's department
are working their hind ends off
Mr speaker I'm just concerned
that this might be over
burdening them and madam speaker
that's all of my questions thank
you very much for the responses
on your first bill thank you
very much thank you madam
speaker gentle lady.
Singh further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Madam speaker will my good
friend of from the south valley
of the Albuquerque yield.
Madam speaker gentleman and
friend.
Are you.
Speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo
while this isn't your first bill
it is the first bill you will
pass all try to be easy here.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
These are questions that I ask
in Judiciary Committee I was
hoping to see an amendment.
And of let me take you to page
three.
Of course the twelve.
We're just talking about we're
gonna look back five years and I
really believe that five years
is too short a time period.
I think you should look back a
little further.
Thank you madam speaker German
we have to subscribe
specifically to the requirements
of the federal Department
department of labor.
German response because.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo can you is that
requirement you can only look
back five years for a minimum of
five years.
Madam speaker gentleman only
five years and they have to be
recertified after five years.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman from South families go
to page four line one we talk
about the you know we're doing a
background on the perspective
contractors and subcontractors
what's not in this paragraph is
that we're going to do
backgrounds on the employees of
those contractors and
subcontractors.
Thank you Mr chairman so it not
only includes an employee that
would have access to that
information it also includes the
owner the contractor that would
have subcontractors or employees
under them Fund figure
gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
south valley are you saying that
the subcontractor employees or
contained in this paragraph.
Madam speaker gentleman yes so
the the owner of the company as
well as the contractor that
works for them that would have
access to that data.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentleman that wasn't brought
out in Judiciary they didn't
cover that I'm taking down on
page four we go down to.
Line twelve to about sixteen.
And we're talking about we're
going to investigate and were.
Of going to determine if this
person is
Qualified to go ahead and be
there.
There's two questions that I
have the first one is how does
how do you deal with
expungement.
As the Senator knows.
Couple of years ago we passed a
bill that allowed you to expunge
your record and you can have
somebody that six bunch.
Thank you madam speaker
government.
If it doesn't for on their for
their FBI background check in
with a plan to situations on.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo this is a another one
that I brought up that's kind of
unique.
Let's take my County.
Let's uh a business has an
employee who's in bezels money.
The please right up the
K..
They send the case to the
district attorney's office.
And
The the Bernalillo county
district attorney's office
currently has a threshold or
minimum embezzlement before
they'll prosecute the case.
Unfortunately that is fifty
thousand dollars.
So someone sold forty thousand
dollars.
And the case was of if you will
an airtight case and it was sent
to the DA's office that person
would never be charged.
So we'll have no rest record.
But.
when you go to the agency.
it you know you're looking at a
rest an FBI records.
You don't say a word when we
look at any pending any any case
one you may have been involved.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman from Bernalillo our.
Embezzlement does not qualify
for expungement.
And if someone is not convicted
as in any other situation and if
it doesn't show up on the FBI
background check then we will
not qualify for the thank you
Mr.
Madam speaker and gentle woman
from Bernalillo just change it
to Larson the I'm an employee of
the company that I stole forty
thousand.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman if it shows up on the
F. B. I. report and it would
actually qualify it would not
qualify.
Madam speaker and gentleman but
the point I'm pointing out is
they will not be arrested and it
will not be on the record that's
you know I think that John I
think this is good legislation.
So I think that there needs to
be I was hoping that we'd have
an amended and here to
specifically look at non
prosecuted cases and see what
they were but that's all my
questions thank you madam chair.
Seeing further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Well the June from Bernalillo
you for just a couple of
questions.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman yield.
Sir.
What is.
To what we're trying to
accomplish is the problem.
State department workforce
solutions for service.
A compliance issue.
Thank you madam speaker German
it'll bring us into compliance
with the federal labor
department rules and regulations
and so without that compliance
we stand to lose that
significant revenue that I
mentioned earlier.
Gentleman.
Madam speaker gentleman's pride
were aware of department.
Madam speaker gentleman's none
that we're aware of we've not
heard of any problems really
compliance issue house can
matter.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Your is about correlating for a.
Crime perhaps applicant was
convicted of.
Jobs with the replying for
Senators subjective to me so I
resolved.
It would not thank you madam
speaker gentleman's
again let me reiterate that is
only for that narrow band of
employees twenty five employees
or potentially contractors that
would be subject to the
background checks and there are
very specific disk qualifiers
for the employment and there is
an actual list the DPS will be
working off off of and trying to
determine that any Canada does
not have any of those in their
backgrounds madam chair
gentleman.
German German
as a representative would be a
financial.
The.
Instructions.
The gentleman I will read the
disk qualifiers I have a list of
them out here actually bribery
counterfeiting embezzlement
forgery fraud identity fraud
identity theft immigration
violations money laundering
receiving stolen property
robbery tax evasion or theft.
Thank you for that Madam
speaker.
Last question sure this was
going to apply to a very should
should.
Total employment pool.
Department workforce solutions
to.
Is approximately.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman it's only twenty five
employees for qualified.
Thank you gentlemen for your
answers thank you gentlemen
madam speaker.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you madam speaker.
Appreciated the debate this
afternoon.
As I said just a minute ago it
is really a house cleaning
aspect that we must take care of
turning to ensure that we do not
lose important federal dollars I
appreciate Senator Padilla
caring is B. one of three and
appreciate your time on a
speaker.
Thank you we are on final
passage of Senate bill Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one oh three the
vote is now open.
The thirty six already.
We do forty.
Is.
Is about to close.
Electronic portion of the vote
is close the curtain clerk to
call the members without a
recorded vote Representative
Alcon.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative Google votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews yes
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative Andrea
Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
those yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato yes
Representative small.
Representative small votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo votes
yes.
Representative Andrea Romero
over yes Representative Andrea
Romero votes yes.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Alcon votes yes.
By a vote of sixty two in the
affirmative and zero in the
negative Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one oh three has duly
passed this house.
Next we have item number twenty
Representative Cadena Senate
bill one thirty eight are you
ready thank you madam speaker
you get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
Senate bill one thirty eight.
Has been taken and that.
It is now subject to debate
amendment for substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill
thank you madam speaker Senate
bill one thirty eight is cleanup
legislation that's technical in
nature this legislation was
crafted to clarify ambiguity in
statute language as it relates
to G. R. T. deduction for
hospice and nursing home
services that has been in place
since two thousand five
additionally madam speaker SP
one thirty eight defines Max
which are Medicare
administrative contractors and
this clarification throughout
the statute has been most
appreciated by the taxation and
revenue department finally SB
thirty eight has no negative
impact to our New Mexico general
fund thank you madam speaker.
Debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentle lady from doing any old.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
We had a interesting debate on
this in the on this bill in tax
and so madam speaker and gentle
lady if you could explain to
folks a little bit about how.
Although we're including two
different definitions that are
not currently included in the
law.
Why there is no additional cost
to the public B. even though we
are include we are ex expanding
the definition of health care
provider to include.
nursing homes and hospice care
so if you could just briefly
explain that to the body for
those who could not serve on tax
it may not make sense thank you
madam speaker and gentleman I
can certainly do that since two
thousand and five with the
legislative intent behind it the
hospice providers and nursing
home facilities became part of
the New Mexico section seven
dash nine dash seventy seven
point one so they were eligible
for the G. R. T. deduction for
those Medicare services provided
in two thousand and sixteen
during a special session there
was a pretty significant tax
omnibus bill that came through
with the intention of trying to
clarify and streamline this this
statute in the section of law
previous to these changes made
in two thousand sixteen section
a of this bill Senate bill one
thirty or this or this section
of law had a long list of
providers that were eligible for
this deduction what they tried
to do is break down that
paragraph form list actually
define the providers that were
eligible and in doing so they
begin to use a word or term
health care practitioner as it
turns out everyone else on that
list was indeed a health care
practitioner a dentist a doctor
of oriental medicine anesthetic
trainer PT what is distinct here
is not actually that nursing
homes and hospice facilities are
considered health care
practitioner but they're not so
what this language does is add a
new section of law that defines
and will we still have the
definition but also names out
directly that they continue to
be eligible for this G. R. T.
direction.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady one thing that I did
not ask the other in committee
was with
The changing of of the.
The.
Crooning hospice care and
nursing homes including I'm here
that that under the definition
of of health care practitioner
will that affect any other
portion of law if we're going to
be redefining health care
practitioner in this bill Madam
speaker and gentleman we are not
including the nursing homes or
hospice facilities as health
care practitioners that's
actually the impetus for this
clarifying language is that they
are not falling under that
definition so we needed to set
them up as their own section in
this in this statute but I
appreciate the question we are
not expanding just clarifying
what has been existing practices
two thousand five thank you
madam speaker gentle lady so
what's happening here is health
care practitioner still will be
that other list of health care.
Introduce or.
Professions but we besides
health care practitioner we're
also including separately
hospice care and nursing homes
Madam speaker gentlemen you're
accurate in that so they have
been included as eligible for
this G. R. T. deduction since
two thousand five but with the
the switch in in statutory
construction in twenty sixteen
of the language frankly landed
in in in in a way that was a bit
ambiguous because they relied on
the health care practitioner
definition of which these two
types of services did not fall
under so that's exactly what
we're doing today they have been
defined at the back of the bill
for a for many many years now
and they've always existed but
we're clarifying here that they
continue to be eligible for this
deduction even though they're
not defined as health care
practitioners.
Thank you madam speaker in the
ladies and for how long have has
this deduction that in place
for.
The health care practitioners.
Madam speaker for different the
scopes of practice in health
care practitioners that's
happened in different iterations
for these folks the nursing
homes and hospice programs
they've been able to take this
deduction since two thousand
five.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
So they were.
In the original definition what
it was not specifically defined.
That's health care practitioner
but then we in two thousand
sixteen point health care
practitioner became the top or
the name of the groups.
And then a list of what a health
care practitioner was on that
list was also listed out that's
when they were in very early
left off is that correct Mr
speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman they were not left off
they're still named as you can
see on page to hear of this bill
they've been named all along
it's just become a bit confusing
because the term health care
language is used in two
different skews me the term
health care practitioner is used
in two different places within
that paragraph and they're sort
of sandwiched in the middle so
the legislative intent remains
clear it says that you can be
someone that has receipts as a
health care practitioner or a
health care for to practitioner
or the let's see health
imperative Services for hospices
or nursing home so frankly there
was a long list of course.
Sandwiched in between health
care practitioner language these
providers have had some this is
about the ambiguity here TRD has
never assessed a liability TRD
continues to clarify that they
don't see a liability owed here
but this is about reassurance
and peace of mind making it
crystal clear that through the
multiple revisions of the
statute they remain eligible for
this deduction.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so TRD at no time
suspended the ability for
nursing homes or for for hospice
care to be able to take
advantage of this particular tax
break Madam speaker and
gentleman they have not.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentle lady so real quick was it
the.
was at the the taxation and
revenue that came in ask for
this clarification or was it the
nursing homes and hospice care
providers Madam speaker and
gentleman it was an association
of the nursing homes that again
have their experts and financial
folks on board looking at this
with some concern that with the
different administration this
could be called into question
and because they relied on this
G. R. T. deduction for almost
two decades they're just doing
their due diligence to make sure
that the language matches the
practice they've been engaged
in.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady and and just on a
side note
I I'm not exactly sure why well
and and we had this discussion
but I'm not really sure why
nursing homes and hospice care
providers are not considered
health care and as as I
mentioned in committee I I've
I've lost my parents over the
last several years and and the
care that they that they
received was very good and it
was medical care.
And so I don't know if at some
point that's another discussion
as we talked about at some point
maybe we need to.
Talk about re categorical
categorizing them and I I I know
how you feel about that as well
the madam speaker and and gentle
lady and we sell a lot of time
through the pandemic talking
about our frontline nurses in
the hospitals.
And talking about the work that
nurses and doctors have done
through out this last couple of
years of the madam speaker and
gentle lady I think of the folks
that work in the nursing homes.
At hospice care especially
considering the age of their
patients.
I think the maybe we need to
recognize them as well because
they've they've been on the
front lines especially at the
beginning Madam speaker and
gentle lady of COVID.
And and this long.
Time of of battling they were
hit first and they were hit
hardest and I just speaker
generated to Maria to be able to
reach back out and I like this
legislation I will be supporting
it.
I I would if there's a way for
us to also recognize of those
that those health care providers
because Madam speaker gentle
lady.
I I think we we do focus on the
hospitals we do focus on them
being overrun in the critical
care about a speaker and gentle
lady.
there is that critical care
takes place as well without.
Maybe all of the
Attention or even finances being
delivered to those
institutions but I I for one
appreciate what our hospice care
providers
in our nursing home nursing
homes have done during this time
and madam speaker and and a lady
just once again just to
reiterate that as I saw my
parents.
Go through this wasn't COVID
related prior to comment about
speaker gentle lady the way the
the in many instances those are
the folks who were there.
At the untimely passing of our
families and so.
I item is laying the session I
don't think there's nothing we
can really do
but I this is one thing we can
do justice to give those nursing
homes and hospice care providers
just the ability to know that.
This is not gonna be interpreted
interpreted differently current
law will no longer be able to be
interpreted differently
potentially by making this a
technical fix so I appreciate
you for bringing this to the
floor to us and to the sponsors
for for bring this legislation
forward thank you madam speaker
thank you gently thing further
debate the gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder thank you
madam speaker.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
please you.
Thank you madam speaker yes to
the gentleman from curry.
Externality employee one of my
analysis talks about the
Deduction for Medicare
administrative contractors for
individual providers and it
lists the hospice care nursing
homes which are found on page
two in your new language on line
twelve.
This report here addressing
those two but it goes on to
mention clinical laboratories
home health agencies and
dialysis.
In a provide clinical
laboratories in dialysis on page
five line six and eight.
But I don't find home health
agencies anywhere in your bill
so are are they going to be
allowed the
Deduction for as a contractor or
do you know where they fall
within your bill gentle lady and
madam speaker gentlemen I
appreciate the question I first
want to share that I teamed up
with Senator Kernan who someone
I trust so much both on the
fiscal side but also as a health
care expert in New Mexico part
of the reason we got into this
together is that Senator Kernan
I both in in SP one thirty eight
and myself in a bill to extend
G. R. T. deduction for dialysis
facilities where in the same
session working to amend the the
the particular section of law so
we've been in this conversation
to make sure there was no
conflict between HB eighty one
that I passed out and just be
one thirty eight neither of us
in our new language address home
health agencies so they already
exist if you'll see on page
three they there are there in
that section that's well excuse
me in my bill.
As introduce its page three line
ten but just to clarify we don't
in either SP one thirty eight or
the bill I did related to
dialysis facilities impact
what's happening with home
health agencies.
So madam speaker generator noted
it does that mean that they are
eligible or they are not because
they're not addressed in this
bill.
Gentleman it seems to me that
there's been other pieces of
legislation introduced related
to destination based sourcing
and and connected back to home
health agencies I'm not sure if
the implications of that but
otherwise on my read it looks
like on page three they are
included within this this
statute just to clarify again
none of not this legislation or
the other piece related to
dialysis impact that deduction
in any direct way.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady LA I'm looking on page
three line ten is is that where
you are receipts of a home
health agency for payments
United States government it's a
trip yes Madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you delighted that was my
only question I just the founder
of an item that I couldn't
explain to figure out so thought
I would ask like you have very
high confidence in the Senator
Kernan and so just to.
We'll support your bill but I
just was curious about that one
issue thank you madam speaker.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker body I
certainly consider it an honor
to work with Senator Kernan all
we still have her with us in the
legislature I just in closing
would echo the sentiments
expressed by our minority with
Montoya certainly there
frontline workers across each of
our communities I'm honored to
include a hospice facility down
home that serves so many
patients with care and
compassion as well as nursing
homes in the district I
appreciate the the body for of
this debate and I now move that
SP one thirty eight.
To pass do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate bill one
thirty eight the vote is now
open.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
vote is close the clerk to call
the members without a recorded
vote Representative all point.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative black.
Representative bone grafts.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes Representative yes
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lord.
Yes Representative Lord votes
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative Andrea
Romero.
Yes Representative Andrea Romero
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo both
yes.
I the vote is now closed by a
vote of fifty nine in the
affirmative and there when the
negative sense Senate bill one
thirty eight has duly passed
this house.
Now we're going on to item
twenty one so Senate joint
resolution three as amended and
the gentleman from Bernalillo
and Sandoval Representative Ely
madam speaker would you give me
to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
this bill on final passage has
been taken the gentleman to
explain the bill Madam speaker
within the body this is
proposing to amend article six
section thirty five of the
constitution to find that a
judge that is appointed will
serve at least one year before
general election is held for the
office to which the judge was
appointed with that settlement
terms stand for questions.
Seeing no debate gentleman to
close and and the Senate joint
resolution three do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill three Senate joint
resolution three as amended the
vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
vote is close the clerk to call
the members without a recorded
vote.
Representative point.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative bunga.
Yes Representative Buka both yes
Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Is Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews yes
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero is yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo yes
Representative Trujillo votes
yes.
By a vote of fifty eight in the
affirmative and zero in the
negative Senate joint resolution
three as amended has duly passed
this house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that we go to the next order of
business messages.
Signal projection so ordered.
To read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred in house amendments to
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight as amended Senate bill one
fifty nine as amended
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
This message will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill thirteen as
amended by the house house bill
fifty seven as amended by the
house house bill ninety five as
amended by the house house bill
one eighty with the emergency
clause and returned same here
with and that the Senate has
passed house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house bill one thirty five
as amended by the Senate and
requests the concurrence of the
house and Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
message will be.
Entered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Mexico
will go to the next order of
business committee reports.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
To read.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill two nineteen has had
it under consideration point
same with recommendation that it
do not pass but that house
government elections an Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to nineteen do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson vice chair.
Move adoption Madam speaker.
We are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill two nineteen but a
favorable committee report on
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Indian committee
substitute for House Bill to
nineteen.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Propose nay.
Committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill thirty eight as
amended has had it under
consideration reports it was a
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson vice chair we on
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate bill
thirty eight as a man.
Reduction in speaker.
Sorry.
So we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
Senate bill thirty eight as
amended all those in favor
please signify signify by saying
hi.
Propose nay.
Committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
was the referred Senate bill one
two three have it under
consideration for same as
recommendation that a D. pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson vice chair.
Adoption madam speaker.
We are on a favorable committee
report on Senate bill one twenty
three all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Opposing they.
Committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred Senate joint
resolution ten has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation that a D. pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson vice chair of adoption
madam speaker we are an adoption
of a favorable committee report
on Senate joint resolution ten.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Propose nay.
Committee report is adopted.
Members I founded on claims pair
of spectacles.
At the rostrum.
They were separate at Addis.
Yes okay.
Representative if you're within
the sound of my voice you can
stop looking for your classes.
She's been like a long time K.
K..
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr chairman we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation.
Hearing no objections or refer
to the.
House joint memorial for
introduced by Representative
Chandler.
The Joint Memorial requesting
the United States department of
energy to vacate the nineteen
fifty four decision of the
United States Atomic Energy
Commission to revoke the secure
security clearance Dr J. Robert
Robert Oppenheimer house joint
memorial for introduced by
Representative Chandler.
House joint memorial for.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the.
Judiciary Committee.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
hundred as amended act relating
to cannabis regulation defining
terms increasing the number of
cannabis plants for cannabis
producer micro business and
integrated cannabis micro
business specifying the process
of criminal history record
checks requiring licenses to be
at least twenty one years of age
licensees to be at least twenty
one years of age providing an
exception providing mandatory
minimum training requirements
for licensees and their
employees prohibiting the sale
of cannabis and alcoholic
beverages on the same premises
providing for joint powers
agreement between the regulation
and licensing department and the
department of environment for
inspections of cannabis
facilities to produce edible and
topical cannabis products
clarifying business location
reporting for tax purposes
authorising certain nonprofit
medical cannabis producers to
convert their nonprofit
corporation status to for profit
corporation status and transfer
assets Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
hundred as amended.
Senate tax business and
transportation precepts to
percent of the one hundred is
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Imagine the disappointment of so
many been in the year we had no
hundred bill party hundred bill
in the Senate was about
cannabis.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker move we go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing no objection it
is so ordered.
HM if they want to thank the
speaker of the Republican caucus
will be meeting in room three oh
nine should be.
Maybe an hour.
And we've got off several things
to go over Mr speaker and
I I don't know what we have
always got left this evening I
think we go signing done go
home.
During the thirty minutes.
Mr speaker I rise it's gonna
take on thirty minutes for we
have to go over.
I was concerned about Canadian
city to get up and running and I
just learned about this in real
time.
right now so Mr speaker we have
a hundred and sixty five page
amendment that we just received
that's going into judiciary
immediately following so we need
to go over that bill with our
members.
K. three where we have
committees tentatively set to
start at three forty five.
Mr speaker maybe I'll see how
long it takes fuel supply folks
get fired up if we needed
complex equipment.
Let us know
right from I think we're
actually in the judiciary room
three oh nine is Judiciary thank
you Mr.
The gentle lady from Los Alamos.
Thank you Mr speaker the we will
have our last meeting of the
house taxation and revenue
committee tomorrow morning at
nine AM for schedule to hear
Senate bill one thirty seven I
think is the number Mr speaker
and also we'll have a briefing
from Representative Montoya
Roger Montoya about the rural
infrastructure crisis is one
thirty seven the capital outlay
bill.
Mr speaker No it's a Senate bill
that relates to destination
sourcing in a fund that's
created to support communities
who may have been impacted by
the destination sourcing of
services Mr speaker okay so I'd
just that it not be a final
meeting tomorrow excellent to
have another meeting on capital
outlay and the re offs I
understand Mister speaker thank
you not elected meeting.
The final countdown.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker of the house
Judiciary Committee will make
right after three forty five.
And we have added one build
excuse me to the agenda another
bill by Representative Senator
Brandt Senate bill thirty four
threats of shooting.
So we'll see you all and House
Judiciary.
Member center we will meet
tomorrow to.
The gentle lady from Dhoni any.
In
Mr speaker
of proliferation okay.
Mr speaker the consumer Public
Affairs Committee was going to
hear a bill this afternoon but
we will not be hearing that so
consumer public affairs
committee will not be meeting
this afternoon.
Thank you members take note.
Are there other announcements.
The gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
labor veterans and military
affairs well need immediately
after the Republican caucus or
three forty five either one way
or the other.
There thank you chairman members
techno.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
levy.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
the house stand in recess until
seven thirty PM mountain time.
Thank you.
Thanks every with this in the
gallery.
Thank you Mr ideas for being
here.
The house in recess until seven
thirty PM today.
