Oh
All right, everyone, roll call
is closed. We have a quorum.
Members.
Please get to your seats and
rise.
For the invocation by the gentle
lady from Bernnalio,
Representative Little.
Go to exitra Schulz Hans was the
it's like uh as uh.
And my English name is Charlotte
Little.
I am so grateful to be here
today to offer this invocation.
Creator
Thank you for bringing these
children here to this house.
Thank you for all of those that
made this trip here possible.
They are the reason that we are
here, that we do the work that
we do.
Creator, please continue to
guide us.
To provide us with wisdom.
To provide us with strength.
And to provide us with good
intentions for the things that
we do on their behalf.
As well as all of our families
and community members who are
still at home.
I ask, we all ask for a safe
return to their community.
We hope this experience will.
Open their eyes to what's
possible for them in the future.
And we will do our best to help
to get them there. Nectra and
blessings to all.
And now for the students from
Tahajali Community School to
lead us in the Pledge of
allegiance.
Oh
Yeah
gentle lady from Bernalio
Representative Anaya with the
salute to the flag of New
Mexico.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Madam Speaker.
Good morning, gentle lady.
Uh, Madam Speaker, and will we
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning, everyone.
this
Morning students from Tahajali,
thank you so much for that. That
was incredible. Thank you.
gentle lady from Bernalio
Representative of Beta, thank
you, Madam Speaker. I'd like to
say thank you to the students,
the teachers, the chief school
administrator, the school board
members and the families who
came out today all the way from
Tugela, New Mexico, District 69
to share our beautiful debazad
with the Pledge of Allegiance in
Navajo. I'm so proud to be a
representative and I'm so proud
to have you here today. Aha for
being here.
Sure.
Members announcements.
Generally for Bertillo,
Representative Herndon. Thank
you, Madam Speaker, and Madam
Speaker, everyone will notice on
your desk you have a brown paper
bag and courtesy of
representative Sarato and the
American Society of Landscape
Architects, so this gift serves
as a reminder of the important
work that landscape architects
do across our state. So
landscape architects play a
vital role in the shaping of the
spaces that we live, work and
gather as a community. They are
the creative minds behind our
parks, recreational areas and
the public spaces that bring
beauty and functionality to our
cities and towns, and many of
the projects we fund through
Capital Outlay whether it's a
new park or a revitalized
downtown area or an improved
outdoor space are brought to
life through their expertise and
education. Their work is about
more than
aesthetics, madam, madam Speaker
and members of the house. It's
about sustainability,
accessibility, and enhancing the
quality of life of all New
Mexicans. They helped create
environments that encourage
outdoor activity, foster
community engagement and even
support economic development. So
today, as you receive this small
gift, I encourage you to take a
moment to recognize the
contributions of our landscape
architects and let's continue to
support their
efforts in designing spaces that
that that serve uh current and
future rep uh presentations. And
Madam Speaker, I do have a
special guest on the rostrum, if
I may also introduce him.
So Madam Speaker, I am proud to
introduce Jacob Willis. He's
come to us today all the way
from Salt Lake City, Utah, where
he's a student at, at Brigham
Young University
where he is studying uh exercise
uh at his school, and he is also
going to be on to medical
school. His focus is on making
sure that people have healthy
hearts, Madam Speaker, he was
also
an Eagle Scout and uh he, he
absolutely volunteers with a
group called Simon's Heart,
which continues to exceptionally
uh support his interest in
making sure that we have good
hearts. Please stand up, Jacob
Willis, and welcome.
to the house. Welcome Jacob.
Uh, the gentleman from, oh,
Grants.
You don't go?
Is that right? Representative
Terazas.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, um,
Madam Speaker, I have, first of
all, let me introduce my, my
guest here that the kids and I'm
doing this for Representative
Baca because he's still in
committee,
uh, madam, you wanna stand up,
please, uh, Madam Speaker, as we
have Carlos right here with me.
I just got to meet him and and
his sister first.
Adriana
And John
And their brothers and sisters
and they're here to experience
what we do down here in the
legislature and so and their
parents are up there, uh, Madam
Speaker, and that is.
John and Doris Daus and please
bear with me, uh, please stand
up and recognize them for for
being here with us today.
And my apologies for not having
uh um more information. I'm just
doing this because they're here
and, and Representative Baca
isn't here and so I it I just
got thrown in there but I, I'm
happy that they're up here with
me. I didn't know they're all
brothers and sisters, so we
started talking and I understand
Madam Speaker, that uh the
parents are engineers and I was
very, very disappointed that
they that they weren't
undertakers like myself, but
I'm just kidding, Madam Speaker.
I make people smile this morning
anyway, uh, we appreciate the
the that they're here with us
and I hope they enjoy and learn
something, um, madam, uh.
Um, Madam Speaker, at this
point, um, we.
I want you to turn to a paper
that's on your desk, uh, that is
from Linda uh Calendaria, and
she's the executive director
for.
The Alma Health Foundation.
This organization has a makes
positive impacts in every county
in our state through through the
grants they award which is over
50 guarantees to advance
equitable health and so it's on
your desk if you have any
questions, um, you know, please
read this if you have a chance,
and if you have any questions
we've we've attached um Mrs.
Candelaria's phone number and
and and information I think this
is great for funding
opportunities to uh that are uh
included for statewide.
Initiatives
Madam Speaker, um, uh, after
announcements I'd like to make a
personal point of privilege at
at, at, at the proper point.
We'll do that later, gentlemen.
OK, any further announcement?
Gentle lady from Bernna Lea
Representative Patron.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I
wanted to announce today my
shadow Mariel, who's here, um,
Leon Lascano, she's been here a
whole week with me shadowing um
she's a student in social
studies and secondary education
at UNM. She's a sophomore, she's
made Dean's list since she's
been there.
She's also the secretary of the
oh if you wanna stand up.
She's also the um secretary of
the advising chapter of UNM and
she is also an El Puente fellow
doing research on
translanguaging, which is being
able to speak in two languages,
so today it's very fitting that
she's here with us, um, seeing
that it is bilingual day. Thank
you so much. Welcome to the
house.
Then a lady from uh Bernna Leo
Representative Hockney Vihill,
thank you, Madam Speaker. Also
in celebration of bilingual Day,
we have some, uh, guests in the
certificate, uh, guests on the
roster that we want to
introduce. Um, so the first
person we have is odorless
Marcus Odaus Marcus, if you're
here, stand up.
Um, then we have Cesar
Hernandez. Tamara Lucero, Alfred
Guolet.
Doctor Jesus Mosala, Andrea
Garcia, Sofia Otero, and Jayden
Cruz. So welcome to the house
the house.
And Madam Speaker, uh, we have
the pleasure of a performance
this afternoon from the
Albuquerque High School Mariachi
program and um they're about to
uh give us a great demonstration
of what they can do, so welcome.
fantastic welcome. Are you gonna
make your way over here? Are you
gonna perform over there?
Come on down.
Members, this is the Albuquerque
High School mariachi band.
In
I
Uh-huh
Oh
This
Look at
Look
Incredible.
Thank you so much Albuquerque
High School Mariachi.
I know how much Representative
Corola wanted to be here, so she
thanks you so much.
Any other announcements?
Well, then I'll give mine.
All right, uh, today is National
Service and volunteers
volunteerism day in the
roundhouse. We've got folks, uh,
in the gallery who are
AmeriCorps members, if you're
here, raise your hand, stand up.
All right.
Oh, there we go.
Welcome.
There are 2 people on the
rostrum, Isaac.
Flights and uh Stephen Carter,
um, both are, um, members of
Ecoservants, which is an
AmeriCorps program. Isaac, uh,
just joined Ecoservances. Uh, he
moved to New Mexico to pursue,
pursue trail building and
ecological restoration and has
enjoyed the opportunity to help
a small town community. I think
that's Ruidoso in the time of
need. uh, Stephen Carter founded
Ecoservants.
raise your hand, Steven. In
Riodoso.
As a grassroots effort to
address the needs of the forest,
uh, during the South Fork and
salt forest fires and the
flooding eco servants provided
5500 hours of volunteer service.
So thank you so much for your
service.
Thank you gentlemen.
Any other announcements?
Uh, gentlemen.
Never mind then, gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Madam Speaker, it
now being 11:59 a.m. I move we
adjourn until 12:01 p.m. will
come to order.
Mr. Speaker, Madam Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
journal show that all those
present in this morning session
are present in this afternoon
session.
If there are no objections, it
is so ordered. Madam Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
records show that the journal
has been read in full and
approved, subject to revision
and approval of the rules and
order of Business Committee. no
objection, it is so ordered.
Welcome to day 1014, uh,
actually it's day 14 of the
legislative session.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, Madam
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of Business Committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 415 has had it under
consideration report seen with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and hence referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Doreen
Yeo's chair.
of adoption, Madam Speaker.
We are on adoption of a, a
house.
A favorable committee report for
House Bill 415.
All those in favor?
Signify by saying aye.
Those opposed, nay.
Yeah.
The ayes have it. Committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to who has been referred House
Joint Memorial 9 has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Doreen Y Gallego's chair. Madam
Speaker, move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report for a house to
Memorial 9.
All those posed no, all those in
favor, please signify by saying
aye.
All the supposed name.
Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 577 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Art de la Cruz,
chair.
Madam Speaker, move adoption
please.
committee report for House Bill
577. All those in favor, please
signify by saying I.
All opposed? Nay.
media report, the Icehot
community report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to him has been referred Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 115.
Has had it under consideration
in report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Art de la
Cruze's chair.
Of adoption, madam.
Speaker, please.
Indeed, we are on a favorable
committee report Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 115. All those in favor,
please signify by saying aye.
And he opposed, nay.
Yeah, it's have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick and water resources
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 7 has had it under
consideration report seen with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Cristina
Ortez chair.
Madam Speaker, please move to
adoption.
We are on
We are on a favorable committee
report of Senate Bill 7. All
those in favor, please signify
by saying aye.
All those who oppose, nay.
Me to report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick and water resources
committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 101 as amended, has
had it under consideration,
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Cristina Ortez, chair.
Uh, Madam Speaker, move
adoption. We are on adoption of
a favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 101 as amended. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All the supposed name.
The ayes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred Senate Bill 5 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen's
chair.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 5 as amended. All
those in favor say aye.
All those opposed?
Committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 462 has
had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass and then referred to
the Judiciary Committee,
respectfully submitted to J.
Ferrari chair.
Madam Speaker, move adoption. We
are on a favorable committee
report for House Bill 462. All
those in favor say aye.
I suppose
Uh, committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 542
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the taxation and
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Madam Speaker, move
adoption on a favorable
committee report, we are on
adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
542. All those in favor say aye.
All those opposed? Committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate Bill
417 has had it under
consideration in reports with
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Motion.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 417. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
All those opposed.
Your report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to has been
referred House Bill 330 as
amended, has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Derek J led the chair.
Madam Speaker, please move
adoption adoption of a favorable
report for a House Bill 3:30 as
amended. All those in favor say
aye.
Any opposed? Committee report is
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 357 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted, Derek J lent the
chair Madam, please.
We are on adoption of a
committee report favorable
committee report for House Bill
357. All those in favor say aye.
Any opposed?
Can you report it is adopted.
Mhm
Generally from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 9 as amended.
Senate Bill 100 and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhans senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 70 as amended.
Senate Bill 83 as amended,
Senate Bill 126 and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry
Delehan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, we are about to go into
3rd reading, so please come to
the chamber.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
General lady from Bernalio
Representative Herndon, are you
ready for item number 22?
Madam Speaker, point of order.
State your point,
we still have committees meeting
and I just wanna voice my
objection that there is still
education committee meeting, and
I don't think that it's fair to
start 3rd reading without every
member being able to vote on 3rd
reading.
Uh gentle lady, those members
have been excused. We can ask
them to come down.
But it is time to get moving on
3rd reading, gentle lady.
Uh, Madam Speaker, 20 members
are missing.
Uh, gentle lady, thank you for
that. Um, we're gonna stand in,
um, in a pause for a moment
while we check into the status
of those folks. OK. Thank you
very much, Madam Speaker.
Oh.
Yeah.
Some people
Members, there's been a request
to have gentlemen gentlemen
remove their jackets, saying no
objections, so ordered.
Generally from Santa Fe. Madam
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
See, no objection, so ordered.
All right, members, we're gonna
go back to announcements. Um,
we, we believe that the
education committee is gonna be
wrapping up at about 10 to 15
minutes. So, um, we'll go to
announcements. So any other
announcements?
gentle lady from all those
counties, including Los Alamos,
representative Chandler, um,
thank you, Madam Speaker, just a
reminder that your House
Judiciary Committee is meeting
this afternoon, 15 minutes after
the floor session, we do have a
fairly significant agenda which
I hope to get through in its
entirety, Madam Speaker, and uh
we are having some light food
brought in to help us sustain us
through the toil and royal of
all of our.
So and also Madam Speaker, since
we have this time, um, we will
be meeting on Saturday to sing.
You really don't want that to
happen, Madam Speaker. Um, we
will be meeting on Saturday at
8:30 and uh we will be having
burritos brought in as an
inducement, so, um, lots going
on in House Judiciary and
looking forward to some
productive meetings, Madam
Speaker. Generally members,
prepare yourselves for multiple
meals in House Judiciary. Any
other announcements?
gentle lady from Berlio
Representative Parajan.
Um, Madam Speaker, I had a few
guests today on the rostrum that
I did not get the chance to
announce, and now they're in the
gallery, uh, Madam Speaker, I
would ask if either you could
announce them or if I may
announce them, lady, why don't
you go ahead and announce them.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
so, um, I have some really great
guests today from the refugee
and Immigrant Well-being
Project, um, their names are
Janet Ramirez, Bianca Ruiz
Negron, and Julia M. Hess.
Welcome to the house.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I am so pleased
to introduce a champion speller
to the house today.
We have with us today Andrea
Garcia, Red Mount from the Red
Mountain Middle School Demming
Public Schools from uh she is in
8th grade and she has won the
statewide spelling bee, so let's
all congratulate her
congratulations.
What was your winning word? Can
we ask?
spell it.
It was in Panillo.
Can you spell that for us,
gentle lady?
Um, see.
In Spanish or English?
Either one.
Uh
Do what you want, gentle lady.
Chimpanzelo
ape in chimpanze
congratulations.
How many spelling bee champions
in this room, show of hands.
Congratulations to everyone, but
especially this young lady.
Any other announcements?
We'll just chill for a second,
try to remember the words you
want your spelling bee on.
or lost, like some of us.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
Seeing no objection, so ordered.
Generally, are you ready on item
number 22.
Generally from Berna Leo.
Representative Herndon, are you
ready on item 22. Yes, Madam
Speaker, would you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house.
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill 54.
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, generally to
explain the bill.
Madam Speaker, House Bill 54
will add the definition of
automated external
defibrillator, AED to the
emergency medication
in Schools Act and would require
schools to develop and implement
a cardiac emergency response
plan and with that, Madam Chair,
I stand for questions
from Captain Sierra Socorro and
Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. What
does the gentle lady from Berna
Leo Yild?
I, I yelled to the gentle lady,
thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, um, is there money
in the budget for this
instituting this type of thing
in, in every school.
Um, Madam Chair, gentle lady,
yes there is.
Thank you Madam Speaker and, and
gentle lady and, and do you know
the dollar amount?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
I do.
The amount is $150,000 for three
consecutive years.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and so $150,000 for three
consecutive years is to cover
all of the school districts in
the state of New Mexico? Well,
Madam Speaker, that's what we
will begin with this year. So
we, the way the bill is set up,
if you look on the last page of
the bill on page 5, you will see
that it's implemented in steps
and so by the next year and the
following year, year 2 and year
3, there will be enough money to
carry out the the content of
this.
B.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and is that done
through the procurement code?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
yes it is. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. And do
you know how many um suppliers
there are across the state of
New Mexico, if any of the actual
defibrillators.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I do not, but once they issue an
RIP, we will find out.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. I really hope that they
are New Mexico-based, uh, entity
here so we can keep our money
here in the state. Uh, thank
you, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
and is this run through the PED?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes
it is. And thank you Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and is it
a, um, on a application process
or, you know, what if we run out
of the $150,000 and, uh, how,
how is that? Is it an
application process? How does
that work?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, we
will start with the rural
schools, and I thought you would
like that, madams, uh, gentle
lady.
You are right, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I do like that. Not
that one school deserves it more
than the other. I just wondered
what, uh, the implementation
process of that would be, and so
I, I do thank you for bringing
this forward and I will be
looking in to see what kind of
uh uh response we get when that
RFP comes out, uh, and making
sure that we are, are fair and
dispersing across the state.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you. There is further
debate. The gentle lady from
Dona Anna, Sierra, and Socorro
County's Representative Doo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady from Vernalillo
Yo, I yield to the gym lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. What, what is
the cost of one,
AED.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, we
have determined that it's $1200.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady and so rather than
just reimbursing the school
district for the cost, we're
gonna go out to RFP and, and
you're envisioning like one
vendor will purchase all of them
and then distribute them
according to the guidelines,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that's my vision, but PED may
have a different vision and that
certainly is up to them.
Hey, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, because are they
able if they wanted to, to just,
you know, prioritize the
districts and say, purchase,
send in your receipt and we'll
reimburse you.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, they
are, but we are asking them to
prioritize the rural schools
first. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. I
appreciate that. I mean, going
in the world of early childhood
in a licensed childcare center,
every single employee present on
the facility in a star 5 center
is CPR and first aid, first aid
and CPR license, and for many
years, we've been adding the
training in the AED and that
those have been present. Um,
it's really nice to see a
funding mechanism to cover that
cost, and we had to figure out
how to take it out.
out of our existing
reimbursement rates. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, what
it says that the qualified
person uh will be identified.
How many units per school and,
and is it just one qualified
person per school or what, how
do you envision that?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
every school is required to have
a safety plan, and so we're
asking the schools to just add
this to their safety plan and at
the moment we are planning on at
least one AED that is easily
accessible in every school. It
could grow to be more, but that
is the initial vision.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
is this already uh certification
or qualification that, that the
school nurse would already have.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
it may not necessarily be a
school nurse. The school gets to
set out its safety plan and who
will be trained, so it will be
up to the schools, Madam
Speaker, uh, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. I was thinking of
folks that it wouldn't be too
heavy of a lift or much of an
unfunded mandate if they have,
I'm trying to think of folks who
would already have that
qualification, it might be a
nurse, it might be a, I would
think a school resource officer
or law enforcement officer
probably has that certification,
maybe.
a coach or a physical education
instructor. What types of folks,
uh, uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady would already have those
qualifications. I might have to
ask your expert witness.
Madam Speaker, young lady,
initially we do know that
coaches.
Or do have that certification,
uh, 2 years ago, House Bill
Senate Bill 420 was passed
requiring the coaches uh to have
that certification.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. It's a, it's a
practical, uh, a way to save
lives with a fairly low cost
considering, um, what, what good
it could do and um Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, I look forward
to voting for your bill.
Thank you gentle lady.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you.
Um.
Madam Speaker with the gentle
lady from Berglio, you.
Uh, I, I yield to the gym lady.
So
that speaker generally, I'm
right here, um, uh, thank you
for bringing this, uh, this
piece of legislation forward.
Uh, do you, would you, um please
introduce your expert witnesses,
Adam thank you Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and Madam Speakerim
Lady, and I would like to
introduce my, my, uh, expert
witnesses. My first witness is.
My ease,
uh seatti he's with the American
Heart Association and my second
expert witness is Jacob Willis,
and he is a student at BYU
looking to make sure that
schools are safe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I, I really appreciate
this legislation. I think this
is going along the lines of
really ensuring our safety in
our schools and our and our
programs there, Madam Speaker,
General Leader, um,
Do you know how many schools are
already uh have the, the devices
and speaker gentle lady, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, we don't
know we have a sign that tasks
to some interns to call one of
our schools to see which ones of
them do have a defibrillator so
that we will have that
information.
Thank you Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
Is this part, Madam Speaker,
generally, is this part of the
like um compliancy or are we are
schools in compliance or out of
compliance right now without
having these mechanisms.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so the term that we're adding to
the bill, uh, uh, to the
legislation is new, so they are
not out of compliance and after
this bill passes, uh, then they
will all be in compliance as a
part of their broader school
Safety Act.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I too look forward to
uh voting for this bill and
thank you for bringing it
forward.
Thank you.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady yield?
Ideal to the gentleman, thank
you.
Thank you Madam Speaker, and
gentle lady.
I'm, I'm gonna ask you some
questions and maybe go a little
bit further than you may know
and maybe your expert will know
um this.
A lot of our rural, um,
Schools participate in their
local fire departments and as a
high school student, I was
allowed, uh, I was in the
volunteer fire department. I had
all that stuff and so I
volunteered there. So I'm
wondering, um, with the, even
the classes that are taught
nowadays, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, is that something
that we could get high school
students involved with as well,
or will the insurance be such
that they can't.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I'm sorry, gentlemen, the way
the process is set up with
insurance so that as long as
there is a plan in place, then
yes, we could absolutely have
students learning this process.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I think that's, um,
I think that's great. uh, we've
heard stories from this floor,
from this body, uh, of young men
and young women who've saved
lives and so anytime we can get
a piece of equipment in the
hands of somebody who knows what
they're doing and allow them the
opportunity to use it, then some
of the, uh, how do I wanna say
this, some of our 15 and 16 year
olds may be able to save some of
us 65 year old guys, so I
appreciate that, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, thank you.
Thank you for the debate. The
gentleman from Sandoval, uh,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Will
the gentle lady yield?
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, um, is there anything in
here that holds
These schools and these uh.
People that are trained to use
this.
Um
Is there anything in here that
holds them harmless?
In case unfortunately something
bad happens.
So Madam Speaker, gentlemen, if
you look on
Maybe it's it as a part of a a
statue which is uh 221331.2% of
New Mexico statutes annotated in
1978, you will see that there is
a um a school.
Provision that would uh would
limit liability if that's the
question that you're asking me,
um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, Joan
lady, uh, that's exactly what I
was talking about, um, and who
would be in charge of the
training.
So, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
one of the things that we've
done in this bill is that we
have allowed the schools to
determine how that training will
go in each one of the schools as
we've heard today in uh the
people who have spoken, there
are individuals within their
communities. There's the
American Heart Association, all
of those would be available to
participate in the planning and
what we're doing is we are not
dictating exactly who will do.
the training, but um we are
leaving that up to the schools,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, and
Will they get some type of uh
certification that they've
passed the training.
And will the trainers?
Are they certified trainers, Mr.
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the answer is yes to both of
your questions.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, um,
and gentle lady, and how long is
the training?
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen, it
takes about 6 hours.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
will there be more than one
person certified at each school.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
answer to that is yes, but I
want to remind you that every
school has a school safety plan.
This would be a part of that
plan and so however many people
are dedicated and designated by
that school is a part of that
plan will be the number that
will be uh included in the plan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernalio
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Bernao
County yield. I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
Representative Herndon, um, I
just wanted to stand and support
of your bill today. I, um, I
just madam, madam Speaker and,
and gentle lady, I was just
looking online and I was looking
at school AED. This is also
considered an AED, is that not
correct? gentle lady?
An AED, yes, that's what we're
talking about. Yes, and I was
just looking online and it says
in schools with AEDs, survival
rates can reach more reach 70%
more than 7 times the national
average. Did you know that
gentle lady?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
we did. Oh, that's great, um,
and Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, even more promising
schools with comprehensive AED
programs, including a well
rehearsed cardiac emergency
response plan can achieve
survival rates as high as 85%
and I just wanted, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, you just wanted
to read those statistics because
I fully support your program. I
think this is a wonderful deal,
especially in
Light of the fact that we have
our firefighters coming to
schools at times. We have our
police coming to schools at
times and they can all do you
think that maybe they could also
assist in promoting these
programs, um, in the schools,
gentle lady, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, yes, we do, Madam
Speaker, I'm really excited
about this bill because, you
know, my father was a
firefighter and anything that
can save lives, I fully support
and thank you for bringing this.
forward.
Thank you.
Seeing no further debate, the
gentle lady to close.
Madam Speaker, I ask that.
I, I move that uh House
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill 5454 do now pass.
We pass of Education Committee
substitute for House Bill 54.
The vote is now open.
Vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative and 0
in the negative. House Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill 54.
Has duly passed the house.
Gentlemen from Bernalio
Representative Lenhe, are you
ready on item number 48.
Madam Speaker, I think he meant
from Sandoval, San Juan and Ri
Riba. That is what I meant.
Gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Uh,
house 449 creates a new fund for
major higher education. I'm
sorry, yeah, you got me
flustered. Can you get me to
that point, please?
I can gentlemen, let the record
reflect that all action.
Of necessary for placing, oh,
let's see, what is this? I'll
pill 4:49 as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentlemen, to explain the bill.
Thank you Madam Speaker.
Uh, House Bill 449 creates a new
fund for major higher education
capital projects and and a
statutory framework for that
fund that is time for questions.
Sing debate, gentle lady from
Gatri County Sierra, Socorro,
and Valencia.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Was the gentleman yelled, Madam
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, yes
ma'am. Uh, thank you, um, uh,
gentlemen and Madam Speaker, my
only question is I heard you say
it perked my ears when you said
a new fund.
Is it a new fund?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
it's a, it's a, it's the
statutory framework for a new
fund, but there's no funding
associated to this bill.
OK, thank you. And, and what is
the statutory framework do. This
is creating a new fund
statutorily frameworked and what
does it do?
Madam Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, what it does is it funds
large projects through the new
front which alleviates some of
the issues that we have in
regards to the uh the
competition for these type of
projects on capital outlay
frameworks statewide frameworks,
and so this would be dedicated
for those higher education
projects.
And so, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and what were
some of the problems and why did
we need to change it?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
the problems tend to be that
construction is just so
expensive. And so when we talk
about large projects like this
in any one of our 2 year or
4-year universities, uh, we just
don't have enough money to
fulfill these obligations. And
so a lot of these projects go
underfunded and then they just
sit out there for a long time
and then we don't have enough
money to complete them. And so
with that being said, this fund
goes to uh mediate that so that
there's a dedicated fund for
those types of projects. Thank
you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, and how much money
are we looking to put into the
fund when, when, and when.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
it's yet to be known. We're
gonna discuss this in uh
legislative finance committee
during the interim.
OK, thank you for that. I, I
appreciate that, um, I guess
that's all my questions. Thank
you, uh, Madam Speaker.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Curry de Baca,
Guadalupe, Roosevelt in San
Miguel.
Thank you Madam Speaker or the
gentleman yield.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
gentlemen from all of those
counties.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so on the last.
part of your bill on line 19 on
section 3, uh, G3 or H3.
It says that 2 year educational
institution means community
college or tribal college
located wholly within the
exterior boundaries.
Of the state of New Mexico of
New Mexico, uh, but does not
mean constitutional special
school why why is exterior
boundaries of the of New Mexico.
Why is it listed in there like
that, Madam Chair and
representative.
Uh, Madam Speaker and, and
representative, what this means
is that this will affect any of
our public institutions within
the state of New Mexico's
boundaries 2 year, 4-year
institutions that include tribal
colleges as well.
OK, and, and I guess that goes
to show uh Madam Speaker and.
And Representative, how dyslexic
I am in my reading because when
it says external.
Oh, it says within.
Exterior boundaries.
That, that just
It just doesn't sound right to
me, uh, would you care to kind
of further explain that to me,
uh, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker and and gentlemen,
you know, it, it's, it's against
the law for the state of New
Mexico to apply any of its
funding to out of state
functions and this is exactly
one of those, so everything that
we're talking about in this fund
is within the state of New
Mexico for our universities,
public universities. OK, and
Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen, then it's, it's
telling us.
That we can't expand the
The funding outside of state in
New Mexico then thank you thank
you for that just to clarify it.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker.
Thank you. There's further
debate. The gentleman from San
Juan, Represented Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentlemen yield.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
ranking member from Hack House
Tax and Revenue Committee.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, can you, uh, talk a
little bit about the matching
funds for 2 years and a 4 year
and, and kind of explain that to
the body, please.
Adam speaking and, and
gentlemen, absolutely so they're
are matching requirements for
institutions, uh, in regards to
some of the um funds, uh, in
regards to, let me see, I have
that list here.
Summing of the 404 ins
instruction and general
operations as well as some of
the planning and designs, uh,
for these schools, so, uh, the
school itself would have to come
up with at least 25% of that to
match the funds of the state for
this for this uh funding.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. So if we go to.
Bear with me just it's section C
A.
And it talks about um you know,
50% match from sources other
than the state for a two-year
and 20% for a four year. Can you
address that for the body,
please?
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
please repeat your question. I
just got to page 2.
Um, it's on line 3.
At least 50% match and then Lane
6 or 20% match from.
The respective 2 and 4 year.
Madam Speaker and general, on
page 2.
On page 3.
Line 2, I'm sorry, line 3.
Page 3 line 3.
Got it. Uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, so at least 50% match
from sources from other than
state, from the state for 2 year
educational institutions, so
that means that they would have
to come up with at least half of
that money so that they would,
the state would come in with the
other half to fully fund a
project.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, so was that amount
come uh um
decided upon and and determined
um by um the size of the project
typically for 2 years as opposed
to a 4 year.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, sir.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that's all the
questions I had.
See no further debate, the
gentlemen to close.
Thank you Madam Speaker thank
you body. I now move that House
bill 449 as amended, do not
pass.
We are on final passage of House
Vos about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 61 in the
affirmative and 1 in the
negative. House Bill 449 as me
it has duly passed the House.
OK, the gentle lady from San
Miguel.
And Torrance County. Are you
ready on item number 44.
Madam Speaker, would you get me
to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for
Placing House Bill 405 on final
passages has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Um, House Bill 405 and ask the
volunteer firefighter Service
and training job retention Act.
It provides job protections for
our volunteer firefighters for
both critical training and time
in service.
There is a debate, uh, the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Madam Speaker, well,
the gentle lady yield.
I do yield to the gentleman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, am I, am I
correct to understand that's
almost 3 weeks that these
volunteers will be uh getting
trained.
Um, the bills.
In, in weak time it is up to 2
weeks of service for training,
110 hours and in week time and
for time in service it's up to 2
weeks, so they do not have to
take that entire time. It just
allows up to those specific
number of hours.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. You know, from the
rural areas, this is a great
idea. It's really a good idea.
In the old days, um, you know,
we got off our employers let us
off. I let my employees off for
this, um, my concern is this
we've just passed a bill that's
gonna allow
9 weeks, 12 weeks off for an
individual.
So let's say that individual
takes that off. Let's say mom
has a baby so that individual
takes 9 weeks, 12 weeks,
whatever that was, I can't
remember now.
And then right after that, a
week after that or 2 weeks after
that, they, they're gone for two
weeks for training.
Tell me what you think, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, the
impact on that small business is
gonna be.
Um
Thank you, thank you, gen, thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you,
uh, gentlemen, representative,
um.
Your concerns are valid, um,
when creating this bill, um,
that was one of my primary
concerns was the effect on
businesses, but it was, it's a
balance, it's a balance between
protecting our communities, um,
and also having that ability to
do so, which does impact
employers, um, if I can maybe
enlighten with maybe a little
bit of a different perspective,
you know, you talked about a
scenario where that could
happen, um, keep in mind that
this.
This leave is unpaid leave, so
again it is not the preferable.
Um, type of leave that someone
want to take, especially in that
scenario after just having a
baby, um, but it does allow that
critical time for training. Um,
if you were to maybe reframe
that thought as a pro-business
piece of legislation coming from
a community.
that had devastating effects,
um, to have a little bit of a
sentimental moment that fire
does not discriminate and
emergencies do not discriminate
and this bill protects
communities, um, it gives our
volunteer firefighters those
tools to be ready to be able to
have those skills to protect
businesses and homes alike, um.
main concern for my area are
small businesses is insurance,
um, this is an issue, um, your
insurance rates are highly
dependent upon the rating of
your fire personnel and your
fire team. When you are in rural
communities like mine, when you
do not have the time to go and
train, the minimum requirements
for volunteer service are
passing a physical, doing some
sort of basic training and
signing up.
That means that we have at
minimum, very low qualifications
to be part of this staffed, um,
Response team, the better
trained team is, the higher the
rating will be, the higher
rating they'll be, the more
resources that will be available
to that department to serve
that.
That department. Um, and in
turn, the lower their insurance
will be and in our case, the
ability to get insurance for
small businesses and for
communities, so I understand
that this is a concern on small
business and I do want to stress
that that is on paid time and
that this is only up to in the
case that this is needed, um,
and I also wanna ask that these
are very two different distinct
needs in our community, um, this
need for a volunteer fire has
been there and will
continue to be there, um, just
within Sanigo County alone
since.
COVID since our disaster, our
volunteer fire staffing has
decreased by over 50% and
without offering some sort of
protections for these valuable,
um, service men and women, we
are not gonna have protection in
our rural communities. Thank
you, gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. If we're gonna talk
about balance to businesses,
then we need to back way up and
do something for our businesses
instead of just doing things to
our businesses.
So to everything you said,
madam, um Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I agree, I concur, you
know, ratings, I understand
those, um, my concern again is
going back to that mom and pop
that has 2 employees, one of
them is a volunteer and one of
them is, you know, my age, not
gonna, not gonna do much of that
because, um, so.
That's my concern right there.
We continue to put the burden
upon business owners and while
they need it and while we've
seen firefighting, volunteers go
down for years now. Uh, we've
offered them things uh
incentives to, to come back and
to join and we will continue to
do that. I just think one more
burden on the businesses in the
state of New Mexico. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you gentle
lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Catherine
Sierra Scoria and Valencia
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
well, a gentle lady yield,
please.
Mr. Speaker, yes, I do yield to
the gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I think I, I told my story the
other day of my uh grandson
who's 15 years old, who wants to
be a firefighter and, um, I'm
really, really proud of him and
he saved a guy's life because he
knew some of the steps to take
because he's taken some classes.
Um, his dad.
Uh, is a volunteer firefighter
and has been as soon as he
could.
Could be a volunteer, he, he did
it and, and he takes great
pride, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady in this, um, and, and
they're in the Bosky farms,
Valencia County area.
But I also have other volunteer
fire departments and, and EMS in
rural New Mexico.
Where
I, I think there could be a
better way to to be able to
recruit and retain some of these
firefighters, uh, especially
volunteer. I appreciate what
you're trying to do, but I, I
have a little bit of a problem
creating it in statute to
mandate employers to do this. I,
I would think.
And you know I'm a dreamer, I
guess, but I, I would think
that.
We would want these people to
take the time off to get their
training, but I also know Mr.
Speaker, Madam Speaker, uh,
gentle lady that there is
certain criteria that we hold,
uh, to a standard.
Uh, in training in our EMS in
our ambulances, uh, held to the
same standard as the
Albuquerque, say one in
Albuquerque and it's actually
becoming a hindrance for rural
New Mexico and very costly.
Um, a few years ago, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
helped to pass a bill where they
can get a stipend.
Um, and so I'm, I too am
concerned about mandating
employers to do this and can you
just, uh, I feel your pain. I
know where you come from. I know
where you live. I know the
devastation that you have faced
and, and I'm sorry for that, but
once again,
Um, can you tell me why you
think it needs to be put in
statute.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um,
As personal experience when
drafting this piece of
legislation, it was not done
without reaching out to some
small business owners in my
community volunteer firefighters
in my community, um, I worked
with our, our fire inspecting
team, my local fire chief, um,
In our area you are entirely
right in these small
communities, most people do
recognize the value of these
firefighters historically these
are the people that have always
protected our communities, but
times are changing, the
demographics of a volunteer
firefighter are changing, um,
That devotion to community is
changing, um.
To be able to recruit a younger
demographic and new demographic
there is concern about, you
know, people that have to choose
between job and service. This
was the instance of some
volunteer firefighters that that
choice did have to be made for
some within our fire, the
hermit's peak in the calf Canyon
fire, and it is unfortunate, um,
I think just to pull some
communities out in my area if
there is a fire in Villanueva.
And you're an El Pablo fire
department chief captain you
100% the value of letting your
people go to go take care of
that fire.
But if you are a volunteer
firefighter at a Pecos that is
only 30 minutes say from Santa
Fe, so you may work in Santa Fe.
of the employer may not
understand that same value.
And so that firefighters then
faced with a choice of do I keep
my job? or do I respond to
protect my community and so this
legislation is aimed at helping
just give them those basic basic
job protection similar to jury
duty, similar to military
service recognizing this service
as a public service to have some
basic protections and giving
them that value that what they
are doing is important to their
community and giving them the
protections and such.
And Speaker, gentle lady thank
you Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, I understand that, but I
also understand business.
And, and I understand that um
employees are, are few and far
between, unfortunately right now
with the, uh, I believe it was a
57% workforce participation
rate.
And so
I, I have a, I have a really
good idea that I want to talk to
you about offline, but I'll just
say, how about we do away with
volunteer and we create a way
for them to get paid and make it
a career path even in rural New
Mexico and, and I think there's
a, a better way to do this
without putting the, the, um,
heavy lift on employers, um, and
And creating more animosity, in
my opinion, across the state
where
I, I don't even remember, um,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
number, uh, the gentleman from,
from Grant just told me the
number. I want to say like,
I don't know, 60% of businesses
are small businesses, 60% of the
workforce work for a small
business, and putting this on
them, I just, I just, it pains
my heart, uh, Madam Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, so I, I, I don't
know if I can support your bill,
but man, I support volunteer
firefighters, but let's work on
a bill together to create a way
where they, we don't have
volunteer, we can create a
career path for firefighters,
um, across New Mexico to, to
make it a lifestyle and
something.
that they can commit to. So
thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
thank you, kind lady.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There's
a gentle lady from San McGill in
Torrance.
Um, Madam Speaker, yes, I do
yield to the friendly gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Madam
Speaker, and, and gentle lady.
We had this discussion and, you
know, I've lived this life and,
um, there were so many
parameters and I was actually
Madam Speaker, gentle lady going
to give you an amendment on
that, but unfortunately, we, we
went a little over in education
today, so I was unable to get
that.
And Madam Chair and gentle lady.
So let's, let's break this bill
down.
I'm a volunteer.
And this bill is requiring
Local business to allow for
training.
And Madam, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
The fire marshal's office has
been working really hard trying
to figure out how we're going to
train our volunteer
firefighters.
And
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we, we started an online program
so they can actually get their
training online.
And then we set it up to where
The state fire marshal will send
preceptors down to give you the
exam on a Saturday or a Sunday,
whatever, whatever works in your
schedule and it doesn't really
interfere with a lot of the work
week from Monday through Friday.
And Madam, Madam Speaker, and
gentle lady.
Whenever, say all the
firefighters have radios and
pagers. What emergencies do we
allow them to go to, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, first I would like to
address the, the training
component. I'm gonna take that
part 1st. 1st you are entirely
correct, um, there has been an
opening of training
possibilities, um, they, um, the
fire marshal office has been
coming down on nights on
weekends, working off schedules,
working remotely, um, but the
time that this is talking about
a specifically say for some
people from the northern part of
the state right now our training
institute in Socorro requires
some distance and if there was
specific training that had to be
done in person, and that was
longer than the duration, that
would be the only time that this
was.
Likely to be used because that
would be the only time that they
would be required to actually
have to be someplace in person
during that time.
And that I lost my train of
thought. Could you please
rephrase your second part of
your question, um, Madam
Speaker, gen gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
so what, what parameters did we
put on calls. Every one of our
volunteer firefighters have a
radio and a pager. So when that
pager goes off, is there any
parameters being put on calls
that they go to.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the time protected in the bill
would be defined as in service
time where they are actively in
service reporting to an actual
emergency so they are just
called and never report to an
emergency that would not
constitute in-service time.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. Madam Speaker, and
gentle ladies, so say I'm this
rambunctious volunteer
firefighter, and I don't want to
miss an emergency because I've
been, um, I've been trained in
CPR. I've, I'm
firefighter. I'm an EMT and
every time that pager goes off,
There's no boundaries in this
bill stating what they can go
to. So just say in your, in your
district, or we can say it's in
my district, and we have a pager
that goes off 5 times in an
8-hour period.
That, that volunteer firefighter
that works for the small mom and
pop business and say he's in
heavy or she's a heavy equipment
operator.
And they have to get off the
piece of heavy equipment.
And you know how hard it is to
find heavy equipment operators
and pretty much you're paying
this volunteer firefighter to
respond to emergencies 5 times
out of 8 hours.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
well, for one, it would not be
paid. It would be, it's not
required to be a paid service,
um, for you I think that would
have to depend on the
relationship between that
individuals that rambunctious
young firefighters relationship
with their chief to see where
and when and if they were
needed, um.
Ultimately this does the first
step in any of this is
certifying with your fire chief
and then a responsible fire
chief, they will call those out
that are adequately um needed
for whatever the emergency may
dictate, um, so the parameters
involved are a time limitation,
um, if they choose to respond
and the chief dictates that that
is the proper individual that
should respond, then that will
come out of their time
allocation, um, also keep in
mind that if that employee has
Any other leave
Capability, um, you know, that
would not exist, um, if they are
getting called to any type of
emergency where there is
compensation, say, um, forest
fire, wildfire management, and
they are getting paid as a
respondent to that type of fire,
this would not constitute, um,
if they are also, which this
happens often part of a paid
fire team and part of a
volunteer time, this would also
not constitute, this is only the
time that a chief would
determine that that individual
is the right person to respond.
to this emergency and the
limitations would solely be the
the maximum time in a given year
period.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So how many people,
how many volunteers do you have?
In your area.
Um
Madam Speaker, gen gentlemen,
um, as last count entirely
through Sami County right now we
are at 110 to 130 registered
volunteer firefighters that was
not indicating those that are
considered active so you know
just because someone signs up to
be a volunteer firefighter due
to the scenarios that you just
explained, they are not always
the ones responding to a call.
They are not always the ones
best trained or fit to respond
to a call, but that is the
availability within all of San
Mi.
County, which covers 5000 square
miles covers 60 firefighting
units, 6 rescue units, and a
population of over 28,000
people.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady,
Out of those, I don't expect you
to know this, but I just want to
make a point out of all of those
firefighters that you have in
your area, how many of them
possibly are self-employed.
Um, Madam Speaker, I do, and
gentlemen, I do not have those
statistics. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, and I
don't, I don't expect you to
know that, but in, like in my
districts, a lot of the, a lot
of the volunteer firefighters
are, uh, self-employed, so they
are able to self dispatch and a
lot of the people that worked
for them are volunteers as well,
so they kind of leave their job
and leave what they're doing,
and they go on without any
legislative mandates really.
And
Where I do like the intent of
your bill. I, I actually, I
think I told you I love the
intent of your bill. However,
um, you know, 70% of the
firefighters in New Mexico are
volunteers.
And in one of my districts.
The average age of the
volunteers is 70 years old.
And a lot of these people
Dinner 70, I'll probably still
be working when I'm 70, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, but,
you know, a lot of these people
can, if the fire chief was able
to kind of look over his
firefighting squad and see who
was
Eligible or able to respond
without having to leave their
jobs, sometimes it's kind of a
split.
And
I wish that I could support this
bill.
And you probably will not see me
voting for, against a
firefighter bill very often, but
because this does put a mandate
on the local businesses. I
respectfully.
Oppose this bill. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
The gentleman from Lee County,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Madam Speaker, I do yield to the
gentleman.
I appreciate that and uh Madam
Chair and gentle lady, uh,
Representative Vincent covered
so much of this and, and I
appreciate the way he brought it
to light.
For, for myself, Madam Chair,
and Representative, can you
Assuming
Let's go with the assumption
that paid family medical leave
makes it to the governor's
office and the governor agrees
and signs that bill.
Tell me.
Madam Speaker, and gentle lady.
How that gets implemented inside
this legislation.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, with
all due respect, I am not a
primary on the paid family
medical leave bill so I do not
want to speak for their bill and
implementation should it be
passed with regards to my piece
of legislation, I would want to
say that this is a standalone
bill and it has no bearing on
any other piece of legislation.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I relatively confident we
have no standalone legislation
in, in this house or in the
other house next door. We all
think that it stands alone, but
at the end of the day it ties to
something somewhere, whether it
was intended or not intended
with that, so.
My concern is that
Through rulemaking at some point
in time, this gets converted
into a requirement.
The offsets that that workforce
solutions becomes a
part of, do you have any, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, do you
have any of those same concerns
and thoughts?
Um
Madam Madam Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, can you elaborate on
what do you mean by workforce
solutions requirements.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
through paid family medical
leave act workforce Solutions is
the integrator, the one that,
that cre that creates that
conversation between the
employee and the employer and
time off and in this case,
Um
We're looking at a, at a piece
of legislation that would
require up to 112 hours, which
is just shy of, of, uh, 3 weeks
of training a year.
Um
I'm just curious.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
if there's some way that this
gets tied back that requires a
paid leave piece of this because
it does not
Um, and it's clear inside your
bill that um
It cannot come from.
The hours
inside the team members.
Paid paid time off.
So it, it's confusing with me if
it can't come from the paid time
off, can this be stacked in some
way with paid family medical
leave.
Uh, Matt, Adam Speaker, um,
gentlemen, again, I don't want
to convolute the two, from an HR
perspective this is two separate
initiatives, um,
do not want to speak on any sort
of
Correlation between the two
bills, I want to specify that
this is from an HR perspective a
standalone bill that the leave
allocations is outlined in this
piece of legislation stand alone
and do not have any impact or do
not carry over any semblance of
anything with paid family
medically.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I appreciate your altruistic
perspective on, on this, but
I, I, I've seen rulemaking that.
Um, combines different
legislations together.
And creates a set of unintended
consequences.
With that, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I'll yield back to
you. I appreciate the
conversation.
Now there's further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, madam um speaker does
a general lady yield?
Madam Speaker, I do yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
general lady, um,
I first wanna um um.
I think, uh
The previous are for, for um my
uh colleague from Lincoln Otero
County for his service to his
community.
I also am a brother of the uh.
Of of the brotherhood uh it it
it really takes by speaker,
young lady, for someone to go
through it to
To know what fear is when you're
in a burning building to know
what fear is when you don't know
what, what you're gonna, uh,
respond to and that you have
your brothers and sisters next
door to you, Madam Speaker,
General lady, what would, would,
would you agree that this, this
is volunteer firefighter is, is
really tough mentally,
emotionally.
And physically
Um, Madam Chair, gentlemen, um,
yes, um.
I mean, the, the merits and the
value for a volunteer service
person are immeasurable, um, you
know, this bill was again
brought to give value to this
very high valued um member of
our public safety team.
Um, you know, the wish when
bringing this legislation,
honestly, is that I wish this
legislation was not needed, um,
you know, that all the
sentiments that are echoed in
this chamber is
I wish that these
Personnel were given the value
that they truly deserve in their
communities, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
The, the other aspect of, of
this uh discussion that I'm
hearing on the, on the floor,
um, I speaker lady, I, I came
from a volunteer, um, unit or or
house, uh, uh.
How's uh
Firefighter house 12 in Sawan
County, Madam Speaker, General
Lady, we have right now over uh
just 1010.
Firefighter houses over 100
volunteer firefighters ran
Speaker General lady, and, and
in San Juan County, and yes, my
general lady, we had training on
weekends, you know, to
accommodate our, our work
schedule, Madam Speaker General
Lady, I had to go to Aztec from
Shiprock to Aztec to attend my
weekend trainings and um Madam
Speaker, general lady, um, but,
but there, there's been changes
with that and just in, in San
Juan County,
I think generally, would you
agree that that it's specific to
each.
Uh, volunteer or each county on
how they um are allowing for the
uh volunteers to, to participate
in service.
Madam Madam Chair, uh,
gentlemen, um, yes, I would, um,
the training requirements do
vary from department to
department, um, for instance,
requirements in my county are
very different from Bernalillo
County. That's a great example
in that they do offer more
stringent requirements,
lengthier amounts of time versus
a community like mine that, you
know, offers basic requirements
and it is ultimately up to the
direction of the chief and of
that fire team to determine the
the needs, the training
requirements for that unit.
Thank you, ma'am.
Uh, Madam Speaker, General lady,
and um, and, and one of the
changes, like for Salmon County
is is Madam Speaker general
lady. It's no longer in Aztec
anymore. Now it's through the
community college in Madam
Speaker generally, now you got
to go through the schedule of
the community college to
participate in training, so
Madam Speaker, general lady, uh,
I, I do see that this would be
beneficial in that area, um,
Madam Speaker General Lady
another uh aspect that I'm
I'm understanding your, your
bill, this legislation, Madam
Speaker General Lady, uh, is
when, when those that have to
are on call in our serving.
And are having to, to do the
cleanups, Madam Speaker, General
lady, are you familiar with the
amount of time it takes to after
a house call after uh to to just
clean up the, the, the, the, the
area of, of, of, of the
incident, yeah, that you're
wanting to.
Madam Chair, gentlemen, um,
I would just go and like to
answer that, that if that is a
call and a determination by that
chief of in-service time. I will
leave that up to the discretion
of the chief.
They, they keep Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, um, there's been
times when we're stuck, uh after
uh the scene has been cleared
and uh whether it's a um a
brush, uh a uh a brush fire that
we're just having to do a lot of
time.
Uh
Making sure all of our equipment
is put away and it takes, it
takes, uh, uh, a dedicated time
to, to be able to do that to, to
your hoses and especially if
there's mutual aid involved, uh,
making sure that everybody uh
has everything back in their
units, Madam Speaker General
lady, I'm, I'm, I'm seeing this
from that perspective of, of
having to.
Maybe go back to work and, and,
and, and, and not having to, to,
um,
To be penalized for, for
wrapping up the hoses and, and
taking everything back onto the
truck, uh, would, would, would,
would this scenario be something
that fits into this legislation,
Madam Speaker General Lady.
Madam Chair, gentlemen, again, I
would leave that up to the
discussion of the chief to
determine the responsibilities
and determination of in service.
I don't want to get too into the
weeds of what the chief would
determine is in service for
their unit.
Thank, thank you, man, uh,
gentle lady. I'm, I'm, I'm just
trying to have better setting of
this legislation and just, um,
you know, just trying to
Take it from my own experience
of
of responding to uh to the calls
that we had in um in in in um
and again Madam Speaker
generally would I had actually
gone to visit my volunteer
firefighters in in Kirtland, um,
uh, just before session started
and um and, and, and one unique
aspect of this is, is they, they
actually like being volunteers,
uh, Madam Speaker, General lady,
you know, they're able to have
that flexibility of, uh,
Of, of taking the, the, the time
aside, uh, to, to participate in
public service and um Madam
Speaker John Brady, uh, when,
when I, when I went over there
to, to the, to their meeting, a
majority of them were actually
pretty young. Would, would you
agree, Madam Speaker General
Lady, that there's uh a uh
younger, uh, anticipated group
that are, are, are involved in
the volunteer firefighter?
Madam Speaker, young lady, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I would hope
so. That was part of this
intent, um, the average age
right now is an aging
demographic of a firefighter,
but I would hope to change that.
Thank you.
Thank you, when I, when I
volunteered, I was 18 years old,
so I hope that we could get more
younger people who are in
community to uh volunteer at
their uh volunteer firefighter
house. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Generally, that concludes my
question.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernalia,
Representative Borego.
Thank you Madam Speaker and, and
representative Gonzalez from San
Miguel and Torrance County,
would you yield?
Speaker, gentle lady, I do
yield.
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, gentle lady, I, I
didn't know, I think, um, did
you join the legislature this
year you did, right?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct, um, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, um, are you
aware that last year we uh
worked with the governor and the
state fire marshal's office and
many of the local fire unions to
create a fund that um basically
the governor set $25 million
aside to help fire departments
and firefighters and EMTs to
their ranks. Are you aware of
that, gentle lady?
Speaker, gentle lady, yes, I am
very well.
find some of my communities have
taken advantage of that fund,
but that fund in real reality
has allowed, you know, maybe 1
to 3 possibly per community and
it does pay 100% the first year
and it dwindles off in years 2
and 3, there are minimum
requirements to deploy a truck
to an emergency, so although you
might have one paid firefighter,
the rest are still volunteering,
and we still have a ways to go
to fully fund a volunteer,
hopefully no longer volunteered
by your team. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. And um,
Madam Speaker, and gentle lady,
the reason that I bring that up
is because I, I was involved
with that, uh, fund and trying
to get that fund created and we
were trying to create incentives
for volunteer firefighters to
become permanent firefighters at
some point in time, and Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
You know, in the last probably
year or 2 years, maybe 5 years
we've seen more.
and more fires, and I know that
you've seen them in your
district. Would you agree with
that, gentle lady?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
absolutely would.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, would you agree that these
fires are getting more and more
severe and more intense.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
would.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, it seems to me, and, you
know, I'm, I having retired from
the city of Albuquerque, um, and
having lots of friends, by the
way, who are fire retired
firefighters and and current
firefighters. I just see the um
The need for more and more of
these types of this type of
public employment, public
service, would you agree with
that, gentle lady?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
I would. And Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, your bill, um,
which has been discussed today,
I would think that um would
really create incentives for
possible volunteer firefighters
to become um full-time
firefighters. Do you agree that
that may be the case?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um.
This piece of particular piece
of legislation does not have any
funding attachment, so I would
hope that it would spur
recruitment and retention. I
cannot speak to the financial
viability of a particular fire
station.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
think that your bill really
creates a career ladder in a
sense, um, because it provides
an incentive for um volunteer
firefighters to, you know,
be considered a profession that
is um.
Um, uh, a very needed in our
state and not just our state,
um, my understanding, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, is that
some of our firefighters in New
Mexico have gone to help with
the California firefighter, um,
which just happened not too long
ago, would you agree with that?
Madam chair, gentle lady, I
cannot attest to where they have
been deployed to, but again, I
just really want to stress the
um the value of this piece of
legislation. Thank you.
And
Speaker, gentle lady, I am fully
in support of your legislation.
I just want to say that the way
that I look at it is it really
is an incentive. It really does
create a uh uh an incentive for
volunteer fighter fighters to
work with their employers and
what and I stress that work with
their employers when they are
deployed much like our veterans
when they are deployed, so I
just wanna thank you for
bringing this.
legislation forward, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, and I
fully support you, and by the
way, my father was a 30-year
firefighter in Los Alamos, so
I'll just, that's one of the
reasons I always speak up for
firefighters. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Speaker, and
generally the gentle lady from
Bernalio, Representative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you Madam Speaker, and
will the uh gentle lady please
yield.
Madam Speaker, I do yield to my
friendly gentle lady.
Thank you very much, um, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, I just
have a quick clarification. I do
have family members that are
volunteer firefighters in the
state of California fortunately
they do work with one of them
does work with the uh Social
Security Administration and so
naturally um they get time off
uh because they work for the
federal government and that is
stipulated um as part of their
time off so my question is.
Would you correlate.
Um,
The time off part.
With time off that's given to um
say the uh military reserves or
the National Guard when they
have to go to training.
Madam Speaker, um, gentle lady,
um, there is no
Um
Legal correlation, um, I cannot
speak to federal law which does
mandate mili leave. My only hope
is that the value of a community
volunteer firefighter gets
placed in the same regard as
performing that civic duty
similar as I stated to jury duty
as a public service and military
lead is a public service.
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker,
and that is the correlation and
I appreciate your response,
gentle lady, because there is
that direct correlation. The
difference is these are
volunteer firefighters they
don't get paid and we need to
honor that and then my final
point, um.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady is
that I really truly appreciate
that you've included all
employees including uh domestic
employee employees and of course
our state employees which is
really really important because
they as volunteer firefighters
are already providing a major
public service to all of our
communities and to include all
uh employees is really
important. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and thank you gentle
lady. I'm in full support and
urge the vote of the body.
There's for the debate.
the gentleman from Chavez E in
Otero County, Representative
Henry.
Thank you Madam Speaker to the
gentle gentle lady from San
Miguel in Torrance Hill.
Madam Speaker, I do yield to the
gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker. I just
have a couple quick questions. I
wanna make sure I understand
this, um, when I was in Eddy
County commissioner, we did
quite a bit of work with
volunteer firefighters, um,
actually, much to Leader
Armstrong's point, uh, Eddie
County.
Let's call it 4 or 5 years ago,
did have to go to a full-time
paid paid staff, which we were
glad to do, but within that we
still do have quite a few
volunteers that help us so Madam
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, one of
the questions I have, uh.
What is to stop folks? So in
small town, uh, rural rural
areas, let's use lacroft where I
was born and raised.
If you've got a group of folks
that want to become volunteer
firefighters and so they take
these two weeks off to training.
If there's 5 to 10 of them, how
would that affect the businesses
in our community when they lose
that amount of folks to go do
the training. Madam Speaker, um.
Gentlemen, um, again, just
speaking very hypothetically,
um, you know, if they were to
come in, um, I would also hope
that they would have some
guidance from that chief of that
fire department as to when they
would stagger their training and
they would make those trainings
available.
Um, as previously brought up,
there are lots of alternatives
to training methodologies, um,
the first alternative as, as
noted by the fire inspector as
noted by any fire chief is to
work offline nights, weekends,
alternative, um, that time for
training is really specifically
when there is more advanced
training required that requires
in-person training that requires
multi-day or that requires
possibly time in Socorro or more
in-depth EMS training. Thank
you.
Madam Speaker, thank you,
gentlemen. Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, how much
mandatory training is in Socorro
because one of the things I
understand is to be a volunteer
fire department, uh, a lot of
their training can be worked off
of, of a taskbook, so that's as
they're they're working with the
gentlemen or ladies and
gentlemen that are already
there, um, so as they're filling
out this tax task book that
gives them a lot of the training
that they currently need. So how
much time are they actually
gonna have to go to Santa Fe or
not Santa Fe, um.
training.
Madam Chair, um, gentlemen,
there is not a set requirement
for training for fire
departments across the state
that is up to the discretion of
the fire chief, um, again as a
fire chief when building up your
highest quality response team,
um, I think you would use that
guidance and that wisdom and
your time as a fire chief to
determine what training your
team needs maybe what what needs
are required in your department,
but there is not a set minimum
requirement. So there's a very
high likelihood that some
counties may not need this.
say in an instance where a
volunteer team is made up of
people that are hotshot
firefighters and all their day
jobs, they likely will not need
additional training, so that is
a very big hypothetical that I
don't want to get too into the
weeds on is that is left to the
discretion of the chief of each
fire determinant to determine
the needs of the county and
their city and their unit. Thank
you. So Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, if it's left up to the
chief who's also a volunteer,
I'm assuming in most instances,
at least that is how it works
in.
County
Um, for those that are still
volunteers.
What is the
What's the determine what else
they need for that mandatory
training because I've never met
one that didn't want to go to
training, which is wonderful,
and we shouldn't stop them, but
help me understand how that
chief is going to break that
down for their departments
because many of these
departments, again, some of
these rural areas, their, their
department could only be 20,
304.
Madam Chair, uh, gentlemen, um,
I can, again, I can't speak to
all fire departments across the
state, but I can really give
personal experience into mine,
uh, Meyer fire chief, he is the
only paid personnel within San
Miguel County, um, and it is the
responsibility of that chief for
the county to make sure that we
are meeting requirements,
whatever that may be and needing
safety standards, um, his goal
has been to lower ISO ratings
for our community so that our
people can get insurance so that
we are protected so that we have
resources so again I leave that.
up to the discretion of the
chief, um, local control as we
would say, and education, um,
we'll leave that up to the
discretion of the fire chief to
determine those needs for their
department.
So madam speaker and gentle
lady, I guess that would leave a
little bit of concern for me
because of each department or
each municipality, each county
is going to have different
things that they're worried
about training on and I fully
understand why there would in in
at Artesia that's probably tank
batteries, things like that in
Lincoln County you're probably
more focused on forest fires. So
I understand there's gonna be
specialized training, but if
there's not some sort of
overlying then then what's to
say that uh uh fire or volun
here in your area isn't trying
to take the same material I am,
we're gonna leave that up to the
chief, but at what point does
that stop?
Madam
Madam Madam Speaker, um,
gentlemen, again I leave that up
to the discretion of the chief
to be a viable department, you
have to be recognized to the
state fire marshal and they have
procedures in place.
That certify these fire
departments is viable, so again
I am gonna leave that up to the
chief as to what they determine
is valid, um, for them to go out
on leave to again to go to a
training, they do need to have
the approval of
their chief um within the law it
does require a 30 day notice, so
they do have to sign up for
this. They have to get approved
to go to this training through
their chief. So with the
training perspective, um, that
does have a lot more checks and
balances, and it is determined
by the needs of that particular
unit as to what those needs are.
So Madam Speaker, General Lady,
that I'm gonna continue with my
one concern of
If those folks go to get that
mandatory training and we're
gonna make it's, it's now, if I
understand your bill right, tell
me if I'm wrong. I, as an
employer have to let that person
off to go to that training. Is
that correct? as long as they
give me a 30-day notice.
Madam Madam Speaker, um,
gentlemen, again there is no
mandatory requirement for any
department that is up to the
discretion of the chief and what
they choose, how they choose to
employ their volunteer team, but
if there is a training that has
been determined to be
beneficial, to be essential for
that volunteer firefighter they
would in turn give notice to
their employer and that employer
would hopefully recognizing the
value of this employer of this
service recognizing the need to
that.
To that community
Um, use those 30 days to prepare
for that employee to be gone
that duration of time through
cross training through other
techniques to prepare for that
person to be gone with a 30 day
notice with regards to training.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady
maybe I misunderstanding the
building so I as an employer do
not have to let that person go
to that training.
Madam Chair, gentlemen, um, with
this law, if this law was to be
enacted they would be required
to let that individual go for
training, but again, the hope is
that they would work with their
employer, um, this law also
stipulates that they have to
give notice to their employer
every year, notice of them being
a firefighter similar to notice
of them being in National Guard
member, then they have to give
the notice to the employer with
regards to the training portion
30 days, so giving them adequate
time to
Attempt to not leave an employer
in a lurch, but they would be
required to let them off for
that training time as is deemed
essential by the chief.
And Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that means, uh, and, and as an
employer I don't have to pay
them. They can use their
personal time.
Madam Chair, gentlemen, yes,
that is correct. There is no
requirement to have this be a
paid leave they can use their
vacation time should they choose
if they are privileged enough to
have a benefits package, um, but
there is no requirement for
payment.
So Madam Speaker, general lady,
if let's use the same scenario
that I own a barbecue restaurant
in Artesia, and that's a pretty
good scenario because I did it
one time.
I had 3 folks that were
volunteer fire department if
they're all deemed necessary and
they go on a call, do I need to
shut down the rest of the day?
That would be up, Madam Chair,
um, gentlemen, that would be up
to whatever business plan or
strategies that you have in
place. I do not know the
requirements of your business to
run, um, again, I would hope
that that consideration would be
there. These are small community
based units.
Personal relationships that I
think they would call out the
personnel that are needed and
required and should an emergency
require for full personnel
action, I would think it might
be a pretty serious emergency
and in that case, that would be
up to the discussion of you and
your business team.
So Madam Speaker, in your
scenario, uh, I agree with you,
most of these are small
communities and so a lot of
times these small businesses
have multiple folks working for
them and I think what
Representative Pettigrew and uh
can't remember who else had
mentioned it, but with the paid
federal paid medical family
leave Act that we, we are
looking at or have passed to
this body if you've got one
person off on let's call it a 6
weeks and I know you say these
are both standalones, but when
we're in the business world,
nothing stand alone. They're all
gonna blend together.
Quite often so if at my
restaurant I have one person off
for that uh because they're
taking care of somebody. Now I
have two other folks that are on
my shift. This is a small town,
right? So we don't have a major
workforce to your point,
depending on the size of the
fire, there's a good chance we'd
all shut down and go help. But
if it's just a structure fire,
much like what happened last
night in one of my towns, uh,
and it didn't take them all, but
I think what Representative
Vincent said is what we see a
lot. You have a lot of folks
that want to go and want to go
help.
which is great. That's why
they're volunteers, but now is
it mandatory for me to let them
go and so you don't know the
structure of my business. I
understand that, but most small
restaurants are small boutiques
or whatever you want to say in
these small towns, operate with
a staff of 5 to 10 people at
most. If you drop 3 pretty fast,
you're in quite a bit of
trouble.
Madam Chair, um, gentlemen,
again, um, do you want to
The paid family medical leave if
we're talking specifically in
the scenario of this particular
piece of legislation, um, in
this case if there is an
emergency, um, again, hopefully
that relationship with that
boss.
two employees there. Hopefully
that relationship is there with
that chief, um, and that
firefighters there in small
communities, those relationships
truly do exist. Um, and if they
are being called to an emergency
because they have been deemed
essential, um, then I'm hoping
for that value to be placed, but
per law per statute, if this was
to be enacted, that would be a
requirement.
Madam Speaker, General Letty,
the other thing that you said,
and I'll go back to it, well,
let me just start where, where
we just finished.
You can't remove legislation
that's moving through the body.
You've got to look at it as a
whole as here's what we're
passing through here. How will
this affect our small
communities so you can't say
that we've got to remove that
piece out of the discussion
because that is a piece that has
already moved through here. If
this was to so move through here
we have to understand how
they're both going to interact
together. I think that's an
important piece because as we're
making these rules, we have to
understand how we're impacting
the folks back home.
The other piece that I'll let
you respond to that.
Gentlemen, she already did.
Go ahead and ask your next
question. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Then I
I'm curious though how do we not
make sure that we're considering
all legislation that's moving
through here at the same time.
That's my only question.
Madam Chair representative, um,
If one piece of legislation was
fully signed by the governor and
in place right now, I think that
would be an absolute right now
there is no guarantee of either
of these pieces of legislation
getting through both bodies and
signed by the governor, um, so
right now I am advocating my
case for my particular piece of
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, and
I appreciate that. I guess I'm
just gonna continue to go back
to she doesn't have to answer it
again, but as we're looking at
these and I'm concerned about my
small communities mainly because
many of them have vacancy now
they can't fill and now we're
gonna add this on top. Now the
other thing is once they have
been, once we've given them time
off to go to the training
because it was mandatory of me
to let them do that.
Uh
What recourse do I have if they
never go on a call. They just
wanted to take that time off to
go to a training, but then they
never used that training to go
to a call as a business person,
I, I don't know that that would
feel good.
Um, Madam Speaker, um, gentlemen
as per in the legislation, there
is required documentation when
they do get called out on the
service leave, um.
You know, you hate to put that
on an individual, on an adult,
but there was almost a note
required when he returned back
to service, letting them know
again a verification through
your chief to the actual
attendance when you sign up for
a training, you do have
accountability for attendance
and actual participation.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
yeah, no, I understand that
part. My point is, is once
they've gone to the training,
they've come back with their
note to tell me they went to
their training. What if they
never go on a call, but I have
had been mandated to let them
get off on for to go to training
so they could be volunteers, but
then they never go for a call
they just had two weeks off of
my business.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, and again in absolute great
environment. I would hope they
would never have to go on to a
call. I would hope that they are
excellently trained, if that's a
word, and I would hope that they
would never have to respond to a
service call. Um, if they are
trained, the only thing I can
offer that is that will better
improve your fire service team,
likely improve your ISO rating
and hopefully bring your
insurance premiums down.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, you know, I just, I'm
gonna continue to be concerned,
unfortunately, as Representative
Harlan Vincent said quite a few
times, I've never voted against
the police bill or, or a
firefighter bill, uh, since I've
been a commissioner until today,
um, but this one really bothers
me in the sense of what we're
putting again on small
businesses with all the other
legislation because I will look
at it as a whole that has been
at least moved through here, um,
and how we're going to impact
our communities. The other
example.
that you use that I'm interested
in is you said if, if they're in
Santa Fe.
But they're from, I can't
remember where you said they
were from. You, the business in
Santa Fe might not have the
same, um,
part, I don't you use the
different word you use the
better word to not let them off
to go back home to fight their
fire. Can you remind me that
answer?
Madam Speaker, um, gentlemen,
that Sannaya was with my
community of Pecos village of
Pecos, and working out of Santa
Fe which they are within 20-30
minutes of each other.
What's the time, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady of a structure fire,
would you, would you know that?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I do
not have that information.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, you
know, if I'm looking at my
community as well, I'm looking
at Cloudcroft, I'm looking at
Artesia, so most of those folks
are already gonna work in Almo
Gordo and or in the oil field
and so their time to get back to
that structure fire or to that
tank battery, depending on where
we're at, it's gonna be a, a
pretty big length of time.
So I have a hard time really
taking that into account because
I, I agree with you. I think
when I look at our small
communities most of the time
they're going to let those folks
go because it's impacting them
right away.
I'm not as worried about those
folks that live outside of my
community, mainly because by the
time they get there, get their
gear and get to the fire, the
most likely the the entire thing
is going to be over at that
point. So I'm not as worried
about that. I think our local
communities do a great job
already. I have a hard time
mandating once again businesses
to let people off more. Um, I
think they're already doing a
great job of this. So with that,
I thank you.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Chavez, A Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, with
the representative yield?
Madam Chair, I do yield to my
friendly gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Just a few
questions.
Uh
The definition of employer.
What
What does that, is that every
employer in the state of New
Mexico?
Represented
Um,
Madam, Madam Speaker, um,
Gentlemen, I would like to refer
you to page 2. Employer means
any individual partnership
association corporation business
trust legal representative or
organized group of persons
employing one or more employees
at any one time.
Acting directly or indirectly in
the interest of an employer in
relation to an employee, but
does not include the United
States. Employer includes the
state of any political
subdivision of the state and a
person providing remuneration
for domestic service in a
private home.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, so if I work
for the United States
government, I'm not.
They are not required to let
their personnel go. Is that
true?
gentlemen, you are correct and
we do not have jurisdiction over
federal employees.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh,
Madam Chair, what if I'm a local
uh employed by the local
sheriff's department.
Are they covered under this
also?
Um
Madam Chair, um, gentlemen.
If they are employed by the
local sheriff's association they
likely to be responding anyways,
but, uh, they are part of the
volunteer fire corps and they
happen to not be on duty and not
be getting paid for any type of
service, yes, they would be fair
game.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh,
Just a couple of
More, uh
They, uh
What, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, why the 120 days, is that
what the training is.
That you're asking for requires?
Madam Chair, um, gentlemen,
again there is no definitive
amount of required training
required at all, um, the two
weeks some training that was
relayed as could be valuable,
um, last the duration of a week
in the coro, that is a common
timeframe, so you could have a
week of training for fire
service. You could have up to a
week of training for um.
EMT services when you are on a
volunteer fire team, you do it
all, you do fire response and
you um first responder medical
attention.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair. Madam Chair
Representative. So,
Mm
They, uh, can take this 2 weeks,
120 hours in increments.
Madam Chair
Gentlemen, yes, they can,
depending upon the duration of
the training, some training may
last one day, some training may
last 5 days. Again, as long as
they get prior authorization,
they sign up for the training,
um, they very full are very
aware of the time constraints of
each particular training while
in advance.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair.
Uh, one other
Question, Madam Chair
Representative.
I do feel the pain for the
independent.
Small business employers.
And uh
You know, our lack of workforce
as it is.
Madam Chair Representative, but
Are we in some way, do you
think?
This is
I don't know quite how to put
it. Are we making it where
employers will be reluctant to
hire.
People that are volunteer fire
department.
Madam Chair, gentlemen, I would
sure hope not, um, you know, I
guess again putting that in
comparison, um, you know, when
someone is in the military, it's
recognizing recognized as a
value.
I don't know if employers
typically discriminate on
someone who may have to go off
to training for 2 weeks for the
National Guard, um, again, I
would hope that this would be
put in the sense of value for
this position as a public
service, every single one of us
in the room is subject to jury
duty that does not have a
hindrance on any sort of whether
or not I get a job because I may
be called for jury duty. So
again, I just want to take that.
Just put a different perspective
on it that recognizing this is a
public service that I would sure
hope that that employer would
recognize the value in this.
Uh
Represented, Madam Chair, I too
don't want it to sound like I
don't support our local.
Fire departments and our
volunteer fire departments, but
I have a small business. I have
one employee.
Can I
I'm, I'm a say I'm sick.
Or get sick during this time
frame when this employees off on
his training.
Not that I don't want him to be
trying, but uh it would.
Come to light that, you know,
My one employee I need to make
sure it's there.
Uh
And they're not.
Well, they don't know how to put
this, but, you know, we have no
way of replacing that, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, granted
this is an unpaid leave.
But it is mandated that I
And I would hope they would, you
know, if, if you agree to hiring
someone under these
circumstances, you know, we have
to hold our job. We can't.
You, I mean, there's no.
Retaliation involved or anything
which there should not be.
I said one more, but one last
question.
In, uh
I know in my town, a lot of our
volunteer fire departments are
are the young working aged.
Men and women, would you agree
to that represented Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, um, gentlemen,
again, the average age right now
is an aging demographic of a.
The volunteer firefighter, um,
hence one of the background
needs for this bill is trying to
encourage working age
individuals to participate in
their local volunteer workforce
by giving them the ability to do
so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
agree with that that we do need
more of them, but one more or I,
I keep saying one more
represented Madam Chair, uh,
When this employee takes his 120
hours or 2 weeks.
Uh, he is on untied,
correct?
Madam Chair, uh, gentlemen, yes,
when he when he takes the up to
that time of leave, it is on
paid leave.
Uh
Represented Madam Chair, I guess
this question goes more to the
employee. He's in.
A lot of the people that we
want, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, today our
volunteer fire departments, can
they afford to take
Two weeks off without pay.
Madam Chair, uh, gentlemen, they
may not, and then again that is
a personal decision made between
that employee, the employer, the
fire chief, if they are not in a
position to take those 2 weeks
of pay, they do not have to take
those two weeks of training
leave, um, they can take the
leave or they can take the
training that is provided to
them on nights and weekends
online and all the other
options, so if they do not are
not in a position to to want to
take.
Time off for training, they are
not absolutely not required to
do so. This just gives them the
flexibility to be the best
public servants they can be.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, and we applaud him for
that. It, uh
But if we're trying to grow,
You know, our, our fire
departments in these rural
communities.
We
Madam Chair Representative don't
know if it's fair for us to
expect.
Uh, our volunteers to, to bear
the burden of it either.
Which brings me to the point
like, uh,
Representative Armstrong and
Several have noted here why a
lot of the counties are, are
going to more paid
volunteer firemen's response
time, and all those things on
the house fire, you know, if
they're not there fast.
are going to save any houses.
But anyway, you know, we
He's been a lot, like I said, I
don't want to sound like I don't
appreciate these people. I have
lots of friends that are
volunteer firemen back home.
It, uh
That is
Representative Henry spoke.
A lot of our towns have went.
To demand
Firemen and those with, with the
volunteers as backup.
That's all I have today. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you all for in closing, I
just want to say, um, I
appreciate the discussion, um, I
too look forward to a day when a
piece of legislation like this
is not required, um, I do think
it is unfortunate that we don't
have fully paid fire and this
would be unnecessary to those
comments about those the
The units that have paid fire
teams well then.
I applaud that, you know, then
this legislation is not needed
this legislation has has no
pertinence in those communities
when they have paid by
personnel, um, I brought this
attention out of my community's
need, um, and
out of my personal.
Just response to the value of
this very key personnel, um,
just one last closing
sentimental statement. It was a
volunteer firefighter in our
fire that actually pulled my
aunt from her house to make her
go and to say that that
volunteer firefighter does not
have job protections is unfair
and it's unfortunate and it's
unjust so that is the entire
purpose of this piece of
legislation, so thank you for
your support.
So with that,
I now move the house bill 405.
Do you know Pa.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 405. The vote is now open.
But it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 41 in the affirmative and 22
in the negative. House Bill 405
has duly passed this house.
Gentlemen from Dona Anna.
Are you ready on item number 41.
I am Madam Speaker. Can you give
me that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House bill, uh, house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191. on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill. Madam Speaker.
House preparations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191 creates the wildfire
suppression fund and the post
wildfire fund, increasing
transparency for fighting
wildfires that I stand for
questions the gentlemen.
Madam Speaker
Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill 191 do now pass.
preparations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191. The bill, the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, and
none in the negative. House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191 is has duly passed this
house.
OK, gentle lady from Bernallio,
haha, I'm just kidding, Rio Reba
Sandoval.
Santa Fe Inta. That was a joke
for the gentleman from, not from
Bernal Leo.
Are you ready? Madam Speaker,
will you get me to that point?
Um
All right, let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
240.
On final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain.
Uh, uh, Madam Speaker, uh, House
Bill 240 is really uh has been
endorsed by, uh, both the Senate
and the House, uh, New Mexico
finance uh authority oversight
committee during the interim and
what was really does, it makes
clarifying changes to the
state's drinking water state
revolving loan fund Act to
conform with the federal safe
drinking uh Water Act and that
pretty much wraps it up, Madam
Speaker no debate generally need
to close.
Uh, Madam Speaker, I move that
House Bill 240 do now pass. We
are on final passage of House
Bill 240. The vote is now open.
It's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative and
none in the negative. House Bill
240 has duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo, are
you ready on item number 39.
Yes, I am. Can you get that, get
me to that point, Madam Speaker.
Let the record reflect that all
action has been, uh, all actions
necessary for placing House Bill
156 on final passage has been
taken and is now subject to
debate, amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. House Bill 156
would increase the minimum
teachers' salaries by 5000 per
tier 55,000 for level 1, 65,000
for level two and 75,000 for
level 3 and with that I stand
for questions.
Seeing no seeing some debate,
gentlemen.
From San Juan, I'm sorry that
didn't, I'm not casting
aspersions on you,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr. Speak, uh, Madam
Speaker, does a gentle lady
yield?
Yes, I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Um, yes, uh, gentle lady, um, I,
I, you rushed through those
numbers really quick. Did you
say you were increasing them by
that amount. That's what I
heard.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
yes, they're increasing from
50,000 to 55,000 for level one.
60,000 to 65,000 for level two.
And 70,000 to 75,000 for level 3
licenses.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady. You
rushed through that and I
sounded to me like you were
giving everybody a $50,000
increase. So thank you for the
answer, gentle lady.
I wish. There's for the debate,
the gentle lady from Bernolio,
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Oh, thank you, Ms Sak Madam
Speaker, um, well, the gentle
lady from Buro County Police
Shield, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Berlio
County.
Um, first of all, um,
Mr. Ms. Madam Speaker, sorry.
I am looking, uh, Madam Speaker,
and uh gentle lady, first of all
I wanna thank you for providing
this bill that uh gives teachers
raises, um, it was an important
issue for constituents in my
district and I this is a nice
raise for teachers. They felt
that teachers really need to be
valued and really need to be
supported by our community in
ways that help them also live.
And prosper as individuals and
so they will be happy even
though it may not have been the
amount that they would have
liked to see teachers receive
because these are the people who
work so very carefully with
their own children, which is
their pride and joy, um, and so
I want to thank you for that.
Um, I also want to mention that
it would be nice if we could
look across at the consequences
of when we do provide teachers
raises like.
This, um, because I'm hearing
that at some universities that
what's happening is that any
teachers that had been hired as
lecturers or faculty are now
recognizing that they will get
paid more in the public schools
and so they're going back to
teaching and that's a wonderful
thing, um, you know, but looking
at how do we balance that out so
that faculty also get raises I
think is an important issue and
I also hear that sometimes from
people who have worked.
With um native schools or tribal
schools and so we wanna make
sure that um that we think of
everyone keep everyone in mind
and I appreciate the raise for
teachers. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady no
further debate, the gentle lady
to close. Madam Speaker, I now
move a due pass for House Bill
156. We are in final passage of
Boat's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative and 1
in the negative. House Bill 156
has duly passed this house.
Gentle lady.
From Rio Riba Sandoval, Santa
Fe, and Taos, are you ready on
item number 24.
Madam Speaker, will you get me
to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary has been taken
for placing house energy
environmental natural Resources
Committee substitute for house
of sec, you know, house of
agricultural secia and water
resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 137 as amended.
Has been placed on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentle ladies to
explain the bill.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker, there's no snow
on the mountains. I continue to
remind members of the house that
this is one of the greatest
dangers confronting our state in
the north we look to the Hemas
Mountains to the west. We looked
to the Sangre de Cristo
Mountains to the east and north
and at this time of year it's
not about skiing.
It's about the survival of
agriculture and flowing streams
and rivers in the spring and the
summer that nourish our crops
and provide a living for our
farmers and ranchers in the long
hot summer months ahead.
It's about drinking water, Madam
Speaker, it's about wells drying
up and for those of you who
don't know my well dried up 5
years ago, uh, it was right
before COVID.
It took us a year and a half to
get that well re-drilled. We had
lived on that property. I call
it God's Little Acre for for 30
years with water, uh, a water
well at 20 ft, and when they dug
a new well, it, they went down
200 ft to reach uh new water. I
live right on the Ambuda River,
um, wells were drying up all
over Dixon. I think they put in
about 12 new wells that year and
for those of you who don't.
No, uh, uh, well, down to 200 ft
cost about $30,000. That's the
price of drilling a new well on
a property that you own, and I
can just tell you, Madam
Speaker, and I know you know
this, most people in the north
do not have that kind of money.
So
In Rio Riba, according to the
USD, uh, USDA annual report, we
have about 1.4 million acres in
farming and ranching that
provides about 15 million in
farming and uh um in farming and
ranching revenue that's uh
provided to our local economy in
the North, Madam Speaker, our
wells are drying up the
watersheds and forests have no
rain and the drought has created
a dangerous scenario for
wildfires.
You will hear members of this
house several bills about water,
wildfire protection zones and
buffers during this legislative
session. Many legislators have
worked with state agencies over
the interim to protect our water
resources. This is one of those
bills.
We as a state collectively are
going to have to guard and use
water resources in the most
effective way possible. We're
going to have to use new
technologies to strengthen our
freshwater reserves in the
future we will have 25% less
water in New Mexico.
Madam Speaker, House Bill 137,
the strategic water supply helps
put New Mexico on a new path for
the future. This bill has been
amended many times. We have
tried to, um, we have tried to
listen to legislators who had
deep concerns about this bill
starting in the AG committee, as
you know, Madam Speaker, so I
wanna say overall this bill does
5 things. It has, we have taken
all references to produce water
out of this bill.
It's no longer there.
2, it gives a clear definition
of brackish water and allows for
40 million in House Bill 2 to
help local communities create
brackish water treatment
facilities for much needed water
resources in uh their
communities 3, it provides New
Mexico Tech's department of
minerals and geology $19 million
to study and monitor the
aquifers, uh, in our state and
for those of you who don't know
in the past they're recurring
funding was only.
600,000 a year. This sets a new
stage for us understanding the
water resources in our state,
which I think is imperative for
the future.
Fourth
It gives NMSU 4 million to do
research on brackish watering
systems used to refine rackish
water resources and with that,
uh, Madam Speaker, I stand for
questions. I would like to
introduce my two experts if I
could at this time. I have
Rebecca Rus who is director of
the infrastructure office for
the office of the governor and I
have Tanya Trujillo, who is also
with the who is the deputy
secretary to the uh office of
the.
engineer.
There is debate on the bill. The
gentleman from Colfax, Curry,
Harding, Quay, San Miguel, and
Union representative.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does a
gentle lady yield?
Uh,
Madam Speaker, I yelled and I
wrote this down from the to the
kind gentleman from Colfax Curry
Harding Quay, San Miguel and
Union.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Gentle
lady, in the years I've been in
this house, I don't think I've
seen anybody work harder on a
bill than you did on this one.
The first time I saw it, I
didn't like it much.
Uh, you, we talked about it.
And, uh, you took input, Madam
Speaker, from many, many people.
And Madam Speaker, you, you, you
removed a lot of things, you
know, along, along so taxes on
produced water.
Trying to deal with produced
water, and we got it down to
kind of the treatment of
brackish water. Now, Madam
Speaker, we know that all under
New Mexico there's brackish
water, almost anywhere you go,
some of it, some of it's
artesian brackish water, Madam
Speaker. Uh, you just poke a
hole in the ground and there she
comes.
Um
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, my
first real interest in uh
brackish water was when the
legislative Finance Committee,
uh, visited the Kay Bailey
Hutchinson desalination plant in
El Paso.
That plant produces 27.5 million
gallons of water per day.
At a cost of $2.
Per 1000.
So now an average household uses
12,000 gallons a month.
That's a household of 4.
I would give you a water bill of
$24 a month.
Now, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that's something we can afford.
I mean, that's not outlandish.
That's, that's, that would take
the place of a lot of our
freshwater supplies.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
Kay Bailey Hutchinson diesel
plant cleaned out brackish water
to a point.
That it is so clean that they
have to, excuse me, reintroduce
minerals.
Uh, to keep it from drawing the
minerals out of your body. It,
it, uh, is pure water H2O. They
take the, uh, solids that are
cleaned out of the brackish
water and they just re-inject it
right back into the ground into
the aquifer where it came from.
So it's a, it's a workable
thing. So, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
commend you on all the work you
did on this bill to make it
where everybody liked it for all
the amendments that you took on
it. And with that, Madam
Speaker, I have an amendment.
Madam Speaker, that is the
question. Will I accept gentle
lady, gentle lady, wait, wait
for a second.
It has been passed out.
Can you read the 202 number or
the 231 number, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, 0231515.3. Yep.
That's it, gentlemen.
Would you like to move the
amendment, gentlemen?
Uh.
Madam Speaker, I would like to
move the amendment.
Gentlemen, can you explain the
137.
Go ahead and explain it,
gentlemen. I'm sorry, um, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, what this
amendment does is it requires
public notice.
And an opportunity to file an
objection or protest, very sim
similar to in any other water
rights case. Anytime you put
water to beneficial use and
you're applying for a water
right, uh, you have to file
public notice and you have to
provide an opportunity for
objection, and that's what this
amendment does. It just puts it
in line with other, with other
water.
In the state other water law in
the state of New Mexico.
Gentle lady.
Is this a friendly amendment?
And that Madam Speaker, is the
question do I accept this
amendment?
And uh there are many things I
do at this stage in my life,
Madam Speaker, and many things I
don't do.
And to paraphrase an old song,
Madam Speaker.
Here are some of the things I
don't do.
I don't spit in the wind.
I don't tag on Superman's cape.
And when I bring a water bill to
the floor of the house, I don't
mess around with Jack.
And that would be Representative
Jack Chatville and I gladly am
gratefully accept this
amendment.
I think that's reason to clap.
I'll allow it.
That
Is there objection to adopting
this amendment from Jack.
Madam, I was just that little
statement was objectionable, but
I think that's it. All right.
Seeing none, this amendment is
adopted.
gentle lady.
No
Gentlemen, you, you solve the
floor.
Uh,
Madam Speaker, I yield the
floor.
Seeing no debate.
Generally clothes.
Madam Speaker, I um, I.
I move at Du pass on uh H E NRC
committee, uh, I can hardly read
this, uh, would you read that
for me, Madam Speaker?
I will, gentle lady, uh Thank
you
energy.
An environment, natural
resources committee substitute,
uh, for house.
Agriculture seass and water
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 137 as twice
amended.
Vote,
gentle lady.
Thank you Madam Speaker I move
it, uh, I move it to pass. All
right, we are on final passage
of House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee
substitute for House Agriculture
Rose and Water Resources
Committee substitute for House
Bill 137 is twice amended. The
vote is now open.
road's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative, 4 in
the negative, house energy,
environment, natural resources
committee substitute for house
agriculture seki and Water
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 137 is twice
amended, has duly passed his
house.
Thank you house. OK, we are.
Onto the next item, gentle lady
from Bernnalio. Are you ready on
item number
26
Madam Speaker, can you get me to
that point?
Oh.
Enala from Bernalillo or
generally from Santa Fe?
Madam Speaker, can you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 9 on final action has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate, amendment or
substitution generally need to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I
would also ask before I start
that my um expert witnesses be
escorted in.
Madam
Speaker.
The immigrant Safety Act is a
simple bill.
It does two things. One, it
instructs.
New Mexico Public bodies not to
enter into agreements to detain
people for similar immigration
violations.
2, it instructs New Mexico
public bodies not to lease or
sell publicly owned property to
facilitate immigration
detention.
The federal government enters
into no bed contracts with the
county which then in turn enter
into no bid subcontracts with an
out with out of state for profit
for-profit prison companies.
The federal government relies on
the type of agreements that HB 9
addresses at each of these
facilities.
HB 9 also instructs Cibola
County Correctional Center in
Milan, the Otero County
Processing Center in Chaparral
and the Torrance County
Detention facility in Estancia
to use their contractual rights
to terminate those agreements.
Why are
the agreements structured in
this way.
Federal law usually requires.
The federal government to
competitively bid contracts like
this, but going through a local
government lets them exploit a
loophole to get around that.
New Mexico County's act as
pass-throughs as shields to
facilitate federal immigration
detention to get around basic
scrutiny in in the federal
system.
Madam Speaker, this does not
match New Mexico values.
As New Mexicans we are community
centered.
We
Value welcoming our neighbors
and we champion our immigrant
communities our government
should be focused on caring for
their communities, not
facilitating for-profit
detention.
New Mexico as compared to other
states, hosts a disproportionate
number of immigration detention
beds.
Per capita, about 5 times a
typical state.
Until we close this loophole, we
are incentivizing ice to
continue to do that.
Passing the immigrant Safety Act
gets us out of the business of
immigration detention and stops.
Incentivizing ice to place
detention beds here.
It also makes New Mexico safer
in three ways ice is like more
likely to carry out raids and
arrests close to where it has
immigration beds.
HB 9 would lower that risk.
It promotes public safety.
Breaking the connection between
New Mexico's counties and
federal immigration enforcement
authorities builds trust with
our immigrant communities, so
they feel safe to call 911 or to
seek medical care.
It also delivers accountability
for track record of human rights
abuses at New Mexico's 3
immigration detention centers.
We have the power to hold the
line in New Mexico and not let
the current administration and
ICE use New Mexico's own local
governments to facilitate
cruelty and mistreatment.
Um, Madam Speaker, and with
that, um, I would like to
introduce one of the co-spo, one
of the sponsors of this bill,
representative Andrea Romero.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Uh for yielding, um, Madam
Speaker, this bill is, is
actually quite simple. When it
comes to public bodies using
public funding.
gentle lady, yeah, go ahead and
get that mic.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Um,
when we're talking about public
bodies this is limited to New
Mexico funded state taxpayer
funded, uh, facilities for civil
immigration purposes. We're not
talking about criminal
immigration. We're not talking
about barring ICE from New
Mexico. We're not talking about
any of that. We're talking about
is using these public facilities
for civil immigration
violations. We're talking about
fines and fees here.
Traffic violations, visa
extension situations. These are
not criminals being housed in
these facilities, and yet many
of them for year after year
after year have we have known,
do not meet the standards of
care that we have for even those
in criminal situations, Madam
Speaker.
We don't want to be using public
property for these purposes.
This does not ban immigration
detention in New Mexico. This
does not bar immigrations and
customs enforcement for
arresting people in New Mexico.
It doesn't change how we detain
other folks for mandatory
detentions with criminal records
in our state, and it doesn't
stop state court judges from
making decisions about bail if a
non-citizen is charged with a
crime. Again, we're
Limiting this very, very
narrowly to the portion of these
public bodies and public
facilities that are being used
for civil immigration. This
doesn't limit the amount of jobs
that are there. This doesn't
limit what they can do with that
other part of these facilities
this is taking away that portion
of these facilities being used
again for civil civil
immigration violations. So this
just withdraws the opportunity
for these public bodies using
public funding to.
be involved in these detentions.
This is a small step in the
right direction, and again,
we're, we're very, very limited
in what we're doing here today
and trying to protect what it is
that we do with public bodies in
the state. And again, being in
line with our values as New
Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Back to the gentle lady
from Bertollio. Uh, thank you,
Madam Speaker, and with that we
stand for questions. There is
debate, the gentleman from San
Juan, representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, does a
gentle lady for Berlio yield?
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
representative.
Thank you, uh,
Gentle lady
Um, just reading through the
bill, I had not read through
this bill. I did not come
through any of the committees
that I sit on, um, but I am very
interested in this, um, uh,
because, uh, obviously I, I see
this bill as a preemptive, I
believe, uh, because of what we
expect.
Uh, to, uh, maybe for the
federal government actions to
take place, would that be a fair
statement, um, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady? Um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, I'd like to
yield to representative Romero
to answer that question.
Forgive me, Madam Speaker, will
you repeat the question?
Yes, uh, Madam Speaker, and, and
gentle lady, um, are, are we
doing this in some sort of
preemptive fashion because we
expect uh federal immigration
law to to take place or why, why
are we doing this now?
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker,
um, gentlemen, so we've seen
this bill many years before.
This is not new to the values of
New Mexicans, um, in in
providing the opportunity to
vote upon it today.
This just means that the state
or local government and advisory
board or commission, an agency
or an entity created by the
Constitution of New Mexico, um,
would no longer into, uh, enter
into renew or otherwise agree to
be a party to an agreement to
detain these individuals for
federal civil immigration
violations. So this is about
where we stand moving forward,
um, and a renewal potential in a
contract, um, as we know under
state law, federal.
we would not, um, be able to, to
sever a contract or engage in in
severance of that or preempt
anything that would be already
underway.
So thank you, uh, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, from Santa
Fe.
Um, I'm just trying to figure
out who I'm debating. So from
Santa Fe. So madam, uh, speaker
and gentle lady from Santa Fe,
so with this, uh, if we
implement this, will this be in
conflict with federal
immigration laws it stands
today. Uh, no, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, we would not. Um, it
is up to us as New Mexicans to
decide who we contract with
right now, it's up to us how we
want our public bodies to engage
in who they contract with.
And so essentially this would be
that decision today, Madam
Speaker.
So, um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, so, um,
Uh, you, you mentioned earlier
that this would be in line with
New Mexico values, so Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, um.
Are we saying that New Mexico
values uh stand in conflict or
stand against the principle of
holding someone who is created,
who has uh.
committed a violation of federal
law.
That that is not in line with
New Mexico values.
Madam Speaker, no, I think the
values that we're discussing
here that these facilities do
not need minimum standards that
we do not have unfortunate
control over, being that they
are contractually obligated
separate from what we would be
doing even with our public
bodies here locally. Uh, we have
not been able to meet those
standards through these
contracts and so when we talk
about values, we're talking
about human rights standards,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
So, Madam Speaker and generally,
you're saying that these
detention centers are subpar.
has been reported, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, that many
times in the past, yes, and
Torrance County and
specifically, um, there's been
numerous, um, accounts of how
these are quite subpar, um, and
in, and in fact, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, in violation of human
rights standards.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, um, when it comes to
withholding funds, what funds
are they receiving today?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
we're, we're talking about 3
different areas in this bill,
um, in the state of New Mexico,
um, can you just specify what,
what your, what you're looking
for, what information you're
looking for. Well, and general
lady, you're saying that we're
looking to withhold funds. I'm,
uh, I'm just wondering what
contracts do we have in place
today, uh, other than our, uh,
local police departments are
sheriff's offices in our
detention centers. What other
detention?
centers exist in New Mexico
today that we are.
Uh, contractually obligated to.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So subject to
this bill, uh, we're talking
about Torrance County detention
facility, so a portion of that
facility is contracted to Core
Civic. Um, that's a federal
contractor that runs the portion
of civil detention. Um, we're
also talking about the Se County
Correctional Center, and again,
a portion of those, uh, of the
population is contracted with
Core Civic again um to provide
civil detention services, and
then a
uh Otero County processing
Center. Again, a portion of
that, um, is also um used uh in
um contract with.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the contractor is MTC, um, and
that provides services, uh, for,
uh, civil detention as well.
So thank you, um, Madam, uh.
Speaker and gentle lady, so
you're saying one half of the
detention center is not subpar
that holds New Mexico citizens.
That have committed a crime and
the other side of the building
is subpar that is holding uh uh
illegal immigrants who have
committed a crime.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, right,
that's correct. So when we're
looking at the, the management
over these contracts and the
oversight over these contracts,
um, the scrutiny has come under
the civil detention, um, arena
for those contracts and lady,
where is that report? I had, I
don't believe I have seen that
report. Can you provide that to
me? Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
I'd be happy to, um, and I can
Google it for you right now, um,
but I, there has been numerous
cases of this.
So Madam speaker and gentle
lady, um, on the, on the side
that holds New Mexico citizens.
How is that side substantially
better.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, they're fully separate
entities that manage and operate
as far as how they have
certification to go into one
facility or the other, um, and
so they are actually prohibited
from doing one or the other. In
fact, the state run or the um
local governments, the
governance that New Mexico has
purview and oversight over Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, they,
they are separate facilities as
far as how they operate.
So thank you, um, madam, uh.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
so how does this affect?
Our local
Detention centers in each of our
communities if they uh.
pick up someone for for some
violation of our law, and
they're in jail.
How
How does that, how does that
person process through the
system? How do they end up at
that facility and what happens
in the meantime when they're in
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. So again, this, this
is uh a facility that could come
from the border, it could come
from other states around the
United States, uh, again,
Canada, Mexico, however folks
may be, um, again, uh, sort of,
uh,
Found to have a civil violation
and then detained in New Mexico,
um, then they would be held in
the facility until they had a
federal hearing.
So Madam Speaker, and, and, and
gen lady, how does this affect
our local detention centers, a
local police officer picks up.
Uh, someone for criminal
activity ends up in a local
jail.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, it
wouldn't affect that at all.
So thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle ladies, so, uh, but that
person that is now detained.
At a local
Uh, facility.
Do they transfer at any point in
time over to the other facility
because of the immigration.
Uh, laws that are in place.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't know a case where that
would be, whether that would
happen again if it's under a
local jurisdiction, they go,
they operate under, um, local
jurisdiction, um, purview.
So thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle ladies. So in the
instance that
A
A local police officer picks up
someone for a traffic violation.
They then
Uh, find out that the person has
illegal immigration status.
What happens generally in that
instance, Madam Speaker, gent
lady.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
there are referrals that could
happen to ICE. We've seen that,
unfortunately in many
circumstances where, uh, folks
may want ICE to be, um, in a
location for some purpose, um,
for, you know, if it is an
illegal situation, yes, I will
be called in. That has nothing
to do again with the civil
detention piece and or calling
in ICE for a specific purpose.
Those are all opportunities that
we already have in federal law
within our community.
um, and again this is about
detention and the facilities
that are now contracted with
local governments. So all of the
system with which uh federal uh
compliance would be necessary,
how ICE operates across the
country, that all remains the
same. This is just about the
contracts, um, for the civil
detention.
Thank you, I appreciate that,
uh, Madam Speaker, Jen lady, so
in the instance, so I, I'm, I'm
just trying to go through the
process here. I started with the
civil violation, but madam, uh,
uh, speaker and gentle lady,
what happens if it is something
more violent, say it is a uh
they're picked up locally for
domestic abuse or drug
trafficking or rape or murder.
now that becomes a felony.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, when
you say they, what do you, who
do you mean?
when an individual who happens
to also potentially be uh in
violation of federal immigration
policy.
Uh, is picked up for a felony, a
violent, uh, criminal activity
or drug trafficking or human
trafficking.
Something like that. So now we
have a local community that has
uh a a violent offender but is
also
Has an immigration status like
that, so
because Madam Speaker and, and
gentle lady, um, our local facil
facilities are paid for by local
taxpayer dollars, would that not
be uh an instance where since
it's a federal law that we
wouldn't contact ICE or um
Uh
Let's just say ICE and then
that.
A person could be transferred to
one of these detention centers,
potentially the one here in New
Mexico, is that a possibility
or?
How does that work, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady? Thank
you, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
So in your hypothetical, that
would be under criminal law, and
so this would not pertain to
these detention facilities.
So you're saying, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, that that that
person would not be detained in
one of those facilities, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, no, not for
a civil violation. It would be a
criminal violation, so it would
be a separate, um, again,
jurisdiction for that and all of
that remains the same.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
said criminal violation. I a
violation of of of uh uh of a
violent crime.
That's correct, Madam Chair, um,
Uh, gentleman that all remains
the same. Again, this is for
civil violations only and how
these entities contract with
local governments, the way in
which criminals would be
detained, should they be picked
up by our local law enforcement,
um, or federal law enforcement
for that matter, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, they would not be
subject to to these facilities
that we're talking about here
for civil violations that would
be a totally different separate
entity for criminal procedure.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
As I've been reading through
this, uh, I'm not seeing any.
any exceptions that if there
were people held at one of these
facilities that uh has uh that
is there for a violent crime. It
doesn't seem to me that there's
any exception for us to worry
that a violent criminal would
be would be kept.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, again,
no criminals subject to criminal
law would be in one of these
facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So, uh, I have a question for
you on.
The potential loss of federal
dollars.
For not cooperating with federal
immigration.
Officerss um is what.
Is the possibility that New
Mexico would face a potential
loss of federal dollars, um, for
not cooperating with the federal
government.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
that's not this bill. Um, this
is about cooperation. This is
about again what we are asking
our local public bodies to do,
we would continue to cooperate.
We will continue to obviously be
American citizens working in the
federal system, um, that doesn't
change in this bill. Madam
Speaker and lady, you don't
believe that, that, uh, the
administration wouldn't believe
this to be.
Um, standing in the way.
Of immigration.
Not, no, not at all, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so I don't believe
that to be the case, um, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. I've
been watching.
Uh, with interest.
The last, uh.
60 days or so and what I found
is a um, at the very least a
threat.
Of the loss of federal funding.
For, uh, states that, uh, are
not cooperating with, uh, with
the
Uh, detention of folks who have
broken.
Uh, the, the law in crossing
our, our southern border.
Um
That
is what I am hearing, um, I, I
don't tend to disbelieve.
When it's been stated as many
times as it has.
Um, there's no concern
whatsoever that we might be
putting ourselves in a position
to lose federal funding.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
certainly not with this bill.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe that is um.
Hopeful and incorrect.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, what, what concerns me about
that, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady is, are you aware?
Of how many federal dollars come
into the state of New Mexico per
capita.
Uh, Madam Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, uh, I don't know the
exact number right now, but I'm
not quite sure what that has to
do with this bill.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
has everything to do with this
bill from the standpoint of what
I'm talking about, which is the
threat of the loss of federal
funding. Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, per capita.
New Mexico is ranked 2nd on the
list of federal dollars coming
into the state. Um, that is at
in 2024, those dollars were
$6390 per individual in New
Mexico, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, having served
the last the two previous years
on appropriations, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, we do
our almost our entire budgeting
based on
leveraging
State dollars for federal
dollars. We do that for
everything. We do it for roads,
we do it for schools, we do it
for Medicaid. We do it for
everything. So Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I am very
concerned.
That
We
Uh, have the possibility of
losing federal dollars.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, what do you propose?
In the instance that we passed
this legislation.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, federal dollars are
withheld from the state of New
Mexico because of not.
Cooperating, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. So states have a
clear right under the 10th
Amendment not to actively carry
out federal schemes if it's not
to our, um, values and of course
not to participate in federal
civil immigration detention,
should we not want to, um, under
this law, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, what you're
describing seems retaliatory,
um, and I would imagine that
those would be taken up in
federal court if it was.
Um, Madam Speaker, and, and
gentle lady.
Um
I do believe that it's, it could
be considered retaliatory.
For not cooperating with what,
um,
A
A president
Might be willing to do whenever
he ran for office on
Um
Protecting American citizens and
putting them first above.
Those concerns of those who may
not be. So, Madam Speaker, and
gentle lady, the concern here
is.
We do believe that those dollars
could be at risk.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady,
Um, I, I do have.
A
An idea I have as a matter of
fact, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I have an amendment.
And this amendment would
State that if those dollars were
to become jeopardized.
That this bill would unwind.
After 30 days, which would give
us the time to come back in
here.
And
Um, determine whether or not
that's a battle we really want
to take on, Madam Speaker and,
and gentle lady, um, I, I, I
believe this is something we
need to consider because Madam
Speaker, and generally what
we've seen is across the country
is federal dollars at risk, and
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we are a border town.
And I believe that this is a
concern that we that we need to
address, so give me just a
second, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady. I'm going to be submitting
an amendment.
And Madam Speaker, I ask for a
roll call vote.
Uh, Madam Speaker, the, uh, the,
the 231 number is 0.231753.1.
Does everyone have the
amendment?
Is the amendment online.
gentlemen to explain the
amendment.
Uh, thank you, um, madam
Speaker, um, this amendment.
Establishes a delayed repeal in
the event that enactment of this
bill results in the loss of any,
any federal funds.
This amendments ensures that the
state does not suffer financial
penalties due to the
implementation of the
immigration Safety Act by
introducing a mechanism for
automatic repeal continued upon
the loss of federal funds that
place it places the onus on
legislators to carefully
consider the fiscal implications
of the Act, uh, Madam Speaker,
um,
What this does is it protects us
from the massive amounts, the
loss of the massive amounts of
federal dollars that we rely on
all across the state, um, once
again, I, I mentioned the, the
total dollar figure that comes
in per, uh, New Mexican citizen,
uh, just under.
$6500 per citizen, Madam
Speaker, uh, this amendment.
Would protect us in particular.
Uh, when it comes to uh the.
Medicaid dollars.
Um, Madam Speaker, we are the
largest recipient of Medicaid
dollars in the country.
Um, Madam Speaker, for every $1.
That we that we spend on
Medicaid, there's a 73% match by
the federal government and so
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
what this, what this amendment
does is it places a repeal.
The moment that
Uh, those dollars become in
danger.
It allows us to react. It allows
us to have 30 days if we don't
react, uh, the, the repeal goes
into place, um, if we feel like
there is something else that
needs to be done, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, we can do
that within those 30 days or
following that. But Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, New
Mexicans.
are among the poorest.
In the nation.
New Mexican population is ranked
4th by state. Now we're behind a
couple of our uh
Other territories Guam, Samoa,
uh, but as far as states um.
Madam Speaker, we are 4th.
One of the 4th poorest state in
the nation per capita and this
is just a measure to make sure
that
Um, if
If we were to somehow not take
this president at his word.
And then we are facing the loss
of dollars. This allows us to
have a mechanism in place to
react.
Um, quickly.
Gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment, Madam Speaker, this
is unfriendly, as I understand
it at this point. May I ask the
gentleman a few questions.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, do you
believe in state sovereignty and
the ability to make decisions as
a state without having to um.
Understand the pressures of
federal government in our
sovereignty, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I believe in state
sovereignty, but when we're this
heavily reliant on federal
dollars, our sovereignty is
compromised.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, and
when McHenry County versus Raoul
in um Federal district court was
Uh, deemed a valid exercise of
the state sovereign authority to
make decisions on who they want
to contract with, uh, when it
comes to federal civil
contracts, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, do you believe that
the appellate court squarely
upheld the law as constitutional
when it um decided that the 10th
Amendment should stand for
states that make those
decisions, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I.
I have no doubt that we can make
our decisions, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, what I am saying is
there can be consequences to
those decisions that are not in
our hands.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
again, I, I do see this as
unfriendly. I think we're
already, uh, bracing for
potential federal cuts to our
state generally, um, we had a, a
presentation in how judiciary at
the start of our session about
what our situation would be as a
state if we were to lose federal
funds for any reason, um, this
could be one of the many reasons
perhaps, um, if the federal
government wanted to be
retaliatory against the.
values that we share and the uh
laws that we pass not in just
this session, but in past
sessions, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I stand with the
people of New Mexico and our
sovereignty and I would ask the
body to vote against this being
that it is unfriendly to those
values and the 10th Amendment
and the many decisions that um
that federal district courts
have already um decided upon in
how states enact their laws,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
There is debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Chavez, Representative Mejia.
Thank you Madam Speaker does the
gentleman from San Juan yield?
Yes, madam Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Chavez
County.
Gentlemen,
What is the primary purpose for
the delayed repeal amendment
within the immigration Safety
Act.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, in particular, uh, as
to the, the previous, uh,
debate, um, this is to protect
our budget. So Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, there is one thing
as legislators that we are
supposed to do and Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, and that is to
balance a budget. Unfortunately,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we have balanced that budget
largely on federal dollars.
So Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I just think it is uh
completely irresponsible for us
to uh decide that we're gonna
take on a fight that we're in no
position to win and Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, it was
mentioned over and over and over
again, the values that we all
hold, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, dignity and human life is
a value we all hold, but Madam
Speaker and gentle lady,
unfortunately, we have gotten to
a point in this state where
Uh, I would say over half of
this body does not hold the rule
of law as a value anymore and so
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
still hold the rule of law as a
value. It is the basis, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, for our
society, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, the moment that we
start to align with those who
break the law more than we do
with those who are the victims
of those who break the law and
the consequences of those who
break the law, we do not have a
civil society, so I would
disagree
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
that we all hold certain values
and those values being
Holding the rights of criminals
over those of legal law-abiding
citizens, so Madam Speaker and
generally that is the purpose is
to make sure.
This particular amendment is to
make sure that when we are held
to what our national values are,
which is the rule of law.
Which is, uh, the value of
citizenship, true citizenship,
which Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, is what we believe, as a
matter of fact, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, I know your
business.
The business you hold, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, is that
of helping people become
legalized citizens.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I do not believe in the
values of undermining legal
citizenship because Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, what
that does is it creates second
class citizens.
It creates a working class that
can never reach the American
dream. So Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, I believe what this does is
it reinforces the rule of law,
and then when we are against the
rule of law in New Mexico and
the federal government holds us
responsible for that.
What this does is it says.
We're going to reconsider at the
very least we're gonna come back
in here and decide whether we
are really willing to bust the
budget, or are we really willing
to come back in here and tax.
Those who have taxable dollars.
To be against enforcement of
federal law, Madam Speaker,
generally, that's what the
purpose of this amendment does.
Madam Speaker, um, thank you,
thank you for that answer. I
have one more question which
federal funds are protected
under the amendment for
potential reduction or
withholding.
Um
Generally, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, yes, uh, this is
meant to protect those dollars.
As a matter of fact, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, we have
just had.
The largest budget surplus in
state history, and Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, we're in the
process of considering.
A new tax.
In the middle of all of this to
make us that much more budget,
uh, uh.
Maybe let's say maybe a little
bit out over our skis.
And in the meantime, we're going
to, to tempt the loss of federal
dollars.
That doesn't make sense to me,
uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
Thank you for that answer. I
have one more question.
Madam Speaker, um, who is
authorized to provide the
notification that could trigger
the automatic repeal of the
immigration Safety Act.
Uh, Madam Speaker, and gentle
lady.
Um
Could you ask that question one
more time? Sure.
Who is the authorized?
Who is authorized to provide the
notification that could trigger
the automatic repeal of the
immigration Safety Act.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
the notification would come from
the federal government and I
would imagine that notification
would go to the governor. So
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe this would be triggered
by the governor's office, um,
letting us know that those
dollars are in, uh, in danger
and Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, what I would assume is
either the governor at that
point would call for a special
session or Madam Speaker, uh,
gentle lady that the legislature
would call ourselves back into
extraordinary session so that
we could deal with the pending
budget crisis.
Thank you for that answer.
Um, Maddy Speaker, I have
another question.
What mechanism are in place to
monitor and detect the potential
reduction.
Or withholding of federal funds
due to the immigration Safety
Act.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
could you repeat it just a
little bit louder.
Give me a second.
Let, let me, let me go to my
next question, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, how does this
amendment address concerns about
the potential financial
repercussions of implementing
the immigration Safety Act.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
this, uh, inputs, puts in place
a mechanism within the law.
That uh that that causes a
delayed repeal of 30 days.
From that notification.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I think in part what this
would do, it would help.
The
Federal government understand
that we have something in place
to, at the very least, we are
going to address this. We're not
going to just, uh, blatantly
ignore.
Uh, uh, the
Uh, the.
actions of the federal
government.
Thank you for that answer. I
have one more question, Madam
Chair.
Representative, what steps?
can they state take to prevent
the automatic repeal of the
immigration Safety Act under
this amendment, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, I think we what
we just need to do is adopt this
amendment and Madam Speaker and
gentle lady that.
That will force us, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady that if
there are
The impending
Uh, and, and some sort of
impending crisis this responses.
If we, if we decide not to
respond, it returns back and and
then does this legislation.
Or it allows us to come in.
And if we decide that we want to
double down on this legislation,
it allows us to do that as well.
Thank you for that answer.
Um
I have one more question.
How does this amendment ensure
the essential services such as
Medicaid and public education
remain funded.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, I think more
than anything, what it does is
that it, it indicates to the
federal government that we are
still uh going to.
Uh, that, that we will address
it positively.
Either by allowing it to to re
revert.
Or
By addressing it directly.
Thank you for that answer. Thank
Uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
what role do state agencies play
in implementing the provisions
of this amendment.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
would believe, I believe that,
that they wouldn't play any role
if we decide to come back and
address it ourselves. However,
if we decide not to address it,
it would become automatic.
Thank you for that answer, um,
Madam Speaker and
Representative, what impact
might this amendment have on the
enforcement of the immigrant
Safety Act.
I'm sorry, Madam Speaker, I was
talking to my expert witness.
Let me repeat that question, um.
What impact might this amendment
have on them enforcement of the
immigrant Safety Act.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, once again it would undo it
if.
If we are to lose federal funds,
it would undo it and once again
unless we were to decide to come
back and
And um address it in a different
manner.
And potentially put it right
back in place.
Thank you, thank you, um, one
last question, uh, Madam Speaker
and Representative, uh, in what
ways does this amendment protect
the interests of the state's
residents.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
think what this does, and I
think that's a very good
question. What this does is it
It shows
are
Our tax paying.
Legal citizens.
That we are taking our uh
constitutional.
Uh, constitutional requirement
to maintain a balanced budget.
That that is a priority for us
that our priority is to the
state of New Mexico to its
fiscal solvency, not just to
make a statement that appears to
be political in nature.
Thank you for that answer and
that concludes my questions.
Thank you. There's further
debate on the amendment. The
gentle lady from Bernalo Sibalo
McKinley, San Juan, Socorro, and
Valencia County representative
Abeta.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Does
the gentleman from San Juan
yield?
Yes, uh, uh, Madam Speaker, I
yield to the gentle lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. I noticed in section
6 of your amendment, you
included the Bureau of Indian
Education schools and the
tribally controlled schools, and
this is dear to my heart, as
you've seen the students who
were here this morning reciting
their language and visiting us
are part of a 638 tribally
controlled school. Uh, my
question is, can you tell me?
why the federal government funds
those schools Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, they
They pay for those schools, what
portion that they pay for them
that that is not state dollars,
they do that uh because of
contracts in place. There are a
tribal agreements in place with
the federal government.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
thank you Representative um it's
actually a little bit more in
depth than that. It's because of
the treaties.
My concern here, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative is that under
these treaties, the federal
government is obligated to pay
to operate these schools and
educate our indigenous children,
um Madam Chair Representative,
can you please tell me if, if
there's information that's been
substantiated that treaties will
be broken by the federal
government?
No, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I do not believe that they
would where where there are BIA
schools, I believe the funding
would be permanent, uh, but
Madam Speaker and general lady,
not all schools that were
indigenous and native children
go to school or BIA schools and
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
there is no treaty in place that
requires the federal government
to provide funding towards
public schools where public
dollars are going from the
state.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
gentlemen. I
Respectfully disagree, the
Navajo Nation is one of the
schools in my district, District
69, that has a treaty in place
that requires that our schools
to be funded by the federal
government. I completely agree
with you earlier when you said
um that we should not be
aligning with those who break
the law and the way this
amendment is written, gentlemen,
I'm concerned that there is some
unsubstantiated information that
treaties will be broken.
and I don't agree, um, that.
That's legal. I also would not
want to align with a government
that's willing to break treaties
and so, uh, my next question is
gonna go to Cibula County in
regard to this amendment, can
you please tell me how much Sela
County, who has core Civic um
will lose as a result of this.
Um, Madam Speaker, and, and
gentle lady, uh, first off to,
to address what your, your last
statement about treaties. This
has nothing to do with treaties,
Madam Speaker, and generally,
the state of New Mexico has no
part in federal treaties. So,
Madam Speaker and generally
those I, I do not believe that
the that the nation will have
violated anything, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, we're talking
about the state of New Mexico
taking action.
To say that we are not going to
implement federal immigration
policy and we are not going to
cooperate and in that instance,
federal dollars would be held
from the withheld from the state
of New Mexico, not from native
tribes, however,
Schools that are located on
Indian reservations and tribal
reservations, um, they do
receive dollars from the state.
Those could be impacted, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, impact
aid dollars could be affected.
So Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, to, to that previous
point, um, I do not, I, there is
nothing in this amendment that
addresses tribal entities from
the standpoint of their direct
treaties or agreements with the
federal government.
But Madam Speaker and gentle
lady to, the, the point of
Cibola County, uh, Seil County
has public schools who are
native, uh, children may be in
attendance. And so, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, what
this amendment is trying to do
is to protect those dollars
because of those New Mexico
children.
That would be affected if we
lose federal dollars to the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
representative. I respectfully
disagree with your analysis of
the treaty relationship with
tribes in this state and again
the unsubstantiated fact that
there will be a treaty broken
that will impact the Bureau of
Indian Education and the
tribally controlled schools, um,
in response to the Cibola County
comment. I did hear in testimony
while this bill was being
thoroughly debated by the
judiciary Committee that.
Paul Luddy, the one of the
county managers in Cebula County
had sat on the high end this
would impact uh less than
$300,000 just on the civil side
and the county managers and I
were in full discussion about
how this would impact them and
conversations and due diligence
was done by myself and the um
city manager as well and so we
thoroughly discussed that and
came to
agreement on this, um, I also
wanna add that I did reach out
to my representative across the
aisle, um, who has a core civic
facility in her district and
asked if we could discuss
potential opportunities to
address this and unfortunately I
was not able to um find any
common solutions or figure out
how we can support this effort,
but I do appreciate you bringing
this amendment. Unfortunately, I
cannot support it especially
with um the unsubstantiated.
Uh, results that you're claiming
will occur if we do pass HB 9.
Thank you.
There's a further debate on the
amendment, the general lady from
Bernna Leo and Torrance,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Will the
gentleman from San Juan, please
yield.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I will yield to the gentle
lady just as soon as I respond
to last statement.
Uh, by the representative from
Cibola County, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
We have no authority whatsoever
over tribal agreements, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady, so,
uh, any withholding of dollars
from, uh, from those tribes
directly the the nations, the
pueblos, uh, that would be
between uh the federal
government and them.
This has nothing to do with
that. This has to do with
actions being taken by the state
of New Mexico by the legislators
of the state of New Mexico that
will affect and impact the
dollar potentially flowing into
the state of New Mexico, all
this does is say that this
Uh, legislation that's before us
would revert after 30 days if we
don't take any further action.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, um, to try and make this
some sort of point against uh
native students is completely
inaccurate and unfounded, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and if the, uh, and if the city
or the county of Cibola uh sees
that they, they believe that
there's going to be a minimal
effect.
If, uh, I don't believe it has
anything to do with them
considering the loss of dollars
considering Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, we're talking
about, uh, over almost $6500 per
individual in New Mexico,
there's no way the numbers that
were recited would be the
numbers lost to Cibola County.
We're talking major massive
dollars that would create a
financial crisis that we cannot
tax ourselves out of.
So Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, this, uh, this amendment
is just meant to keep us out of
that fiscal crisis, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, and now
now the speaker and gentle lady,
I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, so that I, what I
want you to do is help me walk
through this amendment so right
now we receive federal billions
of dollars, is that correct you
see billions of dollars in
Mexico and federal money, is
that correct? Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, that is correct.
So I figure you young lady, so
we have these federal dollars
that are flowing into New Mexico
to help with our state so.
If this were to pass this bill
and then the federal dollars
were then somehow cut back,
reduced whatever what you're
seeing with this amendment is I
understanding it correctly that
we got to say, well, wait a
minute, we need to stop this
bill to keep the federal dollars
flowing into the state. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, lady?
Sorry, I'm sorry.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, in part that's
correct. Uh, this still allows
us if this is, if we still want
to continue down.
Uh, playing a game of chicken.
With the federal government, we
can still decide to do that, but
we do it proactively, um, uh,
the way it is right now, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
There we are, that's what we're
doing we're thumbing our, our
nose, uh, at the federal
government who has committed to.
Prioritizing legal citizenship
and the rights of legal
citizens.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
when I kept hearing was people
already worried about cuts
coming to the state of New
Mexico when it seems like this
puts a target on our back when
that um.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
because now it's saying, OK,
we're not gonna play by
anybody's rules and we're double
dog daring you to come after us,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, that is, that is uh what I
believe we're doing. I believe
this puts an unnecessary target
on us, but in the meantime, uh,
I've, I've played a lot of uh.
Uh, games with my children. I
have 4 boys where, uh, there are
targets on you at a certain
point when you're tired of being
targeted, you want, you want a
way out.
Um, we, my, my kids are very
aggressive in board games and it
tends to be that uh that we.
Unnecessarily pick a fight at
times and the and the reaction
is greater than we expected. So
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
all this says is, uh,
And and possibly anticipating uh
uh a response.
This has a mechanism to respond,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
I'm on a speaker and gentleman
that's a kind of a great
analogy. We've passed this, uh
oh.
Here's our get out of that card.
Is that kind of what I'm
understanding this is a way of
saying, wait a minute.
We don't want to lose all our
federal funding, we need to say
no, this is not a great idea and
maybe we should kind of
backpedal on this is what I'm
understanding, um, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen.
Uh, madam speaker and gentle
lady, uh, or we could say.
Nope, we're going to continue to
thumb our nose at federal law
and the federal government and
uh but we do it proactively. It
would require us to address this
within 30 days.
Um, or if we didn't address it,
Exactly what you just stated
what happened is a mechanism
would be in place to, to go back
to keep us from losing those
federal dollars.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
what, how, what would happen?
I'm, I'm thinking about this
seriously. All of a sudden, all
these federal dollars are cut
off if we don't have this in
place.
We're seriously gonna be in
trouble, um, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, because we're at a
loss, we have no way to back out
of this. We have nothing in
there that kind of safeguards
that this was not a good idea of
thumbing our nose at the federal
government and their regulations
and now we're saying no, we
don't want those federal dollars
and we're gonna double triple
down. So where would we get
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
where would we make up all the
funds of the billions and
billions of dollars that we get
from the federal government.
Well, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I would imagine.
Either way, uh, we would have to
call ourselves back into
session.
Or the governor would have to
call us in session to then deal
with the financial crisis.
So, uh, that's.
That's apparently uh what we're
trying to do here is, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady is
create a crisis that doesn't
currently exist, a financial
crisis that currently doesn't
exist.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I am we've been thinking at the
length of time it would take us
to get into the special session
that's a big enough gap, um,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that I can't figure out where we
would get the reserves to fill
that. I, I, I guess out of
funds, general funds, Madam
Speaker, and gentlemen, I, I
can't figure out how we would
fill that gap.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
do not know what the time frame
potentially would be for us to
respond that could be given to
us.
I, I, I, there's no way to tell,
uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, what that could be.
Uh, the, the reality is.
Uh, this
Just signals that
If
If that happens, we have a plan
in place.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
if.
If this ends up or this does go
through and we don't do that and
we're marching forward with this
we also end up we'll probably
end up in litigation and that
would be also expensive on our
in the state of New Mexico, um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, is
that correct?
I'm Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I think that, uh,
potentially individuals in the
state could bring suit against
the state for us for legislators
not holding our fiscal
responsibility and uh and um
keeping this budget.
Um
Balanced, um, there could
potentially be uh lawsuits that
come from the citizenry.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
the, the thing I'm looking at is
to me.
Not even being partisan, I mean,
completely kind of look at this
from a nonpartisan standpoint,
we're taking a risk. We're
putting a big target on New
Mexico. We're not gonna obey.
We're not gonna do what you want
to come and fight us, OK? So now
we have federal dollars that
could potentially be cut off, so
we're going to make every single
citizen of New Mexico suffer
because of we don't come to the
special session and we still
don't agree on this. There were
double down. If it doesn't get
handled, the only other way I
see a revenue.
Just taking it out of the other
funding, shuffling money around,
Madam speaker and a gentleman,
and I don't think that's fair to
the citizens of New Mexico to
say because I have a facility in
my district that not only are we
going to close the district and
we're gonna close that detention
facility in there, but Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
Further on top of that.
Of messing with the funding
that's coming in, we also are
potential closures of closures
of facilities and as I had
brought up before in the last
committee, then what happens?
Now we're sending the people off
to Guantanamo Bay or we're
sending them to probably Texas
where they have 21 facilities,
it almost seems like this is
more of a.
Madam gentlemen,
It's being defiant to say we're
not going to comply because
we're not going to comply, but
at the same time we're gonna
punish the citizens of New
Mexico we're gonna tinker around
with this budget that could be
detrimental and we're just
saying we don't want this in our
backyard because those people
have to go somewhere else, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, they're
not just being released on the
streets because in my facility I
have got people who have
committed crimes and very few of
those people in that facility
are from um from Mexico or South
America most of.
People are Turkish from the
Middle East we have those sort
of people they're not gonna be
released. They've committed a
crime.
They're gonna go to Guantanamo
Bay. They're gonna go to Texas,
they're gonna go someplace where
we don't know if it's any better
or any worse, but we, it almost
seems like Mr, um, Madam
Speaker, and gentlemen that this
is just.
It's a bill seems like almost
about defiance. We're gonna be
defiant to the federal
government and we're gonna say
we necessarily don't really care
what's going to happen to our
citizens because they're the
ones who are gonna pay the price
because we're missing out in
these millions of dollars, um,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
it becomes very problematic on
that and Madam Speaker and John,
was there anything that you
wanted to say about your
amendment because I, I've
It's very frustrating because I
feel like we're just.
I don't want um we're being
defiant and we're saying no, not
in our backyard, we're making a
stand.
Without understanding the full
ramifications of what that's
going to do to our state and
putting the target back. Is
there anything else you'd like
to say on that, Madam Speaker,
and gentlemen, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, yes, I, I, I
agree with what the statement
that is being made, uh, towards
the federal government.
This
Amendment was brought forward
just for one reason.
And that is because we are so
highly reliant on federal
dollars for health care.
Medicaid, we are #2.
In the entire nation actually, I
read that wrong. We're #2 in all
federal dollars that come, uh,
to the state, uh, only behind
Alaska per capita where $20 per
person behind Alaska per capita.
But Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, when it comes to uh
Medicaid.
We are the we are the greatest
recipient of federal dollars.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady in particular, this could
harm even further healthcare and
then Speaker and gentle lady.
We have doctors that are taking
patients that.
50% are Medicaid patients.
What does this do to doctors?
We, we found out exactly what,
uh, uh, this year during this
session, how in previous
session, last session as well,
doctors coming to us saying we
can, we can barely survive. So
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, a
month of loss of federal
funding.
For this, uh, do, does, uh, the
federal government then come
back in and retroactively pay
doctors.
We don't know this is, this is,
this is high stakes poker and
what I'm saying is, uh, that,
uh, I, I'm just trying to build
in.
A, a response.
To this, uh.
Dangerous legislation to at
least allow and opt out before
it costs us hundreds of
thousands of dollars.
And Madam Speaker and
Gentlemen, you, you bring up an
excellent point because we
literally are playing high
stakes poker.
And what is about to happen
because everybody knows Medicaid
does not pay that well. So if a
doctor's already taking Medicaid
patients and 50% are Medicaid.
What happens for a month if we
don't, if there's no federal
dollars coming in. What?
What I'm trying to get at is
this bill is gonna penalize the
people of New Mexico.
Our citizens of New Mexico are
gonna pay the price for us
holding cards.
And trying to outbid somebody
trying to out fake somebody and
saying that we have the better
hand.
When we expose our cards and we
lose and we lose federal
dollars, the only person that is
harmed.
Are the great citizens of New
Mexico, the doctors that are we
already have a lack of doctors.
I can't imagine what a doctor
would think of suddenly like,
oh, you're probably not gonna
get paid this month.
And you may not get paid for any
of that month because maybe
you're exactly correct. Maybe
the federal government is gonna
come back and say well we're not
gonna pay that because you
played this game of poker.
And we're not gonna pay.
So
Madam Speaker and representative
you grow, uh, bring up a, uh
sorry, a gentlemen, you bring up
a great point.
Who's gonna pay for that for
that month if it was a month.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
would imagine we'd have to pull
it out of reserves. We'd have to
pull it from, uh, where we have
dollars, we have, uh, by next
year, we were scheduled to have
about $11 billion in the early
childhood trust fund. I believe
we'd go after that and every
other fund that we've created
over the last several years. I,
I'm not sure that this is how we
want to risk these dollars for a
just a political statement.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
speaker and, and gentlemen, I
agree with you 100%. I believe
it's a political statement. I
think it's a.
Telling the administration we're
not going to comply and.
We're already, if people are
already worried about cuts, why
would you throw that card down
to say, OK, uh, we dare you.
We dare you to come take our
funds. I don't understand that.
I do not understand why we want
to penalize the people of New
Mexico. I don't understand why I
want to penalize, uh, the people
are our doctors, we're already
losing our doctors and we're
sitting down facilities and
again my point is these people
are not magically getting out,
they're being moved into another
facility, so.
Madam Speaker and.
Gentlemen, I appreciate you
bringing this forward and I
support it because all you're
saying is, hey, if this does go
sideways, we have an out.
And I thank you for that.
There's more debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Donana Representative S.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Speaker. Madam Speaker, with the
gentleman from San Juan Yil?
Um, yes, um, Madam Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from
Donana County. Awesome. Thank
you, Mr. uh, Madam Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen from San
Juan. Uh, Madam Speaker,
gentleman from San Juan, looking
at your amendment, uh, it seems
expansive, so you say, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, any federal
employee agency or entity.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, is
that right?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
Gentlemen, sorry, and they've
had all gentle ladies so far,
Mr. Speak Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Yes
It includes all
Got it, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, and so, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, this seems
to vest.
Anybody who is employed by the
federal government with the
power to effectively repeal a
state law. Would you agree,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen?
No, Madam Speaker, and, and
gentlemen, this, that would be
triggered by the federal
government announcing the loss
of federal dollars. So, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I have to
be an official, uh, from the
federal government who has the
ability.
To withhold. So Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, I believe that's
just one person.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so,
uh, there's only Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, why then go through
any federal employee agency, or
entity, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, why not say the one
person if there is a one person,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen. Madam
Speaker and, and gentlemen, I
would hope.
That wouldn't be all out war
with the federal government and
we wouldn't be losing every
dollar, but it could be targeted
if I were to look just at
Medicaid dollars.
If that were withheld for a, for
a bit of time. It could be
dollars that go towards road
projects. It could be dollars
that go to our schools. It could
be dollars. I don't know. So
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, and
this, and, and once again, I, I
stated one person, but the
reality is, uh, the Congress
could also pass a law similar to
this, like what we're doing
today. Uh, the federal, uh, the,
the, the, uh, Congress could
come in and say we're gonna
withhold dollars from
from
A state from certain agencies.
Um, I don't know. I don't we
don't know and as, as was stated
by the previous uh uh person
debating me, the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Is that
Uh
We're we're playing a card.
Which we don't know necessarily
what the outcome will be.
And, and, and I have played
cards. I like cards. Um, you
usually don't play a card unless
you think you have a better hand
and Madam Speaker and, and, and,
and gentlemen, I don't believe
we have a better hand here,
which is what concerns me. I, I
think this is irresponsible
because uh just by looking at
even if I looked, Madam Speaker
and gentleman at Florida.
Florida, who only gets about
$1600 per person. There's a lot
of persons in Florida.
Uh, many, many more than us, so
they, they would be risking. I
don't believe any one of the
states need to be playing this
game of, of DAR or uh Russian
roulette potentially. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, however, when I go
back to read your amendment,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, it
says any federal employee,
agency, or entity, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, it's my
reading of that is that
Um, any federal employee, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, means any
federal employee. And so, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm gonna
explain some of my understanding
of that system, uh, and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, we have
federal employees both in the
states around the country, uh,
in, in the nation's capital.
Would you agree, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen? Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, I would agree
with that, but I do not believe
that they all have that
authority to be so.
Once again, this allows us to
ignore that this allows us to
ignore or address, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, and I think that
could be done very easily.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
so, but we do agree that there's
federal employees in various
places both in our state, other
places around the country, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, and in the
nation's capital. We agree on
that, right? Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, we do. Great. And so,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
one example sort of how that
might be is that the leader of
say the Forest Service, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, in that
agency is in DC. Would you
agree, Madam Speaker, gentlemen?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
do. Great. And then Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
agree that that comes down to uh
sort of a regional office that's
here, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
in New Mexico.
Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I'm, I'm going to
capitulate to the fact that
there are a lot of federal
employees, some who have no
authority whatsoever. So Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I don't
believe this would trigger that
based on just a federal
employee, uh, sending an and an
ugly letter to the state, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, I
don't believe that that is how
this would be triggered, to be
triggered essentially by
notification of someone on our
side who would receive
That notification and then.
The governor
Or maybe the speaker, maybe the
leader in the Senate would
receive that and then.
We would determine whether or
not that they have the ability
to come through with that
because Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I don't believe
there's anybody who would
presume to get in front,
especially if there are federal
employee of going and making a
threat.
And usurping authority from a
president or congress that there
would not be some retribution
from Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, this amendment is
specifically.
Uh, pertaining to those who
would, um,
Make this threat and who could
follow through with it, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen. Uh, thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I'll come back to
that briefly, but Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, in the, the
scenario that I'm thinking of,
uh, we've walked through, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, there
are, uh, say regional foresters
who execute contracts, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, to do
thinning projects. Would you
agree with that, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe I've already capitulated
to you what you're the statement
you're trying to make, I do not
believe they would have the
authority or they would presume
to take that authority, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen. OK, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
thank you for that, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I guess in
this example, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, a federal employee
who uh is a contracting official
for any federal funds into the
state. On my reading of the
amendment could
say, I'm denying you money based
upon my personal feelings about
a law and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that would trigger,
uh, the repeal of that law.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that
seems to me like a gross
expansion of federal authority.
Would you agree or disagree?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I think that is taking the
amendment to an extreme that is
not logical. I do not believe
that anybody who works for the
Forest Service would take that
upon themselves to do that. But
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, if
someone with the Forest Service
was instructed to withhold
funds.
by a superior and that where the
person who were to send it, I it
would be behoove us to
Reach back out to the federal
government and say this has been
threatened. Is this coming? Is
there, is there actually any
weight behind this, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen? Uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, that
happens all the time in, in, uh,
Let's say uh uh negotiations in
this building, uh, sometimes,
uh, things are pushed forward
and
It's
It is an ultimatum sometimes
there are things pushed forward
when there is, it's where there
is actually, it's going to
happen one way or the other, and
there's other things that are
pushed forward sometimes where
it's a negotiating
tactic, uh, so Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I think that if
someone were to reach out and
they had any authority, I would
in that instance if I were in
the governor's office, I would,
uh, reach out to the federal
government and say this
happened.
This person uh made this threat
of the with withholding of
dollars and Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, if they did that
without any authorization, I
would think that person is
probably the person who's going
to bear the brunt of the
administration for talking out
of turn and making threats out
of turn. So, uh, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, I, I believe, uh,
one thing that I've seen from
this, uh,
President, he's not afraid to
say that you're fired. And so I,
I, I think the, the point that
you're trying to make, uh, I
don't think applies to this
amendment whatsoever. Oh, OK.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, going to that
point, uh, has there been sort
of a is this sort of reading the
tea leaves, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, have we seen a mass
firing of federal employees in
the state of New Mexico this
year.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, not
that I'm aware. However, um,
Madam Speaker, and gentlemen, it
does appear to me that, uh,
anybody that is not going to uh
comply with the prerogatives of
the administration, and they
work for that administration. I
do believe that they are at risk
if they are deciding to not show
up to work, not go to their
workplace, not, uh, to respond
to, uh, uh.
Requests for response, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, but in
particular for dereliction of
duty and for not following
orders and insubordination. Yes,
I believe that those folks are
in very much in danger
of you now, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So I guess just to be
clear, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
my impression is that they're
actually have been, uh, hundreds
if not thousands of New Mexicans
who work for the federal
government who've been told that
they're no longer employed by
The federal government this
year. Is that your understanding
or do you have a different
understanding?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that's exactly why I do not
believe that someone would go
out of their way to make a
threat that is not in alignment
with uh what uh they've been
instructed to do. However, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I hope
this is going somewhere because
that is really way off the, the
amendment at this point. Uh,
thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, it is, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the,
you, in addition to saying any
federal employee, which your
amendment says, man.
Speaker, gentlemen, agency or
entity, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, what is entity
referred to Madam Speaker and,
and gentle lady that or
gentlemen, the Congress would be
an entity.
Congress would be any other
entities, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I believe those are
the only, those are the only
other entities besides the
administration and those who
work within the administration
would have the authority to do
this.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, my
understanding, there's an
entity uh that is uh known as
the Department of Government
efficiency, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, is that your
understanding?
Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I'm not sure they
would have the authority to
withhold an entire uh budget
from uh from a state. However, I
do believe the Department of
Homeland Security, um, um, I
would believe ICE, I believe
that might be where we would
hear, uh, about the potential
loss and Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, and that is a point.
The point is we're not
threatening.
Uh
We're not threatening.
Individuals within the
administration that we are doing
this to them, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, we are Mr.
Speaker, I didn't, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Um, the reality is we're not
thumbing our nose at them, we're
thumbing our nose at the
president of the United States.
And so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, I know you're,
you're playing all these
hypotheticals, but the reality
is we all know well.
Who
If there were to be funds
withheld, where that would come
from. And so, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I know we're, we're,
we're, we're jumping around with
hypotheticals, but the reality
is,
All this does is if.
We are threatened with that type
of of of withholding of federal
funds.
That we
Have the opportunity to respond
or if we decide not to respond,
it allows for after 30 days for
our uh for our, for our, for us
to protect our budget, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
The, I, I guess I didn't quite
get a clear answer on the
entity. Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I think we all
acknowledge that uh Congress,
much like the legislature here
in our system controls the power
of the purse. Would you agree,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, generally, uh, yes. However,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as
we've seen through executive
orders, even at the state level,
uh, we've seen with governors
here in New Mexico where certain
priorities are priorities and
others are not. Dollars are
withheld, dollars go forward,
dollars are told to not be
expended by within departments.
So, uh, Congress does control.
The budget process.
However, as we've seen the, the,
any administration, whether it's
a governor or a president has
broad authority within the
distribution of those cars
because they control Mr. Madam
Speaker, you just pulled it on
me again, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, for instance, uh,
we budget for a certain number
of FTEs every year within all of
the administration, uh,
departments, um, and Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, those
dollars aren't always spent.
As a matter of fact, um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, what we
see all the time within the
budget is bar adjustments where
things that we as the
legislature have not
Um
Uh, uh, authorized.
With the exception of broad
authorization power to move
money around for things that
were not specifically
authorized. We see that all the
time, so yes, Congress has the
power of the purse, but Madam
Speaker, uh, and, and, and
gentlemen, the administration
has the do the job of
administering and Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, I believe that we
have seen that authority being
used when uh.
Uh, cities, uh, when, when
mayors, when governors.
Uh, and now in this case it
would be the legislature and for
this to go into effect, the
governor would have to sign it.
It would be the combination of
all the of all the legislator or
the legislature and the governor
making this decision. This would
be
More than just a governor making
a decision, that would be this
entire body making that
decision, which is exactly what
I'm talking about. We have the
power of the purse strings here.
I would hope that we would want
to protect that, but Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
we're risking that, um, because
The power of our purse strings
are dependent heavily on federal
dollars.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the,
um,
The it seems to be your
assessment is that setting aside
the any federal employee, agency
or entity, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, there's one person in
the federal government who gets
to decide whether New Mexico
gets the funds that it's legally
authorized. Is that your
understanding, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen? Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
I think
The, I think that is the
question.
I think that's the question.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
uh,
And if we are legally authorized
this year, what happens the next
budget year.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
just like us, our budget
changes, um, and Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, uh, the a a a
president just like a just like
uh an administration gets to
veto bills including budgets.
And so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, even if, even if it's
not immediate.
It could be the next fiscal
year.
And so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I, I think there's a
lot of consequences here that,
that we need to do our due
diligence in making sure that we
do not harm our budget. OK. Uh
thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I guess our agreement
that a question hinges upon
whether one person gets to
decide if, uh, New Mexico gets
the funds that it's legally
authorized, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, your amendment to me
would
Sort of vest that one person
with a whole lot of authority.
They get to pick and choose what
laws they like, what laws they
don't, Mr. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, they get to pick and
choose what um what funding they
send to a state or not and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, now there's
other folks who are wishing to
debate, but Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, the idea that one
person gets to control funding
uh in our.
our federal constitutional
republic system is, isn't the
way that I understand it, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, your
amendment seems to vest any
person who's employed by the
federal government with this
authority, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, our conversation
seems to focus in on one person
having that authority, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I think we've agreed and we note
that there are hundreds if not
thousands of New Mexicans who
have been laid off by the
federal government, seemingly I
guess because of one person.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
Even if there's for multiple
reasons, I can't support the
amendment. Uh, I would distill
it down to the main one, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, which is
this expands federal authority
over a state in pretty
remarkable ways. I know maybe
it's not meant to, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, but that's,
um, that's the core reason why I
can't support the amendment. I
appreciate though very much the
conversation. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Uh, there's more debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Curry Debaca, Guadalupe,
Roosevelt, and San Miguel
represents Amora.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
a gentleman from San Juanil.
Uh, yes, Madam Speaker, I will,
uh.
Um, in just a second.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I,
I would like to respond briefly
to how much authority and a an
administration has, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, we have
an administration in New Mexico
that has determined, uh, what
cars can be sold in New Mexico,
uh, we've made that broad
decision with just the stroke of
a pen from one individual
because of a board that's been
put in place, so yes, uh, an
administrator has a lot of power
and Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
when
we've seen this over and over
and over, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, that when, uh,
There is a, a, a
Mm
Challenging
Of uh that authority, uh, we've
seen it in the state of New
Mexico.
We've seen it, uh, between not
just a single party uh governor
who has done that, but Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, we see
that authority that that has had
within uh um the ability to, to
do executive orders, uh, we know
that that exists broadly. We
know that that power exists.
However, um, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I believe that
The Congress is likely going to
follow through with similar
language that is going to say
this is a priority for us and if
states don't want to comply,
their, their funding is at risk.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I mentioned the one person that
uh is uh someone that we do not
want to play, uh, dare with
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, it
appears Congress at this point
is prepared to make that
decision as well. So Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, this does
not
give that authority over to
them. This puts in place a 30
days for us to respond.
This triggers a mechanism, but
then this body and this governor
have 30 days to respond, and it
may be that we say we're going
to do this anyway, but Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, at the
very least we will have done our
due diligence and protected the
people of New Mexico. So Madam
Speaker, uh, at, at this point
and gentlemen, I do yield to my
gen uh to my friend from Curry
County.
Thank you for that, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
So as as we debate this, this
bill.
I think we've been straying off
and, and thinking that
Your amendment is actually
changing.
The mechanics of the bill and
what it's intended to do.
And, and the way I look at it,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, is
The bill still does what it was
intended to do.
But, but under the
circumstances, if, if.
We were
Cut on the federal funding.
Then it reverts right back and,
and, and we eliminate that bill.
So, so this amendment, Mr. uh,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen from
San Juan does not change the
mechanics of the bill
whatsoever. Am I correct?
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
it does not. It leaves it
exactly as is. It just allows
for a reversion in the case of
the loss of federal funding.
And
Madam Speaker, and gentlemen,
you know, I've been here 6 years
in this chamber.
And
Some special sessions in between
and and all our regular
sessions.
And I've never
Scene
An amendment of this kind that I
can remember.
And I've never seen.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
The opposing party.
Of, of the amendment.
Vote for an amendment.
That was introduced.
And change
The, the friendliness or the
unfriendliness of an amendment.
But I think this time,
gentlemen.
And Madam Speaker, I think we
ought to be paying attention.
I think this one's different.
And the reason it's different.
Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen.
is because we know what's going
on at the federal level.
We know the personality of our
president.
We know his determination.
When it comes to immigration.
This country was invaded.
By criminals.
By people that are coming into
this country.
And creating havoc over here and
taking over cities.
Taking over communities.
And that's why the determination
of the president is so big it's
one of the issues.
The President ran on.
And the vote showed
That the people of this country
want it fixed.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
So that
Puts us
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
would you agree that that puts
us on high alert.
As to what can happen.
If we fight
Not only the president.
But the Senate
And all our congressional people
up in, in, in, in DC.
If, if we go against the federal
rule.
This state will suffer. It's
already been, it's already been
mentioned.
At the federal level we're
seeing what's happening.
Would you agree?
That it's, it's not only
In the debate was mentioned that
one person.
But there's
A trifecta in in DC at the
federal level.
We're not talking about one
person we're talking about the
majority people.
The majority vote.
And, and the backing that the
President of the United States
has.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
would you agree?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree, uh, the reality is, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
whether or not we decide that we
want to be a sanctuary state.
And uh ignore.
What has been, it was a very,
very
Unambiguous.
Election last year.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
we, we've all been notified.
That that illegal immigration.
But
In particular, the fact that
fentanyl
is flooding our streets. The
fact that we have completely
unfettered human trafficking
going on, and Madam Speaker,
and, and, and gentlemen, the
fact that we have um
A completely
Near the open border in New
Mexico.
To the point that the Mexican
gray roof roof we've opened up,
uh, corridors for them to go
back and forth through the
fence. So, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, the reality is, yes,
it's one person who has, who is
following through with uh
campaign promises, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, but the reality
is
We're standing in the way of
The vast majority of the
American public and the vast
majority of the other states. So
the reality is we're going to
play a game of chicken, it's not
just a one against one man,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
it's against.
Uh
What
Millions and millions.
Of American citizens have said
they want, and Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, what Congress and
what they believe their mandate
is, so the, the, the reality is
we don't hold any cards.
New Mexico, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, doesn't hold any
cards.
And the reality is we're going
to play this game of chicken.
I give
I don't want to play this game
of chicken.
I don't believe that any of us
should decide we're going to
play this game of chicken just
to make what is in my mind,
nothing more than a political
statement.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, we
have decided in New Mexico over
the last several years that
we're not gonna take border
security serious.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
we've decided that we are not
going to hold people uh liable
for criminal activity. That is
something we've done, but we
have never before, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, decided to thumb
our nose at a president of the
United States.
That is an issue.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
Let me just say it. I'm chicken.
Um, if I'm not in that car and
I'm driving and I'm in a bicycle
and I'm heading towards a, a, a
Mack truck.
I tell you what, I'm gonna
swerve.
I think that that that I, I, I
have done what is it that they
say in the art of war that you,
you go to the top of the hill
and you look down and you look
at the army that's facing you,
and you determine whether or not
you can win.
We need to make that
determination. This is not a
fight we need to pick.
And I think it is irresponsible
for us to do that when the
number one thing that we do
every year is uh around budget
issues. So Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I completely agree
with your assessment that this
is something that it's not just
an individual, it is both
chambers of the United States
Congress and Madam Speaker, the
majority of the states which are
demanding.
That what they've seen with the
criminal activity that has gone
up.
This is not happening out of uh
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
this is not happening out of uh
out of racist belief, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, this is
out of wanting to protect your
family from the dangerous
criminal element, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, this president
believes in legal immigration,
as do I.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I believe that legal immigration
is the only way to give people
the opportunity to receive the,
the benefits of this country
that we live in. I do not
believe in illegal immigration
that all it does is propagate uh
poverty at least American level
uh uh uh poverty. It may not be
the poverty of the countries
that they're leaving, but I
don't believe just because it's
a little bit better in America
for them uh to
to, um, have subpar jobs or work
under the table or always be
afraid of, of immigration. I
don't believe that's what we
want. That is as a Hispanic,
that is not what I want for the,
for the majority of people
crossing the border who are
Hispanic. That is not what I
want. I want the ability, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen for people
who come to this country have
the ability to attain the
American dream, and they're not
going to get it through this
broken.
Immigration
These broken immigration
policies that we seem to want to
perpetuate.
And I, I, I, I am not, I'm not
willing to see any person in
America living in, in 2nd or 3rd
class status, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
As the representative from Dona
stated a while ago.
It's already begun.
He's already, we know that
there's some layoffs been going
on. We know that the president
is carrying through with his.
With his agenda.
We know he has the backing.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen from
San Juan, it's not if.
It's just a matter of when.
The, the state of New Mexico
faces repercussions.
for
Legislation like this.
All your amendment is doing.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
Is, is creating
An insurance policy.
And helping
The state of New Mexico, if we
get in trouble.
With this legislation.
I believe this is one time in
this chambers.
That we ought to vote in an
amendment with a roll call vote.
And save us the heartburn, the
heartache.
And the destruction of our
Monetary system that we have put
in the state that supports.
All the people of the state of
New Mexico.
And most
Most of all
The minority poor
That won't have any money in the
bank, any credit card chance to
survive.
When the prices of everything go
up because of a situation that
we caused in the state.
I believe your amendment is a
good amendment. It doesn't
change the bill. It just makes
it where we have some kind of
insurance policy against
The federal government coming in
and and and hurting us in a, in
a bad way.
With that, Madam Speaker, I end
all my questions.
There's more debate on the
amendment, the gentle lady from
Los Alamos, Sandoval and Santa
Fe, Representative Chandler.
uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Will the gentleman from San Juan
County Yield.
Uh, yes, Madam Speaker, I yield
to the gentle lady from Los
Alamos.
Um
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I just
wanna confirm we're still on the
amendment.
Yes, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, we are still on the
amendment. Very good. So, um,
I'm really interested in talking
about the amendment, Madam
Speaker, and, and gentlemen. So,
um, are you, we, I know that the
gentleman from uh Donana raised
this, but I'd like to pull the
thread a little bit more. The,
the proposed amendment.
Talks about notification from
any federal employee.
And so, madam Speaker,
gentlemen, any federal employee,
so does that employee actually
have to have being an agency
that has some authority over the
funds that may be at issue or
suspended or somehow taken away
from us, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker, and gentle lady,
as I stated to the gentleman
from Donane, uh, yes, it would
have to be someone who has
authority to follow through. And
um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
where does it say that in the
amendment?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, doesn't say that in the
amendment, but it also doesn't
say that that we have to react
to it, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but
it does say that there will be
an automatic.
Repeal of the law if any
employee of the federal
government notifies us that
funds are going to be suspended
because of this particular
statue.
Madam Speaker and generally, the
key word is notification.
The word is not that they have
authority, it's that we're given
notification, so whoever that
envoy is, uh, would, uh, give us
notification, it would be up to
us. We received that it would be
up to us then respond to the
federal government and ask if
that's true. And so, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, it
could be anybody from the
federal government if that
person is given the authority to
come inform us. Um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, so we
would ask if it's true and if
it's not true.
This does not go into effect,
um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, is
that right? I'm Madam Speaker
and gentle lady. Yes, if it's
not true, it would have been a
false notification.
And where does it say that,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, we're
in the amendment does it say
that?
Um, Madam Speaker, it's silent
on all kinds of things, but
Madam Speaker, it says
notification, the, the, the,
the, the point is it would be a
notification from the federal
government, not from an
individual. It'd be a
notification from the
administration, I believe there
are many people who could make
that and so.
Um,
there's no way that I was gonna
list that, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh.
It, it doesn't say in the in the
um proposed amendment that the
person has to have authority to
actually.
Um, drive the decision, Madam
Speaker, gentleman does it. It
says any employee.
Um, Madam Speaker, it says
notification.
Threat or false statement is not
notification.
Um
And what is a notification
actually if, if, um, let's say
the president had a press
conference, Mr. Speaker,
gentleman said,
Um, New Mexico, we don't like
that law.
We are suspending all of your
Medicaid payments. Is that a
notification?
Um, Madam Speaker,
General lady probably I would
respond to that it would behoove
us to respond and say is this,
are you actually gonna follow
through with this, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, there's a
difference between threat and
notification notification is
more official.
Oh, OK, so a press conference is
an official notification, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, that's what
you view.
Is that right? I'm Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, no, I don't
think that's an official
notification. I think it could
be if we, we hear that we sure
better respond. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is a tweet.
A tweet
A notification, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, or do we still use
that word tweet anymore, I guess
we don't, huh? I don't tweet, so
I don't know what's the right
word? Is a tweet a notification
from the president. Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, I don't
believe that's notification.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
when I get a notification.
From the utilities that my
utilities are gonna be shut off.
That's much more official. I
didn't say a threat. This
doesn't say any statement that
says notification, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, I don't know
how we can construe notification
other than it's official, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
I believe this amendment, the
proposed amendment is lacking on
a number of fronts. First of
all,
We should define what a
notification is. We shouldn't go
by what the gentleman from San
Juan thinks is a notification,
whereas the gentleman from
Chavez might think is a
different kind of nullification
laws usually have important
terms, Madam Speaker, defined
notification is not a defined
term, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
in fact, sometimes I have heard
of firings through tweets these
days, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
and apparently that is one way,
um.
Things happen in this universe
now. Um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen,
Uh, who has the authority to
hold, withhold federal funds,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen from
San Juan.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
Just to back up a bit, um, and
talk about ambiguous language,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we passed legislation out of
here with ambiguous language
with experts who don't know how
it's going to actually work. We
do it all the time, notification
is actually a very specifically
defined word and so I don't
believe it's nearly as ambiguous
as you are implying, but Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe that Congress and the
President have the ability to uh
take.
actions to withhold funds.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
you said Congress and the
president. So are you
acknowledging, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, that first we need
the legislation from the, um,
Congress before the president
can unilaterally make that
decision to withhold funding on
some kind of basis such as this,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. Madam
Speaker, yes and no.
Um, because, uh, there is a lot
of authority within the uh
president's hands to make
decisions like that, and Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, it
could be a delay.
Uh, which would be just as bad
for us. It doesn't have to be
complete withholding. It could
be withheld for 11 months, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, which
would be a disastrous for us and
then funds might start to flow
and Madam Speaker and generally,
we see it all the time. The, uh,
we could, we could, uh, we could
chalk it up to government
inefficiency. We do it all the
time, uh, Madam Speaker, and
generally there's current,
there's dollars right now not
being delivered in the state of
New Mexico to the residents of
the Lincoln.
fire because one secretary has
decided that she is not going to
let those dollars out until the
board changes. So, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, not just the
president but their department
heads that have some authority.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
there is, um, self appointed
authority, um, assumed authority
and there's legitimate
authority, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, would you agree with
that statement?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
believe there is authority.
And that is what we're trying to
address today is, uh, when those
with authority.
Go to withhold funds.
All my amendment does is make
sure that we don't risk losing
those funds. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we're in the
amendment is there any reference
to someone having proper
authority to withhold the funds
or proper authority to provide
the um notification. Could you
identify in the proposed
amendment where that's at, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, first off, this only applies
to people who can actually do
it. So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, um, I went through this
earlier. It's been asked and
answered several times. We can
rehash it again, but somebody
can make a false statement. I
believe the moment that we
respond to that, that we would
know whether or not that person
was making a false statement,
and I believe if that person was
making a false statement and in
the form of a threat, that
person would be let go of, so
I'm not worried about that. I'm
not nearly as worried about.
that because we are uh there,
there is the only way that this
happens if it comes from
somebody with authority.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you,
it's your view that people who
make false statements, who work
in the federal government are
routinely terminated, Miss Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, is that
you been your observation, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and, and, and
gentle lady, I just believe that
this, that there is a history of
letting people.
Uh, getting
Being fired for not following
through with what they're
supposed to fall through with.
So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, most of these
questions don't have anything to
do with this amendment.
These, this amendment merely
puts in place a mechanism for us
to respond if we don't respond,
this happens automatically.
Period. Uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I gently and
kindly disagree with your
assessment that my questions do
not relate to the amendment. I
have specifically referenced
terminology and the amendment
and have asked for explanations.
So, um, just want to be
clarified. I'm very clear about
what we are talking about, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, um,
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, we had a, I had a very
long discussion about these very
same questions, uh.
Not 20 minutes ago.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, have
you, uh, just, um, considered
that a provision like this is
reinforcing the potential for
repetitive behavior along these
lines, and by that I mean, OK,
we are now forced because we're
afraid of the federal
government. We're afraid of what
they might do because they don't
like the public policy that we
as legislatures have the
authority to adopt.
We, our fear is embedded in
this.
Amendment
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, and
has it occurred to you that this
will now be the expectation that
this clause will be something
that now will be needing to put
in everything we do because
we're afraid, we're afraid that
the federal government doesn't
like the policymaking that we as
within our prerogative have been
doing, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
are you not concerned about that
the precedent, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that this sets.
Uh, no, madam Speaker, and
gentlemen general uh lady, I am
not, um, I, I don't believe that
sets this precedence whatsoever.
I do believe, however, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, we have
set the precedents of not
holding criminals accountable
for their actions and Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, I do
believe we are receiving from
that, uh, the natural repetitive
nature of criminal activity in
all of our communities,
including the free flow of
fentanyl in our streets.
that we speak to the amendment.
I point of order. I ask that we
speak to the amendment, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, which is
what I have been doing and
trying to keep us on track,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Gentlemen, please stay on the
amendment.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think this sets a terrible body.
I think this sets a terrible
precedent. It reflects fear on
our part, and I don't think that
is the kind of message that we
want to be sending to
individuals in the federal
government who may seem to like.
To pray on our fear with I yield
the floor back, Madam Speaker.
There is more debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
San Juan, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentleman from our County
yield.
Yes, I yield to my neighbor to
the west.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. I wish this debate
was in front of 2 million people
within the state of New Mexico.
I wish that this debate
specifically concerning this.
Um, amendment that you're
bringing forth.
Is a very thoughtful.
Um, amendment
I think people need to
understand that this body of 70
people is doing could impact 2
million people within our state
or a little more than 2 million
people.
Um
Mr. Madam Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I'm gonna show my age
here for a minute.
Back in the 80s,
Um, the federal government
withheld um highway dollars for
states that would not comply
with the 555 mile an hour speed
limit.
And they withheld funds from
states that would not comply
with the 21 year old drinking.
Is that correct?
Mr. Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Yes, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, that is the case. I'm
old enough to remember that
myself.
Thank you, sir. Um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, um, are
you also old enough to remember
when I or when uh funds um were
uh uh withheld from states that
did not follow the federal law.
When it came to crime fighting.
Yes, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, this is not the first
time there is precedence for
withholding money for not, uh,
following and complying and
cooperating with federal law
enforcement.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I,
I don't think this is fear
mongering, and I don't think we
want to um.
Present this as fear. This is
just saying that if in case the
federal government does decide
which they have done many, many
times over the years to withhold
funds. This gives us an
opportunity to come back, sit at
the table and figure out what
best we need to do as
representatives for the state of
New Mexico, is that correct?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Yes, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, that's exactly what
this does.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
am not a lawyer, so I'm not even
gonna go there.
Um, but I do not see.
Any reference here to any treaty
at all.
I thought I was on the wrong
amendment there for a minute
because that was brought up and
I wasn't paying attention, um,
but.
I don't think there's any reason
to fearmonger about this. This
is a simple statement that says,
If one plus one equals 2.
This is what happens if one plus
1 equals 3, this is what
happens, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, is that correct?
Uh, Madam Speaker and, and
gentle lady, uh, gentleman.
I might not know to right
pronoun to call you, but uh my
math is correct. That's, that's
the way this works.
Thank Mr. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um.
I, I cannot state enough for
this body.
There's no reason to fearmonger
about this. We need to sit at
the table and, and talk and look
at this objectively, um, I don't
think this amendment in any way,
shape, or form, uh, should, um,
send fear to anybody in this
body or anybody in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
There's more debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Bernalio represented Torres
Velasquez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. um,
with the gentleman from San Juan
County Yield.
Uh, Madam Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady.
Um, Madam Chair, uh sorry, Madam
Speaker.
Um, I am just wondering.
Um, can acts be repealed, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, yes.
What is the Madam Speaker and
gentle person from
San Juan County.
Um
That's the process for repealing
an act.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, um, there are multiple
ways to do that, but I'm not
exactly sure how this has to do
with the amendment.
Well, Madam Speaker and
Representative from San Juan
County, um,
In all of those options, does it
have to be written into law
first?
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, we have sunsets and we
have rapes and many of them are
in place. There are many things
that we have had in place that,
uh, certain actions taken and
there is a response.
Um, Madam Speaker and
Representative, I'm just
wondering if this um amendment
is actually needed in order to
repeal an act.
Uh, it's not necessary, but it
is the way that this amendment
is written.
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker.
And thank you gentlemen from
Uh, San Juan County.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move to Table
House floor amendment number 1
to House Bill 9.
The motion before the spot to
table House floor amendment
number 1 to House Bill 9, a vote
of yes, and the amendment will
be tabled. Vote of no, and the
amendment will not be tabled.
OK. The vote is now open.
Vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 38 in the affirmative, 21 in
the negative. Uh, this, the
House floor amendment number 1
to house floor, House Bill 9 is
now tabled.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor.
Yes, um, Madam Speaker, Mr.
Speaker, I appreciate that
debate. Um, I, I do believe, uh,
that, that.
That we are not in complete
control of, of.
Everything here in New Mexico we
are totally reliant on, uh, not
totally, we are very reliant,
Mr. Speaker, on federal dollars
and so Madam Speaker and Mr.
Speaker and body, I think uh
this is something we need to be
concerned with, um.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady
from Los Alamos, um, I am.
Uh, concerned.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
that if
Through our actions and through
this bill.
That we
That there's a potential from
this that
Folks, uh, that have been
Remanded to one of these jails
gels in New Mexico.
That if they're released.
Concerned and I don't, I believe
this one might be friendly.
madam, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I have another
amendment that would
Um
Require that if
A illegal
A uh that has uh committed a
violent crime in particular that
if there is a release due to
this legislation that uh the the
victims of
Uh, that, uh, that individual
would be notified that that
individual is being released.
That is all this does, so Mr.
Speaker, I have, uh, submitted
an amendment.
Uh, and I'd like to ask for a
roll call vote. You got a roll
call. Are you formally moving
House for amendment number 2.
Yes, uh
Uh, would this still be number
one? No, uh, it'll be number 2
just to keep, um keep order,
especially online. OK, thank
you. I, I know in years past
that is not how we did it, so I,
I appreciate that. So, um, Mr.
Speaker, uh, yes, uh, the, and
by the way, the the 21, the 231
number is 231-752.1.
And Mr. Speaker, yes, I would
like to move, uh, this amendment
for consideration that that
didn't match with what I have.
31752.1.
That's what I have now.
Uh, we'll get that passed out
and we'll get it posted online
and we'll come back to you to
explain the amendment.
And I believe the amendments
been passed out and it is posted
online, the gentleman to explain
the amendment.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, uh, this
amendment.
Uh, just requires, um, that
notification to any victim of a
crime when an individual who is
detained for federal
immigration, immigration
violation, uh, is released.
Pursuant to term to terminate
detention agreement. This
ensures we are prioritizing
public safety over the rights of
undocumented criminals.
All right, gentle lady.
From
Santa Fe, is this a friendly
amendment.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, no, it is not.
Is there a debate on the
amendment.
She had a lady from Santa Fe,
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House floor amendment number 2
to House Bill 9.
We are on a motion to table
House floor amendment number 2
to House Bill 9, a vote of yes.
The amendment would have been
tabled a vote of no, and we're
back on the amendment.
The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
The borders aren't closed, but
what if 38 in the affirmative,
19 in the negative house floor
amendment number 2 to House Bill
9 has been tabled.
Back to the gentleman.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, thank you for
the debate. Um, I had a friendly
amendment the other day. I was
hoping.
That this could be friendly, but
um, uh, Mr. Speaker, I yield the
floor.
There is further debate. The
young lady from Dona Anna,
Representative Rubio.
Back on the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I
honestly didn't think I'd have
an opportunity. Well, the gentle
lady from Santa Fe, please
yield. I will yield.
Thank you, um, gentle lady, I.
I rise in support of this
legislation, um, as you have
mentioned in previous comments
in your intro is that we've
heard this bill many, many
times, um, I, when I was elected
in 2016, it was one of the first
bills that I introduced in this
legislature.
And I'm just really
happy about how um clear and
focused this legislation has
gotten over the last, um,
Which I can't believe has
already been 8 years, um, but I
think this is a demonstration of
how much work has been put into
this legislation that it isn't
just something that um we just
threw out.
Over the course of the last
couple of months this has been
work that we've been doing for
the last 8 years and so I'm,
I'm, I'm, I'm really happy that
we've gotten as far as we have
on this legislation and that.
And then I ask the others um
support it because it's, it's
critical as we move forward, um,
especially when we're talking
about.
Um, communities who are highly
dependent on on on these types
of of industries like this isn't
something we should be profiting
off of. This is something that
we should move on from, and so
I'm really happy that we're,
we're moving in, in that, in
that direction, um, I know that
there's been a lot of questions,
um, I've been listening a lot in
committee around some of these
questions and so I wanted to
focus some of these um questions
here and hopefully relieve some
of the concern.
um, but one of the questions
that we have that we've been
hearing a lot and I recognize
that this is a federal issue and
um.
And, and, and whether or not the
state of New Mexico should be
involved in these types of
issues, um, but can you clarify
specifically around this type of
authority to be able to enact
this legislation.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you for the
question. Again, back to the
bill, um, this is squarely
within our powers as a state,
how we make our laws and who it
is that we want to contract
with.
Um, this is about public safety
and public health in our
communities. Again, the type of
business that we want to do, um,
in our communities and that's
squarely within the state's
authority, subject to the 10th
Amendment, um, and so this is a
value that we are bringing to
the table today based on those
principles, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you gentle lady. I know
that
When it comes to the facilities
that exist currently here in the
state of New Mexico.
I think a lot of the decisions
that we make our policy choices
and so when we're talking about
this issue specifically, would
you say then that it is our
responsibility to make these
types of choices in terms of our
policy for our communities, um.
When, when we're impacted by
something as as serious as
what's what, what we've been, I
mean we've been dealing with
these types of institutions for
decades. This isn't just
something that just came out of
the woodwork. This is something
that the state of New Mexico
committed to as an economic
development tool back in.
I guess when I was in high
school, I don't know, 90s or
something where um this, this,
this institution decided this is
how we're going to make build,
create jobs for our communities,
which in my opinion is such a
lack of imagination and so I, I,
I, I, I guess my question is
those were policy choices. This
is a policy choice that we're
taking now, um, and, and what
are your thoughts in terms of
what that what that
responsibility responsi
responsibility looks like now,
um, when we're decades past what
our initial value system was
back then.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
thank you, gentle lady on the
policy decisions that we make as
legislators, we come and
represent our communities and
the values that we bring to the
table about again the type of
business that we wanna do, what
authority that we have as a
state to represent, um, our
values and again it's up to us
to decide that. It's not up to
the federal government to impose
upon us any of this. It's our
decision how we want to enact
into these
contracts and the federal
government has nothing to do
with how it is that we engage in
the decision to make about
immigration detention that's a
choice that's a value
proposition that we get to make
about how what our local bodies
engage in, so we get to choose
whether or not we want to
cooperate or again, um,
Look at the types of, uh,
Contracts that we want to enter
into.
Um, and, and where it is that
these detention operations take
place. What we're saying here is
that we do not want that in the
state of New Mexico these
contracts, should they be
renewed or looked at in the
future. We just don't want that
type of business done here. Um,
histo historically, Mr. Speaker,
I'm mad at my Santa Fe ancestors
for deciding to have the
corrections department over UNM
in Santa Fe. That was a decision
that was made long before, uh,
we even became a state, Mr.
Speaker.
gentle lady, and I think as
history proceeds, we've seen the
vibrancy of a community come
together and enact in different
business practices and values as
we move forward and this is
those these these decisions are
being made exactly upon those
principles today, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you gentle lady and I, I
think one of the the the
tragedies of this entire
institution and it's not just an
economic tragedy, but it's also
the tragedy um that exists
within the um the operations of
these institutions, um, can you
tell me a little bit about the
level of care that these
institutions have when it comes
to um the health care that's or
any.
of the care that any type of
care that the that the folks who
are being detained received in
these in these institutions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Unfortunately,
what we've seen and what has
been reported has not been good.
In fact, we've seen that we've
had multiple civil, um, excuse
me, human rights violations and
that when these folks are
detained in these communities
and especially with vulnerable
populations that we've seen
families being torn apart. We've
seen that when folks are in
these detention facilities,
their rights have been violated
and under a series of various
federal investigations and local
news outlets here in New Mexico
we, it's been very well.
Documented that these folks in
detention are not getting the
medical care that they need and
that the facilities themselves
are quite dilapidated and not
meeting basic needs for the
folks being housed in these
facilities. So again, outright,
um, moral and ethical violations
of how it is we detain at all to
meet the needs of basic needs of
individuals in any circumstance,
much less having that happen
right in our community, right
under our noses.
um, as we've known for years and
years, and these contracts have
been, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, lapsed in different
capacities. This has not been a
tradition of New Mexico to do
this. This has been, um,
essentially something that is an
opportunity that has been
brought in by Co Civic and some
of the other, um,
Uh, federal contractors, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but by no
means has this been a consistent
practice, but when it has
happened, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we have seen multiple
egregious violations of folks'
rights.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady, and I think one
of the things that has been
really, um, um, tragic as well
is that as we've been pushing
for a lot of these institutions
to not only um detain people,
um, human beings, but for
profit, but also that it's, it's
in my opinion, exploiting the
workers that are within these
institutions and so
With the stories that you're
hearing from folks who are
inside who are being detained.
Have you heard any stories from
the workers themselves in terms
of what their experiencing as, I
mean, because that's what we're
we're told all the time is that
these are jobs for our
communities that um there's
people who are employed there
that are receiving benefits, but
I, I don't know if that's
entirely correct. Can you, can
you add to that, please?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So again, these are jobs.
It's not limited to perhaps the
one job where you're a federal
contractor only, the, the
facilities span if you are
certified within that, um,
space, but what we understand
about many of these spaces and
one in particular just a month
ago, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
there was a whistleblower
complaint filed just, just about
a month ago where, um,
folks working at the Torrance
County facility, um, highlighted
chronic and dangerous, um, work
settings under staffing,
violations not only of the
workers' rights and the
environment that they were
subject to but also racial
employment discriminations for
Latino workers in that
community, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so we're seeing
that not only is it bad for the
detainees, it's also bad for the
folks subject to um the
contractors overseeing this in
that capacity. So again, going
back to the quality of jobs that
we're trying to bring into our
state and diversify our economy,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
is unfortunately a stain where
we are trying to work toward
worker protections and rights.
This makes it harder for us to
do that work, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentle lady and I, I
think.
If the conditions are as severe
as they say they are.
Um
What is the level of care within
these facilities when it comes
to folks who are detained, um,
when you're talking about the
work, the workforce within these
institutions, for example, that
I'm hearing about persistent
understaffing, especially when
it comes to medical positions
like we're, we know that we're
facing this issue within the
workforce within this these
spaces, but also in terms of the
folks themselves who are being
detained.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
we look at the level of care.
We have a, a standard of care
that everyone is meant to
receive and they're supposed to
receive that care. Um, and
unfortunately, we know that
there have again been human
rights concerns and violations
of those rights, um, so we're
seeing that in practice, there
not meeting the demands of even
their base level of their
contractual obligations, um,
these facilities, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, again have been
dealing with persistent
understaffing, including for
those medical positions. Again,
if you need
the level of care we've heard
about violations of folks not
receiving that care while in
custody and the companies that
run these detention centers, um,
I'm sure you would believe, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they,
they're privately operated.
There are some of them are
publicly have public
shareholders and in particular
after this administration was
put into office, we saw their
shareholders go up. That's who
they're responsible to these
contractors in our state.
They're not responsible to us or
the people or even these public
bodies.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they're responsible to their
shareholders and that goal is to
maximize profit and so when we
see the insufficient facilities
and oversight of many of these
buildings, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, their subject to this
abuse and neglect often without
having to answer to um.
The people of New Mexico, and
that's what this is about as
well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
It's up to us to decide whether
we want to continue facilitating
these violations, um, and these
egregious settings for which
they're detaining against civil
immigrant violations, um, and,
and essentially we're endorsing
and if not enabling that harm to
the folks in this setting, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady, and I guess one
of the questions that I have
that
Um, when it comes to the
treatment of folks within who
are detained and and this is
something that I've learned
serving in the legislature is
that
Oh, the loss of life is, is
important, but it also like
money matters and when you, you,
you always have to talk about
the economic consequences and so
when we're talking about the
losses of people.
In in in these institutions for
me, just a person dying in these
institutions is already too
many.
Individuals, it's too many human
beings dying if it's just even
one. And
That's generally not enough to
make a point in, in here and so
I guess the question is, is
around New Mexicans and bearing
the costs of what that loss is.
Can you share a little bit more
about what that cost is to New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, as you
stated, there's, um,
You know, it's a priceless
situation when there is a loss
of life.
And not only are our local, um,
Staff members having to liaise
with the families, repatriate
the folks that are in these
conditions help to liaise with
the loved ones of this person
having to call upon not only the
medical investigators and law
enforcement officers to
understand and investigate the
settings with which folks have
passed in, um, in these detained
settings, um, the whole
community is stigmatized by the
situation when somebody
I, um,
is in these settings and happens
to die for whatever reason. And
if it's essentially a reason for
having a facility that didn't
meet their needs where they
didn't receive the medical care
they needed or the facilities
themselves were failing to meet
their needs. Well, now you have
legal costs, not only to the
local government, perhaps, can
it can expose them to potential
liabilities and again the
stigmatization of the entire
community for being, uh,
enabling essentially that type
of practice within.
Their own community so the
concentric circles of um issues
that arise not only legally but
again emotionally all of the
different, um, folks involved in
that situation when somebody
passes while detained, um, is
immense, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you gentle lady, and.
I think all of that is to me
just a very, it's very, very
serious, and it's very, very
concerning. Um, and I guess one
of the things that I've been
hearing a lot in committee, um,
and when we're hearing this
spill and even today is the
issue around oversight and the
state oversight and is there
some form of accountability that
the state can have on this issue
because it is a federal issue
and
Um, and I raised this because,
you know, I, I'm an organizer.
I've been doing organizing work
for a very long time,
particularly on the border,
representing the city of Las
Cruces, we have become very
heavily militarized, um, when it
comes to border security and um
one of the things that for many
years we have fought for is from
the federal level is that how do
we increase accountability? how
do we increase oversight and,
and instead of getting all of
that we have.
received more militarization of
our of our of our border. I mean
our community in Las Cruces is
very much locked in, um.
I think there's a lot of, of,
of, of talk today around should
we even be pushing for this
bill? Should we,
it is, is, is this bill even
necessary, um, and to me I, I
believe that it is, but can you
share more a little bit about
why we as a state need to really
Um, take initiative on this
issue, especially when it comes
to accountability, especially
when it comes to oversight,
because clearly it's not
happening at the federal level.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. This is,
this is really it. This is us
holding power that we have as a
state under the 10th Amendment
in the Constitution. This is our
ability really to not only react
but pro proact in response to
the problems that have been
created because of these
contracts and because of this
activity in our communities,
this is really us owning that
space and being able to to speak
truth to that power where we
have that opportunity to
do something else, to do
something different.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we're all Americans, we all
follow the Constitution. We all
follow all of these fabrics of
laws and create them and we have
that ability right here in New
Mexico to be on the right side
of what we know is happening and
give us an opportunity to really
respond and proact in the right
ways of saying this is not the
economic development we need. In
fact, it's dangerous, harboring
folks that, um, are in these
situations that are
compromising.
into their life and also
compromising to the local
community, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's just not the kind
of business we want to do.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady and, and thank
you for that. You know, I,
again, I, I stand in strong
support, um, this is a very
targeted bill, um.
I mean, people know my politics.
I there's more that I wish that
we could do, but I recognize the
importance of what we can get
done in this chamber and so, um,
I just, I, I think this is an
important step moving forward
and um and so I, I stand in
support and I urge my colleagues
to support as well. Thank you.
gentle lady from Berle and
Torresentative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, with the gentle
lady from Santa Fe County,
please yield. I'll yield to my
friend from CPAC.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and gen
lady. So I have some questions,
um, so apparently in Otero
County, they have bonds in there
and as of today they have 22
million in principle, almost 5
million interest remaining to
pay off if these were shut down,
how would they repay these
bonds, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I have, uh, did you ask
about Otero County? Was that the
area? Yeah, I did because, uh,
there's really not repurpose
that building. They're gonna owe
millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies. So what does
that, how does that affect
Aterra County and how would they
even repay these bonds? Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies.
So there was actually an
analysis done in 2021, I believe
in preparation for this, uh,
legislation in particular
because we wanted to understand
the impacts of the legislation
if we were
going to propose exactly
something like this, um, and,
uh, UNM professor, um, an expert
in public finance found that
terminating the contracts would
not impact the county's bond
reading, number one, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if the is
the bonded issue is a revenue
bond and not a go bond revenue
bonds are only secured against
the revenue from a specific
project that they fund, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so unlike
obligation bonds which are
secured against the city or
county's tax revenue, um, and.
require a public vote. This is
different. So the bond agreement
for Otero specifically, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady
contemplates legislation that
would make ICE detention
unlawful, so investors, um, were
aware, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that this would have been a, a
risky investment and so this
would be reactive to that.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, help
me understand so they get a bond
and there's a repayment that's
due.
And now they don't have to
because this bill passes.
And now you're saying that it
just goes off into oblivion and
nobody has to pay anything off.
There's no effect anything so we
just scrap it as it's OK, don't
repay it, madam, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, no, we want everyone to
meet their obligations, um, but
the important thing I think
about this bond in particular is
that county taxpayers would not
be on the hook for the
difference. Uh, that's a really
important principle about this
type of bond, um, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when Otero
County may
00, still, um,
The money on the bonds, the
money in reserve would continue
to make payments.
If or when the ICE contract was
canceled, um, and when that
happens, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, if they could repurpose
the facility for another use or
expand the uses that would be
under the purview of the local
community rather than ICE. They
could do that or they could use
that portion of the facility for
another purpose as well, so they
still meet their obligations,
um, as per the rules of finance,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but they would just have to
adjust accordingly.
So Mr. Speaker Dylan, I just
wanna make sure I totally
understand this because what I
just asked was are they still
obligated and then we went on to
repurposing the building, so if
they cannot repurpose the
building, it just sits there.
They still have that money owed.
You're saying now nobody has to
pay for it. Taxpayers don't pay
for it just the state of New
Mexico eats that cost, is that
what I'm understanding, Mr.
Speaker Delady? Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so again, there's
so many different options
subject to the rules of finance
that
they would be able to enact. So
this does the um
Of course, the, if their state
contract with ICE, um, and or
core civic or one of the other
um.
Contractors ceases to um be
renewed, um, essentially, it
does not require closure for
that space, and it doesn't
prevent the repurposing of that
facility. So those would be the
options essentially the first
options first and best options
for being able to um look at how
to repurpose that facility if in
fact that facility, madam, or
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady did go
into default or bankrupt for
some other reason that they
couldn't repurpose.
and they couldn't or they
couldn't um.
Essentially look at other
options. Uh, yes, we again,
subject to the rules of finance
like any other business, if they
can't make ends meet, they
close.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm, I'm sorry to belabor this,
but I, so the building closes
can't be repurposed, nothing
happens to it. It sits there.
There's still all this money out
there. There is no other way to
get that money.
So Mr. Sella, again, my question
is you gave me some options, but
would on one of those options be
that the taxpayers of Otero
County have to repay that
because they took a bond on a
promise, Mr. Speaker and
gentlelady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
again, bankruptcy in that
situation would be a last
resort. Um, we know that there
are many folks specialized in
being able to look at
repurposing, um, for better
service of community, so there
are many, many options before
that comes down. And again, as
my understanding and the
analysis of um,
What we understand about bond
reading and about who's on the
hook for that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it's not, uh, the
taxpayers of the county at all
in Otero, um, essentially when
we look again subject to the
rules of finance, that debt
would be sold and likely
repurposed into a different
category, um, overall.
Mr. Speaker lady, yeah, you said
there's many options. Can you
give me just one of those
options that would be for Otero
County or Chaparral because also
Chaparral has a facility there,
Mr. Speaker Johnny, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, are you just asking
me to creatively think about how
to repurpose the facility
because I got a lot of ideas.
No, um
Mr. Speaker Dela, you said that
there were multiple options of
how to handle this based on the
rules of finance. I was just
asking for one of those options,
Mr. Speaker, John lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, again,
um, so when we just think about
how bankruptcy would work or how
refinancing would work or how we
would be able to re-purpose that
financing for something else,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
would be working with the folks
that financed it to begin with
and be able to work with them on
re-purpose, um, whether it be a
change of use or change of
facility, etc. all of that would
be on the table for opportunity
to relook at the loans created,
um, and
to deal with any debt that may
be obligated, um, should the
contract end.
Mr. Speaker Deli, do you have
any examples of how you would
repurpose a detention facility.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, so
in the past when we've seen
these facilities close in, in
several other states, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they have
used and repurposed their
facilities for expanding
detention where there were
facilities that had already had
detention in place, um, for, uh,
a number of different
situations. There has been uses
of these public facilities, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, for
housing the homeless and for
those that are unhoused, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, there has
been
conversion, uh, for everything
from grow houses and
greenhouses, um, to a number of
different facility reuse
opportunities uh where these uh
facilities did close down, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. And Mr.
Speaker, and generally, so what
exactly happens when a county
defaults and what does that do
to the counties or cities, to
the IRB bond.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, so
again, in particular with Otero,
uh, the shareholders would
essentially lose money because
that contract would not be
renewed, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but the local taxpayers,
the local county would not lose
any funding, um, subject to
that.
Mr. Speaker and gen lady, so I
have some further questions on
this because there seems to be a
lot of options, a lot of what
ifs and what's going to happen.
And of course, being in
politics, I have a tendency to
look at the worst case scenario
of a building just sitting there
and like in chaparral, Orange
County, the the three facilities
that we have, they're now
sitting there vacant, these
bonds.
Are supposed to be repaid.
They're not getting repaid and I
just see that it's kind of a
debt that's being washed because
this bill has been passed, Mr.
Spearer and gentle lady.
So I do have a question, um.
So if these facilities close.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what,
what other states have these
facilities or any of these other
core civics and what happens if
they end up in another core
civic facility where maybe the
conditions are worse than what
are here, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Can you ask that again, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, just, are
you saying like if we ended the
contract and started another
with Core Civic for the same
purpose or different purpose.
Mr. Speaker, John Lady Weston,
let me just break it down
because I think I asked a lot of
questions. I and I know it's
hard when the experts are
speaking to you at the same
time, which is being gentle
lady, let's just ask this one
question. So there are
facilities we have 3 in New
Mexico. There's 4 in Arizona.
There's 9 in Louisiana. There's
21 in Texas, um, the other
option, uh, uh, there's other
states that they could go to and
quite a few of these are core
civic.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we're moving them out of a core
civic facility where they will
be moved into another core civic
facility and what are your
thoughts about the care that
they're gonna get there because
there's quite a few lawsuits
already against all the
facilities. So Mr. Speaker
Nalani, we're basically shut
because we're not gonna release
these people. They're going from
one facility to another where
the care is going to be equal to
what it is in Torrance County or
less than, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
well, that is possible and
again, we're trying to hold
accountable, um, these
unfortunate situations where
contractors are not meeting
their obligations, otherwise we
may not even be here today, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if they
were, um, what we're seeing is
that we just do not want this in
our state and we know Mr.
Speaker gentle lady, um, when it
comes to transfers, this is a
common, um, practice. We know
that folks are we we've had
this.
happened before because um the
facility in Torrance, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady did have a
lapse in their contract even
with Core Civics, so they know
how to deal with that, but
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, they may be
subject, unfortunately to the
same or worse situation in
another state and that's why as
a principal of this bill is that
we do not want that practice to
take place in our state.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
looking at that concept to not
want to have them in our state
and shipping them off to another
state we're basically just
saying I'm gonna just say it.
It feels like we're saying to
them, we don't care about you.
We're just gonna ship you off to
another core civic facility, Mr.
Speaker, De lady.
To me
It seems like if there's so many
issues that are happening that
allege, I don't know, that are
happening with core Civic.
And there's lawsuits involved to
me, Mr. Speaker, it seems like
we would rather keep them here
and the reason why we have lots
of activists that are here to
check on them to, to make sure
they're having issues met.
So it seems like we're almost
saying to them, OK, we don't
care, we're shuffling off
somewhere else. That's how it
feels to me, Mr. Speaker, and
young lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is
How
I'm trying to figure out how to
word this because it's really
bothering me.
It feels like at the end of the
day, we're shuffling people off
to say we don't want to
interstate and we're not dealing
with the issue.
So Mr. Speaker Dan lady, I'm
just gonna ask this question
because I probably already know
what the answer is.
Don't you think maybe it might
be better to keep them here so
we keep an eye on them and do we
have any say so over what a
private facility does, Mr.
Speaker and John lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, first
we'd love to have you as part of
um the activist community
ensuring that human rights are
met and that wherever we are
across this country that we are
fighting for very basic human
rights, um, no matter your
immigration status. That's an
incredible incredibly important
principle of this bill because
we're talking about civil,
civilly um housed folks in these
facilities, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, the second thing that
I would in
response to that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that on
principle for us in New Mexico
we're saying this is happening
under our watch right now.
And we no longer want this
practice to take place in our
state and that's why we are here
on principle to say that these
activities under our watch
subject to our public bodies who
are engaging in this contractual
practice. We do not want to
happen here. We have that power
over this ability to contract
and this is why we're here
today, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so we do have an
opportunity to look at how we
contract with private entities
and what we obligate ourselves
to.
Especially when they're not
performing on the contracts to
the level with which we
understand they need to, and
that's what we're talking about
today, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I understand what you're
saying however I see a little
bit differently. We have them
here in our backyard. We can do
more things right here in our
community because
When they get shipped off, which
is they're going to do.
I mean how are we gonna feel at
the end of the day when we find
out that these people that were
in contact with that we know
about, and they get sent to, I
don't want to pick any other
states, but they go to another
state.
Mr. Speaker John Laney and and
it ends up that the care was
worse.
You know, we're not really
fixing the issue when we started
talking about the root cause,
we're shuffling people to
another facility that we really
have no say so over their going,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady. So
going back to my other question,
and I don't know if you
answered, I'm sorry. Do we have
any oversight as us as
legislators over these private
facilities to make sure they do
the quality of care that we
would like in New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
is it. This is the
accountability. This is us doing
that right now and enacting this
piece of legislation. This is
our ability to say while it's
been under our watch, we've seen
the multiple violations of human
rights happen under our watch,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
is where we get to continue a
practice that is about our
values and no longer about, um,
this type of practice, and this
is again engaging with private.
Federal contractors, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
not obligated to us. This is our
choice. And this is how it is
that we hold them accountable.
And Mr. Speaker, and generally I
don't think I don't understand
what you're saying. I do, but on
the, on the last portion, do we,
and a serious question, do we
have any rights as legislators
to say that if you're gonna have
this private facility, you must
do X, Y, and Z, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, as legislators, this is
the power that we hold for the
local governments that have had
these contracts, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I believe they've
been trying to ask those these
various contractor.
to uphold their end of the deal
that they're subjecting their
local community, the staff
members, the folks in these
facilities to unfortunate
violations and not providing the
facilities themselves to be able
to do their jobs. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
why we are here to be able to
hold that accountability at the
level that we have as a state
understanding what's happening
locally.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and, and that's the enforce
unfortunate part and see, I see
it a little differently because
If we sent them someplace where
they get less care they're
getting here who we're not,
we're still not fixing the
issue, Mr. Speaker Delady. We
are sending them off to any of
the other facilities which are
probably owned by Core Civic.
And as we're stating or not
holding up their end of the
deal.
And to me, I look at it, I, at
the end of the day I'd rather
have us say, you know what,
we're gonna keep these here so
we could do more lawsuits, we
can try to force them.
Because that seems to be the
issue, right, Mr. Speaker
Delaney? We, we have these
people that are in there that
has been an issue about it and
those are not being addressed,
Mr. Speaker lady, um, I did have
further questions, um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
So on revenue jobs.
Specifically, and, and I know
you're gonna say that well it's,
it's more important that we move
the facility out, but Otero
County and Torrance County.
I don't know if you've been to
Esani or out to Torrance County,
there's not a lot of job
opportunities, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, what about the
effects that it's going to have
on the people that have lost
their positions only because
when you go to Estancia, there's
not a lot of job opportunities.
I can't speak for a Terra county
because Representative Block
went home. He's sick today, um.
This is Mr. Speaker, gen lady,
uh, I want to address what is
about to happen to Torrance
County, and I'm not comparing
because this isn't an apples to
apples conversation because
we're talking about the human
rights of people we're talking
about shuffling them off
somewhere else, but Mr. Speaker
Delani, for my community that
takes a huge hit because there
really is nothing out there to
move these people into another
position. It's been that
facility there and there's not a
lot of stuff that is happening
out there, Mr. Speaker, and
there's nothing that we can make
right now.
for any type of rural
development to say OK we're
gonna have jobs for you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies. So
what, what do I say to those
people in my community that no
longer have a place to work and
don't have benefits, uh, etc.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, first
I would, um,
Argue that there's so many
different things that this
legislature is doing to purpose
funding capacity building,
training, bettering people's
lives through education, um, to
be able to transform communities
that are looking for economic
development opportunities, so
the fact that any community
would want to look for
opportunities to diversify, to
look for different jobs, to be
able to bring new and emerging
businesses.
into that community, I would say
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady that
we're here to help with that.
That is exactly what this
legislature has committed to in
these historic revenues and
investments that we've been
making in the future of New
Mexico and the present of New
Mexico, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so I am thrilled to work
with Torrance County on what it
is that we could be doing in
that community to look at new
and emerging economic
development opportunities.
When it comes to this facility
specifically, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Torrance and Cibola
are actually owned by Core Civic
and not the counties, so I could
potentially continue to detain
people at both of those fac
facilities, but they would have
to contract directly with ICE
and I'm sorry, directly with
Core Civic, um, and if ICE
chooses not to do that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, then.
They would essentially avoid the
regular scrutiny of the federal
competitive bidding rules that
is ICE's choice, um, but nothing
in this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady requires that, um,
so this type of worry about
closure, um, is one of those
sort of scare tactics that we've
identified, um, about why we
shouldn't have this opportunity
to do this today, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, and essentially
just avoids that transparency in
these contracts should they be
able to do that.
And Mr. Speaker, I do have one
more question for you on this.
It looks to me like this is
unfunded mandates.
And are you going to hold Otero
County harmless.
And the facilities in Chapel.
Uh, this bill could cause harm
to one of our counties and are
we willing to do this? Are you,
are you willing to do this, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
just, we just fundamentally
disagree that this would be an
unfunded mandate.
So just for you gentle lady,
what I'd like to do is if this
does go through, I, I really am
counting on you to come help
make jobs in Torrance County
because I'm on our side. I don't
have a lot of push or pull on
anything that really happens in
the state other than fighting
for the rights of my people in
Torrance County. So, Mr.
Speaker, I would invite you to
come to the facility and try to
take a tour and then make sure
that we talk to all these people
and you tell them how you're
going to help them to get
gainful employment when they
lose their positions and we're
gentle lady, that's all I have.
Thank you.
There's lady from McKinley
represented Lunch room. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield, please.
I will yield to my friend from
McKinley.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I, uh, would
like to also discuss local
impact, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
trying to get my head around
this bill, and I want to start
by saying I do not agree in any
way with mistreatment of people
ever. I'd never agree with that
and I just want, I want everyone
to know that.
But I'm trying, I'm trying to
understand this, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this bill would,
uh, prohibit state and local
governments in New Mexico from
entering into contracts with ICE
to detain people, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? That's exactly correct,
um, Mr. Speaker, generally,
specific to civil detainment.
Alright, and, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I also read that it
forces all contracts to be
canceled in a didn't.
see any type of timeline, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so this is
again a uh reactive bill, we
cannot cancel contracts that are
currently in play, but, um, no
public body may enter into renew
or otherwise agree um to
continue uh to detain those
folks. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what about the issue
around uh leasing or selling
these facilities.
Uh
Regarding the local government.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so it
depends on which facility you're
talking about because the
ownership is different, um, in
Torrance and Cibola, these are
um uh civic core owned
buildings, um, and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they can
decide who they want to contract
with if if Core Civic wants to
um decide to enter into a
contract with ICE directly, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so it
really just depends on on which
building we're talking about.
Alrighty, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, my, my focus is
gonna be about Sabola County.
That's my home county. That's
where my family lives, that's
where I grew up.
Um, so I, I can't speak
intelligently about the other
two counties, but I want to
focus on Cebola since it's
probably next to McKinley
County, one of the poorest
counties in the state and.
I wanted to ask our private
prisons licensed to operate by
the state of New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
while it is allowed, um, it's
not required.
So Mr. Speaker, I know that um I
do economic development work and
I know that anybody that does
business in the state of New
Mexico for profit has to be has
to have some kind of license or
or business license with the
county or the state, uh, I'm
surprised that something of this
magnitude wouldn't have to have
some kind of a business license.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, you're
correct. It does need, um, the
folks that are operating do need
a specific license and a
business license.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so who's
responsible for compliance, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I know
that when our city gives out a
business license and there's
complaints, our city code
enforcement has to go out and
check, check up on it. So who
does that for prisons?
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
when the contract is entered
into the AG's officer Department
of Justice needs to be able to
sign off on that contract once
it's entered into. After the
fact, however, on compliance and
everything else, that is the
purview of the contractor and
contractee at that point and at
this point with with with the
various violations that we've
seen, there hasn't been
sufficient oversight, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker, that's the part
I'm confused on if the state has
a role in this, particularly the
AG's office and has identified
these these problems why haven't
they done anything about it?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, again,
it's more so on the basis of the
contract that's entered into
initially that the state is
involved again through the AG's
office. The state has no other
responsibility to those the the
way in which those contracts are
engaged in after the fact.
So Mr. Speaker, when you all
were looking at some of this,
was there some consideration
that we beef up that um
compliance responsibility,
particularly the AG's office.
So, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
um, whether or not we wanted to
decide or be complicit in in
federal immigration detention
was sort of the first principle
that, uh, of what we decided
that's probably not what we want
to do locally, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So the second to
that is that we don't actually
have power to oversee, right?
The federal government or to
tell ICE what they can and can't
do. So as a general practice, we
can't go in and tell the federal
government that they're not
meeting their demands vis a vis
their contractor.
in our local area. So it's
created an unfortunate situation
where we don't actually have a
proper feedback loop to have
that kind of accountability. So
when we're looking at this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, imposing
that state sort of oversight
over federal immigration
detention would likely be struck
down in a court when we were
actually trying to figure out,
could we hold them accountable
to something, but again we have
preemption based on federal
practices in our local
communities, so we wouldn't be
able to tell them, um, and
manage.
up within those contracts.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, but uh
it was my understanding that
there are some state monies that
go into these facilities.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
not our understanding. It's just
federal monies that go straight
into that those specific areas,
um, no state money goes into
that.
Now, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just wondering if things
like JTI weren't used for job
training, um, if there weren't
things like, uh, fixing a
parking lots, uh, with Capital
Oley. I'm just curious, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, to
our knowledge, core Civic, any
of the other, um, contractors
have not sought after any state
funding for economic development
in any of these areas.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I'm read in these fiscal impact
report impact reports that
Cibola County will lose 300
jobs.
Um, is there, I, you know, and I
don't know if this is true or
not, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I've had my issues with some of
the FIRs recently.
But if it is true, will there be
some kind of a hold harmless at
the end of the day for a county
Lexola.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, uh, we understand that core
Civic only op operates about a
third of that facility, so the
300 number is actually about the
total number of beds that are
available in the entire
facility, so many of the various
jobs, um, could actually be
repurposed for the other 2/3,
um, opportunity within that
facility itself, so, um, we, we
disagree with the FIR there, but
on the whole harmless, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, we
think there's a bunch of
opportunities to look at at some
of that.
um, should that portion of the
facility, um, have any issues
financially.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
know that these, uh, FIRs are,
are put up for the public to
read and I can tell you that
I've had lots of, uh, people
contacting me about the 300 job
loss and don't completely
understand how the two
facilities work together, who
has the master contract? I
assume it's Core Civic, um.
But I'd like to ask also.
Mr. Speaker, a gentle lady, when
we say, and we talk about New
Mexico values I'm curious where
the three counties contacted
when this bill was being
developed or did they show up at
at hearings and make their
wishes known.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, yes, we've seen folks for
and against across the state,
um, certainly from the
communities that, um, are
subject to this legislation
specifically, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and just to go back
to Cibola County Correctional
Center, more specifically, the
core civic runs the entire
facility, but only about 12 to
15% of that is ICE detainees
specific to this legislation,
um, so when we're looking at the
impact um.
And some of the, I think, fear
mongering that's been happening
about the jobs overall and, and
what the impact could be
locally. We've been working with
folks and helping educate the
public about what that really
looks like in the hard numbers
of what's going on in community.
And Mr. Speaker, that's my
concern if we don't trust what's
in these FIRs which I don't, um,
and we're not sure that it's 300
jobs. We don't really know what
it would be, so I do have some I
have some concerns about that,
um.
And I am curious, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, have there been
lawsuits filed in Cibola County
for that facility,
mismanagement.
The most recent lawsuit, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady was for a
trans woman that died while
detained in 2018 for a wrongful
death, so that lawsuit is still,
um, I believe underway.
Mr. Speaker, for Cibola County,
there's, is it one or many?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
forgive me, it, it did just
settle, but that was the one,
and I believe it made
international news, um,
happening in Cibola County,
yeah.
All righty, um.
So I, I again Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I want to say that
I don't agree in any way with
mistreatment of people for any
reason, but I do have concerns
about this bill.
I have concerns about what the
impact could be to the
community, um, it's very, very
hard to do economic development,
repurposing in places like
Cibola County. Again, I can't
speak to the other two counties,
but I do have some concerns
about this, particularly, uh,
when it comes to the state
saying to counties this is what
you are going to do, Mr.
Speaker, I've been very, very
proud to serve on the tax
committee this year and I can
tell you that.
Every time there's a tax bill
that comes forward that's going
to impact local governments in
any way. Everybody's hackles go
up and I and mine included, so
I'm, I'm, uh, concerned that
The counties would be um forced.
To cancel contracts, um,
concerned about what that
timeline would look like.
And, you know, I'm just hearing
from these folks out there and
they're concerned. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, this matter having been
under consideration for 3 hours,
I moved to closed debate.
There's a motion to the debate.
All those in favor and if I say
no.
I was supposed to 8.
The I have it. The debate is now
closed.
Gentle lady from Bernard Lee too
close. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
do now move that House Bill 9 do
now pass. on final passage of
House Bill 9. The vote is now
open.
Well, it's about to close.
The boys are closed but what of
35 in the affirmative, 25 in the
negative House Bill 9 has duly
passed this House.
Gentle.
Lady from Donana Sierra and
Socorro Representative Doo, are
you ready on item number one.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point? reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill 161 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution. The
gentleman to the gentle lady,
excuse me, to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and uh
body this bill creates a free
annual camping pass for all
veterans in New Mexico. With
that, I stand for questions.
See no debate generally to
close. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move that House Bill 161 now do
pass. We passage of 161. The
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The boat is not closed, but I
voted 59 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative House Bill 161
has duly pass this house.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and
Elterdo Representative Vincent,
are you ready on item number 40.
Mr. Speaker, would you give me
that point that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
175 on final passage has been
taken. It is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill you, Mr.
Speaker. This is the forest and
watershed restoration Act
amendment and it's a very
straightforward bill. It just
does a few things, expands
funding and eligibility, uh, the
bill ensures that projects
design.
to create and maintain buffer
zones between forest and
populated areas can receive
financial support, enhances
wildfire mitigation by
supporting these buffer zones of
the bill aims to reduce wildfire
risk.
Uh, supports environmental
protections, the funding will
help with watershed restoration
and forest health improvements,
which are critical for
sustainable land management, and
Mr. Speaker, also encourages
collaboration and allows
different organizations,
including state local
governments to participate in
forest and watershed
conservation efforts, and with
that, Mr. Speaker, I'll stand
for questions. There is a
debate, gentlemen from Sanville
and Santa Feed McQueen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, there's a
gentleman ne? I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, it,
it jumped out at me in your bill
that it it contemplates uh doing
treatments on private lands, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, can you
explain to me how that passes
muster under the anti-Donation
clause.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
absolutely. So,
I
was able to uh get a ruling from
the Attorney General, and he, he
said he had an opinion that this
did not violate any kind of
anti-donation clause and also,
uh, the New Mexico Supreme Court
has reported repeatedly ruled
that projects that are
undertaken for public purposes,
including projects on private
property that involve only.
Incidental or inconsequential
benefit to private entities do
not violate the anti-donation
clause because they're not
donations at all. And Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, this bill
proposes to authorize projects
creating buffer zones around
neighborhoods and vulnerable
community infrastructure.
These are public projects that
serve the, the very public
purpose of reducing wildfire
risk to entire neighborhoods.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when you
say you received uh a ruling
from the Attorney General, so I
assume that would be an attorney
General's opinion. Was that on
your bill or was that a prior AG
opinion. That was the prior Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
have a December 1st, 2022, uh,
opinion from the Attorney
General and it talks about
projects incidentally that
incidentally but not
purposefully.
Benefit private property, so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, my
understanding of this is, for
example, if you built a highway,
And maybe you own some land
along the side of the highway
it's now more valuable.
Because of the presence of that
highway.
Um, then that's not an
anti-donation clause violation
because the, the benefit is just
incidental.
But
I don't read this as saying you
can directly impact the private
land, you can do the work on the
private land.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, let
me give you a better one.
Since I'm a fireman,
I pull up in a fire truck to
your house.
And I deliver my services.
And would you think, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that that is an
anti-donation because I'm giving
you something for free, or would
you think that I'm protecting
somebody's houses and the rate
of spread.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so the
provision of emergency service
services such as fire and police
protection is a different
category, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if the fire
department showed up at my house
and painted it or re stuccoed
it, I think we would have a
problem.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
sometimes we do do that,
especially when we have
aircraft, we might paint your
house pink with slurry.
And would that, would that cause
an anti-donation problem, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, again, the
provision of emergency services
is a different category.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
just, I'm trying.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
know, I know this in your bill.
It says, um, it says that
incidental benefit is OK if it
is outweighed.
Uh, by the benefit to the state.
Is there, is there a, uh,
A balancing element to the
anti-tonation class?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
guess what I would have to say
is whenever you have a, a
community wildfire program, CWPP
and you had, and people live
within the forest boundaries.
Simply what I'm stating is,
It's a public benefit for us to
put in a buffer zone to keep
everybody's houses from burning
down.
And it's a direct public
benefit. If I can't get somebody
to or there's
Lots of uh fuel in the, in the
forest adjacent to your house,
then I would say if we go in
there and put a buffer zone in,
it might save your house and 200
more.
Mr. Speaker Zuma.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if there
was a public benefit to say, uh,
give a grant to a a nonprofit or
maybe a private school, uh, and
that would benefit the public.
Could you do that under the
anti-nation clause?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't know, so I guess what I
would have to say is, and like I
told you in committee, I, I
really highly look at this
almost like the opportunity
scholarship.
I'm giving
Free education to students.
Say they want to go to medical
school.
And we give the opportunity
scholarship for students to go
and become doctors and that
investment is going to benefit
New Mexico.
And maybe even states beyond
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
uh, you know, I, I don't think
we're gonna agree, um.
I, I'm troubled by.
What I see is sort of a growing
pattern, uh, in the legislature
of we have a hard time complying
with the anti-donation clause,
so we just sort of pretend it
doesn't exist, uh, we passed a
bill here yesterday which I
believe violates the
anti-genation clause,
the language, please.
Mr. Mr. Speaker, I'm discussing
the anti-donation clause. Thank
you very much.
Don't refer to the bill from
yesterday, whatever bill that
was.
Mr. Speaker, we've passed other
bills. Is that sufficiently
vague?
I'll allow it for now, but
please proceed.
I believe violated the
anti-revision clause, and I
think there are others working
their way through the system.
Mr. Speaker, the language in
this bill does not reflect.
The language in the
anti-donation class, and I, I
absolutely appreciate what
you're doing, you know, I, I'm a
big believer in, in forest
management, um,
We just got to do it right. And
as written in this bill, I don't
think it's right.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The gentleman
from Colfax, Curry, Quay,
Harding, San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, does a gentleman yield?
I yield to my good friend from
all those counties.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I just
wonder if any of you have ever
heard of state forestry.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have heard of state forestry,
and I was going to introduce my
expert witness.
This state forester, however,
she had a bicycle accident and
she had surgery today. And then
her deputy,
was out and then my other expert
was out, so I'm all alone today,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, let me
help you just a little bit.
Uh
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I will
tell you that state forestry
only.
Only works on private land.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
forest out there that you think
about, it is worked on by the US
Forest Service, US Department of
Agriculture for service, state
forestry only works on private
land.
So, state forestry does a lot,
right?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
they do.
They, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, have you ever heard
of WUE?
Woo means wildland urban
interface.
And it's a thin area that exists
between urban centers in the
forest, the wildlands, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, have you
ever heard of that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have heard of that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I will
tell you that those worry
projects are funded on state,
federal, or private land,
because they
Save the lives from
state, state, federal and
private people, OK? Uh, I'm, I'm
a guy that believes in the
anti-donation clause, but I can
tell you that there are
exceptions, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
Um
Have you ever heard of the soul
Conservation District.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
soil conservation Districts were
put into uh effect back in the
30s when we had the enormous
erosion. Our creeks and canyons
were washing away the soil was
blowing away, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they were put in
effect to work on.
State, federal, and private
land. They can put money on
state, federal, or private land.
And not only that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they can put state,
federal, or private money on
state, federal, or private land,
and they do, uh, NRCS is federal
money. It goes on to private
land all the time. Uh, Mexico
Finance Authority is state
money. It goes on to private
land all the time.
So, I will tell you that your
bill is in good shape.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sal
further debate, the gentlemen
close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 175 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 175. The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 56 in the affirmative and 2
in the negative.
Howsville 175 has duly passed
this house.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
See see no objection to
disorder. clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Bill 532 has headed under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted to the
Speaker, I move adoption of the
committee report. a favorable
committee report for House Bill
532, although those who've ever
seen it say I.
All the supposed name, the ISA
Criminal Report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House, Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 343 has had it under
consideration.
The reports them with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Deana Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
how health and human services
Committee substitute for 343.
All those in favor are signified
by saying no.
I suppose nay.
Where's my guy?
he lost his voice.
Yeah, I have it be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee 2 has been referred
House Bill 402 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
House government elections in
the Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 402 do
pass, respectfully submitted.
Deana Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House Bill 402 as amended, but a
favorable committee report and
how government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for 402 as amended.
All those in favor of saying a.
I was supposed.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 416 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair? move withopson.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house 416. All those in favor
signify by saying na.
All the supposed nay.
Yeah, I have it. Commit report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to whom it's been
referred House Bill 554 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 554 as amended. All
those in favor, say no.
Pona
Yeah, I saw it. Can we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 27, has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted, do you want a Johnson
chair?
We're adoption of a favorable
report for Ovie.
Let me start over again. We are
an adoption of a favorable
committee report for House
Memorial 27, all those in favor
signified by saying a.
Although suppose nay.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Memorial 34 has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted D
Wana Johnson, chair. Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report for House
Memorial 34. All those in favor
but say I.
All the suppose nay.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 40 has
had it under consideration
report seen with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair. Move adoption
adoption favorable report for
House Memorial 40, all those in
favor sing 5 by saying peace.
Well apo say nay.
The peace has it committee
report adopted.
He was study the Office of Peace
in case anyone's wondering,
passed unanimously.
I think it was unanimous, maybe
it wasn't.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Ready?
clerk to read.
Cinna Bill 88 as amended,
introduced by Representative, or
sorry, Senator Munoz, an act
relating to public funds
creating the Medicaid Trust Fund
and state-supported Medicaid
fund requiring the legislature
to provide for the transfer of
reversions of general
appropriation Act
appropriations, and general fund
appropriations for capital
outlay projects to the Medicaid
Trust Fund for a limited time,
requiring certain investment
income credited to the general
fund to be credited to the
Medicaid Trust Fund.
For a limited time. Amending
certain sections of the laws
2021 to 2024 to require general
fund capital outlay
appropriations to revert to the
Medicaid Trust Fund, making a
transfer from the general fund
to the Medicaid Trust Fund.
Senate Bill 88 as amended.
88 as amended have been read
twice by title is referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 123 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo, an act
relating to law enforcement
amending the Regional Transit
District Act to clarify persons
responsible for law enforcement.
Senate Bill 123.
Senate Bill 123 have been read
twice by title is referred to
the House Transportation Public
Works and Capital Improvements
Committee then the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 119
as amended, an act relating to
economic development, amending
and enacting sections of the
bioscience Development Act,
authorizing investment in
bioscience companies
establishing requirements,
providing penalties. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 119 as amended.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 119
as amended have been read to us
by title is referred to the
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
house.
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 235
as amended. An act relating to
public schools, amending the
mathematics and Science
Education Act, defining terms,
providing that the mathematics
and Science Bureau of the Public
Education department monitor the
implementation of instructional
and professional development
programs requiring high school
districts and charter schools to
develop mathematics professional
learning plans requiring the
public education department to
establish a mathematics
instructional leadership.
framework requiring mathematics
coaches to hold mathematics
specialist endorsements
requiring public schools to
adopt, beginning in 2026, 27
school year, a mathematics
interventions process that
includes mathematics screeners
for students in kindergarten
through 5th grade. Parental
notification if a student is
identified as having
characteristics of a math
difficulty and the provisions of
intervisions for the student.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 235
as amended. Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 235 as amended, haven't
been read twice by title is
referred to the House Education
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial one as
amended, introduced by Senator.
Padia.
A joint memorial requesting the
energy, minerals, and natural
resources department and the
economic development department
to jointly study and make
recommendations to expedite
forest restoration through
economic development in New
Mexico. Senate Joint Memorial
One as amended. Senate Joint
Memorial 1 as amended have been
read twice by title is referred
to the house energy environment
and natural Resources Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial 2
introduced by Senator Campos, a
memoir, a joint memorial
requesting the governor to
appoint a task force to study
the needs of frontier areas of
the state and to consider the
efficacy of the community
operated infrastructure network
model for the improved delivery
of necessary services. Senate
Joint Memorial 2.
Senate Joint Memorial to haven't
been read twice by title is
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee.
Cin Bill 9 as amended,
introduced by Senator Sewells,
an act relating to oil and gas,
enhancing civil penalties for
violation of the Pipeline Safety
Act to conform to federal
guidelines. Senate Bill 9 as
amended.
Senate Bill 9 as amended,
haven't been read twice by
title, is referred to the House
Energy environment and Natural
Resources Committee the the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 100 introduced by
Senator Tobiasin, an act
relating to the Albuquerque
Metropolitan Arroyo flood
Control Authority, increasing
the limit of outstanding
indebtedness of the authority.
Senate Bill 100.
Senate Bill 100 have been read
twice by title.
It wasn't this the one of the
party bills it was Senate Bill
100.
Should bring it straight to the
floor.
Just kidding.
Senate Bill 100 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the house, water, I I guess
I'm sorry, how agriculture, a
gas and water resources
committee the the.
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 as
amended, an act relating to
crime amending the racketeering
Act, adding certain crimes to
the definition of racketeering.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 as
amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 as
amended, haven't been read to us
by title is referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
In a bill 83 as amended,
introduced by Senator Stewart,
an act relating to public funds,
creating the innovation in state
government fund for state
agencies to create master plans
and increase agency capacity to
implement climate change policy,
making a transfer from the
general fund to the innovation
and state government fund,
making appropriations from the
innovation in state government
fund. Senate Bill 83 as amended.
Seville 83 as men that have been
read twice by title is referred
to the House Energy, Environment
and Natural Resources Committee.
Thence the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 126 introduced by
Senator Padilla, an act relating
to telecommunications, amending
section 63-9H-6 NMSA 1978, being
La's 1999, chapter 295, Section
6 as amended, increasing the
amount from the state rural and
universal service fund allocated
to the broadband program from
$30 million less certain
expenses to $40 million less
certain expenses, increasing the
cap on obligations.
of the state rural universal
Service Fund plus administrative
expenses and a prudent fund
balance from $30 million to $40
million. Senate Bill 126. Senate
Bill 126 haven't been read to as
my title is order printed and
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered.
Announcements.
Gentlemen from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, your house
appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 6:05 p.m.
tonight in room 307. There will
be dinner. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thanks to uh the gentle
lady from Taos Rio Riba in Santa
Fe.
Dinner for everybody?
Come to appropriations and find
out, Mr. Speaker.
Don't threaten me with a good
time, sir.
Gent lady from McKinley and San
Juan, Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee family.
We'll have breakfast burritos
and coffee 9:30 a.m. tomorrow
and then committee will start at
10. Thank you.
Members take note, gen lady from
Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
will be meeting also at 6:05 in
room 317.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from
lady from Santa Fe Los Alamos,
and Sandoval, Representative
Chandler. Um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, Your House Judiciary
Committee will also meet at 6:05
and if you haven't seen the
text, there's some food in room
308. Did you see my text to save
me some food?
Oh, we'll save you some food,
Mr. Speaker.
We will.
Yeah.
lady from Taos Mr. Speaker, on
Sunday, there is another dinner
for the women of the house and
only the women of the house.
At Maria's.
At 6 p.m.
You should have already received
your invitation, ladies.
That is all, Mr. Speaker.
The German from Donana is
wondering where his invitation
went and he request one.
Formal motion, Mr. Speaker, I'll
save a doggy bag.
Young lady from Berlin.
Gracias, uh, senor Speaker
Javier Martinez. um, I just
wanted to announce that today is
International Women's Day and
Mr. Speaker, if it's
appropriate, I want all of the
women in this house, all the
beautiful, intelligent women in
this house to stand and give
each other a round of applause.
Thank you Mr. Speaker who didn't
stand. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
And it, it wasn't a joke, but
that was, that was good.
Alright, I have 2 announcements
before people depart, uh.
House Bill 618 is a generic
bill.
The 202 number for this bill is
0.231549.1.
Again, generic bill, House Bill
618202 number is 2311231549.1.
The new title of this bill is
Department of Information
Technology Procurement role in
responsibilities.
And it is sponsored by the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Uh, generic House Bill 618, um,
will be removed from the rules
committee and referred to house
government elections and the
Indian Affairs Committee. Again,
that's generic House Bill 618
removed from the rules in order
of business committee and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
See no objection. It is ordered.
Here's the second announcement.
House Bill 417.
Which is item number 15 on your
3rd reading calendar.
There was an amendment that was
put in the tax committee, which
was the last committee for this
bill. He has come to my
attention that the there was a
drafting error in the amendment,
and instead of trying to figure
it out on the floor.
I'm going to remand that bill
back to the tax committee. I've,
I've conferred with the sponsors
and the chair of tax, and they
have agreed to do that to fix
that bill before.
Uh, it, it gets taken up on 3rd
reading. So see no objection
that is so ordered.
Last chance for announcements.
lady from
Wereba,
Sandoval and Taos.
And Santa Fe. uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh, could you, um, tell
us what the schedule will be for
the house tomorrow.
Absolutely, great question.
Uh, we expect to be on the floor
tomorrow starting at about noon
open roll call after morning
committees meet, um, I've been
in conversation with both
leaders. I, I really don't want
us to have to come in on Sunday,
um, so we'll, we'll work hard
tomorrow and and hopefully stay
out of the building on Sunday. I
know Representative Lara needs
to do laundry and iron his
shirts.
And the request has been duly
noted.
Any other announcements, any
other questions?
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I've got
2 tonight, um, did you hear
about the kidnapping at the
school?
I did not, gentlemen.
It's OK. He woke up.
Sounds good.
What is the second one?
Mr. Speaker, why did the egg
have the day off?
We're back to egg jokes.
Why? This one's appropriate.
Because it was Friday.
And with that, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I move that the
House did in recess until 12
p.m. tomorrow.
The house was set in recess
until 12 p.m. tomorrow
afternoon.
