Or
Representative Romero.
Representative Laura.
And Mr. Chair.
We have a quorum. We have a.
Well, welcome this morning.
We'll be hearing from districts
1 and 4.
Uh, please introduce yourself
and let's begin.
You've got it. Thank you. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, good to see
everybody again. Before we get
started in District one, Mr.
Chairman, if I could, I just
want to follow up on a couple of
questions that were asked, uh,
on Tuesday, um, so we provided
the DE's contact information to
Candy. She'll get that out to
all the members so that way if
you guys have any questions or
something comes up when you're
out on the road, you'll know who
to contact. We, we prefer that
you contact the district
engineer, um, that's, that's the
person you want to talk to and
then he can, he can funnel that
information down to.
his team as he sees fit, um, I
did also forward some of the
rumble strip information to, to
Aaron, of course, and he's gonna
follow up on that, the rumble
strip issue and there's things
in our toolbox we can help with
that. One of the other comments
was Mexico 76 near Holy Cross
Elementary School in the in the
school's own sign.
And we talked to our field crew
out there and as soon as we wrap
up the snowstorm here,
finishing, uh, pushing snow,
we'll get on that sign as soon
as we can.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think that's
all I had as far as my notes
went. We'll get started with
District one,
I'm happy to introduce Mr. Aaron
Chavarria. He's our district
wanted engineer. Many of your
members, um, they represent some
of those districts within his
district, so I'll turn it over
to him, please.
Mr. Chair, Representatives, good
morning.
Um, thank you for having us here
today.
Uh, they
Yeah
Secretary, do you have a handout
for? OK, thank you.
Why don't we just wait a minute
and get those out.
All right
I think everybody has received a
copy. We're working from
District one's presentation this
morning.
Um, good to see Vice Chair
Lauda. Good morning. Um, I'll
turn it over to Erin. Thanks.
So, Mr. Chair Representative,
good morning. Thank you for
having, uh, having us here this
morning, uh, and then I'd like
to thank you guys for your your
continued support uh for our
districts, uh, it's much
appreciated.
Um, so we'll start on, on page
2.
Uh, district one is housed in
Deming, New Mexico.
Uh, it, it makes up the
southwestern portion of the
state.
Uh, it encompasses uh uh part of
mostly most of Socorro County,
Sara County, Donana, Luna
County, Hidalgo County, Grant
County, and a small southern tip
of Kayron County.
Uh, we share about 180 miles of
international border with
Mexico.
Uh, we have 3 international
ports of entries, antelopehas,
Columbus, and Santa Teresa. We
border Arizona on the west,
Texas on the east.
Uh, on page one, on page 2, I
have a map of our district
boundaries.
Uh, also have our district one
commissioner is John McIlroy.
Uh, and then at the bottom,
bottom right, uh, bottom left
table is our employee breakdown.
We have a total of 297 employees
at District one, we currently
have 275 of those uh positions
filled.
The next table, uh, is our
budget.
Uh, that's, uh, that's our
budget for this, uh, for FY 25.
Uh, payroll and benefits, uh,
we're about 20 almost 23
million,
uh, operational 6.7 or contract
maintenance 4.2.
Bill supplies 4.6 signing and
striping 1.7, uh, rest area
maintenance is 4 million.
And we currently have uh just
over $330 million of ongoing
construction contracts.
On page 3, we, we begin with our
legislative uh funds uh that
we've received a loss of 2019,
um, I, um.
1 and 2, I'm happy to say all
those have been completed.
Uh, page 4.
Laws of 2020.
Uh
All those as well have been
completed in the amount of 19.9
million uh loss of 2021.
Uh
These are, uh.
Half of them have been
completed, the other half are
ongoing studies that we
currently have.
Uh, those, those should be
completed, uh, this, uh, by June
of this year.
Uh, laws of 2022, we have uh uh
one project that was a US 180,
that project is currently under
construction, so we're gonna,
we're gonna start expanding
those funds uh first.
So we should be uh
Complete with that here in the
uh.
Probably the next 67 months of
this year.
Uh, laws of 2023.
We have uh New Mexico 213
corridor, uh, we were, we were
awarded 28 million.
That project will, will let uh
October of this year.
Uh, as soon as construction
starts, we'll start expanding
those funds as well.
Page 5, loss of 2024.
Uh, we have 2 item 3 and item 5.
Uh, uh, item 3, those two
projects are, are ongoing,
uh.
Uh, the I-10 project, it's about
halfway done. We did, we did
have to shut down for the
winter. Uh, we'll start up again
this, uh, spring.
Uh, and then item 5.
Uh
The first two projects, the
business loop.
Uh, they're ongoing, they're
almost complete.
Uh, we, we were able to buy
some, uh, our front end loader,
our EOB, uh, so that one's been
completed. All the other
projects will be completed, uh,
this spring as well.
We move on to our maintenance
projects that were completed.
Uh, in FY 24, uh, we completed
about 20.1 million, uh, you
know, several counties around
the district, uh.
Uh, on some of these secondary
roads, uh, US routes.
Page 6 is our upcoming contract
maintenance for this year.
Um
The, the first one in Mexico 28,
that one's been completed, uh,
the rest will be completed this
uh this spring, uh, we got about
$31.3 million of work contract
work that we'll be doing, page
7.
We have a completed construction
projects, um.
Uh, about 71.2 million that we
completed, uh, closed out last
year, uh, I'll just highlight
the very first one because it
was on, it was a picture on the
cover sheet, which is a
roundabout in tier C, uh.
Um
I thought it was a very
successful project. It's working
well.
Page, PG, we have our ongoing
construction projects, uh, just
a little over 330 million.
Uh,
We have uh just a couple that I
like to highlight is uh a new US
180, that's uh uh going from 2
lane to 4 lane, uh, under phase
one, that project is under
construction, uh, and then we
have a project in Las Cruces,
uh, 23 million, that's New
Mexico 101, uh, that connects
town of Masa to Las Cruces, uh,
city of Las Cruces.
Uh, there's a, a middle school
right there as well, so we're
adding sidewalks, lighting,
walking path, uh, drainage, uh,
so it's gonna turn out to be a
good project.
Uh, next table down at the
bottom is our, our step uh for
FY 2526.
Uh, we got roughly 265 million
of projects, uh, uh.
That have been uh
Uh, that are on the list uh for
letting. I added the letting,
uh, year and month on there, uh,
for your information. Um.
There's 2 projects in here that
are that are pretty significant
to the district, that's the New
Mexico 213.
Uh, we're taking it from 2 lane
to 4 lane, uh, divided
uh, highway, uh, but it's gonna
connect to to the Texas line
where Texas is constructing a
new bypass for the city of El
Paso.
So it's a it's a significant
route for the region, uh, and
for freight traffic and anybody
that wants to bypass the city of
El Paso.
Uh, we also have a new roadway
uh parallel to the border.
Uh, it connects Santa Teresa
area to the city of Southern
Park. It's uh, we, it doesn't
have a road number yet, but we
call it the Border Highway
connector.
Um
So that one's going to be those
two projects will be led this
year as well. Page 9.
Our, uh, these are unfunded
projects that we have, but
they're, they're either in
design or they're going through
the study phase.
Um, the first two, I always, I
always have our interstates. Uh,
we have I-10 and I-25 and it's a
big task to keep those in in
fair to good condition. So
we're, we, it's just a cycle
that we're uh doing uh payment
rehabilitation on those two
projects. So, so they're always
on top of the list.
Um, we have quite a few bridge
replacements and um.
Safety projects going on around
the district.
Page 10
We move on to our local
government road fund, uh, these
tables, they make up the uh the
county co op program, the.
The municipal arterial program,
uh, county arterial program,
school bus drop program, and the
others program.
Um, we have something like 40,
42 entities in our district.
Um, you know, and the, the these
ones combined are about 4.8
million.
So it's, it's pretty
competitive, um.
It it's a good fund to help the
entities.
Um
It's just, it's just very
competitive to try and support
all of them.
Page 11. This is our, our
transportation fund, uh, FY 24.
This year we had 13 projects,
uh, 13 entities that got funded,
um.
Roughly 11, 11.5 million for uh
district one.
Uh, page 12 is just a
compilation of local government
TPF.
Uh, construction and maintenance
projects, uh, just uh a colored,
uh, map to show where uh those
funds are being expended.
Uh, we got a pretty good
diversity around the district.
Um, there a lot of it is focused
around the urban areas, uh, some
in the rural areas.
Uh, and then the table down at
the bottom is uh it's a summary
of uh for each county how much
we've uh we've spent expanded on
each county.
Page 13.
It's our, our, our priority
construction projects uh for
this uh for this year, those are
listed in the order of priority.
Uh, we, we are, uh, we are uh
asking for the border highway
connector, that's our new
roadway.
Uh, uh, it's at a project cost
of 115 million, uh, we're about
$70 million short.
Uh, we do have an info grant,
uh, for 45 million.
Uh, the next project on there is
Noval Canyon, that is a bridge,
a trust bridge on I-25, roughly
mile marker 107.
Uh, that one's, uh, the
estimated cost of 146 million we
have uh a VIP grant for 72
million, so we're asking for 76
million on that one.
Uh, the others, uh, I-25, those
two projects listed.
Uh, it's to add a uh in the city
of Las Cruces between the Loman
and US 70 to make that 4 lane
interstate into a 6 lane
facility.
Um
Those, those projects, uh, as
well as Angler, uh, anglers as a
bridge. We want to add ramps on
there because it's gonna add a
uh.
Uh, pretty good, uh,
transportation, uh, route for
the city as well as relieve some
of our other intersections in
that area.
Um, those, those projects will
be.
they will be, will have final
design on those two projects
this summer.
Um, and then I have the US 180
project which is phase 2, uh, to
4 lane at a cost of 130 million.
Our priority contract
maintenance projects, uh, that
we're asking for this year is
for New Mexico 11, uh, it's a
pavement preservation project
from Columbus to Deming, uh,
that, that covers the entire
route.
Uh, cost of 27 million.
Uh, and then we have New Mexico
26.
We want to do some uh uh payment
uh rehabilitation on a uh uh.
Short section of that roadway.
Um, we're asking for 8 million
of that, but we're also coming
back and doing some uh center
light rumble strips, uh.
In August or September of this
year.
Uh, when I 40 closes.
Uh, a lot of traffic uses uh 26
from uh I-25 to I-10.
Uh, so we, we've had some, uh,
uh.
Significant number of uh uh
crashes on that route.
Uh, the rumble strips will help
with the distracted driver uh
scenarios that we have.
Uh, and then the last table on
this, uh.
Presentation is our district
facility improvements, um.
We were, uh, these are all
ongoing or they've been
completed. That's just what
we've done this year. Uh, I've
listed the patrols where they're
happening or the office, uh,
we've done insulation bay doors,
HVAC, uh, bathroom and
electrical work.
Uh, we're at about, uh, so far
1.7 million.
Um, and with that, Mr. Chair,
uh, I'll stand for any
questions.
Thank you, Mr.
uh, first we have, uh.
Vice Chair Lotta.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Good morning, Erin. It's
good to see you.
Uh, I'd like to, uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh amend you on your vacancy,
right?
Very low.
I really like that. That means
it's a good place to work and
that people want to be there. I
want to congratulate you on
that.
Also, I had a question regarding
on page 13.
The Border highway connector.
And on there it says that state
match is needed.
If I recall, and I think
Representative Lentro was the
chairwoman at the time.
I think we have appropriated was
30 million or something like
that from.
from the COVID money
To to this project.
And I was wondering if that is,
is that.
Uh
Is that included in the state
match? Has that been reduced
from the state match, or is that
in addition to the 30 million
that we had originally
appropriated.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lata, no, that, that, uh.
Uh, that 70 million does not
include that prior
appropriation, uh, that was,
that was done.
Uh, I believe we, we.
We didn't use that because uh
because of the deadline, uh, and
trying to get this project
designed and out the door and we
wouldn't have had time to use
those funds.
OK, thank you for that. So, uh,
do we know what, what happened
with those funds?
I, Mr. Chair Representative, I
do not know exactly where those
funds went.
I can, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, as you all may
know, the ARPA funds were
required to be under contract
pursuant to the federal deadline
on December of 2024.
And so we
had to identify projects for
which we could be under
construction and have a PO
issued for those projects before
the holidays. And so we can
present you with a report of all
the projects that are now under
construction with ARPA funding.
I believe it was the sum of
about 242 million in
construction dollars
representative.
Thank, thank, thank you for
that. I appreciate that. I was
just, I was just curious because
I, you know, we have the ask
here. I know we had appropriated
some money, so thank you for
that and yes, I would appreciate
the list. Thank you. Uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, and Erin, you know,
I, there's, there's a lot of
Things happening in District
one.
You know,
I almost bug, I'm almost bugging
you and I thank you for your
patience with me, but I just
want, uh, I just want you to
know that, you know, you'll
continue to have my support. I
appreciate the work that you and
your crew do and uh I look
forward to working with you this
year. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Next job
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I, I did have a couple
questions. The first is, um, I'm
looking at your page too. Is
your district commissioner, a
former DOT employee, am I that
old that I remember that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lustrom, that is
correct. He was a former
district engineer, um, here in
the District 5. I remember that
well. I'm getting old. Well, um,
well, I'm glad he's, he's still
participating with the with the
department and.
Helping you guys and what you're
doing, uh, the second question
that I had, Mr. Chairman, is on
page 12.
This is the map where it has a
the color coding of different
funding sources that are used
throughout district one.
I'm looking at the very bottom
of the area.
Uh, south of Las Cruces, where
we're looking at uh Sunland Park
and and others and it's looks
like you're using um local
government road funds there, as
well as uh transportation
program funds.
My question is, is that is this
area still part of the unified
planning area for El Paso MPO.
Mr. Chair, uh, Ostrom, yes, it
is uh part of the El Paso NPO.
You know, that's always been a
heartburn for me, Mr. Chairman,
because why these NPOs work,
they have their own instruction
dollars, they have their own
planning activities.
And I've always uh had heartburn
with the fact that you've got an
MPO in Las Cruces.
But yet this southern area is
part of a Texas MPO.
So when you think about projects
like the one that uh
Representative Laura just
brought up.
Order highway connector.
That's exactly the kind of
project that would be an MPO
project.
But I guarantee you that Texas
isn't going to do this project
because it's probably not gonna
rank high enough on the priority
list.
Which is a bummer for us, so my
question is, is how do we get
out from underneath them?
Um, when they're doing our
planning.
Or an area, there's probably one
of the fastest growth areas in
the state of New Mexico, that
does not make sense to me,
Mister Chairman.
So what, what are we?
Think about that, uh, especially
yesterday.
Uh, both, uh, uh, vice chairman
and I were in commerce promoting
a.
And when I think about Donana
County and where that might be,
this is kind of the area, right?
This is where trade happens. Big
activities down there.
Um, we try to ordinate all the
infrastructure activity.
You guys are a big piece of
that, Mr. Chairman, uh,
transportation is critical for
down there.
Um
Let's, I mean, I, I, I got a
problem with that. I don't know
what we do about it, how, what
do you have any suggestions, uh,
Mr. Secretary, I mean, how do we
deal with that? We've got a
Texas group doing our planning
for the fastest growing area in
the state of New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Lustro David Quintana, chief
engineer, um, so NPOs are
structured through CFR and um
we're gonna have to actually
work with the feds to see how we
would do that. Um, so I, I don't
think it's anything that the DOT
can, and we can lead the effort
and bring up the discussions,
but considering this area's
technically part of the El Paso
Metropolitan area as defined by
CFR. That's why it's within the.
El Paso and PO I know Mr.
Chairman. I know why and and you
know it's stealing our
population and our planning
horizon, which will see no
money, but I think what I would
like to ask for.
I'd like to see how much.
That El Paso MPO has put into
New Mexico.
And
That would be very telling. It'd
be very telling about how much
they give a damn about what
happens in New Mexico.
Um, because projects like this
and so we what we wanna do is we
want to leverage.
Uh, if, if the bill passes and
sign is signed into law, we want
to leverage trade for money with
other funds.
The funds that you guys are
putting in, runs the environment
department and others, but we
won't get a nickel out of Texas.
So I'd like to see how much
money the Texas MPO.
As put into southern New Mexico.
And then I, I did want to say
that I remember Representative
Laura when we um.
Building that budget with a ARP,
um.
ARPA money.
What the department had done is
that they had several different
sources.
I had a kind of a difficult time
because they were trying to make
sure they were meeting all the
deadlines for all the funding
sources which projects could be
eligible, so they had to move
some things if I remember
correctly.
I'd like to see that chart also.
I'd like to see what what what
we put into this, but I do, Mr.
Chairman, think we have a
problem when Texas is doing our
planning. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom, I agree with you, uh,
secretary, if we could have a
briefing just focused on this
particular issue.
Thank you.
Next we have uh uh vice chair
Lata.
I apologize, Mr. Charmer. We're
going again after I had another
question that I forgot to ask.
Um,
I, I wanted to ask a question,
Erin.
Yeah, yeah
You mean the, the recent
Developments from the feds.
You know, are we, are we in
danger of losing any of our
federal money or being frozen.
Uh, and if so,
How is that going to impact the
projects that were that that
were kind of, that we're working
on.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's a great question, and
we've been, uh, you know, asking
and the answers, I think seem to
kind of be changing daily. Right
now, um, we've been
communicating with our Federal
Highway Administration, uh,
regional director. She's been
very helpful in articulating
where there are limitations at
the present time. For us, it
seems to be on um
Discretionary grants that have
not yet been committed. Uh, we
continue to get reimbursed at
this time for the projects we
have active that includes uh any
change orders that require
federal highway approval, but we
are, are kind of at a standstill
as it relates to obligating and
executing grant agreements for
which we received award
notifications already.
Um, some of the memos suggest
that uh perhaps it'll be kind of
a review of other programs and
funds, but we've yet to get
official word on uh what if any
changes will come from those
reviews.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Secretary, and Mr. Chair, off
the top of your head, Mr.
Speaker, would you know how
much, how much money we're
looking at.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
let us get you that number. I
don't want to overspeak. I don't
want to appear as though I'm
over dramatizing a situation in
any way, shape or form. So let
me, let me get a good number for
you, please. Thank you. I
appreciate that. Thank you. Yes,
and, and one other thing I'll,
um, you represented Lustrom's
point about the El Paso NPO. So,
um, when I first was elected, I
was placed on the NPO.
But it was very difficult for me
to be there having full-time job
and having to go to the your
meetings.
So I know Aaron has a seat on
the MPO.
Uh, the Mason Park, the mayor of
Anthony, state rep, and the
state senator.
And so Representative Madrid was
kind enough to take over, so he
was going to the MPO meetings,
uh, Representative Madrid is no
longer with us, so there's a
vacancy there with the on the
rep side.
So I a very like and and I'm
glad Representative Lunstrom
brought these points up, Mr.
Chair, was because, uh, I, I
personally
belt
And I'm gonna say this, that,
you know, we get bullied.
There's only 4 of us there, and
you know, we would get bullied
by the folks from.
And so, you know, it, it, I'm,
I'm not gonna say that they
weren't welcoming or they
weren't accommodating, but it's
pretty much what, you know, what
they want I see most smiling
back there is in it so it's,
it's something that uh I think
it does need to be addressed.
You know, at one time I had
asked, can I send a proxy or
someone to go in my place to the
NPO, they have said absolutely
not, you have to be there.
And so, given the way we, we're
here as a volunteer legislature,
you know, that we have other.
These other obligations that are
placed on us.
And sometimes I can't go or I
can't be there.
So I, that's one of the things
that I hope that we can address
is, you know, me and my position
for Representative Gallegos or
Representative Silva and sent
someone in our stead to these
meetings because these are very
important, especially now that
we have our district legislative
assistance.
And so I think that's something
that we also need to look at if
if we have any say in it, I hope
we do, but, uh, given the
circumstances of my experience
with the El Paso and PO, you
know, that's pretty much what
they want.
Want to make that point. Thank
you, thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Borego.
Mr. Chairman
Um, thank you, gentlemen, your
report was very clear, um.
So
I don't know a lot about the El
Paso area in your district, so
it's very informative.
Um, but I do know a thing or two
about planning, and I think that
the information that um.
Representative Lustrom brings up
is critically important, um, do
you have a GIS, um.
Location where you keep an eye
on all these roads, kind of like
Albuquerque does.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, yes, we do.
And where is that located? We
have uh we have what we have,
um, on our external website, we
have a version of it called An
Inhodes. You can look at that,
um, internally we have some
mapping that is utilized by our
engineers, um, and they have
access to that on their laptops
or their computers. So we have
various versions, but yes, the,
the.
The entire network is linear
reference to GIS so we can
pinpoint anything from
maintenance operations,
construction, everything down to
an absolute.
Point on on any road.
So there's not a central
location in this part of.
Of the state.
Mr. Chairman and and
Representative, yes, the central
location is at the general
office in here in Santa Fe. that
is a centralized location for
all our intelligence, yes,
exactly, and then that's fed out
to the 6 districts. OK.
All right. Um,
And what about this area that um
Representative Lundstrom
mentioned from the El Paso.
This district or this area.
Mr. Chairman Representative, all
the way up into the border we
have includes
that includes that area it's not
the Texas side. Once we hit the
New Mexico-Texas border, that's
where our logistics stop. OK.
Our intelligence and our system.
So that that function is not
coming out of Texas.
Not our GIS linear referencing
system. No, that is ours, we own
it.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lunstrom. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
You know, it's interesting and I
appreciate the question that was
asked uh about.
The technology and where where
it where it stops for us and it
makes sense obviously with state
with state line, um.
But what my, I'm curious about.
With the MPOs that I've worked
with in the past we used to have
one in Farmington and, and I was
uh part of making sure that got
set up.
Um
My question is with El Paso, do
they have all of ours, do they
have our transportation data for
southern New Mexico when they're
making decisions.
Or do we provide that Mr. Chair
Representative Lumstrom, uh,
yes, uh, if they don't have it,
they ask for it, um, and we
provide it to them.
Mhm.
OK, so they, they don't have it
in their MPO system.
Uh, unless you provide it, yeah,
they might have it through the
uh because they they do have the
MPO boundary, uh.
Uh, within, within the NPO, so
they should have that
information. Anything that's
lacking, uh, we, we will provide
for them.
So Mr. Chairman, the Las Cruces
MPO doesn't do any, include that
whole southern part of the
county in there.
process.
No, ma'am. The two NPOs but with
each other, uh.
But
yeah, and that's the part I
think that's really crazy for me
to try to say that you've got
this metropolitan area.
In our, in our county down
there.
But
Doesn't have any planning
responsibility.
For 20 miles south of them,
right?
I don't know how far it is.
A episode Laura from Tunland
Park to Las Cruces, but.
Cause I went to state, I'm
pretty familiar with that
county.
I understand those those
distances, but it does not make
sense to me.
That the Las Cruces MPO would
not include them in their
planning horizon.
Because it's a um.
You know, road networks don't
recognize.
State lines like that. I can't
imagine him McKinley County that
when we're building a 491 371,
working on I-40602, any of those
roads.
That we would stop because the
planning that planning area.
stops.
Especially when you're applying
for federal money.
So I, I think.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, they, they
could bring in the federal um.
Staff to come in and talk about
this.
Do you think we should try to
get this resolved and maybe it's
not my area, but it just seems
to me that because we work
statewide as a committee that we
need to be aware.
That, um, there's projects that
the MPO should be paying for
them.
And that they should be in those
planning horizons.
But we might want to have the
federal, um,
A that the department works
with.
Give us that update because this
is a federal designation, the
NPOs, RPOs, there's a federal
designation.
You guys don't get to change
those boundaries.
Um, and it's based on
population.
So now that we've had a lot of
growth, I assume in Donana
County, why don't we have this
an expanded Las Cruces MPO.
I don't know, maybe that's too.
Too logical, Mr. Chairman, but
we, we, it doesn't make sense to
me. I agree it's too logical.
Yeah
Uh, no, I agree with the
Representative Lindstrom and.
If we can issue an invitation. I
don't know if they'll come, but
certainly doesn't hurt to ask. I
think we need to delve into this
a little bit and so we'll try to
get to the bottom of it. Thank
you. Uh, next we have
Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
sorry it's late. Thank you for
being here and I'm looking at
all these great projects. My
questions
I'm new to the committee, so I
still don't even understand like
who maintains which roads, um,
but I, when I'm looking at the
Donana projects, it doesn't seem
like there's that much north of
70.
Can you tell, you don't do
anything outside of
DOT roads or which roads do you?
are you involved in?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, uh, yes, we're responsible
for all steroids.
Uh, within the district, so.
Um, as long as it's a state
road, we maintain it. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and my question
is in regards to in hatch, the
Canal Bridge that is closed and
collapsed.
Is not a state road, but because
it is closed.
We are having major traffic
issues, you, you can, I'm sure
you're seeing increased
incidents, though all of those
vehicles that are transporting
products are having to go
through your routes. Um, what do
we do about that, that area is
never gonna have the money to
replace that bridge.
yeah.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dao, I think
maybe we should have a
conversation and get with them,
but I think TPF might be be
right up their alley.
Um, and we can certainly talk to
them and get them started. So
what's nice about TPF initially
we can ask Mr. Chair, I'm sorry,
what does TPF stand for
transportation.
Um, and we'll get them started.
We can do study and design as
part of one phase and then we
can come back the next year and
they can ask for construction
money, but I think that's a good
start for now. I mean, we could
look at
Maybe some of the the irrigation
districts, maybe there's some
funding there are funding they
could tap into maybe some
grants.
But
I think
Conversation at minimum to start
this off, we could, we could
probably find something for him.
Mr. Chair, are, are y'all, are
you, are y'all hearing a lot
about the increased traffic
right down through the middle of
Hatch because of that,
yes, we have.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and then, um.
In these unincorporated areas
where the millings are available
at the governmental entity wants
to use it. I'm seeing in mostly
like East Mesa, Oregon area. The
roads look like Arroyos, but how
are you letting people know that
they've got access to those
because they have like Moongate
Water District. They have the
Donana swollen water, the county
and city doesn't seem much
interested, but how do you let
people know?
About that and how are we
promoting that program. So Mr.
Chairman Representative Dao, so
we've actually had meetings with
uh some soil and water and
irrigation districts themselves,
um, one of them came up and met
with the secretary and I not too
long ago. Uh, we, we talked a
little bit about TPF and we
talked about the availability of
millings, um, we at the
Association of Counties meeting
uh last week as this session
kicked off. Uh, we were there
and we talked about the donation
of millings there with them as
well. Um, so we're doing the
best we can, um.
Including, including to the
point where we have a design
project out there and we go to
public meetings, we'll let them
know, hey, listen, there's gonna
be some millions coming off this
project is a locals interested
in in accepting some of those
because we can use the contract
to actually have the contractor
taken from the project side and
put them in their yard. So we
have some flexibility when
there's an active construction
project. So there's, there's
lots of things we can do as long
as we can get to know out there,
right, and you, you mean on a
private property yard or, or to
the soil and water or to the
water district or, OK, that's
right, that's right.
representative, that's correct.
All right, Mr. Chair and thank
you. I, um, my.
When I was running for office
back in 16, you were doing the
study and the designs for the
roundabouts and tier see if
anybody's seen, we have 3
roundabouts and tier C within
less than 3/4 of a mile. It's
quite, quite.
Is that tears
Oh my gosh, you have it like on
the cover of like, OK, so I got.
Other than legalizing marijuana,
that was the calls that I got
the most, but it was, it's done,
the reserve been cutting in May,
um, and now I have the city uh
city limits of Socorro and the
front page of the El Chieftain,
like the week after election was
mixed responses over coming
roundabouts, so I was just like,
oh my gosh, we're gonna go
through this again. What, how
many roundabouts do you think
you're going to put through the
business loop in Socorro.
Oh my gosh, Mr. Chair
Representative now, so, so, um,
there's a proposal to do is it's
11 roundabout in Socorro, uh,
again, it's mixed feelings.
It's, it's a lot like the truth
of consequences we have uh
divided opinions on them.
Uh, as we go through our study,
um, you know, we'll, we'll
select the best option and see
what the general public uh tells
us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
Thank you, um.
Uh, for the presentation, uh,
and to the public.
This is my 8th day on the job,
so, uh, so please, uh, um, you
know, I, I apologize, um.
Uh, these acronyms, is there a
directory because
transportation, you guys use a
whole different acronyms and
appropriations. So, uh, if, if I
could just have some assistance
on, on that, um, I'm trying to
look on your website for a
directory on all these acronyms,
uh, like what is the VIP grant,
you know, so it's just, just
stuff like that so I could be
better prepared, um, and, and,
uh.
I appreciate uh representative
Lindstrom for for bringing up
that.
Concern uh with with the state
of Texas. I, I'm concerned about
Texas taking our water.
And, uh, but, um, but to the
committee, uh, Mr. Chairman, I,
I also wanted to just offer uh
uh uh
A little bit of advice, uh, um,
I'm, I'm working on a memorial
bill and uh Senator Ben Ray
Lujan called my office a couple
days ago. A really good
conversation with him cause he's
doing a similar legislation at
the federal level, uh, and, um,
and one thing he mentioned to me
that he's on the uh
transportation committee.
So if, if we can uh uh work with
his office with this federal
issue, um, I think that could,
uh, uh, help, um, uh, move us
forward.
OK.
Thank you. Let's move on.
We're running short on time. You
got it.
Mr. Chairman, if that's all for
District one, we'll move on to
District 4.
Excuse me, Mr. Chair, I had.
Oh, I, I apologize.
We, we missed you.
Uh, first of all, uh, thank you
for being here, Erin, and thank
you for always being available
to answer my questions.
Um, outside of session. I
appreciate that. I guess my my
I'll, I'll skip right to my most
important issue, which is
safety. I know you, you all have
a zero fatality initiative. I
think we heard about during the
interim.
Um, I have a, what I feel like
is a serious problem down on
Highway 9 with wide loads coming
through at the same time, we
have school buses, um, running
from animus into the rural
areas, and I, I get
People contacting me about being
run off the road by wide loads.
I know part of that's a law
enforcement issue. I did reach
out to the state police. They
put license, I think they have
put license plate readers.
To, to monitor who's actually.
You know, who's on the road, but
I was under the impression that
um there are limits or
restrictions as to when those
wide loads can access that road
is, do you know anything about
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, Jones.
So, so we do have a restriction
on the wind blades that uh that
go through New Mexico 9.
Currently, uh uh everything
coming out of Santa Teresa.
Uh, they take New Mexico, they
go west on New Mexico 9, and
then they go back to I-10 and
then come back east and hit
I-25.
Uh, but their, their permit, uh,
is that they shouldn't be on the
road during the school hours
when the buses are en route. So
that would be in the morning,
uh, and then in the afternoon.
And that is their their permit
requirement.
I'm at a loss as to how to
enforce that, and I'm really
concerned about this issue. We
have school buses running off
the roads, you know, um, so I
really.
I like to know your thoughts on
that and how, you know, you all
to be involved in.
In enforcing that, um,
And I will keep up with the
state police as well. I need to
touch base with them about the
license plate readers. Um, it's
just, it's such a rural area,
it's hard to have law
enforcement down there all the
time. Um.
I will move on to another issue
we've talked about in the past,
which is trash on I-10. It is.
Horrific.
don't, I'm embarrassed uh threw
out a lot of my district, it's
just trash everywhere.
And I, I understand at one point
or another, we had been hiring
um
mates from um from the prison to
do that trash pickup and and I'd
like to see that happen again,
or at least some some way to
take care of that, what has been
for as long as I've served now a
terrible problem. Do you have
any updates on that?
Mr. Chair Representative Jones,
so yeah, in the past we did use
uh inmates to pick up trash, uh,
the, the contract we did have
with the corrections, uh, we, it
was, uh, it was really cheap to
use uh inmates for trash pickup.
Uh, we did look into uh getting
into a contract with corrections
against again this year, uh, but
the cost is actually very close
to what we're paying. It's
slightly higher actually than
what we're paying the, the.
a contractor to go out there and
pick up trash.
Um
So we, we do have to, 2 private
contractors, uh.
Uh
on the ground, picking up trash.
Um, it's just we have a big
district and um.
It's, it's hard to get to every
road.
And Mr. Chairman Representative,
we could maybe touch base with
her and after on the sidebar and
give him some of those areas
that you're just seeing
typically every day or whatever
you, you know, whatever's going
on in your district and then we
can direct to the contractors
out there and at least get it
picked up now and, and we'll see
if we can't get, get them on a
more regular rotation in those
areas.
OK, thank you very much. I
really appreciate that. I feel
like people especially going
through on I-10, there's so much
traffic there. They, they have
this vision of New Mexico as
being
Just ugly, and it were not.
And I know it's, it's a big
issue, especially on the um.
The rest stops. And while we're
on that subject, Mr. Chair, um,
the rest stop that has been
closed between Demming.
Lordsburg, the westbound, is
there an update on when that
will be.
Representative Jones, uh, we, we
finally we needed to replace
the, the water system, uh.
And that because it had a high
levels of nitrate. Uh, so we are
very close to opening that rest
area back up. I, I don't have a
date for you, but we're, we're,
we're very close to getting that
open again.
OK, thank you very much. And one
more thing.
Um
I did notice I'm really excited
about the priorities you have
for um Highway 11 and Highway
26.
Um
Do you have any idea when those
will begin?
Mr. Chair Representative Jones.
So, so, um.
That's a, that's a request that
we're making this year for that
those funds, uh, on New Mexico
26, we are going to proceed uh
with uh doing centerline Romo
strips from, from Deming to
hatch.
Uh, as a safety, uh,
Uh
Uh, device, um, and then the,
the paving itself, um, you know,
hopefully, hopefully we can get
some legislative funds to
proceed with that as well.
OK, very good. I'm excited about
the rumble strips. That's great.
I, I use that road all the time.
I know it's, it's a great road,
but it's easy to go too fast.
It's easy to get distracted, got
a nice shoulders and everything,
so we've had a lot of accidents
there. So thank you for
prioritizing that. Appreciate
your help and thank you for
always being there, like I said,
and thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Let's go ahead and
move on.
Mr. Chairman.
Again this morning, happy to
introduce Mr. Adam Romero. He is
the district engineer for
District 4 that is located up in
northeast New Mexico and the
office is located in Las Vegas,
um, where they're seeing lots of
snow this winter where we need
it the most. Um, I'll turn it
over to Mr. Adam Romero, and
he'll take it from here. Thank
you.
Chairman, representatives, uh,
thank you for having me here
today.
As Rick told you, I'm Adam
Romero, the district 4 engineer.
Uh, a little bit about myself.
I'm a, I've been with an MDOT
District 4 for 22 years and uh
And I've been the district
engineer for the last 18 months.
Um, I was born and raised in Las
Vegas, so, um.
I'm home. District 4 is my home,
so.
Um, with that,
Uh, District 4, it's located in
the northeast quadrant of the
state of New Mexico.
Uh, we have 7 counties, uh, we
encompass Colfax, Guadalupe,
Harding, Moraquey, San Miguel,
and Union.
Um, we have 6 rest areas, 4 port
of entries.
Um, we consist of 20
municipalities. Las Vegas is the
largest municipality. We're,
we're a rural district. We're
one of the rural districts in
the state.
Um
Although we're we're rural, we
may not have a large population,
we do have a lot of roads.
Uh, we have approximately 3100
center line miles.
roadways, um.
We have I-40 and I-25 run
through through District 4.
We have a lot of interstate
miles and we also have a lot of
US uh US Highway miles. We have
4 US highways.
Um
So I am the district engineer
are.
Commissioner
Is our NMDOT commission
chairman, Mr. Walter Adams. He's
also from the Las Vegas area.
Um, Mr. Adams, uh, Chairman
Adams.
Uh, is an ex NMDOT employee and
combined all his service with
NMDOT he has well over 40 years
of time.
OK, so, um,
Our fiscal year 25 budget.
We're worried about $44 million
half of that, uh.
Going to payroll and benefits,
then there's a breakdown of the
rest.
As far as our employee
breakdown.
District 4 has uh 313.
Full-time employees. Currently
we have uh 26 vacancies.
Which is about an 8%, uh, we
were, we were actually lower
than that but.
At the end of the year, we had
some retirees, so it went up a
little bit, but, but we are uh
filling those positions.
Page 2
So now, um,
We have our laws of 22, our
legislative funding.
Um
For 2022 we had.
Uh, $20 million.
6 projects
All those projects have been
completed.
Uh, 2021.
We had
$28 million.
Uh, there's a list of the
projects, uh, the majority are
completed.
We have some that are still.
Under construction that are
about those that those that
funding should be spent soon.
Um, we're about to complete all
those projects.
Uh, we also had in 20.
Uh
21, the American uh rescue plan.
We had $9 million that's being
used.
On a roadway, New Mexico 39 and
that projects under construction
right now should be completed by
the end of the year.
Page 3, we have Laws of 2022.
We had 37.
$0.6 million.
We've uh completed all the
projects with the exception of
the Raton Pass phase 3.
And that one was 20, we had 25
million for that project. It is
under construction currently.
And we're looking at our fall
2025 completion.
Uh
Laws of 2023.
We had $12 million.
Uh, 6 projects.
They're all complete with the
exception of of.
One project on New Mexico 434
and that one will be starting up
now in the spring.
OK, uh, let's see, uh, lots of
2024, uh, the 120 million.
Special uh appropriations, our
district got 13.7 million.
We have completed 2 of those
projects.
And uh the other ones will be
starting now in the spring of
2025, the other three.
And as far as the the uh 70
million special transportation
appropriations, our district uh
received $15 million.
We've completed two of those
projects and
The other ones are either um
they they'll start now in the
spring or they're in the design
phase.
Uh, page
Page 4,
Shows uh where all these
projects are located throughout
our district, um.
You could see that we, we try to
spread them out.
Throughout the seven districts.
A lot of the projects are on the
interstate I-40 has a lot of
highlighted areas as, as well as
I-25 and we're also able to get
some of our secondary roads up.
And there also.
Completed, uh, so these are some
of our on page 5, some of our.
A major construction uh projects
that have been completed.
Uh, we had a project in
Tucumerry.
And that's completed as you go
down, you'll see there's many on
I-40, I-25s, a lot of our US
routes are included and some of
our secondaries, uh.
For a total of 141 million.
Dollars
Uh, we have some ongoing
projects on the next table.
Actually, a couple of them
actually got completed recently,
so we, we did put complete on
those ones, um.
But right there, we had 123 of
ongoing projects again, a lot of
interstate projects, US
projects.
And in a few secondaries in
there.
Uh, we got some bridges.
Um, so upcoming major
construction projects, um.
We have uh an I-40 project uh
for 16 million.
And we have uh another project
on 104 for 11 million.
And uh we have
About $30 million of upcoming
construction projects.
OK, um, completed.
Maintenance projects
Um, we've completed.
In the last couple of years,
about $28 million worth of
maintenance projects.
Uh, these aren't very large
projects or to to 2 to $4
million projects, uh, spread out
throughout the district.
Uh, again, we have
A lot of interstate projects and
and US routes also.
Um
We have some upcoming
maintenance projects, um.
I spoke about the noble ship on
4:34 and we're we're doing some
extruded panel signs also on
I-25.
Um
So we had some ongoing wildlife
real quick,
sorry, sorry, uh, Adam, Mr.
Chairman and members, um, I
thought, I thought this was
important for this district to
report out to you all.
As you know, we had the largest
wildfire in his district in the
history of our state and we did
do a lot of work during that
time, not only we were cutting
line and actually in front lines
for for many months there, but
also now that's the clean up and
as everything's kind of coming
back, um, we did have a lot of
damage to our infrastructure and
I, I just wanted Adam to touch
on that and that's where we're
gonna go with this. Sorry, Mr.
uh Chairman, no problem.
Uh, so, so as far as uh wildfire
related maintenance projects,
uh, we spent over $7 million of
state funding.
Um,
Rick was, we got it from Rick's
shop, um, we did Projects
guardrail replacement. We had
routes where the guard role had
completely burned. We had to go
in and replace all the
guardrail, uh, we did a lot of
fence replacement.
Um, and then we did some, some
roadway uh hot and place recycle
projects and recycle milling
projects.
Um, so these are some of the
maintenance projects are also
our our patrols out there, they,
they put in a lot of hours out
there, a lot of overtime.
Um
It was bad. The fire was bad.
But what was worse was the
flooding that came afterwards
that that really made it hard.
Every time it rained, our guys
were working two days straight
to clean up these routes, it
was, it was a nightmare. It was,
it was tough.
OK, page 7,
We have our, our step, which is
our statewide uh.
Transportation improvement
program.
Uh, we have
We're showing fiscal years 25
through 28.
And these are future projects
and there's um.
We have the costs and
And uh everything uh we, we do
have a lot of projects coming up
in the future.
Uh, we have some future unfunded
projects, um.
419, it's a rural route, but it
does need some bridges replaced.
Uh, we have some I-40, an I-40
project and an I-25.
Uh, project, uh, business loop
in Las Vegas, Grand Avenue.
Um
We're looking at the 3rd phase.
And we're looking at the
business loop in Springer.
And then uh we have a study.
From Tucumcurry to the Texas
state line on US 54.
Uh, to see what we need to do
out there if we need passing
names or or lane or what we need
to do, but.
Uh, we're gonna get a, a study
going soon.
Page 9.
Uh
Transportation project fund,
TPF.
For fiscal year 2023, uh, we had
17/17 million dollars.
Spread out throughout our
district through.
Many entities
Um
2024.
We had 8.5 million.
Uh, spread out also through
throughout the district.
Uh, a lot of these entities,
they're.
They don't have a lot of
funding, so these projects
really, really help them out.
They're always very appreciative
for the funding that we can
provide to them.
And uh page 10, there's a map
with the dots showing the
municipalities and counties for
these TPF projects.
Ah
are taking place. Again, we try
to get every through every
county.
OK, so our local government road
fund LGRF.
Uh
2024.
County arterial program cap.
We had 1.5 million, we spread it
out throughout the seven
counties.
Um
School bus routes
About
879,000.
again, we spread it out through
the the seven counties.
Um, municipal arterial program.
Our map program
Another 1.3.
Uh, that we're able to share
with uh.
Looks like 5 entities.
And then our uh
Other cooperative agreement, uh,
we're able to share with uh
New Mexico Highlands University
about $92,000.
Local government road fund
fiscal year 2024 cooperative
agreement, um.
We have
About 1.5 million.
Uh, these are smaller projects,
about $100,000.
Spread out again throughout the
district.
And our school district
cooperative Agreement 2024.
187,000.
Uh, shared between 6 school
districts.
And page 13 just shows uh.
For these projects are located
throughout the district.
That completes the presentation.
Sherman with that I'll stand for
any questions.
Thank you, members, any
questions?
Representative Borego, followed
by Represent Dao and Hernandez.
Thank you gentlemen, again very
clear report.
Um, so I had a question with
regard to your, you mentioned
the fires in northern New
Mexico.
I happened to
Grow up in these areas, um.
Spent a lot of time camping and
fishing.
Um, so I just wondered, um.
You mentioned the amount of
money that you put into
Um, you know, recovering the
roads and debris and all sorts
of things.
Um
Did that
Mr. Chairman Representative
Brego. That's correct. So we
would upfront the money, get the
work done because of the need
and the necessity up there in
the area and then we would seek
reimbursement through FEMA on
the back end. So you, you were
reimbursed.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
just um clarify, not
contradicting at all with Mr.
Padilla said, so.
There are 2 projects, if you
will, that are going on related
to Hermits BA in recovery. The
first is what we're doing on our
state assets and like Mr.
Padilla said, we would go in,
perform the work to repair our
assets. Would that be all the
items that um Mr. Romero talked
about.
And then we'd seek
reimbursement.
The second project is NMDOT has
been managing the fire recovery
efforts for Hermes P Caf Canyon
with a
a single large contractor.
Today we've spent 90 million $90
million.
On fire recovery Herbert's P Ca
Canyon. That funding on the
front end is coming by way of
executive orders by the
governor.
We're working with Department of
Homeland Security and a
third-party monitor to ensure
that all of the expenditures we
make in that effort are
reimbursable by FEMA. When all
of that funding comes back to
us, we'll then reimburse it back
to the fund from which the
executive orders supported it.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was just
checking to make sure that you
guys somehow were made whole in
terms of, you know, the, the
funding that you did spend and
make sure that it doesn't.
Entirely come out of your budget
and then you're not made whole,
so thank you for that.
Have you done a representative?
Representative Dell
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. Can you
tell me about, um, Highway 39
between mascara and Logan, I, I
think this has been going on for
30 years.
What's the plan to complete that
project?
And timeline.
So we're currently working, uh,
we, we've already completed most
of that corridor.
We're currently, we started
another project um there, there
hasn't been much done. It got
suspended for the winner.
Uh, but that is the, the last
stretch.
On the Logan site
And once we complete that, that
road, that stretch will be in
pretty good shape and as, as you
see in in the presentation also
we've done some contract
maintenance on the mosquito site
all the way to US 56 and between
Moscato and Roy, um.
So it's, it's a lot better than
than it's it's been in years
past. Mr. Chair, could you
explain to me what you think is
remaining left un.
After this next um
portion
it's uh I think it's mile marker
5 to 14.
Um
That's north of Logan.
Once that's completed, that,
that stretch is gonna be, I
don't think there's much.
Much more you need to do out
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you Mr. Chair, um,
City Ratton visited my my office
yesterday, so I had a big group
from Ratone, um, and there was a
lot of frustration there.
You know, but, uh, hearing this,
you know, now I, I wish I had
all this information before they
came to visit me and um this is
really good uh for everyone in
the region, including my family,
uh, we usually drive up I-25,
uh, instead of going through
Wolf Creek Pass. So, um, I'm
really good to hear about this
project. Um, the concerns that
they brought up to me was just
how in Colorado, there's a big
difference there. Wait, they're
taking.
I with the road conditions are
compared to and I'm sure that's
all gonna be um uh uh fixed, uh,
they mentioned that this is a
project that's been in
construction since the 70s, and
so, um, yeah, there's just a lot
of frustration there, and I'm
looking forward to this. Uh,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to mention that on page
4, this is an incredibly great
map that's been presented by
this district, and I'd like to
ask if we might be able to get a
similar map like this for all
the districts.
This is, uh, important, I think
for.
because this department is not a
general fund agency.
When I set up and.
2019.
The section 9 in the general
appropriations Act. There's a
lot of.
People not wanting to do that,
but we did it anyway.
It was a way to move general
fund into the construction
budget.
of this department.
So
Now we have an opportunity to
see what was actually spent.
I look at the laws of 2020 and
House Bill 2.
Conceived by the color coding
exactly where it went.
I'd like to ask Mr. Chairman, if
we might be able to get a map
like this for all of our
districts. Um.
This is gonna be super helpful.
Um, so we know where General
Fund went because they were not
a general fund agency, they rely
100%.
On, uh
On the road fund. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Padilla. Can you
help us with that, please, Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
absolutely. I think that's a
great idea and we'll get that
done for you.
I don't think we have any other
regular business other than the
presentations, but a couple of
things I would like to mention,
if we could have a
The ranking member Brown and
Representative Hernandez meet
with Representative Lindstrom,
myself and the vice chair for
just a few minutes after this
meeting.
And also we're gonna start
providing some coffee for the
members back here, uh, hopefully
you drink it. If you don't,
we'll stop doing it. But being
on a owed coffeeholic. I would
like some.
Mr. Chair, you're also providing
burritos. Once in a while,
perhaps.
Thank you. See no further
business meetings adjourned.
