Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee um I'm here to
present House Bill 38, uh, in
2017 October 2017, it had a mass
shooting in Las Vegas, um, as a
result, we, uh, as a federal
government, we were able to pass
a law.
Uh, that, uh, prohibited the use
or possession of a uh.
A modification device that is
commonly referred to as a clock
clip.
Um, it is, uh, it will take a
semi-automatic weapon to uh
fully automatic weapon. This is
currently our, uh, a felony.
This is a a a federal law
as we've heard in many different
of our uh trainings, um, we have
a variety of statistics on our
crime rates throughout the
state, but one thing that has
stayed consistent is an increase
in juvenile.
crime, so these uh lock clips
are especially attractive, uh,
to, uh, that population as well.
And there seems to be an
enormous amount of them, um, in,
in our public and because of
that.
Uh, are
Uh, are, uh, fell in our our
national, I'm so sorry, our uh.
Uh
Our fellow prosecutors have not
been able to have the resources
to always charge on that crime
and so our state law enforcement
and our DAs have come to me and
asked if the legislator could
give them a tool and make what
is already a felony already a
federal crime and put it into
the state crimes so that they
would have if for some reason,
um, they decide the.
Federly decide not to charge on
this possession we would have
the option to charge.
On the state. Uh, I have two
expert witnesses today. One is a
chief of police of Las Cruces, a
chief story, and I also have
district attorney Sam Bergman
from Berlio County, I'd like
them to make a brief statement
and then we'll all stand for
questions, uh, Chief.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jeremy
Stewart, police chief for Las
Cruces. This is an issue that
has hit Las Cruces recently, but
it's hit us very hard. Uh, my
street creams, street crimes
officers have been dealing with
this for the last 1.5 to 2
years. And it seems like it's
continuing to grow and become
more problematic.
Unfortunately, it tends to be
our juveniles that have block
switches. The Glock switch is
very effective at converting a
semi-automatic into a fully
automatic machine gun under the
federal statute.
And there's a lot of damage that
happens. I could show you all
dozens of videos at this point
from Las Cruces from social
media or from search warrants
done on phones that showed the
damage that that is occurring in
Las Cruces. They're used on
drive-bys, they're used to
damage property. They're used to
shoot each other, um, and it's
extremely concerning because we
don't have an answer for it
right now. Obviously for officer
safety, it's a significant
challenge because generally
speaking, the police don't tend
to carry.
guns are select fire weapons
anymore. And so we have kids and
young adults running around with
fully automatic weapons, um.
This is an issue I think that
A few years ago, I probably
would have jumped on. I, as a,
on a personal note, I'm a
competitive shooter. I spent a
lot of time competing
nationally. I've done well for
myself and I say that because
I'm a gun guy. I I enjoy
firearms. I love shooting. That
is my outlet for stress relief.
So this isn't about trying to
ban a gun. This is about banning
a device that takes a gun and
makes it into something that is
already illegal on the federal
side.
The Assistant US Attorney's
office. It's not that they're
unwilling to prosecute these,
but they don't have the capacity
and so in Las Cruces, it's about
10 to 20% of the cases that they
can take on. And so the rest of
them, they go in charge. So when
we have juveniles oftentimes
involved in gangs that possess
these if we don't have a stolen
gun if they're not under 19.
There's absolutely nothing we
can do. There's nothing we can
charge. We can't even seize that
weapon because it's not a crime
on the state side.
So I
I urge and I appreciate the the
representative for taking this
on and sponsoring this bill and
Mr. Bregman for being an
advocate for this because this
is something that we are seeing
across the state. And if you're
not seeing it in your community,
you will. They're too easy to
get.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
Thank you, Chief, and now I'd
like to have the district
attorney speak. Thank you.
Madam Chair, representatives,
thank you for this opportunity
to speak to you. I think um both
the representative and the chief
of of laid out a little bit of
what this does. Let me just add
the following. It is already
illegal under federal law to use
these conversion devices. It's
already illegal there.
These conversion devices are
very, what they do is you put
them in.
You can make them on a 3D
printer, you put them in the
gun.
And all of a sudden having to
pull the trigger each time to
fire round. They fire 30 rounds
in 2.3 seconds. I think my
office handed out a handout.
There's a QR code. There's a 5
2nd video on that QR code should
you choose to see that, but
that's how they work, these
Glock switches.
are so devastating.
I, I hate to even use these
words, but they're.
Eventually, unfortunately, cop
killers. All you do is point the
firearm pull and hold the
trigger in 30 rounds in 2
seconds. How does a police
officer defend themselves
against that.
And the, the, the mass
destruction of human life that
these switches can do.
is astronomical.
Um
You may ask the question, why do
we need it?
If there's a
If there's a federal law already
for we absolutely need this. So
many decisions even out on the
street when the US attorney's
office is contacted by local law
enforcement or federal law
enforcement.
And they decide not to take the
case.
For whatever reason that might
be, oftentimes it's because they
don't have the manpower, the
bandwidth to take the case.
person who just shot up.
Uh
A full clip of 30 rounds if you
will, in 2.3 seconds.
No consequences. They're left,
they're left to go, they're left
to be free.
I want to help you, our partners
in the US Attorney's office when
it comes to combating violent
crime. I want the opportunity,
so do my fellow district
attorneys around the state these
conversion devices are hitting
the streets everywhere, and
let's get ahead of it before
we're too far behind, and so I
would ask that you consider
supporting this legislation. I
think it would really be um
important and it's something we,
we would be able to absolutely
use right away and
and effectively in the district
attorney's office in
Albuquerque. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Yes, I, I just like to take a
moment and I really would like
to applaud uh our state law
enforcement and the district
attorney offices across the
state. They have reached out to
me. They're asking for the
legislature to give them this
tool so that they can have the
option to make the charges when
the federal uh enforcements are
not able to because of
resources. This is at an
epidemic rate. That's why
there's.
So many of them and why they
want it, I really want to thank
um the law enforcement and the
prosecutors across the state
that they are willing to uh ask
for this tool so that they can
address this issue. Thank you. I
rest for questions.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to the
audience, um, who is here in
opposition.
OK, would everyone like to
speak?
OK, um, where we have under 10,
so um we'll go ahead and pass
the um microphone to you.
And 2 minutes max. You can
always go less.
That sounded like encouragement.
And then please state your name.
Yes, ma'am. My name is David
Brannan. I lived in New Mexico
all my life. Uh, family.
sisters, brothers, I've raised
kids.
Nurses first responders, law
enforcement,
Um
And indeed, we, we do have a
crime problem in New Mexico. Uh,
what concerns me is that I'm a
problem solver by profession,
and
All too often we seem to say
that.
Guns
commit crimes, and we go at our
problems with that assumption.
And I, I don't think that that
we will ever solve these
problems at that um and so.
This bill
Uh, purports to match the
federal.
The law, but in indeed, um,
It's, it's not, right, so it's
only part of the federal law,
and all too often we don't fully
understand or appreciate or give
credence to law-abiding New
Mexicans. And so in this case,
um, there is no exception in
this bill.
And so if you have taken the
time to uh get registered as an
NFA owner and you're firearms
collector, and you spend the
time, money and resources to
engage in that business, uh,
this bill would make you a
felon, um, also noted where
these is that, uh, law
enforcement is not accepted in
this, and so is law enforcement
going to
Handover
I, I, I that not.
And so my concern is my request
is that this is a problem, and I
appreciate uh my legislators,
take your time to look at them.
But
You know, there's a community of
people who
Statistically are more
law-abiding than even law
enforcement.
But we're not going to invite
them.
Um, I think we can do better.
That's my request.
Thank you.
Thank you, Nick Sanchez from
Northern New Mexico. First of
all, the bill of legislation
following the Vegas shooting was
not.
A Glock switch. It was a bump
stock.
And that legislation was
overturned in the Supreme Court.
Furthermore, there's no mention
of a Glock switch in this bill.
It's so vague. I don't think any
of us even know what was being
talked about.
And as we know, when you pass
something like this, you're
taking it out of the hands of
the law-abiding citizens and
potentially making them a felon.
Felons that are already existing
are criminals, they don't care
about your laws.
So if they want to get one or
possess one, they're gonna hang
on to it or get one.
Furthermore, the language states
under federal law that any type
of device or weapon that's
classified as fully automatic is
not banned. It is, it is
resectioned under a class 3 NFA
item, not making it illegal to
possess, but requiring a special
permit and license. There's a
lot of people like he spoke
before me that have NFA said
items and by passing.
something like this, you are now
taking away.
The permit and licensing he took
to possess that item which
federally lost states. But
furthermore, I didn't see any
language in there about banning
for purchases of those items in
New Mexico, which would prevent
them from ending up in the wrong
hands. Instead, this is a law
that's only gonna make felons
out of the law-abiding citizens.
People that purchased them while
they were legal.
Say they have a firearm that's
modified with some sort of
switch. It doesn't say a glock
switch. It says a device, and
that is so vague and can be
interpreted by a judiciary
system, a law enforcement agent,
any which way they can.
Thank you.
OK, we're gonna limit it to 10
people, so um.
We don't want people adding in
as the
didn't raise their hands.
Madam Chair of members of the
committee, I want to start off
by thanking you for the
questions and the decision you
made earlier on the previous
bill, uh, the last thing we want
to do is turn our kids into
felons based on some prank or
something uh uh allegation that
somebody made, so thank you for
that and uh uh let me, let me
state again that uh we just have
major concerns with a lot of
this legislation that
seems to be like inching away
at.
People having semi-automatic
weapons as an example, and, and
again, as I said earlier, tools
that uh we uh.
Guns, tools, we find necessary
in our rural areas in our ranch
life, uh, that we absolutely
have to have to reduce the
threat of, of predators on the
ranch, not only to our
livestock, but to our kids, you
know, uh, with, with that said,
uh,
I, I ask that uh you folks make
a conscientious decision every
time this bills come up.
that
We're not trying just to be uh
politically contrary to a
federal laws or decisions made
by the Supreme Court, so that
somehow this state can get an
edge on gun owners because
that's a, that's the way it
appears a lot of times that
pieces of legislation are being
introduced.
Regardless of the fact that we
already have.
1900 laws.
That can be used to address this
matters in the, in the fact
that.
We have felons on the street
carrying guns, uh, I give a
classic example 2 years ago, my
nephew was uh was killed.
Uh, shoot out and
One of the active members in
that incident was a felon with a
gun, and he never was even
charged. The sheriff and the
state police gave him a slap on
the hand and sent him away, so
the fact is that we have all of
these laws in the books.
Somebody isn't implementing
them, so we have violence that
continues. Uh, thank you for
your time.
OK. Someone else in the back,
OK.
My name is Eugene Burdette.
I'm one of the executive
committee from the New Mexico
gold Miners Association.
We are required.
As a group when we go out in the
wild that we carry a sidearm.
We've had people encounter
lions.
Bobcats, rattlesnakes, a lot of
other things out in the wild.
Now we go, we do our gold mining
out in the mountains where you
get a lot of this wild far out
there, and
It's, you know, you never know
when you're gonna have something
come up on you.
And by going in there and
attacking the guns is not the
way to go.
Because we have a requirement
that we carry a side on when we
go in the mountains.
So
You know, please think about
that and uh give it an idea to
see what you have to do. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Tom Kay
and I'm here today representing
the New Mexico Firearms Industry
Association.
We support 100% the legal
ownership of firearms in their
use, and we fully support.
full prosecution of anybody who
commits a crime with a firearm.
We understand the intent of this
bill, however, we don't support
it as it's written.
Um, it's already illegal
federally to, to own these
conversion devices which has
already been talked about.
Um, however, there is a process
through the National Firearms
Act to legally own them.
Uh, for having one without going
through the process, the federal
penalty is $25,000 fine.
And 10 years in prison.
Um, many people, collectors and
enthusiasts are legally own
these devices.
And there's no way for them to
continue to legally own them.
Not just machine guns. I don't
understand those aren't included
in the bill. It's the conversion
devices.
There are conversion devices out
there pre 1986 manufacturer that
are legally owned. These would
become illegal and turn those
folks into felons.
There's confusion and ambiguity
in the bill. I got to see more
of it as the bill was being
presented. I heard reference to,
I believe it was a bump stock in
the Las Vegas shooting.
That was banned by executive
order, the courts later
overturned that.
I've heard mention of what Glock
switch. I've heard mention what
Glock clip.
Let's be clear about what we're
talking about here. So everybody
understands.
If
This bill is changed.
To read verbatim with the
federal law says in regards to
these items and includes the
National Firearms Act language
about possession after
completing the process.
Then the New Mexico firearms
Industry Association and
National Shooting Sports
Foundation will support the
bill.
And New Mexico shooting sports.
Thanks, Anthony.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chairman.
Members of the committee, Carry
Romero, executive director and
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Council of Outfitters and
Guides. To be clear, we're not
opposed to the intent of this
bill. But we would like to see
is an amendment to the
definition of conversion devices
to mirror the federal law. And
it basically in all of the
federal documentation, they call
it machine gun conversion
device. What's problematic about
calling it weapon conversion
device is that it rolls in other
types of conversion devices. So
for example,
like a caliber conversion device
which would allow you to shoot a
different type of ammunition,
maybe a cheaper type of
ammunition, something like that.
So, um, we would just request
that it be amended to, to mirror
the federal law. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook at the Law Offices of the
Public Defender, as with the
previous commenter, we do not
oppose the intent of the bill,
which we believe to be
preventing the commission of
violent crime with automatic
firearms, uh, LOPD has been
working for many years to
identify ways to prevent crime
rather than reacting to crime
with higher penalties. Our
primary concern with this bill
is that it makes it a 3rd degree
felony rather than making it
illegal in a civil way, which
would also
give law enforcement the ability
to seize the weapons from
people. The, what we think the
result will be, is not that
people are going to just be pro
prosecuted for possessing these,
these, uh, devices, but that
this is going to become an
add-on charge in cases where the
devices were used to commit a
violent crime where we already
have 1000 laws on the books to
prosecute. So we don't think it
will actually make our
communities any safer. We do
think it will only increase
incarceration rates in
Mexico, and we would ask you to
consider a civil alternative.
Thank you.
Anyone else in opposition.
He will go to um.
Our Zoom audience.
OK. Go ahead and unmute.
Madam Chair and the members of
the committee, uh, for the
record on behalf of the National
Rifle Association here in
opposition as uh some of the
previous, previous commenters
stated this goes well beyond
federal law, has a lot of
ambiguities and seems to go
beyond the intent as expressed
by the proponents today, blocks
switches are illegal under
federal law. Our concerns are
this will implicate many
currently lawfully owned and in
some case licensed firearms and
firearms parts. Thank you.
Thank you, Nick.
The medical care. My name is
John Wilson from Mexico.
I'm district director in
Massachusetts Association.
And I have some concerns about
this bill for mostly what has
already been stated, but also as
a pass law enforcement officer,
I do understand that passing
laws like this.
Do not work to prevent crime. It
it did, we wouldn't have had
marijuana on our streets, the
one we did before we legalized
it, we wouldn't have a fental
problem with that now.
What we need to do again is
address the real issues and
that's progressing criminals and
keep them in jail.
And not let me buy gang members
and
Prime, these people commit
crime, get a hold of me. And
that's why I will not stop doing
that.
If we put these criminals in
jail when they commit crimes.
That would reduce the
opportunity for most criminals
to get this uh.
Again, you're affecting
law-abiding citizen for
licenses.
Either deal or own some
apparatuss while doing nothing
that will get them off the
street.
Please consider crime bills that
will really do something.
The crime.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next
Good
afternoon, ma'am. Can you hear
me?
Yes, we can.
I stand in opposition to this
bill as a retired law
enforcement officer for uh a lot
of the reasons that have been
well articulated, uh, by, by the
New Mexico Shooting Sports
Association and others. I'm also
part of a nat uh New Mexico
better together advocacy network
that includes thousands of New
Mexicans from every county,
every corner of the state,
lawful gun owners who uh would
echo what you've heard already
about protecting 2nd Amendment
rights and not infringe upon the
rights of lawful kind of guns.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
That's it? Oh, OK. Thank you.
All right. Um, now we'll go to
the audience and those in
support and
That's Keep your hands up. We
just wanna make sure we have 10
people that we can, uh, 2
minutes or less. OK, let's go
ahead.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
good afternoon and thank you,
Marcus Montoya, a judicial
district attorney also in New
Mexico, District Attorneys
Association president and um
your criminals are evolving
technologically, finding ways to
skirt the law, um, take
semi-automatics and making them
automatic with a blink of an eye
and uh in order to maintain
their superior firepower um in
their marketplace against rebel
gangs, against the citizens of
the state, also against your law
enforcement. And so
For those reasons, we too need
to evolve. Our lives need to be
able to keep up with uh their
practices in order to keep the
community safe. Um, I did hear a
lot of the opposition, a lot of
the comments, and I'm a positive
uh and confident in uh the
sponsor our experts and in this
legislative body to craft
language that is gonna not
criminalize uh law-abiding
citizens, but for those reasons,
um, the, uh, New Mexico District
Attorney Association does stand
in support of this, uh,
legislation. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of this committee. Uh,
my name is Robert Hart. I'm the
director of the Governor's
Organized Crime Commission. We
stand in support of this bill
based on our work throughout the
state, uh, two things I've heard
a tremendous amount of law
enforcement officers that have
contacted me and asked for this
very legislation to come
forward. What we see often is
that uh violent gangs are often
using these as enforcement
tactics, just as as DA Montoya
was saying, and there's, it's
not unheard of.
For law enforcement to make
contact with a gang that
Their only crime is actually
having these in their
possessions, uh, in their
possession, it's a lot of the
local and state law enforcement
officers, they have their hands
tied because if the feds aren't
taking the case, they're not
prosecuting the case. There's
nothing they can do. So this is
a huge threat to our
communities. It's being used by
these violent criminal
organizations, and we support
this bill. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is David Funis, and I'm
here on behalf of Sheriff John
Allen and the Bernao County
Sheriff's Office.
Uh, in Berlio County, we have
seen a rising number of these
devices in the hands of
criminals. Their presence poses
a significant threat to both law
enforcement and the community as
they drastically increase
firepower, heightened risks
during confrontations and raise
the potential for mass
casualties due to the rapid rate
of fire.
Addressing this issue is
critical to ensuring the safety
of our deputies and the public.
Thank you.
afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name's Dale Wagner. I'm a deputy
chief of the New Mexico State
Police. I have the honor of
serving over the criminal.
The crime suppression unit and
the special operations unit of
the state police.
Uh, it's actually my.
Distinguished on her because my
crime suppression bureau and my
special operations bureau, Bill.
With these violent felons that
have these this equipment all
the time. They go out every day,
and they put their lives on the
line.
The Department of Public Safety
supports this bill due to the
growing prevalence of weapon
conversion devices which pose a
significant threat to public
safety.
These devices enable firearms to
fire at an uncontrolled rapid
rate, creating the potential to
sever.
For severe harm to both
communities and first
responders.
Although weapon conversion
devices are illegal under
federal law.
New Mexico currently lacks state
statutes to address this.
This gap means that the federal
authorities to
Choose if the federal
authorities choose not to
prosecute these cases involving
these devices, offenders face no
criminal consequences.
This bill would close that
loophole by ensuring state level
accountability, providing law
enforcement with an essential
tool to combat violent crime.
The creation of a state crime
for unlawful possession of a
weapon conversion device is a
necessary step in safeguarding
public safety.
These devices enable the
transformation of semiotic
semi-automatic firearms and a
fully automatic ones,
undermining gun control measures
designed to limit the
accessibility of military grade
weaponry.
By criminalizing their
possession and imposing
penalties such as a 3rd degree
felony charge. This legalization
reinforces the seriousness of
tampering with firearms.
It also acts as a deterrent,
reducing the likelihood of a
legal modifications and
promoting safer communities.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's William
Fireri and I'm a retired
computer scientist here in Santa
Fe.
I didn't actually know if I
should raise my hand earlier or
raise it now because I'm
actually on the fence about
this.
I could support HB 38, but I ask
you to consider two changes that
would improve it, both of which
are closely related. I would ask
for more specificity in the
definition of a machine gun
conversion device.
For example, has been discussed
earlier, a bump stock is not a
conversion device by federal law
and litigation.
Please consider writing down
precisely what you mean.
And secondly, please consider
making your definitions
consistent with federal law to
spare us later ambiguities and
lawsuits.
Madam Chair, Representatives,
thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for letting me speak this
afternoon. I'm here on behalf of
the Albuquerque Police
Department to express our
support for this bill. Commander
Jeff Bernard of the
Investigative Services Division.
I've overseen our gun violence
unit, our gun suppression unit,
or gang unit, and our narcotics
unit. I can tell you from
firsthand experience, we have
seen these devices. We've been
able to purchase them, we've
gotten them on search warrants.
They're very prevalent in the
community and easy to obtain.
I would ask that we think about
the danger these pose to the
community and take action so
there's proper consequences for
these things.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith's
matron, and I'm speaking on
behalf of the League of Women
Voterss of New Mexico and the
American Association of
University Women and uh I agree
with the comments that are just
made. Uh, I urge the committee
to pass this on to judiciary,
make the changes that might be
necessary to conform with
federal law, uh, but this is a
really important bill and uh we
shouldn't delay.
in this committee, uh, judiciary
has the skills to, uh, you know,
to get it to line perfectly with
the federal statutes and the
definitions, um, and I think
this is very, very important
bill. Thank you very much, uh,
to the sponsor and all the law
enforcement experts and
judiciary and justice folks who
worked on it. Thank you.
Thank you. One more.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Janet Williams.
I'm speaking for the National
Organization for Women and for
Moms Demand Action. We support
this bill. We think it's very
important that New Mexico have a
statute on the books.
It's uh, it, it
can't be just left in the
federal hands. We need to
protect ourselves. Thank you
very much.
I think that's everyone.
Um, do we have anyone one person
on Zoom?
John, if you can.
Go ahead.
OK, um, unmute yourself, John,
if you would like to speak.
OK, well,
Just have to go ahead. Thank
you. Um, did you have anything
representative to follow up.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committees, yes, I've just
been informed by my expert
witnesses that they would
consider a friendly amendment to
amend before judiciary to be
more in line with the federal
law.
If this committee so uh sees fit
to give a due pass on this, we
will make sure that it is
amended before it hits
judiciary. Thank you. That's
great. Do we have a list?
Go to the committee. OK,
Representative Lord, thank you,
Madam Chair and experts.
Just one second. So are you
saying that you want to roll the
bill and come back with the
correct amendments to align it,
cause I think if you did,
everybody would agree with it,
otherwise I'm gonna sit here and
ask you a bunch of questions.
Sorry about, I was asking her if
she wants to do the, cause I
know what amendment she's
looking at if she wants to amend
the bill and then come back and
roll it, or does she want to
continue and then hand them a
judiciary, what she wants to do
with this bill
will be. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and thank you
Representative, we'll be glad to
answer questions.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you,
Representative. Thank you,
District Attorney Bregman, and
thank you, Chief story.
I will forget that promptly in 2
minutes, you're gonna become
experts now at this point.
So Madam Chair and
representatives. So if I
understand correctly,
Uh, the gap is that
The feds don't always press
charges. Is that what brought
this about?
Madam Chair Representative, it
is that we have an overwhelming
amount of these conversion
devices on the street and the
feds uh I will sometimes have
limited resources and choose not
to charge. The state is asking
state law enforcement and state
prosecuting DA's offices at
asking for state law so that if
the feds choose not to charge,
they will have the option.
So Madam Chair and
representative, can I ask you
why didn't you line it up
exactly with federal law.
So we actually believe it is
it's.
It is exactly the same when it
comes to the intent of it and in
exactly the same when it comes
to the actual
Implementation of it as well,
um, we didn't name in ours the
previous.
Bill
um, the previous law that says
about, for example, antique
firearms. We're forcing, we're
focusing on conversion devices
as you can see. This doesn't
involve the actual firearm.
We're not trying to ban any
firearm. I'm a gun owner myself.
That's not the purpose of this.
It's to ban.
The Glock switches that are made
on 3D printers. It's to ban the
Glock switches that are imported
from out from countries outside
of ours, that's the intent on
this. We see these everywhere
right now on the streets and we
have to be able to continue to
be able to prosecute him as
well. Here's this issue and by
the way, I, I, I'm not opposed
to the friendly amendment to
make sure that, and we, I just
found out about the concerns
from some of the gun owners, uh,
the gun rights.
Groups if you will, just before
we walked in, um, I, I of course
would defer to the
representative who carrying the
legislation, but I personally am
not opposed to making sure
everybody's happy, but
We've got to get these things
off the streets, and I don't
think there's anybody that can
truly argue that since it's
against the federal law, why
would we not have a state law
because our US attorney's office
is overwhelmed as well as
everybody else is, they need the
help in prosecuting me, so it
makes all the sense in the
world.
And Medicare representative and
experts, that's not what I was
debating. I was debating that
why didn't we just match it,
which is gonna lead to my second
question.
Um, so on the federal level,
Annoying possession of a
conversion device.
It's a violation. You want to
make it a 3rd degree felony.
And a $5000 fine.
Why are we making it so much
less than what the feds do. The
feds do 10 years and a $250,000
fine. Can you explain to me why
we didn't match that exactly.
Yes, madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question.
So, um, Madam Cha
representative, the reason for
this is we are, I, I think I
have a fairly good understanding
when we propose this of the
sentencing structure for all the
crimes.
In the state of New Mexico that
our offices charges every day.
So, um,
I thought this was a reasonable.
Um, for a device that can do the
damage that it does, um, a 3rd
degree felony was appropriate.
If you wanted, I mean, I'm not
gonna post to somebody saying it
should be a second degree
felony, um, but at the same time
I don't think it should warrant
just a 4th degree felony which
is just 18 months.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker. I, for me, I would have
rather seen everything just
matched exact same as what the
feds do, because I got really
irritated last time when we had
the, um, stock purchase.
18 months
What, sorry, what is the point
in even doing that, but I'm not
saying that with this one. I'm
just saying I would like to see
that map.
Um
So I do have another question,
Madam Chair and Representative.
So when we were drafting this.
Let me jump ahead to something I
want to ask specifically.
I it's the meat. Tell me and
define exactly which.
Components we're talking about
banning because it's not listed
specifically, and that is also
an issue for a lot of people.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, I will
defer to my expert witness.
Madam, madam chair
representative.
Our intent is to.
It's not, it's not bump stocks.
It is.
Conversion devices that are put
on these locks.
literally
Turn them
Into an automatic weapon.
Machine guns so that you pull
the trigger back, and it
continues to fire. They're made
on 3D printers, they're made by
companies outside of this
country and shipped in and
people buy them actually online
and other places, so um that's
specifically we're talking about
the switches that are put on
these guns to make them into.
Machine guns
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, the reason
that I ask that is because I
know a lot of people came to me
that had problems with
ambiguity, because we don't,
we're not talking about bump
stocks, we're not talking about
binaries. We're talking about
these switches. The other thing
I would recommend
representative.
Sorry, Madam Chair, represent
experts, we don't call them
block switches because can't I
get a switch for my 6 hour?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative in the bill,
there is no phrase of bumps, uh,
bump stocks or lock switches in
the build conversion to spices
in the in the yeah, and thank
you, Madam Chair, I would have a
lot less heartburn if you just
specifically spelled out exactly
what it is you're trying to do,
so there's zero ambiguity.
And also I would not, if it was
me, refer to them as Glock,
which is if there's another name
to call them because there are
other devices they can like 6
hour.
Um, Madam chair and
Representative.
Is there
Is there a reason cause in the
federal law.
They have got.
When they talk about various
things, they also talk about a
short barreled shotguns and
other things that would be
included. There's a reason why
those were not included in this
bill as well, making of a short
shotgun because that has been an
issue as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. This bill
is about conversion devices.
Man and Ribson please define
transport. What do you mean by
transport because the federal,
when I look at the federal law.
And get to the bottom of all
notes, uh, when I look at 924
does not require the gun to have
been traveled in interstate
commerce. So why did you include
that?
Into this, why it went and to
find travel and why is it being
included in this. If I
understand correctly, it's not
on the federal level.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
will defer to my expert witness.
Madam Chair representative, so
transport.
Let's say that we've got 3 boxes
of these in the trunk of a car.
someone's transporting from one
part of the state to another.
to make sure they can sell to
all their their fellow criminals
to put on weapons so that they
can engage in
Destructive behavior, to say the
least.
So that's a transport. There's
an example of transport where it
doesn't go.
Mm
Over a state line or anything
like that. I mean, we don't need
to deal with whether or not it
goes over a particular county
line or whether with your
transporting these and maybe not
possessing them on your person,
we would also want to be able to
prosecute you for transporting
these devices.
OK, Madam Chair representative
expert, I wanna see if I
understand that correctly.
So you're saying if they.
And the device, the one
particular device we're talking
about that Keridges Glocks with.
If they had them in their car.
And they didn't have.
Back to all the time. We didn't,
they didn't have them. They,
they have them illegally. They
don't have paperwork. There's
nothing.
So you're saying that that's
what you want to be able to
arrest because they're just
transporting it.
In the car. Isn't that still
just possession?
Thank you Madam Chair, thank you
your representative. Yes, I'll
defer to my expert witness,
Madam Chair and representative,
it perhaps could be possession.
It always depends. They're all
these issues are always fact
specific when you look at them
to determine what's possession
or what's transportation, but
transporting them from one place
to another place, we certainly
want to be able to prosecute
that individuals doing that
regardless of whether or not we
can establish the actual
possession.
OK, so Madam Chair
Representative, so that let me
break down a little bit more
about what you mean by
possession.
Possession is then having it on
you.
I'm trying to think of a
question for you to start. I
don't know what it's gonna be,
but maybe I'll ask you about
your dissert specifically, but
So you have it on your
possession versus it is not in a
firearm. Is that what you're
talking about? So possession
could be it's already in.
The firearm being used and
possession would be you have
that lack of a better word,
glock switch in your pocket.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I think we
define transportation, so it's
um to transport you could mail
it, you could have it in your
car, you could be using it for
illegal purposes, it could be in
your weapon.
Transport follows falls under
all those scenarios.
Humanitarian representative and
expert, so
There's nothing that I see in
the bill because the main issue,
as you know.
District attorney Bregman that
they're getting these items all
over the place.
So there's nothing in here
specifically to go after
manufacturers.
Or the person that sent it from,
let's say China, sorry to pick
on.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you represent. That's correct.
Madam Cha this and experts.
So this is specifically then
just.
For them having the possession,
but to answer to the question
I'm still trying to get to.
His possessions is defined as in
the car or possession to find if
it's in a firearm.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. We
use the word possession and
transport in this bill.
OK, Madam Chair, so you're
saying in both scenarios, OK.
When I was looking at.
Mm
Built earlier and talking to
some of our experts.
That
Work in this scenario.
What happens to our FFLs.
That have these in stock.
That using whenever they do a
shooting expo or when they work
with law enforcement.
Are they still also gonna be
felons, or are they going to be
exempt from?
A madam chair uh representative,
uh, so you are, um.
And FFL
I'm sorry, sorry, Madam Chair,
and FFL.
Is what I'm asking specifically
for FFLs.
Yes, so your scenario is that
there is um a contact contacts
using uh.
These conversion devices that
are um uh a felon, uh, currently
a federal crime.
No, what I'm saying is the FFLs.
If they had possession of those,
if they were going to convert a
semi-auto to a full auto, which
they do some time for law
enforcement scenarios.
Would they be exempt or would
they also become a felon, this
spill passes.
Madam Chair representative, um,
are they currently a felon in
this scenario.
No, but it doesn't exclude them
and cherubs, and that's what I'm
trying to get at that. I don't
see anything that also excludes.
And FFL when they're working
with law enforcement legal ways
to make a conversion.
I'm just trying to make sure
term representative that our
FFLs don't get caught up in the
middle of this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'll have
our chief answer this finally
the chief gets Manpresentative
Lord.
It's not common practice for law
enforcement to do exposes or
demonstrations with what we call
a block switch or conversion
device like that. We obviously
can lawfully possess um machine
guns or select fire weapons. So
if we were working with an FFL
who is authorized to distribute
machine guns. We'd be working
with uh a gun that's designed
from the factory to be a machine
gun.
And, and select fire.
But I don't, I don't know of a
scenario. It definitely won't be
best practice for a law
enforcement agency to
Convert, say, a duty pistol with
a Glock switch that would.
I don't see a law enforcement
agency doing that.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, does this
affect
Jumping all around in my notes.
In the um
Machine guns.
Some came equipped.
The ones before 1986. Some came
equipped, they became fully
auto.
Some were converted.
Um, or there are times where
there's weapons are converted
from semi to full that are still
lawful owners.
With the ear switch, I believe
that's what.
Look at my notes.
How does that play out for them?
If they're in possession.
Of that switch and the firearm
that they have legality to own.
Because it was before 1986. What
happens in that scenario?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative if uh their
conversion device is not a crime
today on the federal level, it
will not be a crime within the
state bill.
See, that's something else,
Madam Chair and I'd like to see
in the bill because I want to
make sure there are people that
are lawful.
Owners because I don't know if
people understand you can own a
machine gun.
That is lawful to own a machine
gun in our country.
And it just has to have certain
stipulations, you have to.
beg the government and buy a tax
stamp and pay exorbitant fees
and, and then you can have
possession of that and they can.
Then you get on the list of who
owns that.
So what I want to make sure is
that those people that legally
own that are not going to be
taken down with this bill that
is moving forward, probably.
Um
Cuz the bill has no exceptions
for legally possessed NFA
compliant parts.
Uh, would you be in the future
willing to make sure that those
are excluded, that any NFA
compliant parts.
Or weapon conversions.
Would be in the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative, if
that is not part of the federal
law, then we will not be putting
it in this state.
Um, in this bill in our
amendment.
So Madam Chair and
representative.
Are you willing to
Change definitions in the
future.
So 26 USC section 54 5854B
defines a machine gun as any
weapon which shoots is designed
to shoot or can be readily
restored to shoot automatically
more than one shot with that
manual reloading by a single
function, the trigger.
And we'll be, you'd be willing
to amend.
Line 2.
Hold on page 2.
Line 4
strike that.
And insert which.
The weapon which instead of
that.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
I'll be glad to provide you with
the amendment when we bring it
back.
Um
And we will certainly consider
that.
Manage and represented because
The issue with the bill, it
isn't that nobody supports it.
Everybody said repeatedly that
they support it. It's that you
didn't match.
The wording of the feds and what
we don't want ever in this
scenario is to have something
that is completely different.
We want it to match exactly.
So there's some amendments that
need to be made that help happen
in.
It's going to judiciary, Madam
Chair and next.
Yes.
I'm, I'm sure that they are
already aware of all this and
that they will be able to
Make some changes in definition.
We also need to be careful when
we define.
Weapon
Because of Westlaw indicates
that the state criminal law that
a weapon can be.
Sword cane, sharp cane,
slingshots, so you need to make
sure you have the wording
correctly as it.
On the federal level.
Um
Madam Chairman Representative.
When we do this when someone
gets arrested on this charge.
Which is gonna be a felony.
I'm going to support the bill
only with hopes that you change.
If you don't, we're gonna have a
3 hour debate.
Or saying
So Madam Chair and
Representative, um, I hope that
you take it very seriously on
the things that need to be
changed and just line it up
exactly with the feds do. My
biggest grievance, I don't, I
want the charges to be the same.
I want the fine to be the same.
Um
And it's concerning.
We still haven't addressed the
issue of how we're going to take
all of these components off the
market.
Those are everywhere.
So we're going to pass this.
People are going to get
arrested.
And if we don't keep them behind
bars, like I said earlier in the
last bill, they're gonna get
out, commit the same exact crime
all over again.
We're still not getting to the
heart of the problem, but the
problem is when you go on.
to the apps that have these
things for sale and people are
using bitcoins. I don't even
know how we even follow through.
Make sure that there's just that
happen.
Other than when the person has
them in the possession.
Um
On this,
What is it gonna take to
Work with the ATF on the same
level.
Because you're taking something,
taking it off the market, what
happens that switch, so it goes
through the whole process.
After the chain of custody, is
that then surrendered to the ATF
or where does that component go?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'll defer
to my expert witness.
OK
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
at the conclusion of a criminal
investigation, there's a
certain, there's a retention
period, but eventually it's set
for destruction, so it's
destroyed, similar to how we
have to destroy certain firearms
that are used in a crime.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Um
Like everybody has said before,
I brought up all my questions. I
had a lot that's what I was
trying to bounce around.
I won't support it. I'll.
I'm gonna vote no on it now.
But that's because I don't know
what you're gonna do to it in
the future. I'm sure I
representative.
If you change it to a line.
So to feel about how I feel
about this uh.
3 years in prison.
And $5000 fine when the feds are
doing 10 years and 250,000.
Um, I'll have to think about
that part, but if you can move
it forward and make all the
amendments that would make
everybody happy because what I
have, I already have a bunch of
amendments sent to me by people
that are in the gun industry, by
lobbyists.
And especially by people back
there that you should always
talk to whenever you do a gun
bill, because they can sit down,
the FFLs can sit down and talk
to you, and they have a whole
organization and they're not
mean, they're not aggressive,
they will just sit down and
explain to you.
These are our concerns. This is
what you should be doing. So
when you come to this time at
this table, you already have a
bill that's been perfected and
reviewed and everybody say,
yeah, that's great and we
wouldn't have to spend time
discussing the bill. So that is
my biggest issue, um.
And that's for anybody who
brings forward gun bills. Always
make sure you deal with the
FFLs, of course, always with law
enforcement with people with
boots on the ground to
understand how this thing
affects them.
But I'm going to be voting no
today. Uh, I may change my mind
once it gets to the house floor,
um.
But that's all the question I
have and please, I, I mean,
seriously, I talked to these
people with the FFLs because
they're the ones directly
dealing with this.
You already have people who are
experts in law enforcement and
locking the people up but deal
with the people have to deal
with this on a day to day issue
and make sure that you align it.
With, with the feds say. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and I keep forgetting to move my
water to the other side. So
thank you so much, uh,
Representative District
Attorney, Chief.
A few questions and by a few,
I'm not going to limit that to.
So, Madam Chair, Representative.
I guess I'm gonna start on the
actual bill. I did get an email
from a sheriff in the state.
Who sent me his write up of the
bill, and I'm just gonna look at
page 2.
And I'm starting line 3 and
going down to line 6. He says
that this is unnecessary
language, and I know that you're
gonna update it. So I just
wanted to ask you about this
language.
Fully automatic weapon means a
weapon that shoots and he cut
out.
The words is through the word
shoot on line 5.
And then he also
Struck out the word without.
Manual reloading.
And then he also struck out the
word held.
He believes that this makes it a
lot clearer because he says it's
kind of duplicative, Madam Chair
Representative, did you have
any, any, uh, comments on that
and, and uh what you guys are
gonna be doing, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative, uh, yeah,
we, uh, I am sitting next to an
attorney, district attorney, and
you know most certainly be
aligning that language.
I, I'll be seeking.
Like, uh, the advice of
attorneys. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Yes, I would
just note that from the sheriff.
I don't know if that
specifically is like, such as
the definition is what we're
going to be updating with
federal law. I don't know if
it's just the penalties or just
the actual.
The actual uh
Individual device that we're
trying to
Limit. So, Madam Chair, I would
just note that. Thank you for,
for looking at that for me.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess my next question is
regarding who is.
going to be eligible to be under
this law regarding a grandfather
clause.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
wondering if anyone's
grandfathered in in this
legislature.
Madam
Mm
Madam Chair Representative Nell.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. It
would maybe consider
That
I know a lot of people own these
devices and most of the people,
all the people I know at least
personally.
Our lawful gun owners. So I
would just certainly consider.
What those folks are.
their concerns are. So, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Continuing on here.
So for example, Madam Chair,
Representative, if an individual
unknowingly possesses.
Weapon conversion device because
of a manufactured defect.
Or some kind of undisclosed
modification.
Would they be still criminally
liable under this new statute if
this bill is passed.
Madam Madam Chair
Representative, are the rim in
your scenario and your
hypothetical situation are they
criminally liable um uh on the
federal level.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So I
believe
From what I read on, I, I have
the ATF document here of the
statute. I don't believe they
are, Madam Chair, and according
to an FFL that spoke to
Representative Lord, no, they
are not.
A man representative, once again
it's very difficult to answer,
uh, accurately on hypotheticals,
but if that is true, then they
will not.
Um
Be at risk with the new law.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
according to what I'm hearing,
it actually did happen. So I
would just make sure to consider
that when redrafting your
legislation.
I find that to be really
important, especially when it
comes to knowing.
Let's just say you, you didn't
know what it is that you were
purchasing and there may have
been something that
was now banned in the state due
to this statute,
may just be something to
consider.
To Madam Chair,
I continue. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
So
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
it was my understanding that you
were going to do your best to
duplicate the federal language.
So I just was making sure that
that was also something you were
considering?
Is that correct?
Yes, madam chair, yes
representative.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So,
let's just say somebody owns a
partial component of a weapon
conversion device.
But it's not fully assembled for
instant.
Madam Chair Representative,
would your bill change?
That
So would I not be able to own a
portion of what that device may
look like or what, what was the,
what would this bill do
regarding something that could
be a component to such device,
Madam Chair, representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
component is not currently in
the bill, nor do we have um.
Plans to put it into the
amendment.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So it's, if it's
not currently in the bill.
To be clear,
I just want to make sure if it's
currently not in the building
component.
Would not be under this
legislation and if I had a
component of such a device, but
it was not.
Fully assembled.
That device would not be banned.
Under this new statute, Madam
Chair.
Represented. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative Block on page 2
line 13 through 15, number 3
weapon conversion device means a
part.
Or combination of parts designed
and intended to convert a
semiotic weapon into a fully
automatic weapon.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, and I did
see that and I did see the word
intend on there.
And that was another question I
had, Madam Chair,
Representative. So how do you,
how, let's just say you're going
to prosecute a case because
somebody has a part.
Of this device, not.
Together and in no way in their
house, they have a device that
is fully.
Compiled into one device that
would be banned under this
statute. So Madam Chair
Representative, how does a, I
guess this might be for district
attorney Bregman, how does one
go about as a district attorney
or any kind of litigator. How do
you go about?
Finding intent if that
individual piece of a device is
not in any way associated with
the fully functional device,
Madam Chair, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative, uh, the same
manner in which intent is
established in all criminal
court cases. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. How is that
established?
Sorry, I apologize,
uh, Representative, uh, Madam
Chair, could you please repeat
the question? Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
representative. How is that
established?
Intent. And you said it's in
every other case. How is it
established in every other case?
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative is established in
uh a different manner depending
on the case, it's a situation is
sus specific.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Well, since
you're amending a specific
statute.
In chapter 30
How would it go, how would it go
about in chapter 30 currently,
Madam Chair, and how would it
change in this new legislation,
Madam Chair.
Represented.
A man chair representative, um,
I am not an attorney, I don't
know.
I don't know the chapter.
I know that it will be uh
reflective of the federal law.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I'm
not an attorney either. Would
you like to ask the district
attorney.
You opine on that. I, I'm, I'm
actually curious about how you
would go establish establish
intent and me as a, as a layman,
I'm not a, I'm not a uh an
attorney by any stretch of the
imagination. I, I'm curious
about this, as are my
constituents.
I representative.
Thank you.
Representative, thank you for
the question. We establish
intent all kinds of ways and all
kinds of different cases, and if
it's a if it's a a con
conversion device and right
before he gets caught with the
conversion device he sends a
text message to his buddies
saying, I got, I got, I got the
thing fully auto now. So now I'm
ready to go kill a bunch.
So that kind of shows a little
bit of intent, right? That's how
you show intent, you have
evidence and then you let juries
describe because it's a vital,
vital part of proving guilt for
for.
Almost all crimes, so yeah, I
mean, all kinds of different
evidence. You can have the
person said, yeah, hey, he just
told me.
All kinds of evidence can come
in.
So that's how you establish
intent. We have to do it in
every criminal case.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative
and District attorney, and I,
I'm curious about that because
of the specific, I, I know you
need all these, all these
different details in a case to
build one, right? As an attorney
and I've I've watched enough
Matt Lock to know that that's
how it happens, right? But Madam
Chairs representative.
I do want to understand, uh,
like if it's a part of a part of
a of a conversion device. They
didn't send a text message.
Let's say, let's just say they
don't even have a cell phone.
It's just in their, in their.
House and let's just say it was
done during a welfare check, for
example, and you find that in a
house. I'm just wondering how
apart.
Of a conversion device could be
used to be established in this
new statue and actually go
forward and litigate it because
I, for me, Madam Chair, and
representative, I want you guys
to be as successful as possible
when it comes to your conviction
rates.
And I want to make sure that
your cases are completely tight.
So if this legislation is
passed, Madam Chair
Representative, I want to make
sure that it's as clear as
possible and as helpful as
possible to folks like you who
are on the ground doing the
work. And so I'm wondering,
Would it, would it be helpful
and, and will this indeed help
you in such a case as that where
it's not really black and white,
no one's sending a text saying,
hey, my buddy, just sent me this
awesome new device. Let's go
fully auto and and shoot up.
Something, right? Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering.
Is this going to in any way
affect that?
And if you Madam,
can you restate your question?
I would be so happy to, Madam
Chair, Representative, uh,
District attorney. So I'm, I'm
asking.
In the instance of a part.
Of a device which is not fully.
Compiled to be a specific device
that is prohibited, although it
does say in the in in the bill,
I don't know if it'll change.
Hearts.
Of this device.
How could that be litigated and
will this new definition help
district attorneys.
To have successful conviction
rates of such cases.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, thank you
for your concern, um, I will say
it will be like uh all other
criminal cases we will rely on
the professionalism of our law
enforcement to uh identify, uh,
the intent and then our
prosecutors to be able to lay it
out for the scenario and our
juries to be able to weigh the
evidence and make their
decision. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank yous
representative. OK. Uh, so,
OK.
Continuing here, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm looking for
The term knowingly in your
legislation, which I see on page
one, lines 20 and 21.
Madam Chair, I'm sorry, yeah, 20
and 21.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
wondering, does the term
knowingly in the statute require
prosecutors to prove that an
individual was aware of the
device was classified in such a
manner as this legislation.
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
defer to my expert witness.
So we have to establish exactly
what the statute would say if
this became a statute unlawful
possession of a weapon to device
consists of a person knowingly
say that so they know.
Of the conversion of ice, um,
having the possession of that or
knowingly transporting a weapon
conversion device.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. OK, so in
the, in the previous scenario
then with the individual who,
who
Doesn't know that they possess
such a weapon, they would have
to specifically know and that
would have to be the burden of
proof.
Or conviction, they would have
to specifically know what it is
they own. Is that correct, Madam
Chair? Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, yes.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. And so I'm
Yeah, I, so my next question is
actually about one of the public
comments that we heard, I
believe it was from the trappers
and guides for the outfitters
and guides rather, Madam Chair
Representative, they spoke
about.
The caliber conversion.
Device that could potentially be
in limbo here when it comes to
this new language, Madam Chair
Representative, do you have any
thoughts on that? And could you
just enlighten me? It might be
one for
The chief.
Thank you, madam chair and
Representative, I will defer to
the chief.
Madam Chair Representative Block
based on even the current
version of the proposed statute.
I don't think uh weapon
conversion device would qualify.
Weapon diversion device does not
make a semi-automatic or convert
a semi-automatic into a fully
automatic firearm.
So I'm not sure how that would
classify. There's lots of other
devices, mentioned Sig pistol
sigs have a chassis system so
you can move that into different
grip modules and so that, those
type of things don't convert the
gun obviously from a
semi-automatic to a fully
automatic fire. So I don't
believe even under the current
um
Version that it would apply.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. That,
that does help and chief
appreciate that.
So
Also, something that my uh
a friend asked me, Madam Chair
Representative, was how does
this apply to class 3 licenses
issued by the ATF.
I represent
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Represented. I'll defer to the
chief.
The simple answer, Madam Chair
Representative Block is that if
it mirrors the federal statute,
I don't think there'll be any
doubt that um FFLs that have the
NFA or the Class 3 would be
exempted as well as people who
possess a machine gun lawfully,
um.
Through NSA. And so those
exemptions would be very clear
in the amendment.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you, Chief that does help.
I'm glad that they would be
protected under the new
amendment.
Federal
That mirrors the federal
guidelines. So I just want to
get an auto searr for their
machine gun lawfully and
transport it to their home,
Madam Chair, representative.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
that doesn't pertain to the bill
in question.
representative. I appreciate
that. Well, since the current,
the current legislation is quite
All inclusive and very
comprehensive. It is my
understanding that it is, Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering if that could be.
Something clarified. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you. I
will defer to the chief.
I'm sure representative block, I
think the again, the easy answer
is that if that's obviously not
the intent of this bill and to
make it clear if those
exemptions are listed in the
amendment, it would.
Remove any doubt that it would
be exempted since those are
legal under federal law
currently.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, and I don't know if you
had anything else to add on
that.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, I appreciate
that clarification. That's good
to know. So, Madam Cha
representative,
Uh
My next question, I, I guess we
kind of answered it. It was
about if it has to be actually
attached to the firearm, the
device, and I'm guessing it
doesn't because it's also a
part, and that's in the current
bill, but we'll see what the,
the one that we put forward.
Next is, so appreciate that
clarification earlier, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, another
question that came up to me was
I, I believe I heard from maybe
one of your experts or you,
Madam Chair, representative,
that these can be manufactured
via a 3D printer, and so Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering if this goes into
effect with this assist.
With
Cutting down on the actual
software.
That could be used to print.
Such a device manager,
representative.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
Representative the current uh
proposed bill will not, but it.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
because I, I think that's
probably a good, good place to
go, especially if that's where
the biggest problem we have is
people are just, let's get a
program, let's get a 3D printer
on Amazon. I think they're 300,
400 bucks. Let's boom, get it,
and let's make that happen. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
think that could be.
Something considered in the
future. I don't know about
judiciary. I know there's a lot
of attorneys on there, and I'm
sure that they will throwing
questions at you, questions that
I certainly cannot ask, ask you,
so thank you Madam Chair and
Representative. Um, my next
question is,
Regarding when we're talking
about intent, we're talking
about knowingly, this the new, I
guess, I, I hate to have to
refer to something that is
amended in the future, but the
current legislation, is it
distinguished between mere
possession and an active youth.
Of the
A new newly converted.
Individual firearm with the
device attached to it.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
don't understand the question,
could you please clarify?
Of course, Madam Chair,
representative. So the question
is, so does this
Legislation distinguished
between active use and
non-active use of such a device.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, this
proposed bill, this bill
proposed law, um, is about the
transport and possession.
Not use
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
another instance is, what if a
person temporarily holds a
weapon conversion device as part
of a lawful disassembly process.
Does that momentarily
Violate the statute if it's
passed.
Madam Chair Representative
Madam Chair Representative is
the scenario, uh, uh.
I
is
like is it um breaking the
federal law.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that
clarification. So I'm, I'm
asking if while
And I, I, I can't give you a
specific response to this, cause
this would be based upon the New
Mexico statute is as we
established previously federal.
That resources are really
tightly stretched. I'm asking
about the specific current bill
in front of us, if a person uh
temporarily holds a weapon
conversion device as part of a
lawful disassembly process, so
that would be a lawful
disassembly process. How would
this bill affect that and would
anybody
In that situation, be
changed in any way by this new
statute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'll defer
to my expert witness.
Madam Chair Representative, you
said the lawful disassembly, so
no, this wouldn't make anybody,
it wouldn't.
make someone
violate the law if they're
lawfully disassembling.
the
weapon from the conversion
device. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative, and I guess it's
It's a really big clarification
I have because I know
Representative Lord brought this
up, protecting our FFLs if they
do indeed.
Have to possess certain, certain
things.
And what
That means for the actual
individual FFL. So Madam Chair
Representative, while an FFL or
or law enforcement agency is
indeed.
complying with the federal law,
I want to make sure that they
have
Clarification on the state law,
that if it, if it's in any way
different because I know these
amendments we're making could be
in full or in part, and I am
just clarifying that there
wouldn't be any kind of gray
area there, so.
representative, I don't know if
you had a comment on that.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, uh,
law enforcement has no intention
and and um.
Searching the FFL.
Events
For this sort of
Yes
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I
appreciate that. So then I have
another question about page one,
line 23 to 25.
And this is
Starting with each weapon
conversion device found in
violation of the section
constitutes a separate offense,
Madame Cha representative, so
I'm wondering how would that,
let's just say I had
10 devices?
Would each of these devices
increase my my sentencing or the
penalty, Madam Chair,
Representative, and how would
that work? Thank you. Thank you.
I'll defer to my expert witness.
Yes.
Chair and Representative answers
yes.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative. And so
what would the, the sentencing
look like. So, years wise, I
know this is what a 3rd degree
that we're doing in this, Madam
Chair, representative, talking
about 3 years times 1030 years
if you got 10 of them, right?
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
so 30 years, just clarifying
that that is something.
That we're doing with this
legislation. So someone could
potentially if they have 10 of
them. I own 10 devices.
I go to prison for 30 years.
I'm sure.
Madam Chair and representative,
that's a question. Yes, that's
what the intent of that
language, each weapon conversion
device found in violation of
section constitutes a separate
offense. Each separate
conversion of ice is a separate
defense, yes.
All right, thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Representative and,
and Mr. District Attorney. So
then, does the classification of
a 3rd degree felony lined with
similar firearm-related offenses
in our current statutes, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, are,
are we gonna, I, I'm not really
sure the tent of your question
you're asking us to comment
about all weapons laws within
our current statute.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. So,
What I'm asking is similar.
Legislation that we've already
passed similar laws that are on
the books. It could even be in
section 30.
Or chapter 30 articles, Article
7 here.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
asking.
This is this similar to other
such?
Places and statutes regarding
the can we keep it this bill and
what this bill is um affecting.
Injecture Thank you Madam Chair
Representative. I guess I'm
just, my question is intended to
be, does this mirror similar
offenses in state statute?
Regarding this specific
legislation.
Is this a fair?
Penalty.
Adam chair, represent.
Madam Chair Representative, are
you asking is the 3 year per
offense and average.
Penalty
For
In in current statute?
again, we're not sticking to the
bill. Yeah, thank you, madam.
I'm really trying to stick to
the current bill, and I'm asking
about the current legislation
that we have in front of us.
Does the current legislation.
Mirror
similar offenses.
In state statute.
So the current bill
Will this be
In compliance with similar
representative,
can you tell me what is similar.
So Madam Chair Representative,
I'm asking about similar
firearm.
Related offenses.
Then I will thank you Madam
Chair thank you representative
I'll defer to my expert witness.
I, I'm
Well, like you said, mirror
similar fire offenses what
similar firearm offense are
you're referring to? I'm not
sure I'm, I'm clear on that,
Miss Madam Chair and
Representative, so.
that's causing the confusion, I
think negligence of a firearm
perhaps.
You know, it can be either a
misdemeanor or going up, I mean.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So I
appreciate that.
So we're saying it varies like,
I I'm just asking about any, any
other kind of
Similar or maybe not similar
offense, Madam Chair
Representative. I'm not really
trying to get in the weeds here.
I really am not. I just want to
make sure that this mirror's
current statute, so I'm sure.
If something to respond, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, we
can't answer this question.
OK, fair enough. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. Next
question, uh,
Could you
comment
Regarding the constitutionality
of this legislation
representative.
And has this been similar
legislation from other states.
Has this been
In the courts and what's the
status of that, Madam Chair,
Representative.
So Madam Chair Representatives
uh already a federal law, I'll
defer to my expert witness if he
has further comment, I don't
know if he does.
representative I
I don't know any argument that
could be made that this is
unconstitutional in any way.
Certainly the federal law.
has it, it's been.
Standing up to plenty of
scrutiny, I'm sure through the
years as well so this is, no, I
don't see any constitutional
issues whatsoever with this
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and I, I, I
think that's good. You know that
there, there've been very large
structural changes in 1930.
I believe in 1986. And so Madam
Chair Representative, it's good.
That we are confident in the
constitutionality of this, Madam
Chair Representative, um.
Another question regarding the
FIR. Let me find that real quick
map here.
One moment.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
have we spoken to the Department
of Justice on the state level
regarding what, what we're in
what we're, we're seeing.
Or uh offenses regarding this
new statute if approved, Madam
Chair.
Manche Representative, just
clarify you're asking if we have
spoke to the State Department of
Justice.
Regarding this proposed bill.
Or
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I'm,
I'm asking about resources that
would be required of the
Department of Justice. If this
does go into effect, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm only asking
that because I'm looking on the
website.
And before, I didn't see, I
didn't see analysis.
But now I do, Madam Chair,
representative, I'm asking about
what they're saying regarding
their budgetary needs and
application of such a
legislative change.
I thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. There is uh
no current.
Um, information being provided
but needing uh additional
resources, although every law
enforcement agency in the state
would look forward to
additional.
Of funding
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and I, I'd
be the first to say, yeah, we
need to fund our police a lot
more and I think that's very
important and especially our
chief law enforcer.
I'm sure that office needs that
as well. So, Madam Chair
Representative, my next question
actually was regarding the
I believe it was spoken about
earlier today.
Minors
Using these firearms that have
been
Modified and so Madam Chairs
representative, I know it's
currently illegal for a minor.
Who owns such a firearm at all,
much less one that's converted.
Madam Chair Representative, how
do we find that these
individuals would continue.
would not continue their
practices if this law was
established, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair, Representative, we
are asking the legislature to
provide a tool for law
enforcement and our prosecution
so that they can be able to
charge those individuals whether
they're minors or not, and that
means it would be an additional
charge along with illegal weapon
possession.
OK, so, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So,
Would you be able to tell me
what the just I know it's, it
was used in your, your
description. So I do, I do want
to make clear what would such a
charge be if, if they were
possessing, they were using just
a firearm.
And what would the and with the
3-year additional, let's just
say one more 3 additional, what
would that sentence be then for
an individual. And it could be,
we could start with minor cause
I know minor, it differs for
that. Let's start with that and
then let's go to an adult, Madam
Chair, representative.
Uh, my name's Madam Chair
Representative, my uh my subject
expert can answer this question,
but this.
Alright, my subject will answer
this question. Thank you.
I I'm sure representative I one
thing I want to address is that
one of the issues we have when a
juvenile possesses a handgun
with a conversion devices is
that right now the only tool we
have if they're under 19 is
unlawful possession of a
handgun, which is a misdemeanor.
And so the fact that they're
having a machine gun, we don't
have any way to deal with that.
Now, at least we can take the
gun because we have a crime. If
they are 19, we have absolutely
nothing. We can't take that that
gun at all, even if it has a
glock switch and is a machine
gun.
I'll defer to uh DA fragment for
any of the sentencing questions.
Madam Chair and Representative.
I think the chief is exactly
right on.
description is there as far as.
Sentencing is concerned.
We have a whole I mean we have a
lot of discussions I'm sure in
this legislature about juvenile
sentencing, so, I mean, this,
this will fall into a youthful
offender, um.
It will continue. I, it depends
on what we do in the juvenile
code in the upcoming session if
it if it remains the same, I
mean right now we'll see
everything from probation to
some type of term of commitment
from a to 2 years to something
along those lines if that's.
deemed to be appropriate by the
children's court judge.
as far as sentencing, we've
already talked about, I think as
far as an adult level, right? So
I think, Madam Chair and
representative, I think that's
the best answer I can give you
at this point.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative
and, and I appreciate that. I
just do want to see what that
could be on it, on the juvenile
level and 1 to 2 years is, is
good to know, at least to get
back to my district and say, OK,
this is what they told me, and
this is what you might want to
look out for Mr. District
attorney down in the 12th, so.
All right, Madam Chair,
representative, uh, another
question I have for you is, uh,
Does this also applies to these
conversion devices that were
legally acquired in other
jurisdictions because I know
currently, Madam Chair
Representative.
We're saying the state law in
our state doesn't cover this.
So let's just say the state law
and
In any state, I don't want to
put any state in the crosshairs
of.
Of potential, but
If they did purchase this in
another state.
And they brought it here. Would
that be an enhanced?
Sentence for for trafficking or
something, Madam Cha
representative, how would this
work?
Would it just be the 3 years?
Would it just be the 11 charge?
Madam Chair representative, um,
uh way the bill currently reads
there is no additional penalty
for crossing the state line.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK.
Well, I appreciate these
answers. You know, I, I still, I
have similar concerns to
Representative Lord regarding
the
Lack of current.
Parallel to the federal law, and
I'd like to see the the next
legislation as it continues on
with an amendment in judiciary,
I would just continue to press
on the, those, those concerns at
least on that page 2 lines.
3 to 6. Just consider those
changes from the sheriff, and I,
I'd be happy to send you any
information that you you
request, Madam Chair
Representative, I also would
want to reaffirm that I do want
to ensure class 3 licenses
issued by the ATF are included
as exempt as well as law
enforcement.
So I think that those are kind
of my big concerns that have
been addressed. I appreciate you
guys for being here, all three
of you. And then I don't know if
you had any other just quick
comments just.
Closing to what I just asked.
So, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, next we have
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I just
want to say thanks to
representative for bringing this
forward. I too have heard from
law enforcement numerous times.
Why can we not charge this? And
it's so frustrating when
They have, you know, collected
all this evidence, etc. and then
the feds won't.
You know, complete, essentially,
um, the process, so.
Um, really grateful to see this,
um, and of course, just was
looking up a lot of machine gun
language federally, so I will
see the definitional stuff in
judiciary, but I appreciate you.
Thank you, Mountain.
OK, um, I was just going to make
a comment too, um, thank you,
Chief story for coming up from
Las Cruces and um district
Attorney Bregman for um
Being here and um Representative
Kates, um, I, you know, think
we, um.
I've talked enough about, you
know, what the different changes
could be, so we'll leave those
um.
To what we hope will be in
judiciary, um, but I also, um.
Lost my notes already. Um, was
wondering, does this, um, this
doesn't affect the sales of
these um.
Devices,
is that right? I will defer to
my expert witness.
Well, in the sense that Madam
Cha, if you, if you're selling
the device and you have
possession or you're
transporting it, it would,
right? So it would it would
capture that kind of conduct.
Great. OK. That's always
important.
Um, OK, and what was the motion?
I'm sorry, rep.
One second.
OK.
We have a motion for a due pass
and a 2nd and we'll take roll
call.
Representative Locke, no, ma'am.
Representative Lord, you know
what the explanation.
Representative Romero, yes.
Representative Thompson? Yes,
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Hey, with the
With a vote of 4 to 2 in favor,
um, you have a due pass for
House Bill 38 and Representative
Lord um to explain your vote.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Like I
stated earlier, it does need to
be amended, and I think you
would get it amended, it won't
have any issues, but until that
time, it's, you're gonna get a
lot of grief for that. So I hope
that you move forward and align
it closer to the federal bill.
Thank you.
OK, thank you. You have a do
pass.
