Thank you madam speaker and
members are you ready for me to
continue on yeah this is so
excited.
The enthusiasm I like to hear.
Okay.
So madam speaker and members I
believe we discussed section
twenty seven that's where we
work and the distinction is the
Senate amended.
When we sent house bill sixty
eight over we were recommending
we that that serious violent
felons if they were unlawfully
in possession of a firearm that
they be charged with a second
degree felony.
However the Senate has modified
that to be a third degree felony
with the six year.
A sentence.
Section twenty seven.
My apologies madam speaker and
members section twenty seven
folks should remember this I
believe we had a healthy
discussion on aggravated fleeing
a law enforcement officer.
What the Senate has done is they
removed
do which was to create a new
penalty for aggravated fleeing a
law enforcement the result in
great bodily harm.
So they have retained.
The aggravated fleeing of a law
enforcement officer that result
in injury and the penalty for
that is.
a third degree felony.
Madam speaker and members
section twenty eight this is new
information but it's actually
based on a previous bill from
the legislature that and this
section establishes GPS data for
defendants on pretrial release
something I know that many of
our members are keenly
interested in.
Section twenty nine.
Is relates to madam speaker and
members of the sentencing
authority.
This section madam speaker and
members that folks may recall
from house bill seventy nine
which was later amended into
Senate bill two thirty one.
That cleans up language that
clarifies that the basic
sentences provided for various
degrees of felony correspond to
crimes.
So designated in chapter thirty
of the criminal code.
Madam speaker and members
section at thirty.
It is also familiar to folks and
this relates to the use
brandishing or discharge of a
firearm now if folks are paying
attention the other day as we
had a very good debate on their
terms possession as opposed to
use madam speaker and members
you will recall that we here in
the house opted to go with the
term possession.
However Madam speaker and
members the Senate felt that the
more appropriate choice of word
was use.
So they have.
Switched at all to that.
In addition Madam speaker and
members
Let's see they amended the.
The I think that's actually the
only sort of substantive change
in that section because they did
maintain the sentencing scheme
the sentence.
So madam speaker and members for
the first portion of that it did
the sentencing enhancement
scheme is one year for use three
years for brandishing and five
years for discharge.
And then
let's see if Representative one
of our.
Colleagues from Bernalillo
county might be particularly
interested in this ammendment
that the Senate did.
Which is to modify the second
occurrence from three years to
five years.
For a second or subsequent
offense as madam speaker and
members.
Moving along and I think we are
almost done folks although.
I don't know that I'm as
engaging as perhaps clean fuels.
Madam speaker and members
section thirty one and thirty to
relate to the crime reduction
grant act and a couple of our.
Colleagues here I introduce that
legislation here in the house
house bill eighty four so that
is something that we all talked
about
Just a week ago.
Moving along.
Section thirty three adds an
additional judge to the second
judicial district and then the
just a Senate amended in one of
our very own bills
Sponsored it was here in the
house house bill one twenty four
which folks should recall adds
an additional judge to the fifth
judicial district and the
thirteenth judicial district.
Six thirty six.
if I have maintained the proper
number in system.
And madam speaker and members.
Section thirty six is the law
enforcement retention Fund.
And I know that there are a
couple of folks here in the
house that are particularly
interested in ensuring that that
language made it through and it
did indeed.
Section thirty seven madam
speaker and members is the
distribution of requests for pre
trial services.
Madam speaker and members
section thirty eight relates to
the violence intervention
program as does section thirty
nine.
Forty forty one forty two forty
three forty four forty five
forty six.
And forty six.
Madam speaker and members
moving along here is another
section that I think will be
particularly interesting for
folks here because the bill
originated here in the house and
that's house bill ninety nine
and it relates to threatening a
judge or a judge's immediate
family.
so that statute.
The language we passed has been
incorporated the amendment that
into this bill as well.
Section of forty eight
is part of that provision as
well and then we are wrapping up
here that section forty nine is
a long awaited.
Victory for.
House members I would say that
operating a chop shop.
House bill sixty sixty nine has
made its way into this bill as
an amendment.
And so the section forty nine of
creates the crime of operating a
chop shop and then section fifty
and fifty one deal with metal
theft.
Finally.
Finally madam speaker and
members section fifty to do it
prohibits defense based on
victim's gender gender identity
gender expression or sexual
orientation and the concluding
section section fifty three
madam speaker and members deals
with effective dates.
Yes that would you like Madam
speaker and members to hear
about the.
To order.
Madam speaker and members alas I
did sort of cover the floor
amendments to the that also
occurred in my discussion of the
different sections so with that
Madam speaker I would stand for
questions.
Generally there is a debate the
gentleman from San Juan.
In line.
Thank you madam speaker
ministers the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield.
Madam speaker I will yield.
Speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and I applaud your
enthusiasm at four eleven in the
morning it's it's much
appreciated and welcome.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo did I did I hear
correctly you said they're fifty
three sections of this bill.
Madam speaker and gentleman one
moment while we.
Confirm our remembering is
accurate.
Madam speaker and gentleman
fifty four is what we believe it
to be.
We are the word.
Going through the entire
process.
Minister digitally from
Bernalillo and.
How many sections were and.
House Bill.
Sixty eight one we voted out of
this chamber.
Madam speaker and gentleman I.
Mr digitally from Bernalillo
it's a.
It's a hardly recognizable to
still call this house bill sixty
eight.
But here we are so since this is
the first time that we've seen.
This new and revised.
Highly revise house bill sixty
eight.
I have answered the questions
transfigured early from
Bernalillo section one of the
bill.
This appears to create a new
fund within DFA.
Lisa new program can you provide
some detail on what this new
program is and what it does.
Madam speaker and gentleman this
corresponds to the allocation
and house bill two that was
identified for a recruitment and
retention efforts through DFA.
Institutionally from Bernalillo
how does the.
How does how does the phone work
better I don't understand
what's.
We use terms like recruitment
and retention but how does it
actually accomplish the.
Madam speaker and gentleman so
this is not actually setting up
a fund like what
house bill eighty six proposed
to do this is to noting that the
funds
are going to DFA and they're
going to establish a program to
distribute the funds for local
law enforcement agencies to
provide recruitment and
retention stipends to law
enforcement officers and that
will all be set up within DFA.
Mr digitally from Bernalillo so
is this different than than your
house bill eighty six.
Madam speaker gentleman yes this
is the sort of the appropriating
of the funds as opposed to
creating a new fund.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo is the.
But I guess I don't know if this
is duplicate of this house bill
eighty six still live or is it
a.
Madam speaker gentleman that is
a fabulous question and in fact
you must have missed one I
told everyone that house bill
eighty six is in fact one of
those sections
discussed let me find it.
Madam speaker and gentleman our
colleagues also a co sponsor on
that initial house bill has told
me that it is section thirty
eight.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo thank you for that.
I guess in the fifty four
section the most of have missed
that piece of it.
Senator gentlelady from
Bernalillo section three of the
bill.
Can you describe what this
police officers survivors.
Definitely benefit of its or.
Madam speaker gentleman's these
are benefits that are provided
to the spouse or family of a law
enforcement officer who was
killed in the line of duty.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo and what is it what
is the amount currently under
statute.
Madam speaker gentleman two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and and the changes
that came over from the Senate
how would it.
change that to fifty thousand
dollar number.
Madam speaker gentleman it would
increase it to one million
dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I've I think that's a
great change
I know you and I've talked about
this offline about the need to
to drastically increase the
survivor benefits
Think we would all be happy if
the state never had to pay out a
single one of these.
Budget but unfortunately it's
not the law enforcement world of
that we find ourselves in I do I
am curious though in the section
three there there was at some
point in a minute drafted for
Senate finance and I don't know
whether gonna drive not.
But the problem.
That that amendment tried to
address is the situation we have
a law enforcement officer.
Who has children from a prior
relationship.
And they are married at the time
of their deaths and their spouse
is not the biological parent.
Of.
The minor children so do any of
his amendments address that
scenario where you have
biological children from a prior
relationship.
Current spouse but when you pass
away everything goes a spouse
and nothing to to the minor
children.
Madam speaker and gentleman
If that is not addressed in this
current
Senate amendment that's
something we could certainly
address in a subsequent session.
I can read to you the exact
language from the amendment if
you'd like institutional
formerly what what everything
would be most helpful to answer
the question.
Madam speaker and gentleman a.
The amended version says the
budget will be paid first to the
surviving spouse if there is no
surviving spouse the budget
should be distributed and pro
rata shares to all surviving
children if there are no
surviving children or spouse
benefits will be distributed to
the surviving parents of the
police officer
yes.
Mr regionally from Bernalillo
side I take that to mean.
Because I think that's existing
statutes I don't think that the
minutes from the Senate change
any of that and I do appreciate
the the sentiment maybe the
legislature does need to review
that we know with what I would.
Characterizes modern families
it's not uncommon for their the
children.
Arm from a prior relationship
and so just making sure that
our.
Are spouses of law enforcement
for taking care but but also
their biological children as
well.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section for.
There's quite a bit of a
language that struck out from
paragraph B. can you explain to
the body.
what what changes that because
when you strike out the old
paragraph be.
Madam speaker might I defer to
one of our colleagues here who
has worked on this legislation
in the past my colleague from
Bernalillo.
Thank you administrative group
Jimmy from Bernalillo general
gentleman from San Juan would
you mind repeating the question.
And Segura gentleman from
Bernalillo certainly so I just
noticed in section four of the
bill.
There's a there's an old
paragraph B. that seems to be
struck by these changes from the
Senate and so and a new
paragraph be inserted with a
much shorter language some just
trying to understand the the
what is this due to strike the
old language in the adding of
the new language.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo gentleman
for someone so this is actually
the the the session corporates
Senate bill three seventy five
from last year the police reform
bill that was vetoed by the
honorable governor next last
year and so this incorporates
all of that bill with certain
changes excluding the the.
The database the database
portion of that was delayed
there was a amended on the
Senate floor so there's going
there's not gonna be any
database of police in this bill
what it does on page four eight.
The current make up of the law
enforcement academy and then on
the next page the top of page
five
You know comes to the new board
Which includes a.
Seven members appointed by the
governor.
Includes all the the current
directors of the satellite law
enforcement academies.
as well as a live from the
public Department pollution from
a native American tribe or
pueblo to members who have
experience in providing adult
education and two large
citizens.
Mr
Ginnelly from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo and I
know who you for quite a bit on
this in the past and so you can
use explain if if these
amendments are concurred with
how do you think that that would
be an improvement.
How this board is currently
operated.
Thank you madam chair diligence
on what no tremendous
improvement all right now the
law enforcement academy just
kind of floating in the flow try
to state government the
directors appointed by the
governor but doesn't really have
a boss necessarily other than
Donald governor what this does
is it puts it changes the name
of the law enforcement academy
to the law enforcement standards
and training council certainly
the the that the new law
enforcement council is under the
direct
the the direction of the
secretary of the department of
public safety so the council
instead of having a director
appointed by the board the chair
by the Attorney General now it's
it's strictly under the chain of
command so to speak kind of the
department of public safety the
secretary us supervises the
director which then has the
board as the governor wanted the
the the governor's veto message
she should like the way the the
house reconfigured the board and
this is consistent language
with.
With what came out of the Senate
last year.
Mr generally from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo I
appreciate the insight so the
director position that you
mentioned that that these
amendments would create.
are they are that is that an
employee of.
Of the PS or is this some of the
to pointed.
If you could shed some light on
that please thank thank you
madam speaker John from from San
Juan so currently the law
enforcement academy director is
appointed by the governor.
And and works for the board.
What what last year's bill does
and what this language does is
it creates a new board creates a
certification board which deals
with the national certifications
at allegations of misconduct and
the suspension or revocation of
licences.
It maintains the training board
which is now the training
council which deals with the
training standards training
officers under the new under the
new the language in this bill
which deals with methods of de
escalation could appear
intervention stress management
a reality based situational
training as well as dealing with
folks with the we're
experiencing mental health
issues and crisis management
intervention so so it creates a
but training council which
trains the officer and then a
certification board which
certifies them similar to the
the the bar and that deals with
misconduct cases so it's it's
the it's what came out of the
Senate and house unanimous last
year and the Senate incorporated
that that bill which was
introduced
into the crime package.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo gentleman
from earlier that's it's awful
I've.
Honestly I don't remember too
many details from that bill of I
guess of substance and just
maybe not tonight but
The I am curious though about
the disciplinary peace because I
know.
That I know that.
Cops one good cops they're
they're actually very adamant on
that point that
they don't like to stick up for
bad cops and.
and so I know that this is been
an issue in the past certainly
so concerning the past to make
sure that we have a good system
in place that we will be
rewarding keeper good cops and
bad cops they go on to some
other industries so madam
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo.
It sounds like the disciplinary
process is now going to be
carved out from one sort of
overture boards should what you
described within the second
board is that correct.
Madam chair representative on
that's correct that's correct it
is creating a a certification
board which will deal with
amended misconduct allegations.
Sigur gentlelady from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo and so
I get that kind of leads into my
next question there I noticed
there's language in this
proposed amendment.
That strikes subparagraphs.
G. H. and in section five and so
can I get some clarification
about what that accomplishes
when you strike this language.
Thank you.
Senator generals on one so that
strikes the language from the
training council the statute
dealing with the training
council so it looks kind of
weird on the page but it did
incorporated in section six
on page seven and this is the
new of the new material dealing
with law enforcement officer
training
that kind of puts it line by
line.
this is I I misspoke some so
master John from San Juan so
that the lines that are deleted
deal with deal with the.
Misconduct allegations of the
removed from the council section
and then the next the the the
section I reference section six
deals with the training language
of the of the council and then
you can jump over to
to jump over to the.
To the certification section and
that's where that language is
inserted back in but it's
written it's written better.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo.
And I know
DPS is is typically consulting
quite a bit on these kind of
changes and can you just speak
to if the body concurs with
these amendments and we create
sort of these two different
boards
do you have a sense of where DPS
is on this this change.
Thank you master the dolphins on
one I think the best would would
be pleased with these changes
it once again it puts the
director of the the now the
training council under DPS the
the then secretary of DPS last
year who's now the chief of
police who was instrumental in
in working on Senate bill three
seventy five last year.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and gentleman from
Bernalillo I I just I don't know
appointments today and.
Maybe you're here the whole time
now.
For the next three hours away
from Bernalillo but I have a
question on.
section six it looks like it's.
Rushing out sort of what is
going to be included now in Los
law enforcement officer
training.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo or gentleman from
Bernalillo can Andrew you
explain what this new officer
training entails.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
from San Juan so a lot of the
training is is currently locked
in the statute and it doesn't
allow for flexibility and
modernization of police training
so this is really good language
that everyone agreed upon last
year
and it's new material and it.
Says the curriculum of each
basic law enforcement training
class and in service training
each year for certified police
officer shall include so it's
not limited to but shall include
and these are just great.
Got a great words on the page
that need to happen in in law
enforcement training and that's
crisis management dealing with
mental health folks that are
experiencing mental health
issues the escalation racial
sensitivity things of that
nature so it so it doesn't just
there's Blair necessarily say
you need an hour block for this
said to our block for that but
rather just says it shall
include these things that that
that police officers must know
you know in the modern world
based on constitutional
policing.
Transfigured gentlelady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo so.
Rice's mention intervention I
think I understand what that
does dealing with individuals
are experiencing mental health
issues I understand what that
means that I think that's it's
important also I think it it's a
tough ask of police officers who
maybe are
necessarily experts in dealing
with mental issues but I
understand that they need to at
least be trained as much as they
can methods of de escalation
that makes sense to me but I
what is what is peer to peer
intervention within this context
I'm not familiar with that thank
you.
Madam speaker John from San Juan
could appear is key in in in in
modern policing.
You know I want to get all into
it but police officers over time
police agencies over time they
Kind of but when I say this but
there's there's just there's a
veil of secrecy there's there's
they just don't hold each other
accountable at the end of the
shift or at the end of an
interaction or the end of the
week
you know the.
The peer to peer there's just so
much pressure
That over time if an agency
doesn't deal with things on a
daily basis doesn't create a
culture of.
Intervention a culture of of
help each other be better cops
on a daily basis it can
deteriorate over over months
years and decades so the.
Intervention is just how to
change the culture of officers
where they criticize each other
as opposed to remain silent.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo and so
It to me I I counted twenty
twenty described that I think of
something like a what I would
call like a mentor ship maybe
but maybe it's members of the
formal and no is it is it as
simple as one when you and I
finishers shift in your the
sergeant on the patrol you know
we go over what happened on the
day I guess I just trying to
understand what what is peer to
peer for that look like I guess
for an actual police department.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman's on want to obviously
this is the training the trains
on how to do that so that they
create a culture of of of
accountability and and to like
the analogy I use is a football
team watching film
criticize each other after it
after a player after a practice
that to criticize and officers
and to be anti cop it's just
helping each other become better
cop so at the end of the days
Amanda.
Maybe you could handle it this
way Hey that was a great job for
you handle it that way Hey the
distance should not turn your
back on that guy you know just
just help each other be the more
professional and just be better
officers on a daily basis.
Banister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
And then in this section
subparagraph page so elimination
of vascular neck restraint so
madam speaker generally of Jody
from Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo
is that what we would call just
a common vernacular just a chill
cold is that what that means.
Gentleman from San Juan yes.
Mr gentle lady from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo and
then section seven.
It appears that we're creating a
new database can I get some
under and some information about
what this database would consist
of of the body adopted of these
proposed amendments.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman's on one so that
section was amended out on the
Senate floor so so I'm looking
at the same bill you have I
don't have the amendments handy
but that entire section was
amended out so next year we can
decide whether we want to.
Want to add that in or not but
that's if we voted on this
concurrence now it would not
include section seven.
Mr Jones lady from Bernalillo
germ gentleman from Bernalillo
so.
I think probably one looking and
then as the Senate Judiciary
Committee amendments.
so there's no database then if I
understood correctly because
that was stripped out on the
Senate floor is that right.
Mr Chairman from San Juan that's
correct.
Madam.
Four AM bring
Speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo burn for Leo
gentleman from Bernalillo
section it looks like.
some languages added to say that
the director is under the
supervision of the secretary is
this the director position that
you were describing earlier of
one of the two boards or is this
a different director position.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
from San Juan the
This is the director of the of
the training council.
And then there will be the
director of the certification
board.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo so which which of the
directors is speaking of.
It offers on one on section
eight that's the director of the
training comes.
Is now called the law
enforcement academy.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo fan and I noticed the
removal of director change as
well.
And I I believe you you had on
this earlier but just so we're
clear
can you explain how are are
creating more may now remove the
director if we adopt these
amendments.
Thank you madam chair John from
San Juan so the the the
secretary of the PS will have
the authority to to fire the
director under current law it's
the Law Enforcement Academy
board.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo and so.
what what role then I guess if
we make the free adopt these
changes with with the board.
Play.
if there don't have the
authority to hire and fire the
director.
what what is really the the role
the board that point.
Thank you Mr general from San
Juan so to be focused on the
training.
Focused on the the trading
aspects of the.
The the the training council.
Mr.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo.
And so it sounds like then that
they.
Because these are experienced
law enforcement people these are
just general members of the
public as I understand it and so
these are experienced law
enforcement officers who would
kind of flesh out.
the meat of what that training
would look like is that correct
that is figures are from San
Juan that's correct that's
correct they would be up it
would essentially write the
rules and Representative so to
speak of the training for more
importantly than what they would
do is what they would do they
wouldn't deal with allegations
of misconduct they wouldn't have
the authority to suspend or
revoke police officers the
licenses they would strictly be
a training council and still
kind of like it would it would
create a separation similar to
the law school and the bar for
the the training council would
train the officers and the
certification board would deal
with the licensing of the
officers.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo actually I really
like that analogy I think that
that that's helpful for me to
kind of.
Grant this thank I do notice in
the definitional part.
Under section ten I'm a little
surprised.
To see that law enforcement
agency wasn't previously
defined.
so madam speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo can you explain.
wire while said we're defining
what a law enforcement agency is
and and how this definition
helps.
Thank you madam speaker down
from San Juan that is a that is
peculiar that it wasn't defined
previously.
but I think it's because that it
was never really made referenced
of in the statute now it's made
reference up in terms of if the
agency does not comply with the
rules of the certification board
in terms of notifying the the
board of misconduct allegations
up like that then it's it's
ineligible to receive funding
from the law enforcement
protection fund so there's kind
of a an accountability provision
toward the end of this part of
the bill
and I think that's why law
enforcement agency is is not
defined.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo so I guess just a
follow up to just for point of
clarification I just want to
make sure that when we start
now.
Defining for the first time law
enforcement agency this doesn't
loop in.
Any law enforcement agency that
wouldn't otherwise be underneath
these statutes is that right
Madam speaker general from San
Juan I believe that's correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo I have a question or
section twelve.
the new language that this
amendment proposes that these
amendments propose it speaks of
both board.
And the council of the the work
council I'm I'm not sure that's
coming from so I'm a little
confused as we have been talking
about two different boards
analysis and there's the word
counsel can you give me some
insight into that thank you a
madam speaker John from San Juan
so last year's bill that was
vetoed.
Created the two boards this bill
is is but is better written the
creates that training council
and the cert cert board to the
law enforcement academy board
becomes the training council and
then the new board becomes the
certification board so that way
there's the council and the
board the council does the
training the board does the
licensing.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo German formerly okay
that's helpful so I I've been
probably in precise in mind my
question because I've kind of
referred to them both as board
and board.
And it sounds like technically
there is a board but there's a
separate structure and that that
structures defined more as
the council underneath these new
provisions that correct.
Correct settlement madam
minister Jones of San Juan so we
had to get used to this in a
year to be as the training
council.
In the certification board
essentially to boards what one
of them is in statute called the
council.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo section fourteen.
Of these proposed amendments.
Here's where I think you Mr
flushing out the law enforcement
certification board that.
The gentleman from Bernalillo is
been describing.
And so madam speaker gentlelady
from Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo can you explain of
sort of the composition of this
board or of the of this yeah the
certification board thank you
madam speaker down from San Juan
so this languages cut and pasted
from.
From a Senate bill three seventy
five as it came out of the
Senate.
last year and so it creates this
new entity the law enforcement
certification board
it's established within law the
board consists of nine members
appointed by the governor with
advice and consent of the Senate
that Senate no more than five
members from the same political
party to be appointed to a five
year terms.
with you know.
You know initially.
Thank you know the kind of role
they're not all I appointed same
time the board consists of a
retired judge of municipal
police officers I share of
tribal peace officer a lawyer
who has experience in their of
civil rights.
in an attorney who has
experience defeated defending
the.
The government Wednesday and
civil rights cases and a lawyer
who's employed by the public
defender departments as the same
language that came out of the
Senate last year.
So do described the nine member
board and also describes that
the powers of that board which
is to deny suspend or revoke
licenses and and educate
misconduct cases.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo.
I I do like the composition of
the supported it I Leko loops
and really a a few different
areas of the law you've got a
retired judge.
I like that we have we have.
The municipal officer sheriff's
officer and a tribal officers so
I think we're for bringing in a
lot of different perspectives
the perspectives and interests
there.
And then of course no board be
complete without a couple of
attorneys on there and so we've
got you know the private
practice point us we've got the
public sector defendants and
then the public defender
department so I think that's
good.
madam speaker.
General.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo can you kind of flush
out for us what this language
does in terms of giving them the
authority bill to deny suspend
revoke licenses.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
San Juan so not only do they
adjudicate misconduct cases but
they actually issue or renew the
certification and that's
different from last year so
there's a clear of.
Delineation between the the
training council which is and so
you graduate from the training
council the certification board
gives you the license to become
a peace officer so so the board
up their Intergraph HL issue or
renew a certification to the
graduates or whomever but also
shall deny suspend or revoke.
You know after after
after conducting an
investigation administering the
subpoenas.
And things of that nature so
essentially if a police chief
why am I officers is didn't you
know there's allegations of
misconduct hi David deal with it
internally but also to turn it
over to the certification board
because what I could fire the
officer but that officer still
has the ticket to be an officer
that still has a certification
can go to another agency the
very next day so this
certification board deals with
the actual license of the police
officer
that the the ticket to the
profession so to speak
So it'll be the initial
insurance and then the denial
the suspension or revocation
as a result of misconduct
allegations investigations.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo you mention
adjudication so does this.
But let's say that that Miley
certification is is subject to
being state suspended
it sounds like I'm entitled to
the need to consider a full
evidentiary hearing is that
correct.
Minister down from San Juan
that's correct.
And Mister speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Is does the the seven member
board actually preside over that
evidentiary hearing today
appointed hearing officer do you
know what the language in this
amendment provides for thank you
madam speaker gentle Mr speaker
gentle from San Juan so yes the
board of.
You know there is required to
subpoena the tenants a witnesses
the board shall appoint a chief
executive officer to assist the
board in carrying out its
functions.
the chief executive officer.
I shall employed persons
necessary to assist the board in
carrying out its function so
essentially the the employee of
of the law enforcement academy
board I'm sorry the law
enforcement certification board
we refer to it as a director but
it in statute of the chief
executive officer so that.
That person that person will be
charged with running that
agency.
Conducting investigations and
then.
And then
And then the nine member board
would decide.
That what to do with the with
the license.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo.
And I noticed in a couple of
these sub paragraphs in the same
Schecter section
there's reference to a tale of
communicator.
And until communicator training
program.
is this what we call and just
normal parlance dispatcher what
what is a telecommunications.
Thank you madam speaker John
from San Juan so yes in in in
statute the public safety tele
communicators but there's
actually the the nine one one
operators of.
Commonly referred to.
Madam speaker general.
It is madam speaker now gentle
lady from Bernalillo gentleman
from Bernalillo and so I guess I
didn't realize for looking as
amendments that.
nine one dispatch folks they
actually fall underneath the
same board and and.
that we're we came up with the.
But they fall under the same
boards as law enforcement
officers that correct.
Minister good one there the
similar professions
And so on the next page rate
sixteen section fifteen.
It deals with the public safety
tele communicator training act
and so the tele communicators
are
We're in last year's bill and
they're in this year's bill as
well.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from really
councils that we're looking for
boarding Council.
I will say
you know with regard to.
In the the tele communicators
the the nine one dispatch folks
that is a.
Is a very tough job and I
appreciate you saying that
actually they're they're of the
same profession
They're they're both trying to
intervene in emergencies they do
they do so in different ways
police officers and dispatch
workers and and what a difficult
job.
it is to.
Be on the receiving end of an
emergency phone call.
And not be able to respond
physically to try to resolve the
issue but try to have to stay on
the line
to address those concerns to try
to you know help people as much
as you can before their boots on
the ground
and I'm not sure that we were
talking about the importance of
of our dispatchers and I know
it's also an industry where they
they're having a difficult time
hiring so I'm glad to see some
changes here.
in this ammendment.
And madam speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Section eighteen.
There's some some language
changes here that about the
board.
how they can they can issue a
waiver can you describe what
this waiver is.
Thank you Mr goods are from San
Juan so.
Doesn't change current law but
it just.
changes the wording from the
director shall to the board may
with the approval of the council
so it's kind of.
Distinguishing who has the
authority but apparently
They can essentially waive the
training program if.
If the person can can verify
that they receive that training
in the past.
Madam speaker gentleman
gentlelady from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo
and I I notice as the billing
which you touched on to the
board may with the approval of
the council so
Is some little confused because
we were talking about the
boarding councils being
separate.
Structures� this this would seem
to indicate that the board
somehow falls underneath the
council can you explain sort of
the language usage there thank
you madam speaker John from San
Juan that does some kind of
funny great catch at four in the
morning but.
The the once again the
The council trains.
So if the council deems that
that person's received training
presumably out of state.
Then than the council can
approve that training and the
board may then certify them
based on the council's
recommendation.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo of twenty twenty
given that explanation I that
makes sense to me because you
realize the.
The different rules that each
plays section twenty.
This looks very similar to.
The training for police officers
but now it's for dispatch
workers Madam speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo gentleman
from Bernalillo can you just
explain to the body what this
this new material would create.
Thank you madam speaker massacre
down from someone so that the
language is the same in terms of
the training that the curriculum
for the tele communicator
training shall include and once
again it doesn't give a block of
time or.
Or or anything like that but it
just it allows the the training
council to to develop the
curriculum on going the without
having to change the statute
every couple three years but it
deals with the same language as
the as the cops you know crisis
management dealing with folks
going to a mental health issue
the escalation stress management
stuff like that.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Section twenty one there's some
fun changes that this amendment
would create.
can you describe sort of the
the.
The differences between those
and and the rationale for why
we're changing the funds Madam
speaker a gentleman I can
actually answer that time and
what we're
what has been proposed for that
section is that excess revenue.
from the.
law enforcement protection fund
rather than reverting to the
general fund would then go into
the law enforcement retention
Fund ultimately saving the.
About twelve million dollars
annually from the general fund.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
it's so I'm just trying to send
last part of what you said the
statement so.
I I take that to mean that every
year we're having to take money
out the general fund to cover
this is that right.
Madam speaker gentleman's you're
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so can you just
sure for me how how does this
cure having to tap in the
General Fund.
Madam speaker gentle and I don't
know that it would one hundred
percent resolve the issue at but
in the FIR and analyses that we
saw when setting setting up the
language for the law enforcement
retention Fund the.
Estimated annual distributions
for approximately three million
dollars a year.
and so this would be more than
sufficient to cover.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section twenty two.
The way I understand this.
Part of the statute is it's.
Dealing with the reserve.
The reserves and the police
officer survivor fund is that
correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
I'm sorry what was their
specific question I think you're
correct but
was there a question.
Massacre gently from Bernalillo
there was a question it doesn't
mean it was a well formed
question but there was a
question I'm just trying to so
earlier in the bill we talked
about taking the police
survivor benefit from two and
fifty thousand one million so my
assumption is this this fund
that's described here is tied in
with of those type of payouts
and so I'm just trying to
understand if if there's a
connection so that I can ask a
question about the amendment.
Madam speaker gentleman I
apologize once again what
section are we looking at.
Mansard regionally from
Bernalillo there's.
No need to apologize for fifty
five in the morning it's section
twenty two is what I'm looking
at.
Or at least from the version
that I have section twenty two I
hope it's the same section
you're looking at.
Madam.
Madam speaker gentleman and so
the section twenty two.
F. as in foxtrot.
minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
what I'm looking at is the
subsection B. as in Bravo.
Madam speaker gentleman so this
section is amending the
expenditure limitations for the
law enforcement protection fund
to permit the survivors fund to
maintain a balance of one
million dollars starting after
fiscal year twenty twenty three
currently the survivors fund is
limited to three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars.
Senator generated from
Bernalillo
thank you that that's helpful so
essentially.
Of there's a cap on how much can
accumulate in this fund we need
to make sure that there's enough
in there that god forbid we
actually had to pay out of the
fund there would be enough of
balance in the fund is that
correct.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I I'm kind of curious
though it says work we're
keeping the three fifty three
fiscal year twenty twenty three
which I I think that means all
the way through June thirtieth
of two thousand twenty four and
then.
Starting on July one of two
thousand twenty four bumping up
to million
why why are we waiting so long
to bump it up to million since
we're changing.
The survivor payout two million.
Madam speaker and gentleman
let's see if this provides the
answer.
It increases the law enforcement
protection fund distributions
most increases in fiscal year
twenty four.
The PS two hundred thousand in
fiscal year twenty three.
I'm not sure that that actually
answered it but if we need for a
question like that I would have
to defer to legislative finance.
And that's who wrote that.
Massacred generally from really
I need to.
I got LFC at four fifteen in the
morning
I do you know when the effective
date is of this log in or maybe
maybe maybe is July one of
twenty two so it may not be
helpful but.
Madam speaker gentleman one
moment let us confirm because
some of the effective dates were
changed.
Madam speaker gentleman's so the
effective date of the provisions
of section seven twenty two
twenty three and thirty five
through thirty seven it is July
first twenty twenty two.
Thank you madam speaker
generally from Bernalillo so I
took a shot at maybe solving the
conundrum but it looks like I
swung and missed probably I
thought maybe if there was a
leader a leader effective date
in a different fiscal year memos
part explanation but.
And then I have a question.
Minister generated from
Bernalillo subsection C. in this
and per subparagraph C. in the
same section.
We're changing the the payouts
under subparagraphs one two
three.
Can you explain what these
payouts are in and whether
increased.
Madam speaker gentleman's I'm
gonna see if potentially I can
defer once again to my fellow
colleague from Bernalillo county
who has spent
With many years of working on
these particular provisions.
Madam speaker gentleman's so
these are the annual
disbursements from the fund to
our local police departments are
school resource officers and
they are for the purposes that
those entities deem appropriate.
Typically training and
equipment.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so this is.
It looks like these proposed
amendments are is increasing the
amount of those palaces that
right Madam speaker gentleman
your correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section twenty three.
Looks like there's a new
subparagraphs seven see that's
added.
So the law enforcement officer
remains employed at that
misspelled your county law
enforcement's are for one
additional year can you let the
body know what this new
additional language does.
Madam speaker gentleman's that
just brings it into line with
some of the other things that
we've had to do and in terms in
order to make it
consistent with our anti
donation issues.
Figure generated from Bernalillo
but the I guess the contacts as
we're talking about.
These are contemplating
retention differentials that are
dispersed to local law
enforcement agencies is that
correct.
Madam speaker a gentleman the
money said the retention
differential in the sections
still goes to an individual
officer and so they would need
to commit to remaining employed
for an additional one year.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo on.
And again I think we we pride
has to self offline as well but
you know New Mexico as an anti
donation clause and so you
cannot compensate a public
employee for past performance
the matter how spectacular the
past performance was and so as I
understand this new language of
requiring one additional year it
would be to try to make sure
there weren't any constitutional
concerns is that fair Madam
speaker gentleman yes.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and it looks like in
section twenty four.
For providing here it's almost
as if a a completely new bill
was added in here at section
twenty four because now we're
getting away from law
enforcement and looks like we're
we're tackling maybe some
prosecution for crime issues so
section twenty four.
Can you explain to the body the
changes made and subparagraph
II.
Madam speaker government all
that this section does is
eliminate the statute of
limitations for second degree
murder which as you've noted is
not unfamiliar because it didn't
pass the house is house bill
seventy nine.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if the if the
house does not adopt.
This ammendment can you explain
what is the current statutes
limitations for second degree
murder.
Madam speaker gentleman six
years.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo at think this
actually is of.
This is a point I think that we
need to make to make sure the
public understands why there's a
need for this type of equipment
so can you explain the
difficulties in trying to
prosecute an older.
Maybe.
Maybe what was at one point
really well as still is a first
degree murder case
but because of evidentiary
issues it's difficult to convict
still on first degree murder as
time goes by and how this change
could really.
End up leading to a successful
prosecution of someone who in
fact did commit a crime.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
would like to defer to my
colleague from Bernalillo county
who was a sponsor of that bill.
Thank you madam speaker gently
from Bernalillo dumb of the San
Juan so this is the the language
from house bill seventy nine
that we passed here at the goes
unanimous but anyway you're
correct under current law you
can indict them on first degree
murder try to get a conviction
of first degree murder but if
the jury wanted to come back
second we murder past the six
year statute of limitations it
then says they would be the an
acquittal so as you as you know
I mean it's.
Very difficult if not impossible
to prove first degree murder
years and years after the fact
so this would allow the
prosecution to to indict on
second we murder and to seek a
conviction from a jury on second
murder or
or to plead down from first
degree to a second agree
you know prior to trial now.
The lawyers are caught in a
switch because is it is it
unethical the pleader got a
second greed murder if in fact
the state cannot prove secondary
murder court is prohibited from.
Convicting of September and you
with the first degree so so
anyway it's
That's just some of the the map
going on but it's it should
never the statue addition should
never run on a on intentional.
Killing.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo gentleman from
Bernalillo actually I appreciate
those comments because I I
always looked at it from the
from I guess the standpoint of
trying to to take on the
evidentiary problem of proving
an old first degree murder case
I hadn't thought about it from
the plea perspective of you know
giving prosecutors another
option.
Giving Defense Council and
ethical option
and the need for removing that
secure stature limitations to
facilitate maybe a a plea
agreement as well.
and so I I I do think that this
is this is probably one of my I
think more favorite parts of the
bill I think this is long
overdue
to to strip away the statue
limitations especially six years
six years is not very long
and to make sure that somebody
who has the gentleman from
Bernalillo said someone who
doesn't commits an intentional
act taking another human being's
life I don't think they should
be able to get away for that
just because it's been six years
in a day so I I appreciate that
change that's in this bill Madam
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And possibly gentleman from
Bernalillo section twenty five
can I get some information about
the new crime that's being
created here of a shooting
threat.
Madam speaker and gentleman gas
so section this section actually
we also some of the members in
this body recently saw a if as
Senate bill forty three
and this is.
This section amends the bomb
scare statute to create a new
misdemeanor crime for
threatening to bring a firearm
somewhere with the intent to
place people in fear disrupt the
use of a building or cause an
emergency response.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo some trying to
remember from.
From the O. G. H. three sixty
eight if.
There was a threatening.
Crime in there but was it
specific to threatening to shoot
I don't run I don't recall the
details of the.
Madam speaker gentleman it was
not.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo is is is that crime
of threatening that was in the
regional.
HB Sixtyeight is it still here's
maybe just look further on the
bill Madam speaker gentleman I
apologize so the language that
is in here is the
G. forty three.
he section in house bill sixty
eight that set up of the.
Crime of.
I'm gonna create a criminal
threat has been removed so the
Senate.
Is utilizing the version that
had passed to the Senate which.
Is the language here.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so.
Am I understand correctly
you're.
Your bill.
I am threatening Senator Gallo.
That crime.
But left.
The number of the bill correct
is that right.
Madam speaker judgment that was
merely section one.
Sigur gentlelady from Bernalillo
thanks for the clarification.
I do notice though that there
there is with regard to the the
shooting the threat of shooting
that there are.
Has to be some intent elements
can you explain of the
importance of of the intent
elements here.
Madam speaker gentleman's
it is critical in almost all
criminal criminal charges to
have two things the first is
intense and the second is
action.
Then figure generally from
Bernalillo.
can you tell the body what this
what level of offenses new crime
of would create.
Madam speaker gentleman
misdemeanor.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo
This they're not gonna change
anything this bill this time I
do think it's it's an
interesting choice of a
misdemeanor
because you've already shown an
intent to.
Well place a person or group of
persons in fear of great bodily
harm it involves a firearm.
Involves a public facility.
And the issue I think of not
making a felony is misdemeanors
the way they're they're tracked
could be an interesting issue
potentially
and there's also some some
gatekeepers that felonies curry
as well.
so an interesting choice of
thing by our Senate colleagues
to make that.
Misdemeanors of four three
felony Madam speaker gentleman
yes in fact that was an
amendment from the original
Senate forty three on the Senate
floor for I'm sorry in Senate
judiciary
Senator Baca moved the amendment
during debate to reduce it from
a felony to a misdemeanor.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
section twenty six have
questions on this.
This looks like you might
actually there might be a little
meat left on the bone from age
eighty six of from recognizing
this section correctly.
Madam speaker gentleman in fact
four fifths.
Figure generated from
Bernalillo.
How do you write over the
calculation eighty percent.
Well.
Sir and madam speaker
gentleman's four fifths of the
original bill is still in here.
Massacre gently from Bernalillo
thank you a.
My math skills are always very
good so
so again I.
I want to make sure within the
context of these amendments
we're talking about
Things it's it's generally
unlawful to possess a handgun as
a starting point for this but
then it carves out exceptions.
In one of those exceptions is
participating in a lawful
shooting activity is that
correct Madam speaker gentleman
yes this particular section I
believe it is unchanged from the
original.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo and I may have just.
Not honed in on it during the
debate for H. P. sixty eight the
first time on the floor but
subparagraph five the words
engaging in is added into this
bill was that in in the
resolvers image three sixty and
I just missed a.
Madam speaker gentleman it was
in fact in the original version.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Section twenty seven.
I think this is also part of the
four fifths or creates a new sub
paragraphs the can you describe
what this new subparagraph does.
Madam speaker gentleman yes of
six subsection C.
of section twenty one.
Delineates that a serious
violent felon that is found to
be in possession of a firearm
should be guilty of a third
degree felony.
And shall be sentenced to a
basic term of six years.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
So currently.
If if we don't adopt this
amendment and current statutes
stands
you're left with the fell and
found in possession of firearms.
They're guilty of a third degree
felony.
but there's no.
Sensing enhancement even if
their service violent felon is
that correct Madam speaker
gentleman correct.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo so the way in I read
subsection C. than the new
language is this would require a
basic term of six years in
prison which would be larger
than current statute is that
right.
Madam speaker gentleman that is
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady in
towards the end of section
twenty seven.
it.
It flushes out the new language
does exactly I said exactly what
stirs violent felon is can you
provide the body with a couple
examples of of what would
constitute a serious violent
felon.
Madam speaker gentleman we are
pulling up the list of what
constitutes a serious violent
felon but in this statute
specifically the statute says
means a person convicted of an
offence enumerated in sub
paragraphs a through an of
paragraph four of subsection L.
of section thirty three dash to
dash thirty four and M. as a
nineteen seventy eight.
Massacre generally from
Bernalillo so
That that is what the text reads
but I think problems are eyes
glass over for me it's helpful
to have sort of one of the one
of those actual subparagraphs
mean without having to go to in
those those categories and a
couple of that I'm aware of
would be second degree murder
for example
There's a level of kidnapping
aggravated assault on a police
officer.
Of criminal sexual penetration
hard for those some of those
items including subparagraphs a
through and.
Madam speaker gentleman yes
indeed they are also included
would be voluntary manslaughter
or third degree aggravated
battery yes so those are
considered serious violent
offenses minister gentlelady
from Bernalillo then there's a
couple other.
catches to that are required in
order just even if you commit
one of those offenses in order
to be considered service violent
felon
subprograms Abyan see can
describe what those other.
criteria are.
Madams Mr speaker gentleman that
conforms with the.
Vigil offender statute.
Then figure met Mr speaker Sir
it's been rolled out I don't
know how long Mister speaker
you've been sitting there but Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so one of those
criteria is.
the series I felony that you
commit had that had been within
ten years of.
a previous felony conviction is
that right.
Madams of.
Madam speaker gentleman was
there question.
Then secretary general Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo yes I'm just so there
there it's not just that you
committed assessors filed felony
because there's a couple of
letters that even though maybe
you technically commit say
second degree murder you still
actually could be found and not
be assessors provide felony so
just trying to flush out what
what some of those limitations
are.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if you can help flush
those out.
Then Mr speaker a gentleman yes
the Abyan see here really.
that's the period of time that's
passed after the offense and
saying that
it expires ten years after the
period of probation.
Is over.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo so.
Again the context as I
understand it is you've got a
serious violent felonies and
possession of a firearm that's
unlawful so we're talking about
basically we're talking about
this in our as were they would
get what I would call sort of a
sentencing enhancement and that
is true if they committed this
you know say second degree
murder and less that was more
than ten years ago is that is
that right.
Mr speaker gentleman exactly.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker I'm so
sorry.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo section twenty eight
can you describe to the body
some of the changes that are
being made for aggravated
fleeing a law enforcement
officer.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
indeed so this section folks
will recall of that four fifths
I was at compromise but four
fifths this creates new
penalties stricter penalties for
aggravated fleeing of a law
enforcement and specifically
what.
Subsection C. does is Mr speaker
and gentleman when
Whoever commits an aggravated
fleeing a law enforcement
officer that results in injury
to another person is guilty of a
third degree felony.
Currently all aggravated fleeing
of a law enforcement is a fourth
degree felony regardless of
whether another person is
injured or if it causes great
bodily harm.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo.
And so.
Under the proposed amendments.
If it does not result in injury
then it's a it's a fourth degree
felony which is consistent with
current statute but if if it
does.
Result in injury to another
person and it's a third degree
felony is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo them I'm really
grabbing in the recesses of my
mind but I.
For some reason I had had the
remember that if there was great
bodily harm it created a second
degree felony my remember that
correctly.
Mr speaker gentle men indeed you
are remembering that correctly
in the original version of house
bill sixty eight there was a
subsection do however that is
not in this
the version that we are being
asked to concur on.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo so under the Senate's
changes then whether it's bodily
harm or great bodily harm
regardless it's a class three
felony is that correct.
Your speaker gentleman correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section nine it looks
like it's creating of quite a
new language regarding GPS
trackers can you can you provide
some insight to the body as to
what this new language or do of
the body concurs.
Mr speaker and gentleman in this
section is actually language
that one might have found in
Senate bill two twenty five and
what the the point of this
section is to ensure that upon
request with reasonable
suspicion to believe it relates
to an ongoing investigation for
designated offenses law
enforcement shall have access to
the GPS location data for
defendants being monitored on
pre trial release without a
warrant and Mr speaker and
gentleman I do believe that the
without a warrant is a key
distinction
In this provision.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if the I I I agree
that is that is critical and so
I guess I don't know enough
about the GPS tracking systems
right now.
Do law enforcement not currently
have access to the information.
Mr speaker gentleman you have
hit the nail on the head
of currently law enforcement has
to get a warrant.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
So the.
The.
Persons who have afforded to
track them right now or the like
probation officers are the arms
of the court
I guess I'm I'm curious as the
currently how that works what
entities that that has access to
it.
Mr speaker and gentleman the AOC
is the records custodian for
that information.
Madam speaker Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo
so.
If.
Law enforcement for to have
access to this information
without having obtained the
warrant first.
It seems to me that this would
allow law enforcement to be able
to respond.
Of more readily and and quite a
bit faster.
should say one of these get cut
off or
The GPS tracker show the
defendant being in an area where
or he or she is prohibited from
being being located is is that a
fair understanding this.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker gentle and gentle
lady from Bernalillo and and I
do think it's important to that
we recognized removing the war
requirement do understand the
need for privacy
but the reality is.
You're either incarcerated.
For your release.
with the GPS device right so
we're not talking about someone
who is outside of the criminal
justice system and so I I think
in that with that framework in
mind I think it's reasonable to
say you don't have to get a
warrant.
Will attract the person who's
agreed to where the ankle
bracelet and who's agreed to
abide by certain conditions of
release but I notice in this
this new language that only
applies to certain offenses can
you describe the body what those
offenses are.
Thank you for that question so
this is actually the same list
of it offenses as were in house
bill five and these are serious
violent offenses that really
need this additional level of
monitoring.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so some of the
examples are.
Earned first degree
human trafficking felony abuse
of a child sexual exploitation
of a child.
And then there's a laundry list
as well which I think are for
the same items that we described
earlier is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so.
Again we're not going to and
then this this phone is talking
about concurrence on these
changes but I will share with
you one of the things that I am
I am saddened or disappointed.
that's not included in this list
and I think maybe we should
should seriously consider it in
the interim is domestic violence
offenses battery on a household
member those are those are
serious issues and maybe maybe
there in here and I'm just not
understanding correctly but the
way I redid the languages
they're not included those are
serious offenses unfortunately
they tend to be re repeat
offenses and oftentimes you have
a victim who has a difficult
time defending himself or
herself and so to have a GPS
modern device that could be
monitored by police in real time
without having to get a warrant
I think that's a special class
of victims that we should to pay
attention to is the legislature
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and and I don't see
them listed in here am I missing
anything.
Mr speaker gentleman I think
you're correct that you don't
see them in there and that is
something I would be I'm happy
to work with you on in the
interim Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo I think I really
do think we need to put it stick
tab on that because it's like I
said it's it's a very
unfortunate it's rife with
problems and repeat offenders.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section thirty.
I'm trying to member in the
regional HB eighty six there was
a lot of language that was
struck and there's a lot of
language is added back in but
they're language that was added
back in was really for what I
would call organizational
purposes is that what this
section here is doing.
Mr speaker gentleman a section
thirty is that to where we are.
Mr speaker Julie from Bernalillo
yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman
regarding.
Mr speaker gentleman a just one
moment.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for allowing us to confer the
original house bill seventy nine
and did in fact increase the
penalty for second degree murder
up to eighteen years however
this version the Senate
judiciary and Senate amended
version has fifteen years.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And the the other language
strikes and the the language
additions is really just a
reorganization of the language
itself is that right.
Mr speaker gentleman yes a claim
of.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo
What is the current penalty for
second degree.
Of murder if we don't to concur
in these amendments.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
currently fifteen and so it
would stay the same.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo and.
And that that to be a little
disappointing as well.
As as I think we we mentioned
earlier in the debate you you
have a scenario and under
secondary murder or someone is
intentionally taking the life of
another human being.
But I suppose that's that's the
desire of the Senate and we have
to decide whether we were going
to concur on that or not.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and ask question on
section thirty one.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so before we.
Talk about what subparagraph a
does can you explain sort of the
current.
law regarding brandishing a
firearm if we were to reject
these amendments what would what
would apply.
Mr speaker gentleman current law
is a three year enhancement for
brandishing this.
Amendment
allows for a graduated
sentencing scheme that is an
additional one year for use of a
firearm in relation to a drug
transaction activated burglary
or a serious violent offence.
And in three years for
brandishing and then
Subsection C. is five years for
the discharge of a weapon of
fire.
Mr speaker generally formerly I
know we had some extensive
dialogue on this this
Section.
When we were debating house bill
sixty eight the first time on
the house floor.
I have to say I'm a little
puzzled.
By the language choice of the
Senate because.
If I'm a defense lawyer.
And my client brandishes a
firearm which which I think we
we had established means sort
and in simple terms that I I
pull it out and either I maybe I
pointed out chair I just make it
known that have got this farm.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo that that is a fair
explanation of brandishing a
firearm.
Mr speaker gentleman what you
described could be
Considered brandishing.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if im Defense
Council and my clients looking
at either a the one years since
enhancement or three years since
he has been obviously I'm gonna
try to argue that he or she
should only receive the one
your.
And so even if you Here she
brandished a firearm I would
just say that that they used the
firearm.
and so I'm a little puzzled as
to the use of the word use.
instead of zest which was under
the previous.
Representative for previous
version as I recall is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentleman at the
distinction between possessed
and used is whether or not you
have direct control and so that
was the determining factor
For reversing the amendment and
if you'll note.
section G.
number one does defined
brandished
and so it's displaying or making
a firearm noon to another person
while the firearm is present on
the person of the offending
party with the and with intent
to intimidate or injured person.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo so I I guess I don't
know how you Brenda should farm
without saying you also used for
what am I missing there.
Mr speaker and gentleman so use
would be if you have the gun on
your person so you have it in
your immediate control you don't
have to pull it out and show it
to the person they don't have to
know that you have it it's that
it's.
In your.
Immediate control.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
really I know you're in this on
renewable possession of position
of having to fend these changes
in their not your changes but I
I just have a hard time getting
there.
Just from a practical standpoint
to say that that used means
really possession but not
brandishing because when I when
I think of using something it's
it's act it's not they're not
being used it's it's an active
thing
and so I I you know I made my
point but I think this could
create some issues for
prosecutors downline I you know
hopefully in Eltham wrong on
this this
and as I assume prosecutors will
come to us in a couple years and
say Hey can we look at maybe a
language change here
but I'm afraid that we might get
into a scenario where
brandishing is three years uses
only one
and all prosecutors are ever
gonna be able to show is use
they're never going to get to
the the three year mark because
of the way that I understand
used I don't know it's there's a
difference between that and and
brandishing.
And I guess the other the other
point with that is.
Simple possession
isn't a separate.
aggravated under this scheme
either.
And then Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo can you.
sure for some light for us on in
the same section prior program
the what these changes would
bring.
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
referring to a separate a second
or subsequent finding is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo that's correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman so the
amendment on the Senate floor
increased to that of five years
so House Bill Sixtyeight as it
left this chamber was three
years the Senate has increase
that to five years Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thanks for the clarification and
same question looks like
paragraph the.
He is an excellent makes some
changes as well can you describe
what those changes are.
Madam sorry Mr speaker gentleman
I don't believe there changes
from the version as it left the
house for
subsection E..
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo.
So the I guess the underlying
questions I'm looking at saying
we're we're already on the line
to in the HB sixty eight
thousand maybe it was swindle
house is that right Mr speaker
gentleman that's correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo looks like section
thirty three I don't remember
anything about application for
grants in the ritual HB sixty
eight.
can you talk through what
changes these proposed.
Senate amendments would do.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm so glad
you flat to that in fact you
might remember we had a great
discussion on here on the house
floor of house bill eighty four
the grant reduction efforts
right the crime reduction grant
act so this language should be
familiar to members as we
discussed in that it.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I'm really not trying
to be rude but it's it's the
familiar me was not not this
morning so can you flush out for
me what what this grant doesn
how this language changes may
may help that.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
worries at all I don't know that
I will would be able to tell you
off the top of my head what it
included either
but it amends the crime
reduction grant act which
currently exist but it expands
the allowable purposes for which
the grants may be awarded to
include.
Developing or improving
coordination of services between
law enforcement agencies and
treatment programs establishing
law enforcement crisis
intervention teams.
Coordinating access to programs
for transitional or reentry
homes for individuals recently
released from incarceration.
Recruiting or retaining law
enforcement officers prosecutors
public defenders corrections
officers and mental health
workers.
Developing or expanding data
driven policing programs and
staffing of criminal justice
coordinating council.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo thank you for the.
Education and what House Bill
number the state that came out
of.
Mr speaker gentleman house bill
eighty four.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo do you do you by
chance have a tally of the
number of bills are rolled into
this guy.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
know what I would actually love
to get that specific number for
you and also potentially this
the number of sections or the
percentage because I think
you'll be very impressed with
how much we have actually seen
before but if you give us a
little bit of time on that and
perhaps we could move on to
other questions what we research
that.
Mr speaker gently formerly of
Abby happy to although I I'm not
sure I can trust myself to
remember that at this point but
maybe maybe with between the two
of us will be able to remember
section thirty four I notice
also add some new material I
don't recall seeing.
in house bill.
Sixty eight so can you explain
the body what this new section
thirty four does.
Mr speaker gentleman the new
section thirty four ads a judge
to the second judicial district.
Mr speaker deliberately okay so
I I think maybe I'm still
looking the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Amendment so my section thirty
four creates the database so is
this the same database for time
similar database was referenced
earlier in the bill that that
was struck on the Senate floor.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for catching that you're correct
that section was amended out.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so that's not part of
what you're asking us to concur
on is that correct Mr speaker
and gentleman you're correct
thank you.
Mr speaker gentle lady
formerly you mentioned.
a new judgeship.
But I think this.
This house bill sixty eight
actually.
It's three new judgeships is
that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if we're being
asked to approve three new
judgeships to recall this house
bill to have have money in the
budget for these three new
judgeships.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
section thirty eight the law
enforcement attention fund can
you describe what what this
language does please.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes the
law enforcement retention fund
is a new fund that is set up
that provides
For one time retention
differential payments to law
enforcement officers that will
be distributed by DPS and those
retention differentials are
equal to five percent of the
base salary for our law
enforcement officers.
When they reached four nine
fourteen and nineteen years they
do need to remain employed for
one additional year with that
law enforcement agency.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo it's a I know are far
a colleagues in the other
chamber are smart but it seems
like this idea was maybe crafted
somewhere else can explain where
the the idea came from.
Mr speaker gentleman you're
correct it came from house bill
eighty six.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and I'm trying to
find in this.
This version.
the.
I think I found it the the four
nine fourteen nineteen is that
in paragraph D. as in delta.
My apologies could you direct me
once again to where I'm looking.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so it's under.
subparagraph D. as in delta.
still in.
Section thirty eight.
And the Mr speaker and gentleman
This is where it specifies that
it's five percent of the
base salary of for the four line
fourteen and nineteen years of
service and what was the
question.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so you would
reference the four nine fourteen
nineteen when you're describing
what this section does and so
just trying to make sure I
located the right section and I
just want to confirm that that
is in fact the correct section.
and can you just speak to
how the way this is set up the
that we don't need to as
legislators worry about there
being any anti donation clause
problems.
Mr speaker gentleman that's a
wonderful question thank you so
by
Making it such that the law
enforcement officer remains
employed with the same law
enforcement agency for one
additional year.
We.
It within the guidelines so that
it's not an anti donation
violation.
Mr speaker gentle lady from from
Bernalillo and so essentially
you're not you no longer.
Compensating them for past
services rendered really come
sing for them agreeing to stay
on for one additional year with
that same agency is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo are you aware to
the attorney general's office
weigh in on this.
Of this this formulation to to
to give their opinions whether
this was constitutional or not.
Mr speaker gentleman I do
believe that as we were having
house bill eighty six vetted we
did get to
Feedback from the attorney
general's office that this
Was up to snuff.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo you're right opinion
was is is not correct that's
that's too strong work because
that that's a term of art for
the AG's office so I
that's a good catch there but
but they did at least provide
some feedback on the service Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo what happens if we
adopt these proposed amendments
and there's not enough fund
balance in the police retention
fund that we're creating.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
under the original house bill
eighty six there was sufficient
funds in house bill two four one
almost two years of estimated
retention differentials however
in this amended bill sixty eight
which is very confusing between
eighty six and sixty eight
Because of some of the
amendments earlier in the bill
setting up the
excess revenues from the law
enforcement protection fund to
now go to the law enforcement
retention Fund we will have a
stream of revenue that should
provide funding.
For many years to come.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo that that actually
that the new wants on a change I
I did not catch that so I
appreciate you actually
highlighting I think that's
that's good news is the funding
and house bill two is it
recurring as well in addition to
what you just described.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
unfortunately and house bill two
the monies for nonrecurring Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I I recall some of
the.
The public comments as house
bill eighty six made it through
some committees and also some.
Some emails that that we
received from constituents that
there were some concerns about
who would or would not be
included as a law enforcement
officer under this fund.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
would you mind just flushing out
for the body so we know of who
who would be considered a law
enforcement officer that would
be eligible for these type of of
mispronounce.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
so in this section at the
definition for this section of
the law enforcement agency and
this is.
Where I think we'll we'll get
the answer to your question
means an agency of the state or
local political subdivisions of
the state that employees
certified law enforcement
officers or the police
department of a tribe that has
entered into an agreement with
the department pursuant to
section twenty nine dash one
dash eleven now the distinction
here Mr speaker and gentleman
that I believe your
pointing us to is that this does
include our livestock aboard our
state park folks the law
enforcement.
Officers that were not included
under a near or definition.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I'm pleased that the
Senate is included those changes
I think it's important to to
recognize all of our our law
enforcement community and and
really incentivize all of those
employees to remain with their
agencies so I appreciate that
and I am on a personal note also
very please Mr speaker gently
from Bernalillo that although
the numbers are transpose that
that this fund is is going to at
least it appears going to get to
the fourth floor and the
governor can decide whether
she's going to sign or not I'm
hope I'm hopeful that she will
because I think this is a nice
it's a nice boost for our police
officers to show them that Hey
we value you you are important
our communities
and and it's also I think a wise
use of taxpayer dollars to.
L. as how much it costs to train
a new officer each time you have
a vacancy to send them to the
academy and the length of time
and so to the extent that we can
more efficiently use taxpayer
dollars to keep our current law
enforcement officers with our
current agency I think it's a
good move on a number of fronts
so Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo there's some
new.
Material in now at in the
section thirty nine I don't
remember seeing it in sixty
eight and house bill sixty eight
of and it revolves around
requests again can you explain
to the body what this new
language does.
Mr speaker and gentleman you are
referring to section thirty nine
is that correct criteria for
distribution of grants Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo that is correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
the specific section relate
specifically to requests that
are supporting pre trial
services
and it requires AOC to
standardize pre trial
supervision around the state
based on best practices.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and there's there's a
couple of other new sections one
of them is creating the violence
intervention program Act
section forty forty one.
Forty two maybe maybe below the
of us as far as on my pager and
now so can you explain what is
the the violence intervention
program act that this these
amendments are seeking to
create.
Mr speaker and gentleman so this
section relates back to another
bill that we did have extensive
discussion on the floor here and
that was house bill in ninety
six and just as a refresher V.
I. P.'s support violence
intervention programs.
they require evidence based
approaches for reducing violence
focused on deterrence and high
risk populations.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
I
vaguely remember the debate
That bill passed the house.
Mr speaker gentleman yes indeed
it did and are there is also a
one point seven million dollars
in recurring funding in house
bill two and nine million
dollars in nonrecurring funding
for that program.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo and do you know is
this a reverting fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman one
moment while we confirm.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is a
non reverting fund.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I notice.
Section forty three has some
program requirements can you
explain the body what those
requirements are.
Mr speaker gentleman those are
some of the best practices for
violence intervention programs.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo do you mind just sort
of question out what some of
those best practices are Mr
speaker and gentleman short so
applications for the I. P.
requests must include
measureable objectives under
evidence based interventions a
strategic plan including quality
assurance measures and a plan
for using the funds focused on
community based service
providers.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo and the way I
understand additional parts of
this new language section forty
four.
There's some.
Use the word limitation but I
what I would I would call it is
Safeguards to make sure that
these monies don't end up just
and say one specific community
cough cough Albuquerque.
New Mexico's.
City of course but but to make
sure that some of these of
course our districts around the
state so can you speak about Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo how this new language
helps accomplish that.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that question so the
section forty four does specify
that at least sorry grant awards
will be made to at least two
counties municipalities are
tribal governments with a
population of fifty thousand or
less
at least twenty percent of the
total annual amount appropriated
shall be awarded to counties or
municipalities with a population
of five hundred forty thousand
or greater to the based on the
most recent federal census.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so.
Trying to see there's no
percentage requirement program
for one I don't.
Thank you there is I think it's
a it's a numeral requirement on
a percentage requirement like
per of two is that right.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
right.
And so I I.
I guess the question Mr speaker
generally from Bernalillo if if
at least twenty percent.
Have to go to counties
misspelled is with population
five hundred forty thousand or
greater that means they're still
eighty percent left and then at
least two.
Grant awards after made under
paragraph one don't know what
percentage that is but maybe
seventy or sixty five percent
how is the remaining percentage
to be allocated.
Mr speaker and gentleman and so
as long as the conditions in.
Subsection B. one and two are
met then it's up to the program
and to decide and based on the
applications.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo so those monies could
go to the additional small
counters they could go to the
additional larger municipalities
up to the discretion of.
I guess Department health so
that right.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section forty five
has some some additional new new
language in it that we're being
asked to consent to and it
revolves around application
requirements for these these
grant programs so can you find a
body what what are some of the
application requirements that
are being
Asked of her.
Mr speaker and gentleman so in
summary and the some folks and
with exceptional memory might
recall this from the debate on
house bill ninety six but
neither you nor I have
exceptional memories like that
and so the brief summary is that
the following conditions for
requests under the VIP at least
fifty percent of grant money
should be used for contracts
with community based service
providers reporting to criminal
justice coordinating councils
and grants shall not be awarded
to both the county and
municipality following within
the same county.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I I think I would.
Take notice take exception of
only one thing you said which is
a I do believe you probably have
an exceptional memory I know I
do not.
Of suicide separate materials
and and folks who can remind me
of of other bills that we've
already debated Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo
looks like section forty eight
is requiring some.
Some reporting that this the
these amendments would require
can you explain what with
reporting requirements are
either being asked Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you for that
question so yes you know I think
one of the
Great things throughout this if
between house bill ninety six
and house bill eighty six sort
of interesting with the the
numbers theme here
but we are requiring a lot of
reporting right because we want
to make sure Mr speaker and
gentleman that what we are
attempting to do is actually
succeeding and we want to be
able to track our progress and
measure results so I'm very
pleased that we have another
section here on reporting
and so the reporting
requirements.
That this sections is really
just regarding the use of the
requests received and there are
specifications would you like
for me to go into more detail or
is that sufficient Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo if
you would mind going in just so
a little more detail I think it
might be helpful actually in
this area wonderful certainly is
so Mister speaker and gentleman
so what we're asking is that
each grantee report to the
department and the commission by
November one of each year
regarding the purpose in amount
of each grant received by the
grantee for the previous fiscal
year and processes outputs and
outcomes resulting from each
grant approved by the department
for the previous fiscal year
including relevant data as
required by department rules.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo.
next questions I have heard from
sections forty nine fifty
I do have someone of
recollection of these two
sections can you explain what
bill the sections came from.
Mr speaker gentleman I feel as
though I ought to defer to you
I believe that these came from
house bill ninety nine.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
early I will tell you it it's
nice to finally debate somebody
that's not from my own caucus on
house bill ninety nine just so
you know.
Just.
And and and that you just isn't
here having to to weigh in as
well so that that's a good thing
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo can you explain what
what the new crime that's been
created here and section forty
nine of.
Mr speaker down and probably not
as well as you could.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if we're in court you
could actually asked the court
to to ask the judge to treat the
witness as a hostile witness and
then you can start cross
examining them
so I I.
Let me ask it this way
currently Mr speaker gentle lady
from.
Bernalillo is there any special
statutes that that would protect
the judge or his or her family
members from these kinds of
threats.
Mr speaker and gentleman not
currently so the issue is that
currently there are no statutes
to protect a judge or their
family from threats and so that
is what house bill ninety nine
order to do and the Senate
wisely incorporated as an
amendment into house bill sixty
eight.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
It does I think this is an
important area that that this
body needs to consider and
whether we agree to consent to
these these changes of the
Senate made or not
and really.
One talk about section forty
nine of fifty really these two
are are joined together at the
hip if you will Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo what
section forty nine is doing is
creating a new of felony of the
fourth degree felony and it's a
felony to
threatened judge for the
immediate family member judge of
intent to basically do one of
three things.
Is the judge or his or her
immediate family member and fear
of great bodily harm prevented
up the bility of that judge to
clear out his or her job duties
board retaliate against the
judge
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
can you explain the body what
what retaliation means within
the this context.
Mr speaker gentleman so as used
in this section
so C. three retaliate of means
intentionally threatening bodily
injury to or damage to the
property of a judge or a family
member of a judge with the
intent to retaliate against the
judge for the judges exercise of
the judge's judicial duties and
causing the judge or the family
member to reasonably believe
that the judges or the family
members person or property is in
danger.
Mr speaker gentleman does that.
Provide sufficient information.
Mr speaker generally from really
I'm not sure I can answer better
myself I appreciate that.
And what level felony is this
new crime creating.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
fourth degree felony.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if there's any
members that are maybe have some
heartburn about whether we
should drop these amendments
based on a fourth degree felony
can you tell the body are there
any similar crimes with regard
to either intimidation a of a
jury member or threatening
intimidation of a witness is
sorry gentleman gentle lady just
a quick reminder to members to
make sure where you're masks on
the floor.
Sorry gentleman surgeon lady
thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman
intimidation of a witness is a
fourth degree felony.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and do you know what
level felony is to retaliate
against a witness or a jury
member.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
We did not know that was a
crime.
Is there a felony associated
with that Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo here making me
doubt myself myself now but I my
recollection is actually a
second degree felony it's
treated quite a bit more
seriously maybe a third but
certainly higher than the fourth
there is a third but I know it's
higher than the fourth I do know
that for sure so the fact that
this creates a fourth degree
felony I don't think is out of
line with how we currently treat
both witnesses and jurors who of
course are important parts of
the judicial process.
But.
The judge herself is arguably
just as important if not more
important to that process so I
think it's important that we
sure that up Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo
can you explain who is included
as the family members of of a
judge within this new crime
Mr speaker and gentleman yes but
I would like to let you know
that you were in fact correct
and it was just it's a second
degree felony so to put your
mind at ease
So immediate family members Mr
speaker and gentleman means a
spouse child sibling parent
grandparent or grandchild and
immediate family members
includes a stepparent step child
step simple and and an adoptive
relationship.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo thanks for the
confirmation I never know what
you'll need when you go on
jeopardy I suppose all sick than
the back online and.
And also just of the mind
disclosing who you're you're
very helpful and lovely expert
is to the body.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for asking I apologize that
I did not do so earlier ms
Meghan Dorsey
Attorney.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo I.
Of you my thanks miss Dorsey
she's been helpful and and you
know you've done a great job
during this debate as well but
it's helpful to have someone at
your spot at your side so so
late into the night or early
morning now Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
can you describe to the body
what these changes to house bill
sixty eight mean in terms of who
would be considered a judge on
to this crime.
Mr speaker and gentleman
judge in this section means a
current or former justice judge
magistrate domestic violence
special commissioner for hearing
officer.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo so the way I read
that language is it it would
include obviously our spring
court justices are court appeals
judges district judges mention
judges but also sweeps and I
think.
Probate judges municipal judges
metropolitan judges.
It includes domestic.
Officers that includes
administrative law judges are
LG's their house within the
executive department
and I so I think it's a pretty
well encompassing definition and
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
mind just confirming would
include all those types of of
judges and hearing officers.
Mr speaker gentleman yes it
would.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and section fifty.
I think I'd mentioned that it's.
Remember what I used to but the
third their twins at least
that's the way oral use now but
it is a little different section
fifty compared to forty nine so
Mister speaker gentle lady would
you describe for the body what
what new crime.
would be created under section
fifty there are being asked to
adopt here today.
Mr speaker and gentleman is so
this section would create a
misdemeanor crime for sharing
the personal information of a
judge or judges immediate family
member with the intent to cause
harm place them in fear of great
bodily harm or to disrupt the
judge's duties.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo would you mind
describing what the personal
information is within the
meeting this this new language.
Mr speaker gentleman
yes as in defined in this
section personal information
means a person's.
Personal physical address
personal phone number for
physical location.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so
I noticed that this language
includes the word intent.
can you explain you to speak to
to the importance of including
the element here.
Mr speaker and gentleman as we
discussed earlier most crimes
require those two components of
intent and act.
Mr speaker gentle lady and so by
including the word intent here
with regard to sharing personal
information
it did.
It avoids capturing sort of
innocent sharing of information
it instead ties it to having a
specific intent to say
caused bodily harm to the judge
by sharing that personal
information is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo section fifty one.
this new material being asked to
adopt looks awfully familiar as
well can you share with us were
aware this
information came from Mr speaker
and gentleman yes I can in fact
I would like to defer to yield
if I may to one of the sponsors
of house bill sixty nine another
bill that was discussed and
vetted here in the house
If I may yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and gentleman yes it is familiar
couple days ago we passed house
bill sixty nine through this
body and the amendments.
In the house bill sixty eight
that we're talking about now
section fifty one fifty two and
fifty three correspond exactly
to the three sections that we
passed in the house bill sixty
nine.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Ginnelly from
Bernalillo can you share with
the body under this material is
the material of what a chop shop
is.
Mr speaker gentleman what a
Topshop is itself definition or
what the crime of operating a
chop shop is Mr speaker
generally from Bernalillo
generally from Bernalillo good
clarifying question I'm just
trying to get my arms around
what is an actual chop shop.
Mr speaker and gentleman Topshop
in this section is incredible
the needs a premises where
person possesses receive stores
disassembles for altars and
unlawfully obtained motor
vehicle or vehicle as defined by
the motor vehicle code.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and generally from
Bernalillo
Sir can you X. share with the
body.
What the what the issue is
that New Mexico is facing that
such that we should consider
adopting these the these
amendments.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say that this body has already
adopted this language in this
idea when we passed house bill
sixty nine but as you know Mr
speaker and gentleman auto theft
is
being crime and this criminal
enterprise of operating you chop
shop.
Is driving that auto theft pun
intended to.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo ingenuity from
Bernalillo I I appreciate the
pods whether intended or
unintended and so in your mind
can you explain how if we adopt
these the these changes have my
address that that booming auto
theft problem.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
another tool that our law
enforcement has requested from
us to allow them to go after
these limited range criminal
enterprises.
We have statutes to allow them
to pursue auto theft criminals
these are the folks who are
profiting massively profiting
off of those individual out of
this.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo gentlelady from
Bernalillo that's a that's a
good new on sex I appreciate you
point out
Because the the person who
receives the stolen car and
maybe in some instances of the
ones that the still that doesn't
happen necessary be it the way I
read this language they receive
the stolen vehicle they start
dismantling it and maybe selling
off parts and things like that
and so Mister speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo the way I
understand this is this would
allow police and prosecutors to
try to target the person who's
received the stolen vehicle and
is dismantling or doing other
things in order to turn a profit
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
is.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and gentle lady from
Bernalillo section fifty two.
can you explain what what type
of new crime this is creating
they're being asked to adopt.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
criminal damage to property.
Because yes after attempted
theft of regulated metal.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and generally from
Bernalillo I I guess I.
I'm a little surprised because I
I assume there is already a.
A criminal damage to property
but is it.
Is it the fact that it's a
regulated material is that the
new change to our current law.
Mr speaker and gentleman that we
do have larceny and criminal
damage they're two separate
statutes what this does
differently is recognize the
combined intent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo when you say what can
you just for show what I mean
when you say combined and ten.
One of the criminal attempts to
steal for example copper lines
out of the construction.
a house under construction our
houses already built and they
rip apart a wall to get to the
medal they're trying to steal
this would combine the damage to
the wall as well as the value of
the medals stolen into one
crack.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo and gently from
Bernalillo.
And can you just talk to the
body about the the different
levels of crimes that are being
created here.
In the.
Mr speaker and gentleman and if
it depends on the value of the
damage done combined with the
value of the metal stolen if
it's under one thousand dollars
it's a petty misdemeanor.
More than a thousand under
twenty five hundred it's a
misdemeanor and if it's over
twenty five hundred combined
it's a fourth degree felony.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo internally from
Bernalillo I see also that were
being asked to adopt some
language changes here for
defining what these materials
are.
I'm curious.
I assume the answer is probably
no but.
When you talk about regulated
materials are there any other
frequently stolen items that
maybe don't fit neatly within
these these specifically defined
materials.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
you clarify that question.
Mr speaker generally from
earlier was just a poorly worded
question is is Hollywood so
no I'm just wondering it when we
start really defining these type
of
and let me use the exact phrase
the regulated material.
When you start getting a all the
way down to say a water meter
cover for utility access cover
I'm just wondering if maybe
there's by getting into the
granular level of maybe there's
some things that that we're
leaving out and so I'm just
wondering if does this bill went
through the process if there was
any kind of feedback of any
other materials that maybe
should have been included.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
these these definitions of
regulated material are defined
elsewhere in statute so eighties
or from another section of
statutes with a minor change.
Based on the process this bill
went through the prior session
Mr speaker and gentleman there
was concern expressed about
cakes and college students so
the regulated material
definition was slightly changed
is slightly different than the
regulated material definition
elsewhere in statute.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo and
Ginnelly from Bernalillo also at
the end of section fifty three
there's a new subparagraph C.
that's added can you sure the
body what this new supporter of
C. would do if we adopted these
changes.
General.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
actually standard languages many
places in statute it is also
found in section one.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo read.
The time our says a secondhand
metal dealer shall not purchaser
otherwise receive any regulated
mature that same language.
Mr speaker and gentleman know
the early hour must be affecting
me I thought you said C. as in
cat but you said I think that
next section which is those are
civil penalties we tightened up
the administrative requirements
at the point of sale for
regulated metal.
Mr speaker gentle lady from.
Bernalillo for sure at the the
dialogue
my next question Mr speaker has
a deal with section fifty four
so Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo enough that lets
off the hook the second lady
from.
From Bernalillo
but I have some questions about
section fifty four.
Mr speaker generated from
earlier can you explain the body
what what this new section fifty
four is doing.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman.
Section fifty four
This provides that
It shall not be a defense
justification or excuse in a
criminal proceeding that the
defendant's conduct was a
reaction to gender gender
expression gender identity or
sexual orientation.
On a different it is also not a
defense that the defendant was
romantically propositioned in a
non violent non threatening
manner by a person of the same
gender for a person who is
transgender.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo.
I don't recognize this material
from the house side did I miss
this on house bill Mr speaker
and gentleman no.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo is this this new
material that we're being asked
to consent to was this container
Senate Bill.
Mr speaker gentleman this
section has been filed in the
Senate in previous years.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and
Was this new material at and on
the Senate floor Senate
Judiciary Committee do you know
where it was at a.
Mr speaker gentleman this was
actually a part of the Senate
Judiciary amendment.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
I don't see well let's see
actually no I do see so can you
explain to the body.
what the differences between
gender expression and gender
identity as defined in this new
language.
Mr speaker gentleman indeed I
can find some definition of.
Gender expression as used in
this section means the external
appearance appearance of a
person's gender identity often
expressed through the person's
behavior physical appearance or
voice which expression may or
may not conform to socially
defined behaviors and
characteristics typically
associated with masculinity or
femininity.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo so that's gender
expression of what's gender
identity underneath this new
language.
Mr speaker gentleman my page was
hiding gender identity means a
person's self perception or
perception of that person by
another of the person's identity
as a male or female based upon
the person's appearance behavior
or physical characteristics that
are in accord  with for opposed
to the person's physical anatomy
chromosomal sex for sex at
birth.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
So the way I understand this new
material we're being asked to
consent to.
It is let's say for example
that.
That someone commits battery and
they're being prosecuted for
battery what this new language
would prohibit is that person
from asserting.
As a defense that they may be
discovered what the victim's
gender identity is of that that
would not be a lawful defenses
that is that what this new
sections trying to accomplish.
Mr speaker gentleman is actually
just.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I noticed that there
are a couple of different
effective dates.
Can you explain.
The reason.
Mr speaker gentleman one moment
while we get the amendment to
ensure we are citing the correct
effective dates.
Ms.
Mr speaker and gentleman four
all of the provisions from
sections two through twenty the
effective date of this act is
July first twenty twenty three.
All of the other sections the
effective date is July first
twenty twenty two
and this was an additional floor
amendment from the Senate.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo associate.
Is the the different effective
dates I just remember seeing the
Senate bill the different
effective dates
are they is that just the
operation of the fact that
there's some funds are some
grant programs besides just
criminal statutes of just trying
to send a rational for having
more than one effective date.
Mr speaker gentleman a you're
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo for you able to
confirm how many bills rolled
into this.
Mr speaker and gentleman indeed
I was and I think you will be
pleasantly surprised.
So and I I believe Mr speaker
and gentleman that I had also
mentioned that I might get some
percentages so.
In fact there are twelve
Bills of origination perhaps
that are included in line of
which are from our chamber right
here house bill's.
That is seventy five percent but
Mr speaker and gentleman a
little bit more information for
you.
If we look at the sections are
because you know I think we were
all very impressed with the
number of sections and so I
thought you would like to know
that.
Of the sections.
Let's see thirty one of these
sections are actually from
current house bill's that we
have discussed and vetted now if
we also incorporate of bills one
bill in particular that passed
unanimously last session and was
vetoed by the governor that
would actually take us up to
forty eight sections out of
fifty four and would you believe
it that is ninety two percent.
I think that's great.
Mr speaker generally from really
I I feel like the movie L. for
uses I it's nice to meet someone
has an affinity for Health
culture like I do so it's nice
to meet somebody has an affinity
for math culture like I do
appreciate the the breakdown of
the numbers and the percentages
you mentioned that these
amendments contain.
Sections from a bill that came
out of the sixty but were not
signed for the governor what
what sections are those that
you're speaking of.
Mr speaker and gentleman those
are actually seventeen of the
sections at the beginning of the
bill that really speak to the
council and board if you
remember that somewhat confusing
Seventeen sections where we were
going from board to board to
board to counsel.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and
I think as we started the
dialogue.
This bill.
Left with.
I sections I believe.
And I I and I realize I'm I'm
looking off of the.
Senate Judiciary amendments and
so that's not deprivations in
terms of the total number of
current.
sections so Mister speaker
gentle lady will you give us
what's the current number of
sections in the current version
of HB sixty eight.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
would be fifty four.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so goes from five to
fifty four so forty nine
additional sections
that's a lot of the new
sections being added that we're
being asked to approve here this
morning so I think actually as
the bill sponsored be helpful
for the body here
If you could pick out a just a
few of those sections that you
believe are the most meaningful
that the body should consider
and weigh in whether to vote to
consent.
I think I would appreciate
hearing your perspective because
this is after all now your bills
despite there are many many
sections added to it.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that wonderful question
so
What I would say about this.
The new version bigger and
better version of house bill
sixty eight is that it really
is.
This is an exceptional
opportunity and I am
extraordinarily proud to have my
name on this I think the Senate
for the hard work that they put
in in these very thoughtful
amendments and the reason is
because.
We have talked to so many people
in the law enforcement community
our constituents who are
concerned about crime
and people that want to see
solutions from prevention all
the way to.
Stiffer penalties and what has
been incorporated into house
bill sixty eight really is.
An effort to tackle this problem
from every angle and we are
being thoughtful and
deliberative with this process
you know as I mentioned.
Most most of the the current
bills in here are bills that
came off of our floor after we
debated the man Committee
debated them on the floor.
You know of another huge chunk
was from a bill that had passed
unanimously
out of
the chambers last year and you
know I also should note that
this incarnation of house bill
sixty eight passed unanimously
out of the Senate and I think
that that's really a testament
to this very holistic approach
to improving public safety in
the state and also that there
are components in here that will
help small communities and
components that are going to
help Albuquerque we are looking
at property crime and we're
looking of violent crime we're
looking at crime prevention
we're looking at how do we make
sure that we have enough law
enforcement officers to be on
the streets to make sure that we
are prosecuting crimes and we
are investigating that we have
the folks that we need to do
this well and so I really am
enormously pleased with.
How this all came together
I think that you know there are
also a lot of parts of this that
have taken years and many
sessions to get here and so.
This is not a you know I am so
fortunate that they are being
incorporated into house bill
sixty eight but none of this
would be here without you know
the work that has really gone in
bipartisan and bicameral into so
many of these bills
And so I think that.
That's how I feel about it and
why I think that we have such a
incredible opportunity to concur
with the Senate amended house
bill sixty eight.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo I've.
I appreciate hearing sorry your
perspective on this and I.
I know we have a lot of hard
working legislators and I think
certainly you're you're in the
top of that list
Right a bit and you're juggling
many bills which is very
impressive Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo I noticed
that these changes to the bill.
also include grant type
initiatives in addition to sort
of criminal sanctions can you
talk about
why were marrying those two
concepts with the changes that
are being presented here.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that that just a is a reflection
of the fact that there's not one
solution to this problem and
that
Grants and programs as well as
stiffer penalties and swift and
certain justice are all part of
the solution.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and as we look at the
the new sections and we're all
aware that Albuquerque is it is
top of the headlines typically
when it comes to violent crime I
think we're all cognizant of
that and and even for those of
us to live in Albuquerque we
have a desire to to solve that
problem.
because it all at the end of the
day it's not just a Albuquerque
promise in New Mexico problem
It affects our children.
Affects our in our families it
affects our tourism.
help people view Albuquerque
hello as is how they've you
Mexico on a lot of ways and so
Mister speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo on you're asking the
body to consent to.
Whole lot of changes from your
perspective.
Which of these changes do you
think best tackles the issues
that we're seeing in Albuquerque
with violent crime.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I don't think that I could say
just one I think it really is a
whole package.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
you know for me.
As I study these amendments I
think there's a few things for
me that come to mind
first and foremost studies have
shown that actually
increasing good policing
presence in neighborhoods can
actually drive down violent
crime
and so with that in mind where
we look at your amendment we're
we have the police retention
fund I think that's fundamental
to.
This concept of that having good
and effective experience
policing in our local
neighborhoods of by.
Creating this retention Fund.
you know hopefully that'll
incentivize our officers to
remain in our local communities
at their current agencies I
think that's important.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I think of of some of
the the enhancements
specifically regarding
possession of firearms for
either drug in our Kotick
transactions or aggravated
burglary
where you have a defendant to
had previously committed a
violent felony I think those are
the type of people.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo that have shown that
they have a track record they've
already been convicted in the
past of of of a violent felony
and then there found to be in
possession of a firearm yet
again those are the type of
dangers that I think we need to
take seriously as a legislator
as a legislature and I think
this bill goes towards
accomplishing that I think
that's helpful we talk about
violent crime.
In Albuquerque Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo some of the
other moments that are here and
they were being asked to consent
to that I think it's helpful
actually is the concept of the
chop shop idea
you know of there's a lot of lot
of property crime that is not a
victimless I would say you know
we can think of well somebody
stole from something from me
when I wasn't home.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and and that's that
can be the case but oftentimes
also it involves of person
person interaction so to the
extent that we can address some
of those crimes as well I think
that's important so the there
are a number of good things I
think in these amendments
overall
and so I can understand
Mr speaker gentle lady the
desire to urged the body to
consent to these amendments and
you know we'd we'd shared as
well a couple of things that
that I had some heartburn about
one of which
I'm very serious about and I I
believe you are to about
dressing.
I think it was in the context of
GPS modern devices for persons
that have been convicted are are
charged with excuse me
domestic violence or better in a
household member I think that's
something that we need to take a
look at in the sixty day this
it's too late to do so now but
to circle back on that I think
is important as well
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
I appreciate the dialogue.
Time flies when you're having
fun I guess there's a lot of
amendments a lot of changes I
think it's important for the
body and the public to to go by
go through those on a on a line
by line basis if you will to
make sure that that there's
nothing in there that that we
don't understand or that we're
not comfortable with when we
vote so I appreciate your
patience in going through that I
appreciate the patience of your.
You're a.
phone a friends who stepped in
as well I think that was helpful
and your expert as well so and
Mr to the right place.
Well and what I was going to
suggest Mr speaker and gentleman
is since this has been an
extremely lengthy debate and we
have covered so much ground I
thought perhaps it would be
helpful especially as some folks
have returned and may have
missed our delightful three hour
conversation I thought perhaps I
would just take a moment to.
Recapped.
If you well and so
The
Mr speaker and gentleman within
this you know a bigger and
better version of house bill
sixty eight we're eliminating
the statute of limitations for
second degree murder we're also
increasing the penalty for
violent felons who possess a
firearm.
For increasing the penalty
enhancements for using firearms
and committing crimes and
expanding the situations where
those enhancements would apply.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
also creating a new crime to
address shooting threats that
Stoke community fears and
require significant emergency
responses often unnecessarily.
We are I think you're
particularly pleased with this
creating a new crime for
threatening judges or their
families as a way to intimidate
their impartial role in the
legal system.
End up as as we talked about
circling back on this perhaps
during the interim we're
ensuring that police have access
to the GPS location data for
defendants who are on pre trial
release so we can discourage
them from committing new crimes
and ensure evidence to prosecute
them when they do.
And
with that
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
just like to say that this bill
really does combat the crime
problem from every angle and Mr
speaker and gentleman I have
truly enjoyed our discussion
this morning thank you Mr
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker I yield Mister
speaker gentleman he is making a
motion seconded is matter I've
been on the consideration for
three hours I move to seize
debate.
All those in favor of any may
signify by saying aye.
This was nay the eyes have it.
The mission before the bodies to
concur the sentiment is yes you
sure can you substitute for
House Bill Sixtyeight is amended
all those in favor of
concurrence please signify by
saying hi.
I suppose may.
The eyes have it the house is
considered in the Senate
amendments to House Judiciary
Committee subsea for House Bill
Sixtyeight as amended.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
and Sandoval we're going to item
number four on the current
calendar Mr speaker I move that
the house and for with the
centre amendments to house bill
one seventy one is twice amended
and Mr speaker I would request a
roll call of the house on house
bill one seventy one as twice
amended.
There is a request for a call
the house Stacey seven hands.
I see seven hands call the
house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval
Why don't we would you be
amenable to leaving the call in
place.
On house bill one seventy one is
amended and moving to other
business I am Mr speaker thank
you John.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you miss will go to the next
order of business third reading
of legislation.
No objection it is it is so
ordered.
Members I'm going to direct your
attention to supplement all
calendar.
Number three item number five.
But the record reflect on to
necessary for placing Senate
bill one forty four final
passage has been taken the
gentleman from Bernalillo and
Sandoval to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I am referring to
this as the New Mexico loading
Act.
It provides for security.
Gentleman the and by the you can
continue
sergeant the call has been we're
not on a call the gentleman has
left the call in place on the
previous item removing and other
business that you can open the
doors.
Correct the call is in place on
the other item for moving on to
other business you can open the
doors.
German please proceed thank you
Mr speaker so this is the New
Mexico voting at.
Which provides for security.
For liability.
For accessibility.
For in the state inclusivity
proficiency.
In the process of voting.
It has been.
A long process.
Involving the thirty three
clerks.
The secretary of state.
And this body.
That has led to this carefully.
And combined.
The disparate elements.
Senate bill six.
And Senate bill eight.
And Senate bill one forty four.
Into one omnibus bill.
No different than the bill we
just discussed.
In the criminal justice field
the Senate put together for us
to consider tonight on
concurrence.
The bill has key elements.
It helps protect election
workers.
Including the secretary of
state.
County and municipal clerks and
their employees and agents from
threats and intimidation.
It allows voters the option to
automatically receive mail in
ballots.
By signing up for.
A voluntary permanent absentee
list.
It creates the native American
voting rights act to protect and
expand voter opportunities for
native Americans residing on
tribal lands.
It ensures access to voting
convenience centers and
comprehensive same day
registration.
It mandates the availability of
monitored secured containers
drop boxes sister referred to.
In every county.
Dramatically improves the
ability of voters.
To cure their mail ballots.
Missing around these information
to ensure that their votes will
be counted.
It automatically restores voting
rights for individuals who have
been convicted of a felony and
are no longer incarcerated.
It's streams want this
streamlines the process.
For updating voter information
the claim of New Mexico voter
rolls including automatic
updates of voter information
through MB D. N. A. testing.
It requires training.
Election workers in challengers
and Senator training and
certification for county clerks
and deputy clerks to continue
with the professionalism of the
election process.
It creates a system that allows
candidates.
To collect signatures on
nominating petitions online.
It eliminates the pre primary
convention for nominations to
federal or statewide office.
It changes a variety of election
procedures.
To ensure consistent efficient
and secure election
administration for all
jurisdictions across New Mexico.
Many of the provisions.
Senate bill six.
Remanded into Senate bill one
forty four.
Include cleaning up
clarification recompilation
thank conforming language
including removing references to
the PRC which is this body knows
is no longer going to be an
elected body.
Improving the safe at home
program the confidential
substitute address program.
Protecting elected critical
infrastructure from interference
and hacking and adjusting and
streamlining the campaign
reporting and lobbyist
regulation acts.
This body should know at this
point.
That I have.
Tried over the years.
To be brief in my opening
comments.
Because I always thought it was
important.
To quickly get.
To the debate.
I've had on both sides C.
members talk for long periods of
time.
And I didn't think that was
particularly instructive because
I thought the debate in the
process is what what's
important.
This is the exception to that
rule.
Because much has been made of
the fact.
That we put these bills
together.
Behind a two page document
Senate bill one forty four but
the fact is is it made perfect
sense to do that.
Because we talk.
All of the election bills that
have been vetted by county
clerks the secretary of state.
And by this body the Senate and
the house.
And we put them together to
avoid duplication.
To avoid inconsistency.
And so the members could see in
one bills everything that we had
tried to do.
And there are there are not
surprises in this bill we seen
these.
And so it's important and I did
this.
In Judiciary.
And I think it is important that
we do this now so that the body
can follow these are online.
The body will look at the
amendment the first amendment
that we did and House Judiciary.
I'm gonna go through each of the
sections it'll take a little
while.
To talk about we're of the
sections came from and what the
section for me.
I have with me my cosponsored
from the Senate Senator Duhigg.
We're gonna start on page three
of the amendment.
Section one.
No surprise to this body it's
out of Senate bill six which we
spend a lot of time on.
It defines it is the definition
of real time synchronization.
On that same page Senate bill
six.
I'm sorry section two things
from Senate bill six.
Requiring election related
organizations to register.
Further in advance than they do
now.
Section three.
Also on page three.
Senate bill six is cleaning up
language.
Again nothing that should
surprise this body.
On page four.
Section four is from Senate bill
eight this is the legislation
that was being considered by the
Senate.
We are transitioning to
electronic nominating petitions.
Section five which is on page
six he is from Senate bill six.
This allows for more
flexibility.
Section six then on that same
page.
Is from Senate bill six image
short ensures that when election
code is silent on disclosure it
brought plus.
Something that's needed in the
election code.
Section seven.
From Senate bill six.
Find for the secretary of state.
To protect information that will
keep Alexion secure.
Section eight.
On page seven.
Is from Senate bill six that
insurers form for consistent.
And our issue or approved by the
secretary of state to encourage
uniformity.
Section nine on page eight.
Senate bill six.
Make sure that the secretary of
state receives service for
process and all election related
challenges so the there is one
repository in the state that
knows when election challenges
are happening and where there
happens.
Section ten is from Senate bill
six again in the bill that we
have looked at.
Cleanup of requirements and
restrictions election board
members.
Section eleven on page ten is
from Senate bill six
clarification requirements for
election board members.
And I will add that one of the
reasons that I'm doing this is
because the concern was that
somehow this was a surprise we
were doing the middle night in
fact I think it's pretty clear
that as we're doing this this is
no longer the middle of the
night.
Section twelve on page eleven is
from Senate bill six.
This is because this is the
ability to be able to compensate
messengers.
Section thirteen on the
following page this is all from
Senate bill six.
It ensures that messengers can
collect ballots from drop boxes
in applies the same criteria
messengers as watchers and
challengers.
Thirteen.
Section fourteen is from Senate
bill six this is training for
watchers and challengers.
Following page section fifteen.
Is from Senate bill six this is
cleanup for voter convenience
centers.
We go then to section sixteen.
Which is on page seventy.
This comes from Senate bill
eight.
The bill that was considered by
the Senate.
In fact the Senate floor and
stocked.
And we've incorporated some of
Senate bill eight like we have a
Senate bill six into Senate that
I have been in the house bill
one fourteen.
Section sixteen is cleanup.
For native American borders Mark
sent critical.
The ability.
Of the residents and citizens of
the tribal nations to be able to
vote efficiently and
appropriately and safely.
Section seventeen.
Also on page seventy from Senate
bill six.
Addresses election of at large
candidate.
Which is important for Juan
County Los Alamos.
Section eighteen.
Which is on page twenty.
Is from Senate bill six this is
cleanup of the voter rolls.
Consistent procedures for
cancelling voter registrars.
I'm sorry voter registration.
Section nineteen.
This is from Senate bill six
this is cleanup.
To protect and secure your voter
information.
Following.
On the three.
Section twenty this is from both
Senate bill six and eight and
this is exactly why we did it
this way because there wouldn't
be duplication so that we would
be able to put in one bill.
The the issue that we wanted
which was the goals of having
safe fair reliable and efficient
collections with security in
place to make sure that there
was no fraud.
This is section twenty it's
cleanup and clarification of
procedures for same day
registration and includes the
use of student ID.
Which is currently in the law.
And I would point out.
One of the things that we
noticed in going through section
I'm sorry Senate bill six.
We were told.
Initially that there were no
changes from existing law.
That was not true when you look
at Senate bill six they took
out.
The ability of people with
student identification to
register.
And by the way one thing I
forgot to mention as we're going
through this because I've got a
lot of the emails and taxed if I
knew how to do Twitter probably
Twitter.
Six is that what's not in this
bill that was in Senate bill
eight sixteen and seventeen year
olds voting in local elections
that is not in this bill.
And I want to underline that
that is not in this bill.
And voter registration automatic
voter registration has not
changed as a result of this it
is the same as it has been under
current law.
The one thing I do want to point
out and why this bill is so
critical.
As I'm going through this is
that it incorporates.
Many of the provisions in fact I
thank all of the provisions.
That we had temporarily passed
for the pandemic.
Those are now going to expire.
The drop boxes things that are
were voter convenience for the
pandemic that we found work so
well.
Not much different than
discovering.
That a lot of people when we go
back to regular session we can
take off these masks and we have
real sessions you know what
we're going to keep we're
probably going to keep zoom.
The people will be able to
attend committees by zoom they
can come in person but they can
also attendance soon because of
sufficient it allows greater
voter participation our citizen
participation this does the same
thing it takes the lessons
learned from the pandemic and
rather than having them
temporary make some permanent
like drop boxes.
Now we go.
To pay twenty five.
Section twenty one this is from
Senate bill six this yield
timelines for clerks processing
voter registration and allows
them to open their books sooner
so that we don't have to wait
days and maybe weeks for the
results of an election.
Eight twenty seven section
twenty two.
This is from Senate bill six.
This clarifies the voter
registration requires full
social security number and
allows voters provided
throughout the appellate process
one of the things that we want
to be able to do is not deprive
voters disenfranchised voters
without giving them the full
ability to control or whatever
technical errors have been made
without sacrificing the
integrity of the election.
Section twenty three is from
Senate bill eight.
This is the restoration of
rights for formerly incarcerated
individuals when they come out
of prison they should be able to
vote.
Senate bill eight I'm sorry
sections twenty four on page
twenty nine is from Senate bill
eight this is the continuation
of that rights restoration.
Age thirty one section twenty
five.
Senate bill six.
This is a cleanup of the boards
of registration.
Page thirty two section twenty
six this is Senate bill six this
is cleanup to ensure complete an
actor transmission of data from
the motor vehicle department.
Eight thirty three.
Section twenty seven from Senate
bill six allows electronic.
poll books.
The following page page thirty
four section twenty eight is
from Senate bill eight.
Allows voters to sign up to
automatically receive mail
ballots.
Section twenty nine on page
thirty six from Senate bill six
this is clean of the ballot
applications.
Section thirty.
A thirty eight is from Senate
bill six this time line for mail
ballot applications to reduce
late ballots and protect against
the issues that we see with the
United States postal service and
also requires registered voting
addresses if mail ballots
requested to a different mailing
address.
Again from Senate bill six a
bill that we have seen.
Page forty six and thirty one
from Senate bill six.
Clarifying the hours of early
voting folks offices eight
consecutive hours the clerks can
then be flexible by the way.
These changes that we're looking
at these are changes that were
worked on over months by the
clerk's.
I.
As.
The leader of the opposition
party just told me in previous
debates just because a bunch of
people get together and find
their expertise is very helpful.
But we have a separate job as
the Legislature to take a look
at what they've done compile in
a way that makes sense see what
parts we need right now and
that's what I want to inform
this body is for going through
it it's gonna feel just terribly
long.
But had we done Senate bill six
without Senate bill eight would
be dealing with the with the
bill that's a hundred pages
longer than the bill we're
dealing with right now because
what we did was we didn't add to
Senate bill six we didn't add
the Senate bill eight we took
out parts of those things that
we felt were necessary twenty
twenty two and then we would
come back in twenty twenty three
on things or more controversial
like the sixteen and seventeen
year olds and the automatic
voter registration and do that
at a later date that's not in
here because we try to
streamline the process to make
sure that we had only those
things that were necessary.
Eight forty three then section
thirty two.
Is from Senate bill six this is
again cleanup language the rate
of absentee ballot register.
The forty five section thirty
three is from Senate bill six
this is clean of language of
mail ballot envelopes.
Page forty five.
Section thirty four this is from
Senate bill six notices to
accompany mail ballot methods to
return we want to make it clear
to voters as to how they can do
it.
Section thirty five them from
Senate bill six.
Being up some of the mail
envelopes and drop boxes in
putting in language to make sure
voters understood exactly what
it is they needed to return and
who could do that.
Forty nine section thirty six
from Senate bill six the
sections apply the same process
this body approved and Senate
bill for from the twenty twenty
special session in June of
twenty twenty.
Mailed ballots verification
featuring procedures.
The two section thirty seven.
Senate bill this is also from
Senate bill six clarifying
definitions of immediate family
members.
Fifty three.
Section thirty eight this is
from Senate bill six but also
from Senate bill four back in
twenty twenty requiring
verification and augmenting
hours for absentee boards to
work requiring sheriffs deputies
to be present overnight.
Page fifty six six and thirty
nine this is from Senate bill
six ensuring that replacement
ballots are not subject to the
application deadline.
The eight six in forty.
From Senate bill six this is
clarifying language.
Same page at the bottom section
forty one from Senate bill six
cleanup language for male
present.
Section forty two on Senate bill
six this is clarifying.
The exemptions for documentary
ID's for federally qualified
electors.
Following page on page sixty one
section forty three Senate bill
six clarify a clarification
timeliness for you have a and
that's what I meant last time by
the way you have a you know that
which is uniform and overseas
ballots.
The following page page sixty
two.
Section forty four we have
language from Senate bill six.
Section forty five on the same
page from Senate bill six claim
both safe and home workers so
I'm sorry say that home voters
this is the confidential
substitute address program this
is to protect people
from threats of violence from
fear that they may be attacked
and are under the confidential
program those addresses are
restricted.
Section forty six on page sixty
three this is from Senate bill
six this is cleanup of the
confidential address program.
Eight sixty five second forty
seven.
This is from Senate bill six
this is clean of language.
Section.
Forty eight.
Is on page sixty six from Senate
bill six producing signature
court requirements for the PC
and for judicial candidates this
is a request that we've gotten
across the state for
particularly for judicial
candidates of a very difficult
time getting signatures giving
the amount required we have
reduced but it is from a bill
that we have looked at the
courts want to look at and have
approved.
Section forty nine at the bottom
of page sixty eight Senate bill
six is clean.
Eight sixty nine section fifty
is from Senate bill six
clarifying language.
Senate bill fifty one is from
Senate bill six clarification
cleanup on filling vacancies.
In the following days paid
seventy.
Verification and clean up.
On Senate bill six.
On page seventy two.
Section fifty three.
This is from Senate bill six
this is clean.
Section fifty four from Senate
bill six this is PRC cleanup
those were gonna take out the
PRC because they're no longer
elected body a clarification for
petition requirements.
Just a second.
Eight seventy four.
Section fifty five from Senate
bill six allows the secretary of
state to amend proclamations.
Same rate section fifty six from
Senate bill six gets rid of pre
primary conventions my favorite
part of this entire exercise.
Seventy five sections of the
seven from Senate bill six gets
rid of those private pre primary
convention that we're gonna see
a lot of that.
Senate bill six also has section
fifty nine in it.
I mean I am sorry section fifty
nine of this bill is from Senate
bill six again amending the
statute for pre primary
convention.
Seventy seven section sixty.
Again from Senate bill six
grammar conventions same on
section sixty one and a
nominating petitions also from
Senate bill six.
Senate bill six section sixty
two cleanup writing candidates
also from Senate bill six.
Please eighty one section sixty
three.
This is from Senate bill six pre
primary.
As we go through this.
There are some small changes we
talked about in Judiciary
particularly what was section
twenty four the original
amendment we'll talk about that.
What you're gonna hear me say
over and over again.
Is it the section support all
the four of the sections and for
the most part identical.
To either what's coming out of
Senate bill six or Senate bill
eight it is completely
appropriate that we put it into
one bill.
And I say that and I just pause
for a minute think of the bill
we just did on criminal justice
we do this right bill not
necessarily even the same topics
and put them together in one
bill you know why.
Because the title was related to
crime.
Yes what.
Senate bill one forty for the
first.
Our portion of the title says
related to elections.
And then it talks about
intimidation of voters as a
crime but that's in the election
code.
So what we're doing is we're
putting them all together we do
that all the time.
For those of you on the tax
committee you see that every
single year the to put Gaspard
elements of the tax code into
one bill so that the body can
see globally what's happening it
is no different in this case as
to what we've done and that's
why we've done it.
Now we go back to the bill.
And I know that this is not the
most exciting presentation I've
done and I'm fallen giants but I
do think it's important that we
go through the bill.
Section sixty three then.
Is from Senate bill six pre
primary convention Senate bill
sixty four from Senate bill six
reduces the number of signatures
once again for the P. C. and for
judicial candidates section
sixty five is from Senate bill
six clean up in writing
candidates.
Section sixty six.
Is from Senate bill six this is
clean of the voting systems and
certifications and approval.
Section sixty seven on page
eighty fours from Senate bill
six this is cleanup of ballot
marketing marketing.
Section sixty eight on page
eighty five is from Senate bill
six for more days for ballot
preparation for the clerk's.
Page eighty seven.
Section sixty nine.
From Senate bill six this
changes the next couple of
sections will change the order
of the ballot.
section seventy does that on
page eighty eight.
for those of you who are
fascinated by.
how the ballot is ordered and I
don't know why the county
clerk's office was important but
they did they move the district
attorney around and they move
the district attorney up I don't
know whether that's a good thing
or a bad thing but that's what
they did.
Please ninety three.
Section seventy one.
This is the Senate bill six.
It's a statewide voter
notification before statewide
elections.
Ninety five.
This is from section seventy two
Senate bill six this is
inspections of electronic voting
machines are public so that the
public can be witnessing the
inspection of the machines.
Section seventy three on page
ninety five this is from Senate
bill six clarification of state
election fund what that is where
the money goes section seventy
four is from Senate bill eight
this is the drop boxes setting
requirements and restrictions.
Section seventy five is from
Senate bill six this ensures the
county commissions can't
collection funds into their
general funds and subjects them
to audits I I have to tell you
this is not as a former county
commissioner of this is not my
favorite
but we were I don't remember
frankly if we did that or not
but apparently one of the
problems is there's an election
funding all of these counties
and we don't want to any
commissioners to take that out
stick it in the general fund I
will tell you this to pause for
a minute.
That when I was a county
commissioner.
We had so many problems with our
voting system this is probably
one Representative Harper was
still in high school
but
we we had so many problems in
Santa Fe County.
That I tease unfortunately I did
this publicly I T. is our bureau
of elections that their symbol
forward said bureau of elections
should have bolt cutters on it
because literally every election
that's what they were doing they
were not happy with me all right
page ninety nine.
Section seventy sixes from
Senate bill six this allows
voters to cure their ballots
throughout the whole process.
Why would you deprive a voter.
Of the ability beyond franchise
protective layers if if
everything's there if it's fair
you know they didn't find them
find the correct ID or social
security number you make that so
that they can sure that at any
point during the appellate
process that is from Senate bill
six.
Section seventy seven.
This is clarifying existing
procedures.
And it's on page one hundred.
Section seventy eight.
Provides a standard record
retention policy for election
records and it's from Senate
bill six.
And if it any point in this
opening.
I failed to mention.
That it came from a Senate bill
make a note we'll go back to it
because every single section
came from either section the
Senate bill six Senate Bill Page
for Senate bill one forty four.
Section seventy nine on page one
of three.
Is that comes from Senate bill
six increase uniformed
canvassing process.
Section eighty them is from
Senate bill six and creates a
board to deal with the
canvassing process.
Senate bill eighty one from
Senate bill six is and we
literally didn't change this and
I just referred to this as the
full.
That's what it was it was
doubled under section to deal
with that problem.
Section eighty two on page one
of five from Senate bill six
clarifying the process and
requirements for ballot
impoundments.
Section eighty three.
This is from Senate bill six on
page one of six postelection
audits for every election.
Instead of just the general
primary and regular and local
elections fall or subject to
audit.
Section eighty four from Senate
bill six and it's clean up.
Section eighty five from Senate
bill six on page one twelve
automatically cancel the small
actions sets of four or five
votes I I didn't realize through
those kind of elections but
apparently there are.
Section eighty sixes from Senate
bill six on page one thirteen
clarifying wins special election
for Congress won't happen
because there's insufficient
time.
Senate bill six also provides is
with section eighty seven on
page twenty one fourteen which
is cleanup of primary.
Alexion's.
Page one thirteen section eighty
eight is from Senate bill six
more time to approve the
referendum petitions section
eighty nine is on page one
sixteen again referendum
petitions this is from Senate
bill six.
Section ninety is from Senate
bill six amending the definition
in the campaign reporting
financing at the cleanup
language relating to the pre
primary convention which we've
now gotten rid of.
One twenty one six and ninety
one this is more campaign
finance reporting cleanup from
Senate bill six.
Section ninety two on page one
twenty five from Senate bill six
cleanup of prohibited period
for fundraising to clarify what
is and is not allowed because
one of the problems has been
there's some confusion about
when that fundraising gonna for
this thing set up.
Makes it clear and transparent.
Section ninety three on page one
twenty eight from Senate bill
six and it's clean.
Section ninety four is cleaning
up from Senate bill six.
And it's on page one twenty
nine.
On page one thirty.
Section ninety five this
addresses the you know concern
about fake drop boxes.
this again was from Senate bill
six and approved by the clerk's.
Section ninety seven of from
Senate bill six this is clear
penalties for certain polling
places and adding drop boxes.
Section ninety eight on page one
thirty two.
In some rural communities some
polling places in your bars so
this takes care of that
Section ninety nine
is from Senate bill six this in
subsequent sections.
Are to deal with the native
American voting rights act and
take some of the provisions of
existing law on strengthens and
clarifies others.
Section one oh one on page one
thirty three this is from the
this is again from section eight
the native American of voting
rights act.
same with one oh two.
Same with one of three.
I'm going through page one
thirty six.
Then we start again on section
one I Senate bill eight which
deals with drop boxes in tribal
areas.
It is one thirty seven section
one of six is from Senate bill
eight.
Same the same act allows tribal
voters to use tribal buildings
as a voting address one of seven
is the same act that we're
talking about same with one oh
eight ensuring clerks aren't
burdened by the costs of
implementing the native American
voting rights act from Senate
bill eight.
Section one oh nine on page one
thirty nine mistrust in a
certain.
Gentleman from Travis city in
order assistance on getting
reports from both sides and
nobody has the right deal so I
that's all I'm trying to right
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo I can
clarify Mr speaker if members if
you go to the website Senate
bill one forty four under House
Judiciary Committee report Hey
if you click on that link it'll
give you the documents that the
dollars from Santa is reading
from.
It might be easier Mr speaker
gentleman rather than refer to
page numbers because of all the
complications that I confusing
is I'm referring to sections
those have not changed when we
get to the San disk stop
referring to page numbers and
Justice sections when we get to
the amendment that
Representative Nyberg and I
talked about that I I was able
to accommodate a portion of his
request you'll see it's a simple
amendment I was Mr speaker and
gentleman the amendment that's
going to be passed out I think
it's forty something pages long
but it's three paragraphs that
we're changing on page forty
I'll talk about that when the
amendment comes but it's just
because that's why we wanted to
put it in one bill because when
you're talking about the
election code you're talking
about something that you make
one change and it affects all of
us so if you of Senate bill six
over here the changes this and
Senate bill eight over here the
changes this and Senate bill one
forty for the changes this
you're gonna change everything
so you put it all together and
that's how you come out with
something that actually makes
sense when you look at this bill
which you'll see as it is in an
order the clerks can understand
that the clerks of approved
because we have the legislature
took it and discovered in
invites this was to put it all
together and so that's why I
think the confusion and I will
stop referring to pages and I'll
refer to section.
All right so section one oh nine
we talked about that and we're
almost done by the way and I
will go to the amendment.
Section one ten is allowing ten
signatures for local offices
instead of part a and so the
proper statement you know used
to have to sign a proper
statement if you couldn't make
the fifty dollar payment instead
you ought to get signatures
section one eleven is from
Senate bill six as of writing
candidates.
Section one twelve increasing
the timeline for placing
candidates names on ballots by
seven days this is from Senate
bill six.
Section one thirteen is from
Senate bill six This Is when
local elected system duties
section one fourteen is from
Senate bill six cleaning up
special election language.
Section one fifteen and
clarifying unrestricted
political activities by
lobbyists.
Section one sixteen claim of
local elections in terms start
section one seventeen is
cleaning up from Senate bill
six.
Section one eighteen is cleaning
up from Senate bill six.
Section
one nineteen one twenty one
twenty one are from Senate bill
six clarifying pay bumps for the
clerk's frankly are desperately
underpaid and need to be
compensated to make sure that we
have professional in quality
care of our election system.
A section one twenty two from
Senate bill six okay bonds for
certification of deputy clerks
as they get more training much
like we saw with the nursing
home so we're I was with
secretary Scrase the better
training they received the the
more they get paid section one
twenty three then is from Senate
bill six allowing TRD to help
the secretary of state update
their voter rolls.
Section one twenty four.
is removing as from sex it is
from Senate bill six removing
the filing fees for oats.
Section one twenty five is from
Senate bill six allowing clerks
to use funds for redaction and
archiving subject to audit.
Section one twenty six is from
Senate bill eight seven election
day as school holidays to help
for for the bowling side.
Senate bill eight also provides
us in that same section with a
general election and regular
election shall be on the screen
for a school holiday for
students and staff at the public
school in the state section one
twenty seven them.
is cleaning up and confidential
substitute address program same
with one twenty eight and one
twenty nine.
And then section one thirty is
from Senate bill six cleanup of
confidential substitute address
program.
Section one thirty one from
Senate bill six cleanable
confidential substitute address
programs section one thirty two
from Senate bill six cleanup of
confidential substitute address
program and then section one
thirty three is from Senate bill
six extending convenience of the
location from twenty twenty one
to twenty twenty two and twenty
twenty three the rest of our in
this bill are conforming
effective dates and
applicability and we made one
change in Judiciary to this
amendment on that.
there are further changes one
that I want to highlight.
Is that there was some concern
in section twenty four of Senate
bill six that created some
concerns about the
constitutionality we change that
consistent with what the lawyers
told us would be confident I
would be now constitutional.
At this point Mr speaker.
I would like to do and I will
explain to the body.
As I would like to hand out
house floor amendment one to
Senate bill one.
Is one forty four I would say
the hour is late but that would
be wrong the hours early so it
would the house floor amendment
to Senate bill one forty four.
Thank you gentleman the the
amendment to stream via cell.
No not.
It may be passed out let me read
the tier two number is two two
two.
Eight two two point one.
That amendment should be out in
front of everyone now.
Here's a fun thing about the
election from.
I believe the amendment is is
out.
My current.
This gentleman to explain the
moment.
Members were having the
amendment scanned and uploaded
to the website.
We're gonna have a few moments
please.
Mr speaker.
This is the tool to number
please.
The two oh two number is two two
two eight two two point one.
Thank you.
Members of the body the
amendment has been uploaded to
the website the gentleman to
continue.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
body so this ammendment.
is actually it's forty something
pages the only change to the
bill is on page forty
Representative Nibert Nye.
Had a conversation.
To try and reach some
compromise.
and so we had these three
paragraphs the work that is if
the body approves it.
There Memons them then I I would
just summarize them.
That challengers would be
allowed.
And others to be within service
inside the sound of an election
for reasonable person to see and
hear the election board in the
kind of the boards duties but
not allowed to photograph
or any protected information to
the voter or otherwise you get
protected information from the
water
And and then paragraph seven I
will note.
That when I got the amendment
and it was forty something pages
long.
I did call Legislative Council
Service to find out what
happened to this one page
amendment would result in forty
pages and what they told me was
was that.
Because of the election code
changes of all these other
numbers and everything else but
no substantive changes in the
rest of bill however I have
noted.
That the what what will be a
subsequent amendment
Representative night would
somehow convince them to do a
very short amendment so good for
you representative Nibert to
view curly had struggled
Legislative Council Service that
I did not have but with that
what I would like to do Mr
speaker with the indulgence the
body.
Is to turn it over to a
representative Nibert so we can
talk about this amendment and
then.
of why I will move for its
adoption.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
yield Mister speaker I will
happily yield from down to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker leader
gentleman and thank you for your
willingness to release dress one
of a number of issues and this
particular issue of is one that.
I built quite important because
I have in the past served as the
party
Attorney.
In a county that the
Is someone M. favorable to to
our party and both the Democrat
and the Republican challengers
the have been forced to.
The somewhat distant from the
Handling of.
Balance for handling of the
registration rules and could
really not
properly.
Challenge in anything that would
be going on because I would not
be able to observe it so what
this what this ammendment does
Mr speaker and body is.
To put in a riding in the
statute that the challengers.
And.
Those who are allowed to be
there.
Will be within sight and sound
of the handling of the ballots
and so
They and they have to be within
sufficient sight and sound of
the election board members who
are dealing with the issue
that's an absentee ballot issue
of HB the the absence of the
board of their at Apollo
employers that would be of
course for people check and so
that's the crux of the matter it
also clarifies that the
challengers can discuss issues
directly with the presiding
judge
because there's been issues in
the past as to whether or not
they could even speak so hope so
we tried to clarify that in this
ammendment and the I would
encourage the body to accept
those use one amendment that's
Mentzer off I have a couple
other amendments that will
discuss but certainly this is a
step in the right direction that
was not picked up
in the.
Many amendments that were made
to
Senate bill one forty four.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Since the with that I will stand
for questions on the amendment
and I I move at this time for
adoption of house floor
amendment one to the Senate bill
one forty four.
We do have on the questions from
Representative Emerson from
Travis Lee and was welcoming.
Thank you Mr chairman and will
the gentleman from Santa yield
Mr speaker I will gladly yield
to the leader.
Thank you I think my question is
short and it goes like this Sir
Mr speaker.
I heard the comment about for
the photographs I believe this
is a.
This amendment that deals with
photographs with in the at the
polling place as I understood
the COVID quite on Mr speaker
and gentleman so yes in part so
section six allows the
challenger to be within a
sufficient sight and sound of
the election board for
reasonable person to see and
hear the election board in the
conduct of the board's duties I
they are not allowed to
photograph balance for protected
information of any voter and
shall not be allowed to make any
audio or video recording in a
polling place and when
Representative Ann Arbor the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln suggested that change I
thought that was an excellent
addition to this bill.
Thank you for that explanation
and gentleman Mr speaker all my
question then goes to.
For tiger the that is just
enough.
In a public school gymnasium.
For other purposes then voting
this this ammendment of fact
schools ability to have a visual
image of the gymnasium.
Mr speaker and gentleman know
what this is intended to do is
obviously is protect the privacy
of our.
And the integrity of the process
so that now I'm even having of
various agents are trying to
collect data bases on voters
from what they're doing collect
I mean that there is so security
information in here their
signatures near their state of
birth there is personal
information should be protected
that's what this is intended to
do and this is a I think
consistent with what we try to
do in the bill and that's why I
agree to it thank you of the
gentleman Mr speaker
Issued clarification and I
support the movement thank.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none is there objection
to docking the amendment.
This.
One.
Senate
House foreman to Senate Bill.
Four men and one to Senate bill
a hundred one forty four as far
as amended.
Is adopt.
German you have a four yes thank
you Mr speaker
with that I will stand for
questions I I do want the body
to know.
That please do not remember me
for you know the saying section
forty six paid seventeen Senate
bill six over and over again I
apologize to the body but I
thought it was important that we
be transparent about what we're
doing and to go through this and
I appreciate very much the
bodies patients but I apologize
for the early hour and for doing
that to the body but it was
important and with that Mr
speaker I will stand for
questions on the amended bill.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martinez thank
you Mr speaker will the Germans
on the left as you Mr speaker I
will gladly yield to my friend
and leader from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen first of all I
appreciate.
You're very thorough
presentation Mr speaker and
gentleman I appreciate you going
section by section even though
your page number was a little
off I appreciate you taking the
time to do that.
and there's a very simple.
Why Mr speaker and and gentleman
from Sunderland.
This piece of legislation is
critically important.
To safeguarding.
Our democracy.
Mr speaker and delivered a lot
of the time.
When are the more Chrissy.
Is under attack.
At a time when we have seen over
and over again attempts to
disenfranchise.
People's rights to the ballot
box people's right to elect
their leaders.
As a member of this legislature.
It was of the utmost importance
and continues to be the almost
importance Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa.
That we.
This bill.
We go through it with the.
Telling us that it deserves.
And that we do so.
The sun is rising over this
beautiful city.
This is bigger the woman this
bill could have been debated
last night.
It could be debated at the could
amended at three in the morning.
We chose eager
to amend to debate this bill it
is now seven fifty five in the
morning.
We believe.
In protecting our democracy.
Speaker and gentleman.
field many questions from us.
For both sides of the aisle.
As to the why and the how.
Of the Senate bill one forty
four as amended.
And I have no doubt Mr speaker
and gentleman that you'll
continue to give that Senator
response to every single word.
That is in this document.
Speaker and gentleman.
You mentioned in your opening.
This bill combines Andros from.
Other pieces of legislation.
That have been vetted.
Over the past
thirty days now.
Can you remind the body Mr
speaker gentleman and the
members of the public core I
have no doubt or webcasting this
right now.
What bills.
It is draws from.
Perhaps the scribe the processes
that those bills have gone
through.
To get to this point.
This figure gentleman.
So let's start a little earlier
than that.
That the thirty three county
clerk's.
Secretary St their staff.
Got together.
And.
Thought about.
What would make the process the.
More inclusive.
Forks.
We're transparent but also more
secure.
Reliable.
And respect our.
Election workers.
There's a million years well for
further training.
Once they did that.
They came up with effectively.
Senate bill six.
And fortunes of Senate bill
eight.
Senate bill six.
Went through the Senate.
The process in the Senate Senate
bill six and came over here
after passing off of the Senate
floor.
Came over and went through its
first Canadian.
And that was quite frankly
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Where I'm on that committee
state government.
Word first.
Learn there were things in this
bill.
This body would could not
approve.
Things that were
unconstitutional.
Things that I'll.
Of our protections.
Of the ability register with the
same ease and accessibility.
That was an existing law without
telling us was the clerk's fault
I don't blame them for that.
But it would be our fault.
If we didn't catch that.
The new a thorough vetting of
the legislation slow down a
little bit we had about a week
these clerks I talked to one
center told me that he had
worked on this for two and a
half years.
We worked on it for about a week
I spent countless hours with
others going through the bill
line by line.
Not just to figure out what made
sense what was constitutional
what was consistent with
people's rights which is what
the legislature should be doing
but also to say to the body gosh
because this is a thirty day
session we're not going to do
everything that everybody wants
this wasn't going to be the
fulfillment of all wish lists we
were going to do those things
that were necessary.
Senate Bill however.
Made it through I think to
Senate committees got to the
Senate floor and got stock.
We had dealt with those issues
in the past some of them for
example restoration of felon
voting rights.
So that when people are no
longer in prison and we trust
them to be in our community we
want to invest them in our
community and so we allow them
to vote again.
Once they are no longer
incarcerated.
Senate bill one fourteen then
came before us and that was
intimidation of election
workers.
That went to the Senate process
started over here.
And we used that bill as we have
done with many bills like this
this is not unique to this
situation.
To take.
The necessary elements out of
Senate bill six of the clerks
and the secretary of state state
are sorely needed.
Not much of which had been
tested in the twenty twenty
election and work and now we're
going to build upon that
program.
And we put that along with the
things that we felt were
necessary from Senate bill eight
that I mentioned in my opening
into this Senate bill one forty
four.
Mr speaker and gentleman I hope
that response to the question
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Joe and it does I think it
illustrates how vetted.
These different ideas and
concepts that are in Senate bill
one forty four truly are.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I I
followed.
All of these.
Goals over the course of last
thirty days I follow them very
closely.
I watched.
Most if not all of the house
Judiciary Committee hearing on
Senate bill one forty four where
it was amended into its current
form.
And.
I believe based on what I
witnesses saw that this proposal
was very.
Much.
That is the process.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe.
Described how it is bill draws
from those different proposals
and I want to focus in on a
couple of different.
aspects of the bill and I want
to start with the.
Sections of the bill that deal
with the native American voting
rights act Mr speaker and
gentleman and I would like to
ask you to please expand on what
those different aspects of those
sections are.
And what they do in terms of
protecting the rights of.
For community members to vote.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What the native American voting
rights act us and how was
incorporated into Senate bill
one forty four.
Is that on the one hand we want
to provide as much assistance as
we can to native American
communities find drop boxes of
them with polling places all of
those things.
Well at the same time
respecting their sovereignty.
So that we don't interfere with
their tribal governments and
their tribal interests.
So insurers.
The county commissioners.
In native American areas for
staff.
The tribal political bound
boundaries when redistricting.
It provides a process.
For Indian nations tribes and
pueblos to get drop boxes is
that something the rest of the
communities have.
Especially important in many
these traveler is given the mail
delivery issues in so many of
these areas.
Voter convenience centers will
be available upon request.
So we're not telling them this
is what you have to do if they
requested from us then we will
have a system in providing.
The same kind of process I might
add.
We did in redistricting.
We didn't go to them and say
this is how we're going to do
it.
We asked them.
Can you get together and figure
this out and we will help you
and we will work with you to
reach a consensus same kind of
thing in this bill.
Early voting locations upon
request allows people to use
chapter houses and other native
American government official
buildings as mailing addresses
for their absentee ballots.
In states of emergencies.
In a state of emergency the
native American voting rights
act provides polling places
can't be shut down unless the
nation tribe or pueblo agrees in
writing that it should be shut
down.
And can close the native
American nations to close their
borders.
And still keep their polling
places open to the to the people
there even though others are
kept out.
All cross would then be borne by
the secretary of state.
The whole idea is to say the
tribal nations.
We wanted to the.
But how you both how you have
that process how you participate
in that process.
That is your responsibility we
respect to.
This is a partnership.
That's what this is supposed to
be and we will help them in any
way we can in providing an
election that has integrity
accessibility and security and
so that's what we tried to do in
this bill thank you Mr chairman
I truly truly appreciate the
approach taken care to ensure
that in fact this is a
partnership that this is not an
imposition of sorts on these
communities but that it is a
consensus and and you you said
it perfectly.
Redistricting was a prime
example
if I recall correctly I don't
think we had had trouble
consensus on redistricting in
decades until his previous into
this last of redistricting
session that is something that
we as new Mexicans should feel
very proud of.
Because the fact of the matter
is that we are able to a
cultural.
State.
And in fact the first peoples
the original peoples of this
land.
Are still here.
Speaker and gentle if someone
mentioned something in response.
With regard to fully locations
not being able to be shut down
unless there's an agreement.
Can you expand for the body a
little bit.
Without these protections.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
In fact.
A local government.
Could shut down a polling
location without first seeking
that agreement is that a fair
statement.
So.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
it's a little bit of a
complicated explanation but it
is informed by what's happened
to us during the pandemic.
It allows the tribal interests
flexibility.
That if they want to shut their
borders because they're
concerned the people couple come
from outside of the native lands
in their community expose them
for example to comment they
still have the flexibility to
keep their polling places open.
Flexibility that they may or may
not have now.
In addition they can decide do
we really need to take a chill
pill for a little bit.
And.
Regulator on polling places this
is all part of.
The six principles when it comes
not just a native American
voting rights but frankly how
you treat people all the with
respect.
And that's that's what this bill
tries to do.
Particularly with the native
American communities is to treat
them with respect the consensus
with partnership and I like that
word consensus Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman that let me
let me move on a little bit
further down
the just the fat of my own
curiosity
When you talk about things like.
Valley hearing for example.
I remember hearing a lot of is
during the last certainly the
last presidential election
again because of COVID we had I
think different.
process is in place across the
country can you explain for the
body what valley carrying please
what it is.
I I Mr speaker and gentleman I I
apologize for taking time I just
want to make sure hi I have a
general knowledge of this but I
want to make sure Mr speaker and
gentleman that I'm giving you
accurate information.
The senator from Bernalillo
county that's sitting to my
right as a lot of experience in
this area and I do not
by having spent a lot of time on
the Surrey as a former county
commissioner it helps me to kind
of deal with the questions as
they come the technical
questions but I just want to
make sure I'm giving
deprivations answers so with
respect to your question Mr
speaker and gentleman.
what we don't want to happen.
Is that people.
Vote.
But for whatever reason.
They didn't put in their social
security number their date of
birth a signature is missing
this allows the voter sure those
technical problems even for an
appellate process and by the
way.
These were process sees that
were put in place the same ones
that we're seeing in this bill
that were put in place with
tremendous success during the
pandemic as a result of the
legislation that we passed the
twenty twenty.
And so
Where we're not gonna be doing
something new we are simply
putting some permanency on what
has already so spectacularly
worked during the pandemic.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you for that explanation.
the speaker government you
mentioned in your presentation
that there are things that are
not is Senate bill one forty
four that didn't make it from
some of these other bills.
and I gotta tell you Mr chairman
I was I was deeply disappointed
because one of those other bills
was actually a bill that I co
sponsored along with Senate
Majority Leader.
and that included things like
back and automatic voter
registration Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And.
That is a good processes would
have changed the way our current
AVR system and process works.
It would ensure that more people
would have had access to that
process and it would ensure that
more people who are otherwise
eligible to vote could be
registered to vote.
Of.
Another provision that is not in
Senate bill one forty four much
to my frustration.
Is the concept of sixteen and
seventeen year olds voting in
local elections.
And this is an important point
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Because it seems odd.
But we would be talking about a
sixteen year old voting.
It's sort of not really in the
realm of possibility and for
many of us.
This is the only one of those
bills I carried as a member of
this institution was in fact to
allow sixteen and seventeen year
olds to vote in local elections
specifically school board
elections think about this for
one second Mr speaker and
gentleman.
School board elections.
Are these signed.
To govern.
Public schools.
Throughout our state.
Public schools serve
exclusively.
Children.
They would take between the ages
of five and seventeen.
Yet none of those constituents
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I have ever been able to vote
for.
Who governs them.
Now I want to be very clear.
I am not advocating.
For five year olds voting
although quite frankly.
My seven year old so I can make
better choices me sometimes.
What
if you are old enough to be
trusted with the motor vehicle.
If you're old enough within our
statutes to.
Drive a vehicle operated safely.
I have insurance.
The insurance.
If I trust
is a six year old driving down
the highway later today when I
go home.
Why should I trust you.
Your vote.
What is so offensive.
That we can not trusting you Mr
speaker and gentleman from some
of our.
With your vote.
Speaker and gentleman when I
sponsored that bill whether
gives in twenty fifteen.
There was a school board
election in New Mexico.
One one voted.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
not exaggerating no one voted in
that school board election.
Terribly tragic.
Also very helpful to me because
because when those news came out
my bills being presented in a
committee of the house so
imagine the talking points I got
to use that day.
With speaker and gentleman.
This artificial age of eighteen
is truly artificial.
Prior to the Vietnam War Mr
speaker and gentleman the voting
age was twenty one.
Former president Richard Nixon.
The movement to extend the right
to vote to eighteen year olds
why because eighteen year olds
for getting drafted into the
Vietnam War.
Done this before.
This is not a novel idea.
I didn't come up with some crazy
innovative thing that's never
been tried before.
This makes sense.
Young people.
Many times or on the road.
They are responsible for
themselves.
We don't trust them with the
right to vote with speaker John.
So I gotta tell you I'm I'm
still disappointed that's not in
here but Mr speaker and
gentleman I understand that this
process in this institution is
about compromise.
In the speaker gentleman I don't
see and I don't find compromise
is a bad word.
I had.
The tax bill.
With bipartisan votes.
Leave this chamber two days ago
I guess it was.
And earlier this morning.
We wanted to concur with Senate
amendments in bipartisan
fashion.
Compromise is not a bad word.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
And that's why I proudly
support.
Senate bill one forty four is
amended even though.
One of the most critical pieces
in my opinion.
Are not included in the bill.
Because of.
Compromise.
With the speaker and gentleman.
Our democracy.
Is only as good.
As our access to the ballot box.
That.
I know that we all know that.
And when we infringe on the
rights of people to access that
ballot box for democracy Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Our democracy suffers.
Our body politic suffers.
And that is detrimental to our
way of life.
The fact that we can stand here
for thirty days or sixty days
and this a great to the court.
And still maintain.
The respect for each other and
still maintain the decorum.
Is what keeps us from falling
apart as a society Mr speaker
and gentleman it keeps us from
going to war against each other.
The fact that we can come into
an arena like this one and
debate and argue.
And sometimes fight.
Is what is.
From what we see.
In these other places across the
world.
And the fact of the matter is so
long as our communities have
access to the ballot box we can
keep this democracy going
strong.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
One last single state Madam
speaker.
And the Americans on the line.
Is that.
The proudest moments of my life
was when my father became a US
citizen.
It was roughly nineteen ninety
one.
Is the went through his
citizenship process Mr speaker
gentleman and he you know study
for the test have to learn
we have different presidents and
the other three branches of
government and what not.
And then we went with them to
certainly.
And at the time we lived in the
international disagreed we live
right off of Rhode Island and
copper.
In an apartment complex.
There is a man Mr Todd who lived
across an empty field for we
used to play baseball.
Who drove an old beat up for
temple.
And he was a veteran of the
Korean War.
He came to our apartment.
In registered my father and his
brother to bolt.
My father has been voting.
Ever since.
Think about that for a second.
My ride was inherent.
With the fact that I'm alive.
Is right to both.
Two
years.
It's a struggle that most of us
will never understand.
That's why I do the right
trouble so seriously Mr speaker
Madam speaker and gentleman.
That's why I support Senate bill
one forty four as amended that's
why I support because we
everything in our power.
As legislators to protect that
sacred right to vote.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentlemen for the top.
See further debate the gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman yield.
All madam or I'm sorry yes I
will gladly the yield to the
gentle lady good morning New
Mexico we are here to talk about
voting rights today I am so
grateful to be able to to do
this and I know that many of us
have been receiving countless
emails and I want to hear from
the gentleman and madam speaker
we can talk a bit about what
I've been receiving countless
questions about this bill being
about voter suppression and I
just want
the gentleman and the Madam
speaker to go on the record as
to what this bill actually does
because from the what we're
hearing.
On the in on the internet's is
that this is a voter suppression
bill this is about
harming our elections and
harvesting votes from senior
citizens low income families and
folk forging ballots Madam
speaker gentleman can you talk
about what we're trying to do
here and why we're getting so
much question about this so that
we can allay the fears of the
public that we've been receiving
the these questions madam
speaker gentleman's.
Dot com and speaker and gentle
lady it's exactly the opposite.
What this bill is intended to
provide remember alternately
this came from the county clerks
the election professionals.
This was intended to provide.
More secure
came from pulling information
for example we didn't have
protection from people hacking
into election systems in terms
of how that could be protected
from for example if a request so
we've figured that out.
We make the system more
accessible making sure that
there are convenience centers
and Dropbox things that we have
done in the twenty twenty
election the work.
That maybe elections more
accessible particularly for
those citizens that have a
difficult time either because of
disabilities are elderly or
because they work and they they
can't get to the ballot of place
the following price from seven
to seven the need additional
time it also ensures that we get
timely results from our election
by changing dates to allow
county clerks to review the
information earlier on and it
provides full audits which are
critically important for not
just general elections but also
primary elections local
elections.
It was backs as we talked about.
Our our native American
populations.
By incorporating into this the
native American voting rights
act which we talked about
extensible.
I madam speaker and gentle lady.
Have actually gotten a lot of
emails on the sixteen year old
that's actually something that
the gentleman from Bernalillo
talked about the.
I would have loved to have
included.
Unfortunately for me as the
gentleman from Bernalillo was
talking about.
When eighteen year olds were
allowed to vote.
it sounded to me like she had
read in a history textbook.
For me I lived.
I remember.
That if you Sir why why was it
that you could be drafted in
Vietnam.
But you couldn't vote.
That was a huge struggle in this
country to reduce the voting age
from twenty one to eighteen.
Going to sixteen for school
board elections just frankly
from a personal point of view
strikes me as making sense is
teaching our young people how to
get involved in the electoral
process in an area that they are
intimately familiar with their
schools boy and what that in
here so for those people who are
writing emails that this is
outrageous that we're letting
sixteen year olds vote please
stop sending those to me it's
not in here.
I also wanted automatic voter
registration that is also not in
here we have the same system in
current law that is in this
bill.
In no way.
Is this an attempt to.
Do something nefarious quite the
opposite.
It is intended to further with
the clerks have so competently
done along with the secretary of
state and that is to provide a
reliable system for keeping of
the ballots vote for flexible
hours for counting votes so that
we can get timely results in for
access to the ballot through
drop boxes convenience centers
and a native American.
Lands where where the tribal
interests want them today
and it comports with other
things like confidential
information where people are
confidential programs we talked
about they're still protected.
Representative night we're going
down Madam speaker gentleman so
we wanted to plug back in the
ability of the public to be able
in a reasonable way.
To watch one votes are counted
we also plugged in they can
watch when polling machines are
certified.
This is all an attempt at
transparency to get the voters
the citizens involved in
electoral process in a
constructive way.
And so it is just the opposite
from the kind of you know what
grant there's a conspiracy going
on just the opposite we're
trying to do something that
plugs in what we've learned to
the pandemic works and that is
to make elections more
accessible more secure.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I am so glad to
hear that you know as we've seen
across the country last year
alone nineteen states passed
thirty four restrictive voting
rights bill taxation state
and elections matter we say that
every single time we have an
election it's the most
consequential election every
single time we have one and with
the worry of about voter
suppression and election worker
intimidation it's getting harder
and harder I think across the
country for folks to feel good
about how we're running
democracy and madam speaker
gentleman when it comes to our
your voice is your vote.
being able to do that here in
New Mexico it's sacred and I'm
so grateful to you gentlemen.
And to the gentle lady in the
Senate for being able to see
that we're in New Mexico our
democracy matters.
And when it comes to looking at
the future of that Madam speaker
gentleman I want to talk about
some of the innovations and the
democracy that do exist in this
bill can you tell me Madam
speaker gentleman
about
Online voter registration is
that in this bill madam speaker
gentleman's.
Our gentle lady so we already
have online voter registration
the currently is for driver's
license what this allows.
Is for members of the public.
Do online voter registration
using this is Carino.
It's convenient because most
people notice of securing a
makes it easier for people to
use the online order system.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen with.
Everything from in the COVID era
being online and and
understanding all of the
challenges I think that we had
with some of the government red
tape in getting access for folks
we're talking about voting
matter voting being you know the
top of the list of things that
matter for for access madam
speaker gentleman's having that
ability to to be able to access
your voter registration files
through your social security
number just make sense manager
Johnny because not everybody
drives and believe me if I have
to I could take a lived
everywhere be great Madam
speaker gentleman but that's
just not available to me right
now so that's okay that's great
the social security numbers
excellent Madam speaker John can
you tell me about the election
day holiday because I think this
is so exciting secret in with
something that I think
nationally we've heard about the
what is New Mexico to looking at
doing madam speaker German.
So.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
what we're doing here is not is
not a statewide holiday I hope I
didn't say that it's a
schoolbased holiday and the idea
is is a schools and can use
their schools polling places
which is very common
occurrence anyway we always
voting for Alice across
elementary this would allow the
school to declare holidays of
the building could be used for
that purpose.
That's excellent madam speaker
gentleman I hope I wish it was a
holiday I wish we could we could
figure that out that's for
another year I appreciate how
we're continuing to go into that
direction
Madam speaker Jim and I also
want to hear a little bit about
and for us as candidates and I
know we go through this every
single year and last year in the
year prior or actually should
say last year rumors or in the
year prior we were talking about
nominating petitions madam
speaker gentleman this is a huge
innovation when we were having
to go door to door during the
pandemic funds rigor gentleman
to get signatures to get our our
you know our petitions and
Madam speaker John can you talk
about the on the nominating
petitions online how that's
gonna work Mr Chairman.
then speaker gentle lady I want
to say this slowly because I may
have said it incorrectly and I
have the Senators sitting to my
right
what what this allows is is that
automatically I assumed the
candidate as well as the
secretary of state.
Can check to see if someone is a
registered of a so we're not
putting people on the nominating
petitions that otherwise aren't
registered that can be done more
efficiently and this is
secretary of state in Texas in
petitions much easier people
that are checking that because
it's right there.
The north acting can then sign
Madam speaker gentle lady for
non registered owner.
Thank you madam speaker John and
I appreciate that I think as we
continue to innovate in the
sense of using technology to
make it more efficient more
effective and and understand
again is about transparency this
is about figuring out how to do
it how to be able to to make
sure that everyone's verified
and and have it have an easier
look at that right now we do
everything with paper it's it's
ridiculous Madam speaker
gentleman and I think this is an
excellent support to that system
that said Madam speaker German
I'm I'm also just grateful that
we're restoring voting rights
for for those who've been
incarcerated I know that New
Mexico Carceri it's
some of the highest rates in the
world and one of the best ways I
think is a social program is to
integrate folks back into
society once they've pay their
debts and sabino the fact that
we were immediately scraping
them off of the voter rolls and
now that we're able to to bring
them back madam speaker
gentleman this is this is really
a reintegration into society and
and and truly a civic duty that
I think is important for folks
and I think this just is one of
those merits of this bill madam
speaker gentleman that speaks to
again the values of New Mexico
and where we're headed and and
what's important to us and and
maintaining folks and
participation in our democracy
and that matters Madam speaker
gentleman so I just want to
commend you for that and I you
know I'm so grateful to the I.
Representative have the honor of
representing four Pablo's Madam
speaker the gentleman in this
city of American voting rights
act matters so so much to
protect that for those you know
who have had so many challenges
I think in this democracy with
this with the safety and
security and really the the
promise that we are always going
to be able to have critical
access to our democracy and so
this is this is so critical for
us in our community madam
speaker.
Gentlemen I just want to commend
you for that and I support this
bill and and I'm just grateful
that again as a state we are on
the right track with what we
care about in the integrity of
not just our elections but again
how we envision for the future
of of participation in that and
that will it always be protected
here and
I'm just you know commends you
it for this effort it's it's a
heavy lift it's huge what you
what we've done here to just be
able to look through all of the
possibilities of again
maintaining that integrity and I
just so appreciate this and I I
support thank you madam speaker
thank you gentlemen.
See further debate the gentle
lady from telus Representative
Ortez.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from.
Hello Bernalillo and Sandoval.
Please use.
Madam speaker gentle lady I will
yield
I apologize in advance for
having my back to you we are
supposed to face a speaker so
this will be a little awkward
but I appreciate your
indulgence.
Thank you gentlemen thank you
madam speaker.
Gentleman I have an image on my
computer which I.
Would like for you to look at
after this whole thing.
But I'm gonna describe it to you
madam speaker gentleman's.
It's a a.
It's a bill that will hang.
Of.
John F. Kennedy.
And Robert F. Kennedy.
In the foreground.
In the White House.
In the background.
And in eagle.
Line over the White House.
In this bill that wall hanging.
Hung in my grandma's bedroom.
To the right side of her bed.
Above her bed was a crucifix and
on the left side of our bed was
for all the other some those of
your hand and all the candles of
the saints that she prayed to.
Things are considered.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
These two men.
The other some of those.
And I remember looking at this
every every time is but the
night which was often I was so
comforting to be with her she's
such a strong woman and she told
me the story one night of.
Why she had this bill that wall
hanging right near her bed.
In nineteen sixty my grandmother
was a farm worker she worked in
the fields in Madera California.
To pick grapes she.
Pick peaches.
She worked very very hard.
Ninety six issues forty two
years old.
In the summer of nineteen sixty.
She got a visit in the fields.
From.
One of the Santos.
Operative Kennedy.
Was registering mexicanos to
vote.
Mexicans who had never voted
before.
And he convinced her to.
Register.
In nineteen sixty she voted her
first election the age of forty
two.
For the Kennedys law some of
those.
And you know we of course.
Could never vote for any other
part of the side the Democratic
Party from then on otherwise
face the wrath of my
grandmother.
But for real Madam speaker.
Gentleman.
What she experienced was you
know in the sixties early
sixties nineteen sixty
It wasn't very common.
For people of color from
people's to Ghana's to be active
voters.
When she explained to me how
important what it was for me to.
Never miss a vote.
If I missed a vote I would be
essentially committing a sin.
It instilled in me this idea
that that women like her people
like her of who fought so hard
to vote and who never thought it
was possible for them and when
it became possible for them it
should always be possible for
them and that we should do
everything that we can
everything in our power to
ensure that.
That that could happen.
So I'm looking at this photo and
I'm thinking of this bill that
language sadly succumbed to.
Dustin Agen the one of my
cousins still it Fund speaker.
Madam.
It's that will have the that
motivated me.
To even consider the
possibility.
Of running for office.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman.
In twenty twenty.
I ran for the first time along
with I think eight of my eight
fellow freshman.
Ram.
For office at the time that was
you know let them know time
we've ever experienced before.
We couldn't log we.
You know we we had to do voter
outreach.
Via phone.
And the voters.
For really the first time ever
Had to.
Vote by mail.
And that was something that was
You know I think not not a very.
Popular practice in northern New
Mexico just a few years ago.
My grandmother however in
California voted by mail as
often as she could.
So madam speaker gentleman's.
You know when I think about
making it easier for people to
participate in democracy
especially you know for those
who can't get to the polls.
I think about how we have to do
everything we can to.
Make make voting chronic as my.
As the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
often says making chronic and
make it easy so.
I have some questions for you.
And speaker gentleman.
I want to better.
Understand.
Voting by mail and how hello
this bill addresses that
I understand that right now.
Voters to choose to vote by mail
have to go through some extra
steps.
Requesting a ballot by mail for
each individual election Madam
speaker gentleman is that the
case.
madam speaker.
And gentle lady before I answer
that question if you'd indulge
me for a minute you talked about
the United farm workers I father
was a lawyer for the United farm
workers I brother and I was very
small.
I still remember the story.
The we went into the and
makeshift church Catholic
Church.
The crowd was chanting I still
remember louder and faster she
supported a.
Yes we can.
Over and over again.
And of us came around.
And my brother and I.
Very hungry.
Waivers in their.
And we drove the wafers and I
think that what I realized later
was my brother and I both of
communion.
As two Jewish boys.
And so I just thought.
Just as a moment to share that
story
but I know that senator do here
will have an answer your
question which I know I now
forgotten but she will not have
and I'll get an answer for you
just a minute.
Minister gentleman I believe
you're now Catholic.
The speaker and gentle lady yes.
What's the answer to your
question.
Mr Chairman would you like me to
repeat the question no Madam
speaker you know what that would
be I think helpful the body
because I I did answer the
question get based on the
Senator funds but honestly at
this hour I do not remember the
question but I think we answered
it correctly so you might want
to get the question again.
Madam speaker gentleman I think
I'm actually just going to move
on to I think the most the more
pertinent question which is that
you mentioned in your preamble
about the permanent absentee
ballot registry can you please
tell me how that works and
speaker gentleman.
So madam speaker generally this
is something that I think we're
particularly proud of is that
what it allows people to do is
permanently applied for absentee
ballots that have to do it every
election cycle and what happens
in this instances if they move
or you know something else
happens they can always change
it and they can take their name
off the list but it is
effectively an opt in provision
where they get to opt in and no
I think I said that backwards I
think it's an opt out they are
they often first and then they
can opt out if they want so it's
an opt in provision so it makes
it much more efficient I think
for the voter that wants to vote
absentee which is another thing
that we discovered during the
pandemic was a very effective
tool for people to vote if the
otherwise couldn't former locked
in to go to the polling places.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman yeah I I've found that
that was the case absolutely in
in the rural areas as well those
there were far more absentee
voters than voters in person
I think it does really work well
can you tell me Madam speaker
gentlemen how many states have
universal vote by mail.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think you stumped.
R. Senator but she thinks it's
the answer is for yes so not a
precise answer but it's as good
as we can do for you today Madam
speaker gentle lady.
And speaker gentleman I'm I'm
happy with that answer
what about other states that
have the permanent permanent
absentee lists.
you madam speaker gentle lady we
do not know the answer to that.
Madam speaker gentleman.
I'm okay with that too.
It's it's it's cool it's very
it's cool.
Has bigger gentleman I want to
know a little bit more about
this permanent absentee list is
it.
Is it voluntary.
Yes Madam speaker generally yes
of course it is voluntary.
So the permanent absentee list
is is not the same as the as the
universal vote by mail provision
Madam speaker generally no it is
not this is simply a process
where if people want to be
receiving their ballots on
absentee basis they can do it as
long as I wanted to so they
don't have to continually as in
our can remember from years ago
every election cycle have to
send in an application for an
absentee ballot they go through
that process it makes it much
more cumbersome of the voter
this way every election cycle as
long as they wanted they get an
absentee ballot in the day they
don't want to the teller county
clerk we don't want this anymore
they don't get it the move
something happens same process.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I think one of the
concerns I've heard is that you
know we.
Might be sending ballots to
folks who have moved or who
have.
Passed on
or no longer one of those are
there protections in place to
make sure that that doesn't
happen that the ballots don't
continue to go to voters who
have.
Moved on from this life or from
their rent the place they live.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
while our rules ordinarily do
not permit us to read it would
be helpful in this instance for
me to read from the bill because
this is a constant source of
concern legitimately so on our
constituents that somehow
there's going to be an actor
lists out there so we're looking
at I'm gonna get to the section.
And just a second.
I am I will get to the section
gentle lady but it's rate set
for three thirty seven let me
find to that.
Thing on just a second.
is a yes section twenty nine.
Voters shall be removed from the
voluntary permanent absentee
voter list of the county clerk
for the following reasons.
The water fails to return a
mailed ballots in two
consecutive elections including
at least one general election.
Second.
The county clerk is sent a mail
ballot for other P. selection
mail to the voters mailing
address that was subsequently
returned as undelivered third
the voter certificate of
registration is cancelled
pursuant to provisions of
another section the good so that
already exists.
For the water updates of orders
certificate of registration
indicating an address that is
outside of the county for which
the voters listed on the
voluntary permanent absentee
voter list.
Four five the voters submit a
written request to the county
clerk requesting to be removed
from the voluntary permanent
absentee voter list so the ideas
is to capture all the different
ways that people should not or
do not want to be on the
permanent voter absentee list.
Thank you Mr gentleman I think
that should give us all some
comfort that seems very
thorough.
Gentleman and the gentle lady
from the Senate Madam speaker I
am really grateful.
For this for this bill
The time is now.
To ensure that we all have.
Safe collections that are
election workers are safe that
we can.
We can.
Make voting.
Easier for people.
Whether we're in a pandemic or
not.
All the things that you've
outlined make gives me great
comfort and and pride that we
are.
Uplifting and supporting
democracy and madam speaker
gentleman I have discovered that
the so the low hanging is
actually on sale on eBay so.
I'm gonna think about.
Making that happen for me and
and gentleman madam speaker I'd
like to figure if I can make
that happen for you as well
as a parting gift.
Thank you.
Madam and thank you for
indulging me and my grandma
Maggie.
Made me of chronic voter.
So if you'd like to respond you
can Madam is the madam speaker
gentle lady I appreciate that
very much and I I also over the
chair Judiciary mention chronic
water and I love that phrase so
I appreciate you mentioning it
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
Madam speaker on this point.
Point of order there's no on
this point thank you.
Okay.
seem further debate we'll go to
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker with a
gentleman from Santa yield
again.
madam speaker and gentleman on I
will not only yield to you again
I will yield to you for what is
perhaps the last time.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
it's probably appropriate of.
Came in together and now we may
be carted out this morning
together but the.
Madam speaker and and gentleman.
Of in listening to the debate
wrote down a few few things that
were said.
And I'd like to start with the
statement that was made earlier.
That this bill has received very
thorough vetting of the bill.
Madam speaker and gentleman do
you recall saying those words
Madam speaker and gentleman if I
said it that way I I didn't I if
it's possible I but I don't mean
it that way I know what the
argument is that because we're
in the middle of this session.
The county clerk's.
Other interested parties have
not had the opportunity to go
through this exact bill line by
line and see what was going on
it could it's on the website
they could I understand and I
think I appreciate that comment
about the thorough vetting
having said that the components
of the bill have been thoroughly
vetted.
Really have yet yes there are
some changes that we made that I
try to identify.
But that's why I read every
single section because every
single section in this bill
winter months perhaps years of
that in but we as a legislature
as I have said you know more
than a couple of times during
this process have an independent
obligation to look at that and
we've done that so the gentleman
I'm anticipating madam speaker
gentleman's the state they
haven't reviewed this bill in
the manner that they would like
to go through committees and
staff but that's what we're here
for.
We take the components we put it
together we do have all the time
and that's what we've done and I
do think the components of this
bill have been thoroughly
vetted.
Madam speaker gentleman's I
would agree that we do that all
the time.
I would disagree.
With respect to the thorough
vetting at least on.
The sides of
Of the building the the house
chambers.
So madam chair madam speaker and
and gentlemen let me talk a
little bit about the vetting.
This.
Subject matter but justice bill
this subject matter has received
in the house of representatives.
Madam speaker gentleman.
Senate bill six
was assigned to committee.
Senate bill six ever heard in
committee.
Yes madam speaker and gentleman
it was.
Thank you tell the the body
Madam speaker and gentleman
where was our.
Yes madam speaker gentleman it
was state government a committee
we both survived.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
So was heard by a committee of
the money.
Members of this house Senate
bill six Madam speaker gentleman
yes what it but that the
excludes of course the Senate
side.
So in the Senate and I would go
back and look but I'm pretty
sure for I bang on a can just as
long.
so there were two committees.
The bill went through in the
Senate I if you'd like I can ask
Senator what committees those
were and then passed on the
Senate floor unanimously for
those of us who've had the
privilege and pleasure of going
to Senate committees is a very
thorough vetting process I'm not
quite as thorough as the house
but you know still thorough
and so yes Senate bill six
received quite a bit of scrutiny
and your call.
Madam speaker gentleman with the
win Senate bill six came to
state government.
Because we literally just seen
the bill.
I got through about I think
about a fourth of this bill.
With the sponsor of Senate bill
six.
And I would say was relatively.
Are critical of the approach
that was taken before committee
because it was basically trust
us.
And I don't think we can do that
I don't think we should do that.
And that's why I tried to be so
careful that when the entire
bill.
With the components of Senate
bill six the components of
Senate bill eight Senate bill
one forty four.
It was hours in Judiciary.
Our.
Going through each and every
section in much more detail than
I did on this floor to explain
to the thirteen members of
judiciary.
What we have done and why we had
done it and then took questions
from the committee so that is
also part of our legislative
process so we can't just say gas
nine people are dead and that's
kind of the end of it's not that
at all.
We've had literally lots of
hands on it because as you know.
It's not just the committee
members the look of these bills.
It's also the committee analysts
to look at the bills.
It's a major analyst to look at
the bills it's the minority
analysts look the bills it's our
party so look at these bills
because selection related is
interest groups of one of the
bills for lots of people.
In this process have looked at
the bills once it hit the
legislature which is again
incredibly healthy part of it in
part of our process that we look
at these built in a way that
it gives me the opportunity to
serve the public we really do
hard work up here both sides I
might add.
Do our work up here and good
work up here and that's what we
did with this bill and with the
components the bill.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Senate bill six as you aptly
stated.
Passed out of government
elections and in the affairs.
On a made to one vote.
It went to the judiciary.
And it's never.
The judiciary.
It's been pretty busy this week
and maybe I can't remember
correctly but I'm not sure that
the that we actually took up
Senate bill six and Judiciary
Committee comedy wrong but I
don't recall at this point of
time.
Senate Bill surge referred by
one committee.
And passed out of the committee.
So.
Are you believe them some data I
would grant you some betting.
The other bill.
The
is
Was mentioned that.
Comprises at least a good
portion of what is now Senate
bill one forty four that's
before us.
For the Senate bill nine.
Senate bill eight.
Senate bill eight.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
For the Senate Bill I ever heard
by a committee in the house.
Madam speaker and gentleman if a
real dolphin for just a second I
want to go back question I
promise I'll answer that because
you were asking about the
vetting process and I wanna make
sure.
The sponsor from the Senate has
giving submitted additional
information.
So the clerks the county clerk's
of thirty three county clerks
have gone through both.
Sections six I'm sorry Senate
bill six and Senate bill eight.
On a day to votes on each
section in most sections have
support they supported six is a
whole objections were heard from
folks on process only with
respect to your question the
current question about Senate
bill eight no it never came over
to a poll because after passing
committee not on the merits
money to buy.
They did a process that we are
very familiar with the seasoning
I now this morning they put a
call on.
So rather than have a full
debate on the floor they stopped
it from coming over here which
is part of the reason why we
thought it made perfect sense
that is the center for just
gonna stop it and not let us see
it and not discuss the merits
but just for presumably
political reasons stopping it so
what we would do better speaker
gentleman is take the parts
again parts of the county
clerk's of what that improved.
And plug them into this bill.
Not everything as I mentioned
sixteen year olds AB are not in
here.
but the things that we thought.
Eight would appreciate was ready
for I was consistent with our
philosophy of the bill that we
would go do those things that
both work and were necessary for
twenty twenty two as opposed to
things we could do later.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Senate bill eight.
Has never made it to the house
of representatives it is study
whether to procedurally or
whatever happened over on the
Senate side.
It's not coming to the house it
never got here there's been no
vetting what so ever with
respect to the provisions in the
bill.
From the perspective of Senate
bill eight.
So.
That.
Portion of.
Portion of the substance of what
is now Senate bill one forty
four under consideration.
Has really had no vetting
whatsoever.
Madam speaker and and gentleman.
Senate bill one forty four.
Was a page and a half bill.
Beijing have bill.
The.
Was scheduled to be heard
earlier this week.
In about four hours before.
That bill was a.
To be heard and in the
judiciary.
We received.
A substantial amendment of if I
recall correctly a hundred and
sixty five pages.
The.
Madam speaker and gentleman
you'll recall.
We spent several hours going
through much as you did at the
beginning of of this debate.
Going section by section.
Advising us as to where the
various provisions came from
either Senate bill six which
some of us have been.
Somewhat familiar for very
familiar in my case
For Senate bill eight which we
were not familiar with that all.
And of course we're all familiar
with the page and a half Senate
bill one forty four at the time.
So to to.
To say that the federal vetting
of this bill has occurred.
Madam speaker I mom heads not
gonna be able to handle the
outside noise.
Thank you madam speaker please
go outside if you need to speak
it's distracting.
So madam speaker and and
gentleman.
While you may characterize it as
of the role that in.
For others.
I would suggest to this body
that a thorough vetting of this
bill.
Has not occurred.
Did not occur.
And although I can stand here
and tell you that Senate bill
six.
Has been vetted by.
A number of us who some of us co
sponsored that legislation some
of us have worked on that
legislation for.
Almost the well over a month
now.
and.
We are comfortable with the
provisions in the original
Senate bill six.
However.
Senate bill one forty four.
Did not wholesale incorporated
Senate bill six Madam speaker
and gentleman did it.
Madam speaker John knowing I as
I said they did not.
And madam speaker and gentleman.
Although many questions of what
is now Senate bill one forty
four incorporate provisions from
Senate bill six.
The provisions that were brought
over there are many provisions
that were not brought over in
full in fact there are several
significant omissions from and
and one of those emissions was
the subject matter of.
Floor amendment number one of
which we passed earlier
this morning.
So so.
Madam madam speaker and
gentleman
We've had a lot to digest in a
very short period of time and
some of the things that we see
in the of the bill that's before
us are are provisions that do
not.
Absolutely do not enhance the
security measures of the ballot
integrity.
And I believe every but
everybody in this body.
Wants to have a process that
makes it easy for qualified
electors.
To cast their ballots and I
believe everybody in this body
once every qualified elector to
participate in the process and
cast their ballots.
But I also believe that every.
A qualified elector.
Wants to make sure that their
vote.
To secure.
That their vote.
Will count.
Fully to every other qualified
electors photo.
Madam speaker and and gentleman.
In connection with the issue of
thorough vetting of the bill.
And trying to come up with with
provisions.
To achieve that goal of making
it.
Using for qualified electors to
cast their ballots and on the
same time provide for those
security measures that I think
the the the.
Qualified electors want to see
employees to make sure that it's
a fair and even handed process
and transparent process.
We have twenty.
County clerks.
Reflect their approval.
I Senate bill six.
They took a vote in their clerks
of Philip and there were twenty
eight.
Clerk since that happened said
we approve.
The provisions in Senate bill
six moving forward.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I received a.
Tax last night apparently the
clerks Matt again yesterday
after Senate bill one forty four
as amended.
past the committee made its way
to the floor of this house.
And I am
I received information that
another vote was taken.
Twenty two of the clerks voted
against.
The adoption of Senate bill one
forty four as amended there was
one Clark who indicated of that
clerks in favor of Senate bill
one forty four.
M. four of the county clerk's
abstained from that vote.
We're now considering this bill
this morning.
We have a bill we have a
vehicle.
That.
Has widespread support among the
I thank you use a term.
Alexion professionals.
That
the quote was stated I believe
by the gentleman from Bernalillo
that it came from the county
clerk's election professionals.
Twenty eight of them.
Important favor of Senate bill
six.
Twenty two of them.
Reflected that they are against
Senate bill one forty four as
amended.
So the election professionals
the ones that deal with this on
a.
Regular basis the ones that have
to implement the provisions that
are in these bills.
I can tell you that they labored
over the provisions in this for
many months before I even saw.
Frankly before I even knew about
it.
They had labored
With the for for a long period
of time and they were
comfortable that this that
Senate bill six accomplished the
two objectives.
Make it easy for qualified
electors to cast their ballots.
And yet provide security
measures that they feel are
necessary to protect the
integrity of each and every one
of those ballots.
So now.
I can't say it's not this
morning.
We're considering this bill that
was put together.
Frankly within the span of one
week them.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
you know better than that I how
much time was spent on this
particular bill in here you know
who put it together.
And.
I don't know Madam speaker maybe
I should ask.
Representative.
Gentleman were there any county
clerks at the table.
Assisting those that we're
putting together this amendment.
Deciding what provisions should
and should not come in if twenty
eight of them.
We're happy with Senate bill
six.
Madam speaker and gentleman
couple things on the same one
thank you madam chair for those
kind of course again because it
is not correct to say.
They don't approve of this bill
on content.
They object to the process and
are judging the content we're
not aware of that our
understanding is they don't
object to.
There is a problem.
County clerks are not
legislators don't mean that
pejoratively frankly we're not
County clerk's.
We have different rules.
You and I.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I have worked together.
To jealously guard legislative
prerogatives.
We have worked hard even.
Hi the one I carried.
The constitutional amendment an
emergency proclamation.
That would give us more power in
New.
Emergency long term chronic
pandemic like the one we're in
now.
I did that that frankly some
peril.
With my own party and governor
that I like very much.
But I did that because I think
it is important as a legislator.
We jealously guard our
legislative prerogative our
duties.
These County clerk worked very
hard.
The Senate's approach.
Is our job.
What is the other.
They can sometimes be involved
or not you look at the criminal
justice bill that we literally
just passed.
Put together by the Senate in a
matter of less than forty eight
hours.
Talk just like this disparate
elements.
Of.
Bills that were out there put
them in one package and we
wanted on tonight on
concurrence.
Rude.
The fact is is that far as I
know I went over there to watch
the process.
More prosecutors there defense
lawyers there judges there.
in the drop drafting room going
through the bills to see what
was in there well wasn't there
were there were some lobbyists I
would say but there weren't
those participants.
So yes in this process.
Senator I worked with.
Legislative Council Service to
put together these disparate
elements to make sure that we
had what we needed.
And we had a week to do that
because frankly this the Senate
and I with all due respect to
the Senator send the bill over
pretty late but we worked hard
to get it done in a very short
period of time because we felt
continue to feel it's why we're
here and literally the last
moments provided.
That this is important the
twenty twenty to elect.
All other states.
Are going around and
criminalizing people giving
water to people in polling lines
I mean can you imagine that that
that would be criminalized just
crazy everything to discourage.
Access freedom to vote
encouragement to vote.
Giving people access to what we
so cherish what the leader
talked about that people in this
country have the so many do not.
So many states are making it
more difficult.
We have decided on a bipartisan
basis.
To make the process easier and
more accessible.
And so no there were no county
clerk's sitting option and and
we did have the surgery States
involving the frankly it's our
job.
To go through it and that's what
we did that's what we do with so
many things we take import.
From outside groups whether
they're interest groups for
their other political entities
all like the county clerk's we
get their input in this case
considerable thought that we've
values because we didn't we
changed very little of the
actual lines I'm not gonna say
we is a hundred percent you've
seen some of the changes we
discussed in Judiciary and we
did that and I'd say probably to
you that's the way this process
works and think about.
When we got to and I'm not
referring to another bill but
another subject.
We talked about the changes to
the medical malpractice act I.
Talk to the leader of the
Republican Party.
And I said to the various
groups.
The hospital the doctors the
trial lawyers location at
advocates have gotten together.
To figure out a fix and we
should value that.
And Representative Townsend
quite correctly system E. we
were only job to do he's right
about that we do and that's what
we're doing here today or the
county clerk's sitting in the
room with us no their work was
done.
Our work began.
Madam speaker and gentleman of.
United have worked on a number
of pieces of legislation over
our tenure in this body.
Can you use the word we several
times in describing this.
Assess and and this
Bill that's before us.
The we did not include anyone on
this side of the aisle.
And it certainly didn't include
me have packed you madam speaker
and gentleman have a have a
conversation in the hall I think
the day before and I believe it
I said
Representative I think I use
your first name but I won't do
it here.
Representative of.
What we do always yes B. one
forty four.
And
I believe the comment was made
that the you were working on it
could you show me them to the
would try to give me something.
You know I I manage a carton or
I I I I just want to confirm
that that's correct that is
corrected and and so I I I don't
deny that that happened so I I
want you to know that and madam
speaker and gentleman I I'm not
complaining I'm just stating
that that.
Through this process the that
went through to get to where we
are today.
Was really an effort by.
Madam speaker the and the
gentleman.
The gentleman and possibly some
other folks that the I was are
largely associated with with
your political party it did not
involve the minority and I think
we've already established a did
not to involve the clerks
And I would that it did not
involve the person that's
generally been recognizes the
collection grew in him the
legislature but that's another
issue
Madam speaker and gentleman of.
There are a number of
provisions.
A number of provisions that
We felt very strongly.
That provided some.
Assurance to the public.
The things were being handled.
In the light of very
transparent the the the they
have the right to participate in
some of those things were were
taken out.
Them because the.
I think we may have about thirty
more minutes on this and then
we'll move on to something else
but the I do have a couple
amendments of the I would like
to bring forward and so madam
speaker and gentleman.
I would first like to offer.
House floor amendment number two
to Senate bill one forty four as
amended this particular of the
amendment.
Since we have to on your this
there's there's two separate
ones this one is identified as
point to to to.
Hey.
Four three.
Point one M. S..
And I do believe that was handed
out to quite a bit earlier.
I believe it has been handed out
does everybody have it over the
last two letters M. S..
And if your may find that I
will.
Yes gentleman to explain.
Explain the two oh two number.
For the for the amendment itself
please explain amendment
reporter.
Madam speaker
This particular amendment is
very similar to the amendment
that we just passed it's such a
impact virtually identical
except for paragraph eighty
three.
I have a three.
Provides one of those measures
the the we and I believe the
clerk's felt were necessary
because it involves the mail in
ballots.
What it provides is that.
The challengers.
Shell be allowed to see the
presence the presence does it
exist.
Of the signature the last four
digits of the social security
number not get the view the
number necessarily but see that
it exist on the the outer
envelope.
To make sure that that balance.
If they accepted by the clerk
goes in the correct staff
because there ought to be a
couple stacks one is the
accepted ones and the ones that
are potentially to be rejected.
If it has that information it
should go in the to be counted
staff.
The doesn't have one of the or
either of those
pieces of information it should
go in the potentially projected
stat.
So that is the only change to
the amendment we adopted earlier
we feel quite strongly that DFA
challenger has a right to
interject the challenge of the
acceptance of a balance.
They have to be able to note
that the there's the presence of
that material on the outer
envelope in order to impose a
challenge because absent scene
the presence of that information
no challenge can be rendered.
So that is what this the house
floor amendment does and so this
time I would move the amendment
of house floor amendment number
two to Senate bill one forty
four as amended and I would
certainly like a roll call vote.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
consent of all is this a
friendly amendment.
No Madam speaker NFI might
explain it might be helpful to
the body to know why it's not.
Please proceed to explain first
before I do that very quickly
shout out to my sponsor.
There was a reference made that
there was an expert.
On the Senate side elections so
I'm here to announce that
there's a new sheriff in town
and to sitting to my right.
All right with respect to this
ammendment.
The current law.
Is the challenges watchers in
county Kansas observers shelves.
Not be allowed did you voters
full date of birth for any
questions.
Of the voters so security
number.
That is in the law for a reason.
There is a privacy concern.
Do not want people to see that
even briefly.
Now I have to confess.
The gentleman madam speaker and
gentleman feel appreciate this
that one I first looked at it.
I was so anxious I I I I I have
my friends kidney.
That the people are nice to me.
As a representative always is.
I will almost certainly try to
agree with the gentleman and I
did.
And I had to go back.
And I don't do this often but I
have to go back to the gentleman
in state.
I'm sorry and I made a mistake.
I
I can't agree to this.
My sponsor.
my co sponsor from Senate.
And and
And I have gone through this
carefully and as you look at it
what you realize is.
She there's all kinds of various
things that could happen it is
not a good idea courts don't
like it a lawyer.
Courts don't like it I I if I
want to if I want to say.
To it when I'm answering
interrogatories.
I can always redact the entirety
of the social security numbers
courts also will leave in the
last four include the date of
birth and last four funds.
This is a way of developing a
database that could in the
various hands be used in the
worst possible way.
And so I do think upon
reflection and I I did have to
apologize to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln for first
just kind of going gas through
this I had to go back and say no
we can't do this because on
reflection this is a very
dangerous thing to do I'm not
suggesting that anybody in this
body would do that they would
not.
But you do have nefarious actors
out there and give them even a
little bite at the apple.
Date of birth social security
number even a portion of it I
think it's a very dangerous road
and so for that reason
Madam speaker and gentleman this
is not a family member.
Debate.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker and the
gentleman do you gentleman from
Chavis linking to yield.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I yield.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I actually think of
that.
The sponsor of this bill just
gave us the reason as to why we
need to have challengers have
the ability to see not the
number but is there a number and
is there a signature because
madam speaker and gentleman.
He just said that.
There's a potential of having
Afaria sectors.
Involved in this whole process
the difference madam speaker and
gentleman as he just stated that
the challengers potentially the
nefarious actor.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
The election worker bee and
Afaria secretary I mean if we're
if we're gonna be impugning.
People's integrity ahead of
time.
And we can cause them to speaker
and gentleman the the the of
election workers are gonna see
four digits birthdate and a
signature is that is not right
not right Mr speaker John.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
You're you're correct the whole
system.
Is reliant upon the honesty and
integrity of the people who are.
Collected in those capacities
number one number two the people
that they hired to perform these
functions and number three the
volunteers that perform the
various functions in the
election process and and they
all have to have integrity for
this thing to be.
Transparency and for the public
to have confidence that.
Their ballots are being properly
handled and counted and that my
balance is of equal weight to
your ballots.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman.
That's the point madam speaker
engine we've heard for years
that certain pieces of
identification that are used all
over the place that anyone with
nefarious intent could use a
driver's license number.
the date of birth is on a
driver's license.
if you write a check you have a
a routing number and account
number Madam speaker and
gentleman I I just within the
last several months had to close
down to the bank account that I
have had for for over ten years
because someone got a hold of my
routing number and my checking
and and the account number.
And they went and I'm not
exactly sure how they did it but
they claim that our bank account
we're fortunate we're able to
get that money back the madam
speaker and gentleman what we're
saying here is apparently.
That people who are challengers.
Need we need to be suspicious of
people who are challengers they
should not be able to see the
same information that election
workers are doing Madam speaker
and gentleman are not
challengers observers even
lawyers on behalf of candidates
are they not part of the
collection worker process
they're not receiving a paycheck
for it in the maybe the lawyers
are about speaker and gentleman
but are they not part of this
process I I'm I'm not exactly
sure why we would pick and
choose to be suspicious of in
this process it just it seems
very conveniently.
Targeted towards a group of
people that are there for the
purpose of ensuring election
integrity.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
let me let me answer your
question this way yes they they
are part of the process there
critical process.
They're critical process to land
legitimacy to the entire process
and that's for the challengers
are for both the candidates and
for parties fan for watchers
with respect to third party
observers to the process and so
it's important that these people
be able to fulfill their role
and making sure that those two
pieces of.
The statutory requirements on
the outer envelope are present
is part of that process and it's
even more important that this
ammendment get adopted because
you know what the other
provision that was stripped out
of this Senate bill six.
Madam speaker and gentleman who
was the auditing provision.
In Senate bill six there's no
auditing provision where two
percent of the ballots cast by
mail.
Were to be reviewed to make sure
that they were properly placed
in the to be counted staff that
they have that indicia of of
Of information on the outer
envelope.
And that if there was one.
Envelope put in the wrong staff.
Then they would review a hundred
percent to make sure that the
county clerk and those
designated for properly putting
it in the right staff that
provision is stricken from
Senate bill one forty four.
For not stricken it was never
included in Senate bill one
forty four forty is part of
Senate bill six so this
provision this ammendment is
even more critical.
Sense that portion of Senate
bill six was not incorporated
within the legislation before
us.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman for the question thank
you madam speaker and gentleman.
I'm not sure if you're aware but
since you've been debating but
I've been receiving texts and
emails Madam speaker and
gentleman from county clerks
across the state.
And madam speaker and gentleman
what they're saying is we want
these provisions as people are
complaining more and more and
more about voter integrity and
and that they want to make sure
that the vote is fair and cannot
be slanted one way or the other
Madam speaker and gentleman
they've asked for these election
integrity provisions.
And so madam speaker and
gentleman one of the reasons
we've been
Fighting this is so hard madam
speaker and gentleman is because
what I'm hearing from those
County clerk's is we would
rather see No voter election
changes then this change without
any protections that without the
the ability for the voter to be
able to have the confidence that
what is guaranteed in law is one
person one vote and madam
speaker and gentleman this is
one way to guarantee it because
a social security number is two
one individual.
And so madam speaker and
gentleman I support your
amendment and I would urge the
body to do so for the sake of
insuring all of the voters in
your districts who need to rely
on the sanctity of their vote
thank you madam speaker.
The gentleman.
Counties.
Representative Scott.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln you.
Madam speaker and gentleman
firmly I certainly yield.
Thank
you for.
Opportunity to clinch.
It is signature.
In the last four digits of the
social.
Absentee ballots.
Is a challenge for to.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
that's the whole issue a
challenge can't be interpose if
you don't have information to
make the challenge so if they
don't get to see that
information they can't say it's
being put in the correct staff
or not and that's the issue that
is before us that the issue that
we're trying to correct.
Common sense should prevail.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman seen further debate
the gentle.
The gentle woman from Bernalillo
Representative Herndon.
Madam speaker.
Of.
Gentleman with you yield Madam
speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo ideal.
Thank you very much Madam
speaker gentle gentleman since
the supreme court's decision.
The twenty thirteen decision and
Shelby County versus holder the
nineteen sixty five voting
rights act has been stripped of
its power to check items that
tend to be our lives to be
helping individuals but actually
work as restricting matters.
And where.
The election law changes.
That are allegedly put in place
to make things more easy or hard
to allegedly have greater
security really don't do that at
all and if you look at the state
of New Mexico for example many
cases that we had that there
have been some sort of security
violation and I think those
cases are Neil very minor one of
the things that I if they exist
at all one of the things that
I'm most concerned about is this
concept of always saying that
something is done for purposes
of security when in fact it is a
matter of restriction and if I
look at the if I look at the
amended one of the things that
scares me most of all is looking
at you must have a social
security number on in the facing
official mailing envelope what
if it's mailed incorrectly
people move and it doesn't get
there and somebody else gets it
and something else happens the
there are items here that would
scare me more about allowing my
social security number and some
access to be made available to
somebody should not have it so I
would say that this is not an
amendment that we should pass it
is not one that should be
considered at this time and Mr
spend madam speaker gentleman's
I do not support this amendment
and hope that this is absolutely
voted down it is not good for
the people of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
that's what you want you need to
vote down this entire bill
because that's what it provides
is to put your social security
the last four digits of your
social security on the mail in
ballots.
There is German from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move that
we table house floor amendment
number two.
Right we are on a motion to
table the amendment vote of yes
it will be tabled a vote of no
we will be back on to it the
vote is now open.
The clerk members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash food yes
Representative bunga.
Yes Representative been go both
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena votes
yes Representative Cook.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
It is Representative Miguel
Garcia both yes Representative
Harper.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yeah.
Of course Representative Hochman
Vigil votes yes Representative
Harry Garcia both yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lewis yes
Representative Lewis both yes
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero Romero votes yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Rubio.
Representative small.
Representative small both yes.
said yes.
Voters are closer to forty three
in the affirmative twenty three
the negative the members tabled.
Thank you Mr speaker have an
untarnished record the.
Mr speaker of the gentleman.
Since we are not going to allow
that the security measure go
forward.
As I mentioned there was another
security measure that was
omitted from Senate bill six
that deals with the same issue.
And that is the issue of of.
Having
a sampling of those mail in
ballots.
Verified independently.
So that we can be assured that
the correct procedures were in
place so that the ballots to go
in the to be counted staff.
There are impact properly
identified.
And so Mr speaker at this time.
I would move house floor
amendment number two to Senate
bill one forty four as amended
and I would like a roll call
have a roll call vote it's been
passed down is the to to never
travel to a forty nine point
one.
Yes it's been moved please
explain it.
The as I mentioned earlier Mr
speaker of this ammendment
provides for two percent of the
mail ballots requested.
To be reviewed.
By an independent election
board.
So that they can make sure that
the ballots placed in the to be
to be counted staff.
are in fact contain the proper
indicia of information to be
allowed in that staff if they
don't have that issue then they
go in the other staff and
there's a cure process in the in
the legislation to contact those
voters and allow them to care
about additionally in order to
go and the the to be counted
staff the that should be
There should be some independent
audit to make sure that the
people making those decisions
did it properly so
that's basically the crux of of
this ammendment I can read it to
you if you wish but the that's
essentially what it does it came
straight out of Senate bill six
from Bernalillo thank you Mr
speaker I move to table has
lower revenue but.
The motion which will have a
roll call vote is to table the
amendment governor yes of the
table vote of no we will be back
on to debate of it the vote is
now open.
This call the members that are
recorded Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes representative Armstrong.
Yes Representative Armstrong
both yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash food yes
Representative been called.
Yes Representative Google votes
yes representative Cadena.
Representative.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis yes
Representative Lewis votes yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Harper.
Representative Harper votes no
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
both yes Representative
Pettigrew.
No Representative Pettigrew
votes no Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero both yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes.
Yes Representative is yes.
As opposed by vote of forty two
in the affirmative twenty five
the negative the amendment is
tabled.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker this matter
have been debated for three
hours I move to seize debate
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this was nay.
The eyes have it to be as close
gentleman to close.
Right now for the Rio I am of a
do pass of Senate bill one forty
fours try cement price trace
amended.
We are on final passage of house
Senate bill one forty four has
three times amended the vote is
now open.
But the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon what's
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson votes no
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash was the
address yes Representative
black.
Representative black votes no
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative book of both
yes representative Cadena.
Representative votes yes
Representative Castellano
Representative Castellano votes
no Representative Cook.
No Representative Cook votes no
Representative speaker egolf yes
speaker it off of yes
Representative Fajardo.
Representative heart of let's No
Representative Harry Garcia.
Who.
Representative Harry Garcia both
no Representative Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative lane.
Representative Lane both no
Representative land that.
Yes Representative Lynda votes
yes Representative Lewis yes
Representative Lewis both yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes no
Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative queen votes
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
no Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya
votes yes Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative votes no
Representative Powdrell Culbert
not.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
both no Representative reams.
Representative Rehm votes no
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero both yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero both yes
Representative Rubio.
Representative Rubio votes yes
Representative those over thirty
nine affirmative thirty in the
negative Senate bill one for
four as amended three times is
passed the house.
Just.
All.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house standing leases
subject to the co chair we are
recess subject to call the
chair.
Don't go too far.
