him.
OK, it should go out.
This test, test.
Thank you, um.
Person on Zoom, if you'll go
ahead and um continue.
Oh
OK, hold on again, we're we're
seeing your um.
What you're saying, but not
hearing what you're saying, so
hold on.
Hank Hughes, you should be good
to go.
OK, all good now?
Great. All I wanted to say is
that Santa Fe County strongly
supports this bill.
Uh, we have trouble currently
placing people with vouchers in
the apartments that accept them,
this will widen the choices for
people and give them an
opportunity for a better life.
So we strongly support. Thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Let him we do a pool about when
we, uh, you know, put on the
squares how many minutes it's
gonna be before.
Diane McCash, please go ahead.
Um, thank you, Chair and
committee.
Um, I'm dying the cash. I urge
you to pass this bill because
access to safe housing should be
a basic human right and the
practice of discriminating
against renters based on their
source of income is a barrier
for families to become and stay
housed. When we allow barriers
to housing, we increased
homelessness in our state, not
only is being unhoused a
nightmare for individuals and
families who are directly
impacted. It contributes in a
big way to the, to the societal
problems.
We say we want to solve.
This bill is a vital step in the
right direction because people
have been and are being denied
access to housing because of
unfair income discrimination,
housing should be a human right,
allowing barriers to housing
hurts all of us, please support
this bill. Thank you.
Alexandria Taylor.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor, and
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico Coalition of
Sexual Assault Programs. We
appreciate the sponsors for this
bill, housing as a survivor's
safety and justice issue and
data from our recently released
um crime victimization report
shows that over half of New
Mexicans have experienced sexual
violence. The report also found
that those who were unhoused
have a much higher rate of being
a victim of crime, including
sexual assault.
And that those who have been
unhoused experience more
problems with job loss,
relationships with employers and
colleagues and medical issues.
One of the greatest protective
factors in reducing sexual
violence and secure housing at
the coalition and many of our
providers provide housing
support and have had trouble at
times getting survivors housing
based on discrimination, um, of
the source of income. So we urge
the committee to support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. That's all now.
Thank you.
Um, is there anything else you'd
like to add representative?
Thank you Madam Cheryl I'll I'll
stand for questions. OK.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to the
committee with a representative
block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, expert,
thanks for being here. A few.
Initial questions.
On the bill
So
Let me see where I'm starting on
this thing. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I'll start on
page 7.
It says
On page 7, line 13 to 18, any
form of federal or state.
State or local government or
nonprofit organizations
assistant.
Assistance or housing.
Including vouchers paid directly
to the housing provider, Madam
Chair Representative, how does
that add to the current
ones above it where it says
income for lawful professions,
Social Security, pension
annuity.
Can you just go into that a
little bit for me, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you representatives and
I'm, I'm sorry I didn't mention
that I have two experts, one
that's online, um, Rachel Biggs,
who's the chief strategy officer
for the Albuquerque Healthcare
for the homeless, and then here
I have Elizabeth Ella, who's the
co-founder and um and secretary
of the New Mexico Center for
Housing Law.
And so I just wanted to
introduce them, um I'll defer to
my expert.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
Representatives, um, I'm
Elizabeth Ali, um.
To address your question,
representative, um.
The language at subparagraph 4.
Um
Uh, would cover programs, uh
voucher programs that are
housing assistance programs like
the Section 8 program, Vash
vouchers for veterans.
Um, supportive housing vouchers,
things like that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Got it.
And then it also said nonprofit
organization assistance, Madam
Chair Representative, how do we
know when it comes to a
nonprofit, if that what, what
that income is for because I
know Madam Chair representative
when it comes to a lease, for
example, they ask for your, your
bank statement or they ask just
proof of like pay stubs, for
example. And so when these
nonprofits pay out or
Any kind of assistance program.
Do they specifically say this is
for some kind of housing
assistance or could it
potentially be
Some kind of voucher that is
just paid out.
Madam Chair, and would that
affect this in any way?
matted chair representative
there are um, and let me just
preface by saying that, um,
vouchers are not like there's
not an inundation and and like
we don't have a ton of vouchers
out there, so, um, it's really,
uh, there's a long waiting list
for vouchers when it comes to
Section 8, veterans who are
waiting for vouchers, there
aren't a lot of vouchers out
there and so, um, when it comes
to nonprofit and and so there
won't be a tidal wave.
What I'm saying what if this
goes into law, um, but what I
will say to you is that when it
comes to nonprofits, um,
depending if you're a, a
nonprofit who provides housing,
um, subsidies, for example, um,
if you're a developer, a
nonprofit developer, for
example, that it has um built
multi, um, uh.
Uh, who has, who, who's part of
like this multi-layered funding.
Sometimes they provide vouchers
to, um, people to help
supplement some of their rent to
be able to pay for the housing
that they're um that they're
renting out because they're also
the.
The group that oversees, they're
also sort of like the, it's like
a tenant landlord relationship.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative that helped me on
that, and so regarding that, I
just, so is there anything in
the bill?
That would have, would protect
those folks when it comes to not
just the source of income, but
the amounts of income. So for
example, Madam Chair, if they
had a side job.
It didn't necessarily cover the
full payment of the rent.
But they also got a voucher in
addition to that that helped
cover.
Over that amount for monthly
rent, for example.
Would that
Be covered under this like, like
where the destination of in
conjunction with other kinds of
programs are and I'm sure, and I
hope that made sense.
Yeah, thank you Madam Chair and
thank you Representative, just
to be clear that with this bill,
all we're asking is that um,
that a landlord doesn't judge a
tenant for their source of
income. And so, um, what, what
we're, what a lot of folks
experience um from time to time
is that when they go in and they
apply for rental housing, um, if
they, if they lay out
specifically what their source
of incomes are.
Sometimes landlords will a judge
that tenant because maybe they
have a voucher for Section 8 or
whatever. And they won't
consider that person for housing
and so what this bill does is
it, it, it, it minimizes what it
we we we're we're, we're trying
to enforce this law so that, um,
it's not forcing landlords to
house someone, it's basically
telling them, look, you should
really consider the types of
sources of income because it
all.
It's all monetary, all will go
to, um, paying the rent.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I had a
question about that later in the
bill, but I'll just ask it now.
So, when it comes to the
enforcement of this.
How do we understand
If somebody does indeed have
just cause to
File a claim under the Human
Rights Act, because I know it
can get kind of hairy there for
a minute when it comes to how do
you prove intent and things like
that. And how would, how would
you go about that when it comes
to someone who comes with a,
let's just say Section 8
voucher.
And they were denied housing.
Based, and they believe it's
based upon that, but it could be
for any factor of reasons. How
do we determine specifically the
intent of that landlord to deny
the application.
to my expert.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for the question. Uh,
the amendment gives authority to
the Attorney General's office
and MDOJ to enforce the public
accommodations and housing
discrimination pieces of the
Human Rights Act, and so under,
under that provision, um, and a
grieved party could file a
complaint with the AG's office,
the AG would investigate it and
collect facts and determine if
there were grounds to proceed.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. I just am
wondering how, what facts they
would get.
Because
Someone could file this if they
just got denied any kind of
Uh, application, for example, if
it was Section 8 or if it was in
any of these nonprofit grants or
things like that. I just want to
know if I was a landlord,
How do I prove to this person
through the the rental.
Application process that it was
done in a fair way.
Just to make sure that I don't
get sued on the back end later
on, Madam Chair, representative.
Madame Chair Representative in
uh in a complaint based on a
violation of the Human Rights
Act, it's, it's the burden of
the person filing the complaint.
To
To establish that the the
violation has occurred, so the
attorney general would be
looking to see if the complaint.
Um
Had any merit, and it wouldn't,
it wouldn't be the obligation of
the housing provider to prove
that they didn't discriminate.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative that that does
help on that end a little bit,
but when it comes to someone, if
they just have one rental
property?
And they don't have an apartment
complex complex, for example,
that has a bunch of different
people who may be section 8,
they may have different other
places. If it's just the 11
house and you denied somebody.
That person, they could say,
well, look at my section 8
voucher.
I got denied. I believe it's
because of this.
And if it was only one property
that the owner had, how does
that work? Because there's not
really any other evidence to, to
fact check to see, OK, well,
there, there were other
properties that they, they were
fair. They did give Section 8.
So I'm just wondering how that
would work when it comes to an
instance such as that, because I
know some people in Santa Fe,
for example, they do have only
one property that they rent as a
Verbo or or actually as an
actual rented property, and they
don't have 5 or 6 locations,
Madam Cheer groups.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So when
someone goes and applies for um
rental housing, um.
And they have to go through a
whole verification process to be
able to be considered. They have
to show where their income is
going to come from, and so they
will provide, um, whether it's a
section A voucher or their
veterans voucher, all of that
they have to be able to lay it
out, if the landlord um.
Uh
Denies that and and the renter
believes that they were
discriminated against because of
their source of income, then
they, they can do that
complaint. But as my expert
mentions, I mean, it's gonna be
the enforcement pieces coming
from the attorney general, and
so they're going to do their due
diligence to ensure that
everything that the tenant is
providing, um,
Like it's not gonna be just
this, they're gonna, they're
gonna only take cases that have.
Real actual um concerns and so I
think.
The Attorney General, and their
staff.
I feel confident that they can,
they can do that I I my expert
for for their.
Madam Chair and representatives,
uh, yes, I, I, I reiterate
everything that uh Rep Rubio
just said, um, and I'll just add
that the entire Human Rights Act
is filled with.
With
an assortment of types of
protections that are subject to
the same questions, you know,
whether it's employment
discrimination, um, discriminate
discrimination against the
elderly, etc. the questions that
you're asking apply, so there's
nothing unique that I can see in
source of income as a protected
class that wouldn't apply to.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative. And then
regarding the actual
Location of the rental or the
The person who's renting, do
they have to be filed with, I
cause I don't have a rental
property, so I don't know how,
how would they get those funds.
Through the rent from Section 8
or from
Any of these nonprofits or the
the the veteran program that we
mentioned earlier, do they have
to sign up with the federal
government.
Or how does that work? Because I
know that when I, when
I was looking for an apartment
when I was
Right at a college.
I pretty much like
On the guy on Craigslist.
And it ended up, I didn't get
murdered, thankfully. And so,
I'm just wondering how that
works with really kind of
I, I wouldn't want to say
lackadaisical rentals, but I
would say people who are just a
regular person just wanting to
rent out the property. They just
have a copy pasted contract from
online that we just signed and
how does that work,
Madam Madam Chair Representative
normally uh speaking when it
comes to folks who have
vouchers, um, or use vouchers to
pay for housing, uh, there, they
sometimes in most cases are
provided a list of landlords
that are already accepting.
Um, vouchers and, and, um, I
know that folks can go through
like the housing and urban
development, um, department and,
and, um, and even some of your
local nonprofits, they can
provide you a list of some of
that, uh, listings as well, um.
I mean, and and but but I think
one of the things that we're
we're struggling with and I
think somebody made mention
earlier in public comment is
that, um.
Because there's landlords that
would rather not have to deal
with vouchers because it could
be maybe takes a lot of time for
um the money to come through or
there's just a lot of um
inspections and things like
that, uh, what we're, what we're
suggesting in this legislation
is that we, we want to make all
of we want to make it more
transparent and allow for, um,
opportunities for landlords to
come forward to, to know that
it's, it's
It, it's, it's possible to be
able to to house somebody with
vouchers, like we're trying to
make it more of a positive thing
versus negative and, and I
believe that doing it through
this Human Rights Act and, um,
and having this enforcement
measure, it's, it will allow for
more opportunities for.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So,
With that example, which is a
real life example actually.
Would, so would that person who
had the
Craigslist rental, they would be
subject to this.
As well.
Uh, yes, OK.
That makes sense to me. And then
Madam Chair, representative.
Another question about that.
Also, yes, uh, regarding
insurance.
Because I know that rental
properties usually require you
to hold insurance.
How does this affect any of
that? Because I know that a
voucher, I don't know if it can
go toward insurance costs for a
6 month rental period. How would
that work, this new stipulation,
and I'm sure. Madam Chair
representative in Aler also to
my expert on this, but I think
one thing about.
Renters who use vouchers is that
they're required to go above and
beyond what most renters have to
do because they're using public
funding to to pay for their
housing and so when it comes to,
um, additional costs like.
Uh, rental insurance, um,
That is the cost that they have
to pay. It doesn't necessarily
have the voucher doesn't
necessarily go to, um, housing
insurance, but it's part of the
requirement, I believe, to
actually be able to have a a
voucher, um, especially if when
you're using something that's a
federal, um, uh, Madam Chair
representatives, um.
The bill does not, does not
create any type of um.
Restrictions or rent control on
a landlord, it doesn't require
that a landlord give a tenant or
an applicant paying with a
voucher any preferential
treatment. So if, if a landlord
requires, uh, renters' insurance
of of all of their.
There are tenants, then they can
make the same requirement of
somebody paying with a voucher.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, and I'm sure other
committee members will have more
questions, but that answered
mine and thank you so much.
Appreciate the answers.
Thank you, Representative Lord.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Thank
you. Thank you expert. I did
have some questions for clarity
because I'm
so
Just here.
So when we go to page 7.
OK, so landlords right now, we
know cannot deny people.
Based on race, religion,
national origin, sex, color,
family status, disability,
ancestries.
Sexual orientation, gender, and
spouse deaths.
Those are the current things
you.
Are we in, I want to make sure I
understand this, are we adding
that you now cannot deny
somebody.
Based on their income, or that
they have the voucher.
Madam Chair, Representative,
it's your source of income.
So man chair representative,
would that be?
We can, they can no longer ask
for a source of income.
Then when they're interviewing
people.
And they have 10 equal people
applying, and none of this other
exclusions applies.
How did they pick which one
would be the best renter.
They don't
If there's no income, I mean, I
know. Let me go back to Section
8. So Section 8 covers all of
the rent, part of the rent cause
I know it has to be.
50% of the area median income,
and it goes to the US Department
of Housing.
So when somebody gets a voucher,
is that if their rent's 850, is
it paying 850?
Um
Madam Chair Representative,
I'll, I'll let my expert, um,
share, I think what I will also
add first is that I think it
puts the person who's receiving
a voucher on that equal playing
field so that they're not
actually getting what's
happening right now is like,
say, for example, there are 10
applicants for rent and if a
landlord sees that somebody is
receiving voucher as a a source
of income that it's there's
there, there are times where.
That individual may be that that
may not be considered because
they are using a voucher. What
we're saying now is that this is
actually allowing for an equal
playing field for this person
who has voucher to be considered
just like everyone else, um, but
I'll hand it over to my expert
to talk more about the amounts.
Madam Chair Representatives, um,
uh, representatives to answer
your question, a voucher, um,
section 8 voucher and, and
vouchers that are designed
following the section 8 program.
A, um, they require that a
voucher holder pays 30% of their
income towards rent and then the
voucher covers everything in
excess of 30% of that person's
income.
So if a person has 0 income and
the rent is 850, then the
voucher would cover all $850 if
the person earns $1000 a month,
and they would pay $333 of their
own money and the voucher would
cover the rest.
I'm sure represents anything
that stipulates in the.
US Department of Housing that
They have to disclose that they
have a voucher, and then how
does it work for the landlord,
cause don't.
They have to do something on
their.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK, so they have to disclose
Mount Charmerson that they have
a voucher.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes. Thank you.
So they go to a rental and.
We want people to not put their
source of income, but the
Section 8 still have to list
that they have.
Sure, so, Madam Chair
Representative, when I'm still a
renter, and so when I went in
and and I made my application to
rent. I have to provide what all
my sources of income are to be
able to show that I can actually
pay my rent. And so I, I went in
and and mean and I had to know
what my monthly, my monthly um
gross income is and all of that
in that section of the
application is where the
applicant who's receiving
voucher makes mention.
So if it's a section 8 person, a
person who's receiving section
8, they have to put down where
they're getting their 30%, um,
to pay for their, for their, for
their amounts and then add the
voucher as supplement for their
monthly rent.
To help me with this cement
herbs and they go to fill out an
application, but if we don't
Want to look at sources of
income.
And it's still going to be in
the application, right? They
still have to fill that out.
So where does this part come in
where we're trying to take the
income and voucher off the
table.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that, that
question. It's a great
opportunity to clarify.
This, this bill does not.
Prohibit landlords from asking
an applicant what their sources
of income are, and it doesn't.
Allow an applicant to not
disclose their sources of
income. A landlord can say, How
are you going to pay me rent and
an applicant needs to list how
they're going to pay rent, what
this, what this bill does is it
says a landlord can't deny an
applicant rent simply because
the person is going to pay rent
with alimony, Social Security,
child support, disability
payments, or housing voucher or
other waffles or a job, OK, now
I understand that you're.
You're just saying they cannot
deny because it's a.
Right, so the other question I
have, Madam Chair representative
was on page.
When I went to
18.
And I was comparing it to the
first.
6 patients pages with
definitions, ma'am Chair
Representative.
Some of the things are in the
definitions and some are not.
For example, on on line 21.
2 refuse to otherwise limit or
put conditions of services or
individual because, OK, so you.
I think you had
Right in the
Examples you had.
Sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity. I'm gonna check
with, yeah, page 4, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity,
gender.
But can you tell me if you have
the rest of the things.
Defined in there. Do you have,
because everything has a
definition of race, age,
religion, color, national
origin, ancestry.
Pregnancy, childbirth condition.
Uh, just from all the definition
you have.
Did I miss the point where
they're all given as
definitions, madam.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
they're all of it is defined
except for.
Um
Everything after 25.
Line 25.
OK, man because I I was trying
to go back and I was looking for
it cause it was started off
great has all these old, old
material has.
Definitions of some things, but
I didn't see. I think for me I
would, oh, OK, there's race, we
got race too.
But
Age, religion.
Well, I guess those are kind of
self-explanatory, but.
I think for me, I would want to
know.
Like when you mean childbirth
condition, a definition that
Maybe some other things you want
to explain so that it's
self-explanatory.
Because I didn't see that
anywhere in the definition. I'm
just pointing that out. I
couldn't find it when I. There
was just something I noticed.
Ma'am chair ribs in um.
So the other question I had was
on going back to the metrics.
Were they looking at
The number of cases filed where
they thought there was
discrimination.
Due to income or were they
looking at civil lawsuits that
were.
How did we get to this?
The income is the issue.
Or the, the section 8 is an
issue where what metrics did
they use to come to that?
Madam Chair, Representative, I'm
not entirely sure I understand
your question, but I think what
I understand you to be saying
is, is why do we know that this
is necessary or needed. Yes,
because I'm uh when I know a rep
should asked, I was trying to
think, well, are they looking
at?
There's a huge amount of
lawsuits that were won by people
that said they didn't get
housing based on income or
because we're Section 8 or what
were the metrics that we use,
what did the metrics show?
Thank you for that question, uh,
Madam Chair Representative, the,
the reason that we know this,
this uh source of income
protection law is needed is
because of uh data collected by
HUD over the past um.
They've collected data for the
last 30 years now. They have
done 3 studies, one basically
every 10 years, um, to, to
measure what's called the
section 86 or voucher success
rate.
Um, that is when a person
receives a voucher, usually
after years of waiting for one
because there are way too few
vouchers for the people who are
eligible for them, um, they,
they generally have 60 to 90
days to find a place to use the
voucher that goes to
representative Block's question
earlier about the the um.
Craigslist situation. Uh, the
Section 8 program is was built
by Republicans to to encourage
private investment into and to
and to and to get public funds
to private landlords, um, and so
the way that it's set up is that
a person who receives a voucher
is supposed to go to Private
landlords and um and try to find
a place to rent using the
voucher.
Housing authorities and other
providers of vouchers generally
give that person between 60 and
90 days to try to find a place
to use a voucher, and if they
don't succeed, then the voucher
is pulled away from that person
and passed on to the next person
on the waiting list. So Hud has
collected data, um, and updated
it.
Relatively regularly, the most
recent update uh was a couple of
years ago based on regular
reporting, um, and the
statistics are that more than
30% of people who receive
vouchers are unable to find a
place to use them before they
expire, uh, the data is broken
down by um by housing
authorities, so we're able to
get a pretty granular look in
New Mexico and our, our
statistics are even worse and
across all jurisdictions in New
Mexico, it's not an urban versus
rural divide.
New Mexico. So that's, that's
why we know that it's needed. In
addition to that, based on these
studies, HUD has repeatedly said
that while that it's that they
encourage these types of laws,
more than 24 other states have
passed these laws in more than
150 other uh localities and
jurisdictions have passed them,
including.
Representative unfortunate took
a whole lot of staff.
Yes, it could be that it could
be if there's mental illness, it
could be any of the other
reasons also as well, which I
think it would have been nice to
went back and did a very
detailed study, say no.
This was because of
Whatever. They didn't interview
well, whatever. I'd love to see
all that.
Um, so ma'am Cha representative,
um,
How many
About what percentage of houses
in New Mexico are.
friendly.
Let's take Albuquerque.
Um, I'm not exactly sure what
you mean by that,
um, so maybe like
if you if you've got a list.
Like what percentage would you
say of the housing market.
is saying, yes, we accept.
Or we accept that. Madam Chair
Representative and, and I know
that we've been talking a lot
about like section 8 vouchers
and and veterans vouchers and
things like that, but um, I just
wanna reiterate that the bill is
About any type of source of
income outside of just your
regular salary, so it's not just
specific to housing, it's
specific to um.
You
Anybody can rent anybody who's
on a voucher can rent any house,
uh, regardless of whether it's a
hot house or not. But understand
this building.
So someone goes to apply.
It can't be discriminated based
on income.
But I have somebody that comes
in.
That is
Makes $80,000 a year and they
work at all, they've been here
for years.
They're stable and secure.
I can't take that into
consideration. I hate to say
this, somebody who.
Just lost her
That's no income.
Maybe doesn't have a way to.
Is that, is that where we're
going with this.
Madam Chair Representative, what
we're asking is that when
someone who has uh different
types of amounts of uh different
types of sources of income, um,
that, that a landlord takes
takes it all into consideration
that they're not denied a chance
for housing just because.
Maybe they're getting alimony or
or or things like that. OK. I
understand that. And um.
The last question I really have,
there was a lot of stuff that
was removed from 13 all the way
to 1417. Is this where the new
section comes in on 18 to
replace all of that wording.
Or was it just stricken out for
particular?
started in 13.
Line 14, section.
Madam Chair, Representative,
that language it was moved, so
the the.
In the amendment
Um
The, the human rights or uh act
in general is slightly
reorganized to be more logical,
so that language was moved to
28-1-7.3.
I thought that's what had just
happened. It got moved, um.
I think that's all the questions
I have.
Man
you pass a second.
We have a motion for a due pass,
um, do you take role?
Representative? No, ma'am.
No.
Representative Ramiro? Yes.
Representative Thompson, yes,
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes
Madam sure. Yes.
Um
On a boat of 4 to 2, um, you
have a.
or house built 339 as amended.
And it was
OK, next we have.
It
Uh, House Bill 247 healthcare
practitioner Transparency Act,
Representative Herdon and
Hickey.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
I'm Representative Pamela
Herndon, and I'm here to present
uh with my colleagues from the
Senate, uh, House Bill 20247 and
it's the healthcare practitioner
Transparency Act.
With me is Doctor Martin Hickey,
who will, who is uh also a
co-sponsor of this piece of
legislation. We have two experts
with it, two experts with us, we
have Doctor.
Uh, Natalie Brunner and Bruno,
and she is online and she is uh
so that you can bring her
forward.
And you have a committee sub.
I'm substitute.
Yes, and we have a committee
sub.
Man, I moved
to discuss the committee.
OK and
if you could, the committee
substitute.
Her house Bill 247.
Thank
Thank you, Madam Chair. So the
committee substitute for House
Bill 247 is a is a.
Is legislation that will
explain.
And uh
That will provide
Transparency or individuals who
are utilizing in healthcare
services, and it prohibits
misleading statements from
Practitioners or others.
So that people know exactly who
they're dealing with when they
are engaging with healthcare
professionals.
And um, Madam Chair.
Uh
What did we delete uh
advertisement from the.
Uh, from the, uh, original bill
so that it keeps section A,
which mandates that uh
Any
any advertisement that is
included must include
credentials and scope of
practice. So we want to make
sure that people know exactly
who they are dealing with,
whenever they are engaging with
the health care provider.
So Madam chair uh with that.
We will stand for questions.
It's
Discussion on the amendment
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, so you said you took out
cause I've just saw this, so you
took out.
The advertising, but then you
said it's still in there because
you have to list in section 2.
I'm sorry, I wasn't very clear,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative Lord,
it's in section 2. It deletes
the definition of advertisement,
but in section 3, it keeps
Section A, which mandates what
an advertisement must include
about credentials and scope of
practice. OK, what page is
section 2 on, cause I.
I see
Oh, it's page one, OK.
OK.
OK, Madam Chair, so you're
taking out advertisement means
you still have clinical settings
and you still have deception or
misleading terms.
But you took out the
advertisement.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committees under section 2, we
deleted the definition of
advertisement and under the list
of items for which deception is
prohibited, it shortens medical
field uh under 9 if you see
that, and it adds medical title
under number 10. If you go to
the definition of health care
practice, it adds clinical
setting and it deletes nursing
home and assisted living
community and personal care
home.
If you go on the definition of
health care provider, um, Madam
Chair Representative Lloyd, uh,
the, uh, it moves registered
professional nurse or licensed
practitioner nurse into their
own category and removes medical
assistant or certified nursing
assistant.
OK, so Mount Chair and represent
for clarification, you took out
advertisement, so that now means
That if they run an ad.
Anywhere
Does the deceptive and
misleading term still apply
because you took out.
Advertisement, so I'm trying to
figure out in what sense would
there be misleading you mean in
the office?
So Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lloyd, so the,
the purpose was to look at the
to make sure that the
credentials and scope of
practice is mandated whenever
advertisement is, is utilized,
so the purpose was to clarify
whenever advertisement was
utilized in Section 3, you'll
see that we uh mandated what an
advertisement must include, so
instead of utilizing the term
generally advertisement in
section 2, you'll see that it's
more defined in section 3.
I have to go through and read
that because I know that was a
really big deal for.
The medical professionals reach
out to me. So was that
The only changes there was just
this what advertisement and
communication means.
Yes, madam, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lord, that's
correct. So you'll see those two
differences in section 2 and
Section 3.
Uh, I'm finished cook but I
think rips and blockhead.
Representative block next on the
list. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator. So,
I, I'm sorry, you were talking
really fast and it's later in
the, no, you're good. I talk
fast too. So people tell me slow
down. I'm just wondering, you
said something about a nursing
home assisted living community
or personal care home. Was that,
was that kept in?
the new bill, Madam Chair.
So, uh,
Um, Madam Chair Representative
uh block. If you look under
section 2.
Under the list for which
deception is prohibited.
I'm sorry, in the definition of
health care practice.
We add a clinics, we add
clinical setting and we delete
nursing homes, assisted living
community, and personal care
home from uh section 2.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Why
did we delete those by chance?
Madam Chair, a representative,
uh, Lord, I, I'm sorry,
Representative Black, of what we
wanted to do was to make sure
that uh in a, in a more in a
more professional setting in
terms of where health care is
provided. It is provided in
nursing homes and assisted
living facilities and personal
care, but we didn't think that
that issue was as big an issue
as it is in other um.
Uh medical care settings.
Yeah. Thank you so much, ma'am
I'm sure that's what I had on
these.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, thank you
Representative Bluff.
Any other discussion.
OK.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you. Thank you, Senator,
for being here, and experts, um,
this as well, out of my depth,
so I'm, um, have, uh, some
questions just on, I think some
of the impetus for this, um.
The idea that
There's fraudulent activity
using the doctor term is, can
you just describe some of the
reason why.
We're just deliberating on this
and how systemic the problem is.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Romero, I will
ask my um.
Co-sponsored to answer to that.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Romero.
Uh, Martin Hickey from the
Senate. I'm a physician.
And uh when this was brought to
my attention, um.
Some
By people actually other
legislators said that when they
get care, they're not always
sure who they're seeing, um, and
there are lots of doctors, uh,
there's
Doctors of jurisprudence,
there's doctors of philosophy,
there's.
Doctors of optometry, I mean,
these are what the degrees say.
And it was so that people were
sure to know, uh, it's it's fine
to call yourself doctor, but a
doctor of, of what?
Um, and so that's why
essentially the impetus for this
was coming, so that people had
clearly understood what the
credentials and and the
competencies, and I mean
competencies in a very positive
term. What have you been trained
in? What have you gotten
experience or a number of hours
or what have you and, um, but if
you're uh degree says that you
are a doctor, um, absolutely go
ahead and and.
But please explain, excuse me,
I'm sorry.
The allergies.
Oh man
So,
so that it's just explained that
you're a doctor or what.
And so physician would say I'm a
doctor of medicine, as would an
osteopathic physician, say
they're a doctor of osteopathic
medicine.
a doctor of optometry would say
that they were a doctor of
optometry. Thank you very much.
So I, so that was the impetus
behind the bill, um, certainly,
but then, uh Mr. Najar did
contact all of these different
associations, to be sure that we
got and, and I let him speak to
that. I think we got very good
agreement and we took out there
was some, there were some pieces
in here that also implied that
only if you were a physician
doctor, could you use that, and
we removed that from the bill,
so I
Hoping that it's very friendly
to everyone, and it says, please
do call yourself a doctor, but
a.
Doctor, whatever profession you
have become credentialed.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representatives
Senator.
Um
So when we took out advertising
and when looking at the cause of
action on page 6,
So when somebody is
fraudulently, um, or is an
impostor, um.
purporting to be a doctor and
they're not of any of these
credentials.
Um
Can you just describe how one
would create that cause of
action and what that would look.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee representative Romero,
one of the things that we wanted
to make sure uh we left this
section in the end we kept uh
section A under, I'm sorry,
subsection A under Section 3
regarding advertisement, and we
talked about what type of
advertisement whenever it's
utilized, what must be included,
and it must include the
credentials and scope of
practice that a person is uh
providing with res with respect
to anybody who's utilizing.
services.
So, madam chair, um,
representative, if a couple
questions. So on the cause of
action piece if somebody is
using Doctor ironically or.
Um, you know, her like doctor of
love, or, you know, even the
idea of like home homeopathic
doctors, um, knowing that there
isn't a credential, would that
be a cause for cause of action.
allow for a cause of action.
So, uh, it could be particularly
a Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative Romero,
it could be if the way in which
the term doctor was being
utilized would be misleading,
such that a person might be um
might be misled in terms of the
type of services that they were
receiving, and that would be a
cause of action. If, for
example, Madam Chair,
represented um members of the
committee, representative
Romero, if I, um.
Said, uh
I was uh.
A doctor of uh.
Kinesiology, for example.
And uh I, and you did not know
what kinesiology was, meaning
that it really had to do with
therapy and I was, you were
thinking that that had to do
with my heart or some kind of
way that you were misleading in
terms of what your profession
and credentials were actually
doing, and that would lead to a
cause of action.
OK.
And then the cause of action is
just on any sort of damages that
you would have received because
of.
The misleading, um, nature of.
Submitting to the practices of
that quote unquote doctor and
then having damages.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee represented Mary,
that's correct, because if you
then proceeded to engage in
something that caused you some
harm because you thought you
were getting def you thought you
were getting um
Services from a particular type
of doctor, but you weren't
because you were being misled in
terms of who was providing you
the services, then yes, you
would be entitled to a cause of
action.
And, and Madam Chair,
representative, just so I'm
clear too under the current
trade Practices Act.
There's not protections for
misleading customers on what
your profession may be as a
cause of action.
At this point in time.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative
Romero, we did not think it was
clear enough in terms of with
respect to the practice of
medicine or healthcare, so this.
Thank you.
Um, is there any opposition to
um.
Accepting the uh.
Committee, uh
Medisa.
seeing none.
Is that right? OK.
You have a
Substitute for 247 and we will
go now to the audience. Is there
anyone in opposition to this,
Bill.
Is there anyone on Zoom?
In opposition.
And.
Go ahead.
Thank you.
Bye.
vice chair of the committee and
sponsors.
My name is Nat Dean. I'm a
disability advocate. I concerns
still stands with.
Possible to tape advertising.
For assisted living.
between the assisted living or.
systems that often in place
that.
is the same as assisted living,
would you just not?
Thank you very much. My
apologies for my voice issues.
Thank you. Have a good night.
Stay safe. Thank you, yeah,
sorry, your voice is.
Not doing so well, but take
care.
Um, is there someone else?
Oh,
yes, um, we'll bring your expert
on in a minute. Um, OK, now, is
there anyone in the audience in
support?
OK, um, it seems to be 5 people,
so we'll do that.
One minute, please.
Oh
Oh, you hold it? OK. Uh, Madam
Chairman, committee, um, I am a,
um, a triple boarded
anesthesiologist who is.
My name is Doctor Margaret
Miller.
I'm a triple boarded
anesthesiologist. I have spent
over 33 years in clinical
medicine, and 23 of those years
were spent in academic medicine
training physicians in the
healthcare environment, you will
encounter various individuals
with various levels, um, and
training and intellectual
ability that provide various
levels of services in the
healthcare industry. Um,
Physicians need to be um
Uh, recognized for their
position in in um uh as leaders
in the health care industry and
providing um care to critical
patients and
Their position should not be
confused with other healthcare
providers, and I have seen this,
um, in the healthcare industry,
uh, the state of California has
a law on the books that makes it
illegal for any uh healthcare
provider who is not a licensed
physician to introduce
themselves as doctor.
And yet I have encountered this
in my practice.
So I am for this bill for
clarity, the people in New
Mexico deserve high quality
health care system.
Next
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Linda
Siegel representing nurse
practitioners, nurse midwives,
psychologists, occupational
therapists and so forth. And we
totally support this bill. This
is primarily a name badge bill.
So you have your name and then
you have your license, so if
you're a nurse and you happen to
be in a doctor of nursing
practice, you can say, doctor,
but you're going to say.
Doctor so and so, nurse
practitioner. If you're a
psychologist, the, the, the
entry degree is a PhD. You are a
doctor, so you're gonna say.
And uh doctor so and so
prescribing psychologists, so
every um profession is going to
identify what they are, and so
it makes it very clear to
patients where there are MDs,
DOs, and where there are MPs and
OTs and all the abbreviations we
have, it will say explicitly,
this is what I am, and we
totally support that in every
clinical setting.
Thank
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Richard Romero, I am
a registered Mexico Medical
Board, and we are in full
support of us. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Michael
Caplan. I'm the vice chair of
the speech language pathology,
audiology, and hearing aid
dispensing practices board, and
we support this bill. I've
worked in many settings. I
introduced myself as Doctor
Kaplan, and then I tell him I'm
a speech language pathologist so
that they know who I am. I'm
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with the
Greater Albuquerque Medical
Association. We stand in strong
support of the bill, uh, you
know,
as was described, I think there
was a lot of collaboration, a
lot of discussion amongst the
stakeholders to get the bill
where it is right now, and we
think it's in a really good
place, uh, and really at the end
of the day, we do believe that
patients deserve to, to have
transparency and clarity when
choosing their providers to help
keep patients safe, so we stand
in strong support. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, next we'll go to
Zoom. Is there anyone in
support?
I think we heard that in.
4 people, OK.
You'll take just one minute
each.
Carrie Robin
Good morning or evening. Good
evening, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Kerrie
Robin Bruder, and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Medical Society. Uh, we
very much support this
legislation. We think it makes
sense that people introduce
themselves so that there's clear
eyes around who's providing care
and we hope for a new pass.
Thanks so much.
Rebecca Leaner.
Yes, my name is Rebecca Laha and
I'm the president of the New
Mexico Academy of Ophthalmology,
and we support HB 247. This bill
really is about patient safety.
New Mexicans deserve to know
which member of the health care
team is caring for them. It's
part of an informed consent
process, especially for
treatments given. They deserve
to know the credentials of the
providers that are that are
suggesting care for them. Again,
this is not about titles, not
all training is equal, but it is
about patient safety. Thank you
so much.
Uh, Angelina Villas.
Oh, can you hear me?
Yes, go ahead. Thank you. Uh,
Madam Chair, honorable members
of the committee, my name is
Angelina Via Adams. I am
president of the New Mexico
Medical Society. I am a medical
doctor, a physician, and I'm
proud, and I'm proud to have a
dynamic team of excellent
clinicians in my practice, my
personal practice. We have a
collaborative environment in my
practice to include nurse
practitioners, physician
assistants, medical assistants,
medical records specialists,
prior authorization specialists,
management leaders, nurses,
procedural technicians, and
certified nurse anesthetists.
All
these members of the team are
vital to our success and the
success of our patients,
navigating the healthcare system
is already confusing and
overwhelming. This bill ensures
transparency so that patients
know exactly who they are
speaking with, it allows for
better direct care in all
aspects of medicine, patients
deserve clarity, transparency,
and accuracy. This minimizes
opportunity for confusion and
strengthen trust in the
healthcare system by the
patient. It also helps patients
clear choice in who is involved
in their care and the roles of
the vital team members.
The Medical Society and I urge
you to pass this bill. Thank you
very much.
Michael
Can everybody hear me?
Yes, we can go ahead.
Um, my name is Doctor Michael
Gaevski, and I am the president
of the New Mexico Society of
Anesthesiologists. I am in
support of this legislation as
well as as are our members. It
is um what we see as a piece of
common sense legislation that
would allow our patients in New
Mexico to simply be very aware
and knowledgeable of who their
providers are with the plethora
of providers in our state
ranging on all types of um
Uh, licensing, um, it is only
right that our patients are
aware of who they go to and this
applies to advertising as well.
Um, it is our duty and
responsibility to provide
informed consent to our
patients, and this is simply
something that goes hand in hand
with that. Uh, unfortunately,
there isn't always a culture of
every provider introducing
themselves accordingly uh to
their license and scope of
practice. And so this is the
first step in the right
direction of changing that
culture.
We are very supportive of HB
247. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representatives.
OK. Is there anything else you'd
like to add?
OK, thank you. Um, first we have
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representative Senator, Doctor
Senator, Senator, doctor,
Senator.
I
That's right
So I do have some questions. I
worked for quite a few doctors
in my lifetime. Matter of fact,
since I was pretty much a
teenager. So don't they already
have a scope of practice
violation. I mean, if you
violate your scope of practice,
like if you're a chiropractor,
used to be able to deliver
babies actually used to work in
the hospitals back in the way,
way, way early days, but they
can't no longer do that, so
isn't it already a violation
where they are going to lose
their license, probably if
they're going outside of their
scope of practice and chair
representatives.
and center.
So, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, Representative
Stephanie uh Representative Lord
so.
What is really important to
remember here is that we want
people to know who's giving them
information. So we're not so
sure that they're going outside
of their scope of practice, as
they may be.
having a conversation with a
patient.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Lord that you may think you're
talking to one doctor, but
another, a different type of
doctor. We just want you as a
doctor, whatever your profession
is that you just make it clear
who you are and what you are
talking about.
So we're talking more Madam
Chair and representative and
Senator more about people that
are in a group setting. This is,
it's kind of non applicable
really in a private practice
because it says dentists, it
says optometry, it says
chiropractor, says acupuncture.
So
Where it does get confusing is
when I'm at a facility and I
don't know if I'm seeing a
physician's assistant at DO or
an MD or what type of.
Are they, uh, if you are a
medical doctor, no matter what
you're training, what your level
is.
You have to wear that name tag
as well while you're in that
hospital group facility or
whatever.
Um, yes, you.
Doctor of medicine, MD.
Um, it's short for that.
The um if you're a physician's
assistant who often work with MD
certainly at the VA they do a
lot of the practice there, it
would say the name and
positionian's assistant, um.
Podiatry.
Uh
of podiatry and so again it's,
it's exactly uh.
Excuse me.
I forgot to say
Madam Vice Chair and
And Representative Lord, um.
It, it's the clarity so that you
know, particularly if you're not
going there all the time,
facility so that you know what
the training is of the
individual when we get into the
scope of practice, which
Gets very, very complicated and
actually people are looking at
competencies now that's why I
use the term earlier, we will
see pharmacists, uh, clinician,
pharmacists who go through
uh training that's not unlike a
physician assistant, and they
have proficiencies in certain
areas where they can order tests
uh.
Write scripts and so forth and
so what we're trying to do is
give everyone as much clarity as
possible about who you are
seeing in a particular setting
and you're right it's really
much more in a group setting
now.
Just to, to be clear, I could.
I would be misleading.
If I said, well, I've done a lot
of cardiology as a general
internist in my life and, and I
said.
Martin Hickey, MD Cardiology,
that to me is really misleading
because I haven't done a
resident or fellowship in that,
you know, maybe I've I've done a
lot, but again, it's just
particularly.
So people know that and have the
confidence that in whatever
setting whoever you're seeing
that they've had the training
that allows them, that gives you
the comfort that they are
confident in what they are.
Advising you or prescribing for
you or diagnosing for you.
I hope that offers a little bit
of clarity but thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Represent senator. OK, I
understand that, um.
I guess my question is.
Having worked in doctor's
office, so I'm surprised how
many people don't know what the
doctor.
So is there going to have to be
a next step in saying.
I, I'm uh
Physician's assistant, my scope
of practice this because some
people don't. I mean, some
people don't know.
The difference sometimes between
act I'm sure chiropractor.
So are they actually gonna if
somebody doesn't know and if
you're what you're trying to do
is is trying to prevent somebody
from doing.
Things they shouldn't be doing
for the easiest term.
What is going to be the next
step?
So that the consumers.
If you're looking to protect
them,
Is it going to be that they have
to hand them a piece of paper
and say, here's everything we
have to do so that they don't
have, uh, they're not looking at
a civil suit or liability, uh,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam chair and representative
Lord, thank you for that
question.
Yes, this could get into all the
things that I, I mean, it almost
like be doing it.
history and physical and review
of systems uh on the other hand,
um.
The
I think the individual who is
seeking out a particular type of
care. My wife is an OBGYN and in
her second part of her career,
she became certified through a
lot of courses and training in
menopausal medicine, and so she
has a certificate of menopausal
medicine that certainly she
retired now but that was up on
the wall, um.
And you know, how, how far does
it go, but I think
That
Today, uh, I think people should
be willing to ask.
Uh
Particularly if someone has
branched off, like if I had
branched off into cardiology and
you know, and I'm doing more of
it. I mean, they should know
what did you do a fellowship in
cardiology. I don't see anything
up on the wall, and I, and I
would say, well, I've worked
with cardiologists. I just
didn't bother her. I didn't get
the extra training. Yeah, I
think it's fair to have people
explain that.
Uh, so that folks know I'm
seeing again it's having the
personal confidence that
The person you're working with
has the training to be able to
give you good advice.
Thank you.
Uh, because that's where I was
going with this, if
We're trying to make somebody.
We're a tag.
They can technically in a
private practice, which then
becomes a whole another can of
worms of.
And I, I'll just ask us right
now, so let's just say we passed
this.
Somebody does, they just, it
says.
Do, they don't put what kind.
Um
And then where does this come
into play? Is there a penalty
for that, or does it just add to
the civil lawsuit when you go to
sue, this is another thing
you're gonna say, well, he, this
doctor here, she was not worried
that tag, and I didn't.
Is that
Play out
For the um
Various people that we have
listed in here, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair representative Lord,
thank you for that question. You
know, I technically legally I
could hang out a shingle.
Um, saying
Martin Hickey MD cardiothoracic
surgeon.
And, and.
try and do it, but we have a
whole system of.
Uh, credentialing.
And
certification of privileges
within hospitals and
institutions, uh, you know, I,
I'd have to set up a whole OR
where it's kind of an extreme
example, but the
The point is,
That
We do have a lot built into the
system already and and actually
the tort system, I mean that's
part of the penalty and in fact
that is a very legitimate and
very important role that is
played to keep people within the
bounds of their, their practices
in Almoordo years ago where all
the, the patient care fund
really got sent off
into.
Uh, universe and and kind of
crash things up there was a
fake oste fake ursopod who never
had any training who was using
super glue.
To
With joints put lumbar spine
together and uh I mean that
actually it can happen but we
somehow the system.
Didn't work well enough in terms
of checking.
doing background checks.
Then privileges within the
institution and so forth, so I
think we're getting better and
better at that, so we have a
whole system that keeps people
within the bounds, and if
someone is doing work that isn't
appropriate and there is a poor
outcome that person should be
taken to uh trial or certainly
the bone trial where comes after
so that I think functions well.
It's not perfect. It functions
well.
And Manson.
Senator, I agree with that.
Anybody is misleading and that
does happen.
I'm just trying to get into the
minutia of how far
Do we go for a breakdown list,
I'll just pick chiropractic.
You
Would they have to have
Our scope of practices we can
manipulate the spine, we can do
the neck.
Mid-back, low back, hips, your
knees, your toes, your fingers.
And list all the things that are
in the scope that they can do
and then have the patient sign,
or what would you think would be
the right, cause there's a lot
of things that, and then if you
get into it.
Nature paths, that's even a
bigger broader.
So we're let's do the path.
Where would they
Explain what they do because
there's path do all kinds of
stuff.
So how do they?
Explain to the person what
they're doing and how.
Long, but they need to be a
short sentence, I mean, because
it's the same nature path, but
if somebody doesn't know what I
need.
says
we can fix your gallbladder or
something.
I mean, then we're we're getting
a misleading.
Advertisement, that's a whole
another can of worms, but they
just say.
Doctor, they don't put in
advertising, they just say
nature path.
How far would you like them to
go to stay?
What their scope is.
Or where, where do we draw the
line?
Expert
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, um, they would just have
to identify based on their
license. Um, so they don't have
to go into scope of practice.
This isn't a scope of practice
bill, um, and to address your
question earlier, this bill
isn't designed to increase
lawsuits. It's designed to
increase transparency. It's
basically here to um allow
patients to know who's providing
their care.
And ma'am Cha an expert.
Senator representative
everybody in the whole room. uh,
what is
What is the penalty to them if
they don't, they don't have the
name tag.
What, what, and somebody says,
hey, I went to this doctor, I
don't know who it was and they
reported, they report it to the
board?
Or who do they report it to? Or
is there a penalty?
For that.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord, um, this
bill in and of itself doesn't
create a private right of
action, but there are other
avenues under current law, such
as the unfair Trade Practices
Act, um, the goal of this bill
is just to further define what
should happen within the
healthcare space.
A maam chair representative.
If the board, let's say the
chiropractic board says we don't
align with this, we're not.
Hold anybody accountable for
this.
And somebody wanted to complain
the person didn't have the tag
on.
Would they go to the unfair
practices, or is there really
nothing they can follow up on.
Is there any teeth to this
whatsoever other than saying.
Wearing that
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, um, this specific bill
doesn't have any enforcement
language in it, um, but they
could go to other areas of law,
again like the unfair trade
practices Act and other legal
remedies.
Man represent it when we have to
then go back to the unfair trade
practices and adjust that to put
this wording in there to make it
even applicable, because they're
really not violating anything.
They're not saying, uh, home
births by nature path. Sorry
I'm, please don't be mad at me
but I'm just trying to pick
something to talk.
Home births by chiropractors,
now we get into the legality
issue.
So
If they're working within their
scope of practice and they
haven't done anything wrong, but
they don't wear the name tag.
You're saying that they could
still take them to the.
Unfair practices they'd be
violated on that, even though
that's not an unfair practices
rules.
They rips in Center.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, um.
It's difficult to say under a
circumstance such as that. I, I
think the goal of this is more
to prevent someone with, let's
say a PhD in leadership from
saying hello, I'm doctor so and
so, I'll be your provider today,
uh, without saying.
You know, my background is in
leadership, not cardiology.
And I, I do appreciate, I
understand what we're trying to
get to. I'm just trying to
think.
Because for me, if I was an
office manager who worked at a
doctor's office manager and I
would immediately start drafting
up the scope of practice because
I wouldn't want to get sued.
Oh my God, I forgot my name tag.
I so you'd have to write it on
there.
Um
It, I noticed, Mister Speaker.
Senator Representative expert,
it does have
Advertisement still on page 4
and section 3 and advertised by
a healthcare practitioners shall
include the practitioner's name.
And disclose the type of license
on which healthcare, so are you
saying they would have to say,
um,
Low back hurting, come in to see
Doctor Smith, chiropractor.
That what they would have to,
they'd have to put their name
and their.
license that there are
chiropractors, is that what
you're trying. So Madam Chair,
uh, members of the committee
representative Lord.
In that section, we talk about
advertisement must include
credentials and scope of
practice, so we really do want
them to explain what it is that
they are uh.
license to do or what they are.
capable of doing under the title
that they hold, so that is
absolutely correct.
Madam chair
Representative
I would, I'd be careful about
saying put scope of practice
because it's different from
saying I'm a chiropractor versus
listing out everything in the
scope of practice, very
different.
OK, and already, um, Madam
Chair, don't we?
I could have sworn it was
already mandated that when you
get your license, you have to
put that on a wall where it's
visible.
For Bay and no insurance
requires that medical insurance
and usually scope of practice.
Includes that
Thank you. Thank you. I'll take
that answer. That's what I
thought. So already, so that's
kind of reinstating that, but I
guess what I'm getting at.
I, I see what you're trying to
do. You try to make some
clarification because sometimes
women in the.
If you go to ER urgent care, you
never know really who you're
seeing, it doesn't say anything,
you don't know if you've seen it
personisher, one of my friends'
daughter's getting a PhD in
nursing.
Yeah.
That's her choice. Um,
In the private practice, not so
much.
And then we don't really have
any, I mean, there's no teeth in
it, it's kind of like we're
suggesting.
I guess
Um,
I'm sure, so I think that's all
the questions that I have.
for this for now. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair. So,
um,
You know, I, I practice. I'm
sorry. Oh, I, I thought we had
already done, OK, in healthcare
in a variety of atypical places.
Swimming pools, horseback
riding.
Holmes
Playgrounds
So first up, I wanna say, be
really careful about using scope
of practice because you do not
want people to introduce
themselves and tell their scope
of practice because they would
just hand you a handbook and say
this is my scope of practice.
So, um,
So, I will just start with the,
the substitute, so on page um.
On page one.
Line lines 22.
And 23.
I mean, I, I, I don't.
I don't know that I would call
the places I worked a clinical
setting, but I'm a, I'm
clinician.
So that, that's a little bit of
um
And then to be treated for
disease defect or injury. The
kids I treated didn't have a
disease.
You know, you could say they had
a defect.
Um, they may have had a delay
and injury, so I think that's,
that doesn't really encompass
all of, of the, um,
And I, I must say, you know,
before the the substitute, I got
a ton of emails from all kinds
of.
Doctor, you know, PTs, OTs,
SLPs, um, dentists, you know,
so, so that's a concern of mine,
um, and then one thing that is
not in here and admittedly
they're not human medical
doctors, but veterinarians are
also doctors. So, um, and I know
there's a bill coming up to have
have them added to the
healthcare provider for
non-compete reasons, but um,
And then Representative Herndon,
you said, Madam Chair, that, um,
you know, if you said you were
kinesiologist and the patient
didn't know what that was. You
were liable. I mean, that's.
Uh, that's um worrisome to me
because.
It, it, I mean, they, they
weren't being misleading or
non-transparent, the fact that
the patient.
Doesn't know what that is, is
not really on the on the um.
On the provider.
And then Madam Chair, uh, I'm
just wondering about the
advertisements. I mean, we see
all the time.
Um, you know, that I'm, I'm
Actors playing doctors and
admittedly that probably isn't a
local commercial, but what about
national commercials where
they've got an actor playing a
doctor and saying they're a
doctor. How, how will that, how
will you deal with that?
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative
Thompson, if you notice on the
television, there's always a
disclaimer at the bottom and so
it says this person is not
really who it doesn't say uh it
it actually disclaims whether or
not they are actually a doctor.
I haven't seen, I haven't seen a
case where that hasn't occurred
and I just wanted to go back to
the clinical setting that you
were concerned about that, but I
just wanted to point out, we
were trying to be very um
general.
in the terminology because we
use the word R and we made this
whole list of things and, and we
use the term R, didn't say it
had to be one of those, so we
were trying to be as broad as
possible and and utilizing the
terminology, but I what I think
I hear you saying, Madam Chair,
uh, representative uh Thompson,
you don't like our
Right language, but that's what
was intended to incur because we
didn't want to make it so narrow
that that you would have to
think you'd have to be in a
hospital setting or you had to
be in a clinical setting, but
that there was a broader term
evaluated anywhere, um.
Uh, there would be, um, also
there was a a list of things
that made up that terminology
that we thought would appease
you because we knew that you
would be looking at this very
closely. So I, I met him chair,
I wouldn't say it's too broad.
I'd say it's too narrow. Um, as
I said, disease defect or injury
doesn't really in my mind at
least, and in the mind of people
who work with
Particularly infants and
toddlers with um.
developmental delays, none of
those fit, so, so, and um I
don't, I just.
I'm not sure that, um, like I
said, you know, my sister was a
physical therapist at Carri
Tingley and her job was in the
pool.
So should she have to wear a
name badge in the pool. I mean,
it, it so it just, it doesn't
seem like it.
It seems like
You looked at the, where the
majority of healthcare
practitioners practice which is
more of a clinical setting and
didn't look at those of us who
have different, um.
Differ settings where we work.
Um I
I think
I think I will leave it at that,
but it, it just, it's not quite
there for me. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Most of
my questions were answered, but
I just had a couple. So just to
clarify, Madam Chair
Representative, Senator.
Mr. Najar
But got everyone's title
correct.
Um, doctor, senator.
I'm wondering when like an MD.
When they go into the
The examination room.
Do they have to say, hi there.
My name is doctor.
So and so
Parma.
Uh
General practitioner or
Or hospitalist or
Cardiologist.
Does it also apply to osteopaths
and MDs.
Madam Chair
So Madam, madam chair, um,
members of the committee,
Representative block.
So
One of the things that we are
trying to do is to make sure
that
The entire um.
That the person that is dealing
with you in a medical setting is
transparent. If you are a doctor
of osteopath. Tell us you're a
doctor of osteopath.
I mean, we don't, uh, we really
want people to know who they're
engaging with, with respect to
their health care. This is not
about trying to make sure that
we're bringing lawsuits and that
we are
Finding people guilty of
activities, I mean, uh,
Representative Romero brought
the question, well, what about
the uh Federal Trade Practices
Act. I mean, she's very right
about that, but the
Pa practices that doesn't do
exactly what we're asking for
here in terms of the
transparency and that's what we
were, that's all that we're
trying to do, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, just
be upfront and clear with
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, I, I get
that.
And then my next question, what
if someone comes into the ER.
And they're bleeding out.
They're not conscious. They're
going in and out of
consciousness. Uh are you
supposed to even tell that
person who or they're just
blacked out.
Hi, I'm Doctor so and so, Doctor
of
Osteopathy.
etc. cause for that instance,
that person you don't know if
they've they've
Understood what it is that
You are. You could even be a doc
a nurse.
Doctor of nursing and say I'm
doctor so and so, nursing, etc.
How does that work, Madam Chair,
under the bill. So Madam Chair,
members of the committee
represent the block, and in
those instances I would the
emergency room with no hospital
or emergency room would be
allowing me to engage in a
person under those
circumstances, but if I am
talking to a conscious person,
and I'm talking about, well, I
think that it's best that you
uh.
Make sure that you take 3
aspirin a day and that you also
A milk because that works out
best, that what you want to do
is to make sure.
That the person who's telling
you that is the person who has
the credentials to be describing
what is actually being told to
you. I think what you've
described is a little bit
different situation than I
expect, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, represented block
that I would expect this even to
arise.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. And
the last question of promise.
One's cutting me off. No, just
kidding.
I'm I'm totally joking.
uh, last question was the actual
identifier.
What if you say, doctor.
So and so on the ID, but it's
really small letters.
Underneath the identifier, and
you could be in an
Doctor of nursing and just say
doctor so and so. How, how would
that apply? Does it require
Conspicuousness of the.
Badge, Madam Chair,
Representative Senator.
Mr. Najar
So, uh, Mr. Chair, um, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, members of
the committee represented black.
I'm gonna ask our expert to
answer that question. So she's
online, the doctor's there.
Doctor Bruno, can you hear us?
Natalie, you may speak.
Doctor Bruno, you may speak.
Did you unmute?
So, um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, uh, we wanted her
to speak. She's also on call
tonight, so it could be that
she's on call and she can't
speak, but let me go back to,
back to your question, um, Madam
Chair.
Oh, she's back.
Oh, she is with a patient. She
just said she can't speak at the
moment. So one of the things
that you are saying, um, you're.
Your dad says that I'm a a a a
nurse. I'm a doctor of nursing,
for example, and it's in small
letters and it says nursing.
Well, I would, I would hope that
you.
The goal would be that you would
tell the, the patient that
you're dealing with, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, Representative Block, you
are a doctor, but you're,
you're, you are a doctor of
nursing, that is the scope of
your educational practice. So we
would hope that that would um
again, I, I just really want to
emphasize that this is all about
transparency and letting.
Exactly who you are when you
engage with them, but.
Not about bringing
Cass to take people's lives,
just tell people who you are in
New Mexico would say we want
this.
The few states that say
It's your responsibility to
tell.
Exactly the
Educational background.
Or the level to which you are uh
presenting to them in terms of
these uh information that you're
providing with respect to that.
That OK representative.
Thank you so much. I apologize
for the, the intricate question
at such a late hour.
It it's really all right because
uh those questions are raised
and we, we've actually worked to
To, uh, work on this piece of
legislation for a while and
trying to get lots and lots of
people.
to understand what we were
trying to do, and the good thing
about it is that we had um
number of doctors, a number of
healthcare professional
advocates that we had worked
with, and they stood up and say
this is a good idea, so um
that's what we really want to
bring to this board, Madam
Chair, Representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, thank you so much. I
still, you know, I still have a
few questions on, on this that
I, that I'm rolling around in my
head, but I will, I will let
them be, but I do think.
I also just had some questions
about.
Like
Like a doctor who was a nurse
practitioner, like I have a
doctor who's a nurse
practitioner. She's a
dermatologist, and she also has
another practice that is
Purely
It's not medical. Well, tech
technically it's medical. She's
an injector of of all the cool
things, Botox and and all the
all the kind of kind of things,
but she's a doctor.
nursing. And so I just kind of
had questions about that because
it says clinical setting and
medical setting, and I, I would
assume that would also probably
fall under that. So I won't bore
you with those questions, but I
appreciate all of your time, uh,
representative.
Senator, Doctor, Mr. Najar, and
uh.
The doctor
the ether. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, Representative Romero.
we were flagging on the cause of
action piece, um, on page 6 when
we're talking about penalties.
Um, so the intent of this
legislation is for those who.
Are, um,
Impersonating a doctor
using the language improperly
titles, um.
To then
Be penalized. And so I'm just
confused about what the intent
of section 5 is um.
For what, cause it's construed
to say no private cause of
action.
Um
For violating this act. So what
is the cause of action?
What is the attempt to create
the penalty, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Representative Romero, you're
absolutely right.
to bring a cause of action where
you are going to get some sort
of relief in terms of monetary
uh relief or
Uh, in, in a medical setting, it
would have to go through a
medical board. It would have to
go through an unfair trade
Practices Act, but this act
itself and it is to.
A des required the transparency
of who you are with respect to.
The uh
Care that you are providing to
the, to the person that you are
either evaluating or engaging
with.
So that is the the bigger scope.
I, this, uh, you being an
attorney, Madam Chair,
Representative Romero, it would
be more like the difference
between a misdemeanor and a
felony, but in this case what we
are saying
We're not gonna penalize you and
put you in jail, but what if you
do have something at a level
that's going to uh actually
affect your healthcare and the
person did not when I say health
care to affect your health in
general, and they didn't convey
who they were in terms of the
term of the use of doctor, for
example, I'm a doctor. I'm have
a JD, I have a jurist doctor, so
you should call me Doctor
Herndon, uh for now, so but I'm
just saying that what.
What you, what we really want to
do is to make sure that the
transparency is occurring. The
uh the lack of providing that
transparency, Madam Chair,
members of the committee
representative Romero could lead
to other causes of action, but
it wouldn't be a private cause
of action, it would be one that
would have to go uh.
Medical board or an unfair trade
Practices Act.
You are correct when you brought
that up.
That's, that's helpful, um, and
I think the part of it is just
like it goes through whatever
vehicle, um, they're licensed
through, etc. So, yeah, I think
the uncomfortable part is the
the title talks about providing
penalties and then provides no
penalties or cause of action.
So it is um a bit misleading, I
think even in the title for, I
think what you're trying to get
at, which is the transparency
piece overall, um.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any more discussion?
What is the will of the
committee?
We have it
a motion for due pass, um, you
take role.
Representative Block.
As
Representative Lord, no.
Representative
Romero.
Yes. Representative Thompson.
No.
Madam Vice Chair
Before, oh, I'm sorry.
Representative Block.
Yeah, I know.
Yeah
I almost said yes and I meant
no. I'm so sorry, madam chair.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam, yes.
OK, so we have a vote of um.
For do pass that is tied 3 to 3.
So, um, your, uh,
Bill has been tabled.
Thank
I, I'm sorry.
It's not it's just it's OK. It's
tied. Right, Madam, thank you.
We make a motion for a for the
committee substitute.
on house bill 247.
Thank you.
OK, um, do we have?
Um, the, um, sponsor for House
Bill 17 has um
Just asked us to roll the bill.
Which we are glad to comply
since it's after 7:30. Thank
you, everyone who is here.
is now adjourned.
