I
was.
The two.
Just as.
As.
Okay calling to order the
meeting.
consumer public affairs
committee
the tier two in right from house
district of thirty seven Los
crucis and I'd like the rest of
the committee please introduce.
For us
on a.
Hi Representative Lord.
Part of the Albuquerque
prospect.
John blocked from house district
fifty one.
Good afternoon everyone I'm I'm
happy that will be all I serve
district thirty five which is
the city of Los crucis a lot of
the downtown and surrounding.
Good afternoon everyone I'm I'm
Representative Andrea Romero
from northern Santa Fe County
from the City of Santa Fe to
walking valley into the city of
Espanola we also for some
Republicans thank you for
joining us today and welcome.
Hello I'm Representative Liz
Thomson house district twenty
four which is that near
northeast heights of Albuquerque
including wood rocking the up
town centre whatever that thing
is.
What what what.
Hello I'm sure Lucien under
Canadian system for the consumer
public affairs committee and
also assistant to Representative
Ferrary.
And I live in Santa Fe.
Analysts are support madam
chair.
or if it.
Yes.
The last four.
Maybe it's.
Could you to.
Except.
Thank you.
Thank you all for team here
All of our.
S. centers.
We do have a quorum.
Watching the subject line will.
Fine
I just wanted to set up a few
things for committee this is our
first time.
And.
Yes it is public.
Right get better.
so we will.
Have the introduction of the
bill and then we will take
Fifteen twenty minutes for each
side to make public comment and
then as we're hearing the bill
we will.
Make any questions or comments
to the point of the bill.
You
Also take into account.
Have.
Today so thank you again
And if anyone is here for.
The second bill that we have on
the agenda.
Twenty two thirty one.
Thirty two.
It was.
House bill thirty one will not
be heard in case anyone here for
that.
The state of.
And
Twenty two twenty two.
Twenty two on Thursday
yes okay.
Thirty one will be heard if you
were here twenty two.
Asked to be done on.
Thursday.
Okay so we have house bill nine.
Mr Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
Pamela Harnden representing
house district twenty eight
today I bring before you house
bill nine a secure gun storage
bill focused on child access
prevention and making sure that
children do not have access to
firearms one of the things that
we want to do madam chair with
respect to this bill is to make
sure that our children live long
happy lives and that one way we
can do that is to make sure that
house bill nine is an act and
madam chair how would you like
for me to proceed would you like
for me to talk about my to
introduce the bill and then
introduce my experts and guess I
will follow whatever procedure
you desire.
Well.
Thank you madam chair.
Of.
Thank you madam chair.
House bill nine.
The impetus behind this bill.
Really occurred.
The young boy by the name of any
cargo was shot.
On the grounds of the Washington
middle school on August
thirteenth twenty twenty one.
And with that one of the things
that happened with respect to
that event that young boy was
working very much like Dr Martin
is the king junior and this
month that we recognize in many
way to make sure that children
were getting along he was
working to make sure that he
could help students to navigate
how they could get along
together without violence but in
the end it was spending who
separate the violence house bill
nine sits today to state like.
We want to make sure that
children are state it does not
affect any second amendment
rights to hold a gun not to have
access to a gun it also does not
require anyone to store any guns
in any particular way one of the
things that we recognized as we
were putting this bill together
is that there are various
individuals with various
economic capabilities but there
are various ways in which
firearms can be stored safely
and this house bill nine
actually embraces that in every
single aspect of the bill so for
those who lived in I can
remember when my grandmother was
living with me and she kept
things stored safely the way she
would do it was to put it in our
at her cosmetic case was to get
the key around her neck but
somebody else in the more
affluent neighborhood may keep
there's an of very expensive
drugs storage container and
that's okay one of the things
that we want to do is want to
make sure that the firearm is
stored safely and kept out of
the hands of minors I also want
to express to you exactly how
this bill will work I wanted to
understand that eight House Bill
nine does not criminalise any
unsecured firearms unless and I
underscore unless the unsecured
firearm is used by a minor to
threaten or harm another person
it does not address adults who
are not authorized to proves to
possess firearms it's also
important that house bill nine
as I indicated earlier does not
impose a big financial burden of
firearm owners because they are
manufacturers are selling
expensive ways in which you can
store fire arms House Bill line
does have some exceptions and I
want to know about those
exceptions the exceptions are
for self defense so it but mine
are any has.
Access to a firearm in self
defense and maintaining this up
if it's of up his or her family
that this bill does not apply
and will not bring in a penalty
against the individual who owned
the farm house bill nine
preserves a miner's ability to
hot and to shoot under adult
supervision we recognize that is
the difference in the way in
which firearms may be used in
rural areas different from how
they may be used in urban areas
and house bill nine only
addresses money those who misuse
unsecured firearms so those
things are important for you to
know and understand with respect
to this with respect to be ill
this bill but understanding and
realizing that it only focuses
on child's safety that's what
it's all about and with that
madam chair I'd like to
introduce those who are here
with me today first of all I'd
like you to meet the Mississauga
this is beating heart grows
grandmother she's here with us
today next to me is that the new
server a Bernalillo county John
Allen we also have with us the
Attorney General of the state of
New Mexico well torrez.
Sitting in the back.
In the back I'm sorry is APD
commander let so he is here with
us and also one of by.
One of my favorite Syrians who
have grown up with for many
years and happy to see in here
we have the new district
attorney for Bernalillo county
Sam Bregman and also madam chair
members of the committee I want
you to know that I have with me
one of Michael Sanchez sitting
here Representative the
Tennessee of all come together
so with that madam chair I will
introduce you to but just a I'm
sorry your Mrs Vanessa sorry the
heart goes from grandmother to
make a statement.
Thank.
Mexico provided.
Today I am proud to be here
today to discuss.
Heartbroken State yeah I am off
to a motion for those keys maybe
you could do that so that will
businesses have.
Or as.
The.
I'm also very emotional for the
reason why I am here.
The death of my in the.
We'll keep this to make sure.
I encourage gun owners to please
to are there higher this as my
grandson was killed because of a
wrecked governor's action.
This bill is not only to to
protect the children but to also
teach parents and gun owners to
the responsibility it is a two
year every parent and college
should realize that they are
responsible for the access of
other people to their fire on.
I hope you prove approve this
bill and save the lives of that
other children in the name of
fifties sacrificed thank you.
Madam chair my one of my co
sponsors Representative Bravo
company yet would like to us.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee all
those in the audience and
Those.
I'm here today to give expert
testimony in support of this
bill I want to give you my
sincere thanks first and
foremost I want to.
Give my heartfelt condolences as
always to pin her gross
grandmother.
I supported this bill because I
too am a grandmother.
To grants and four grandsons now
and two sons.
Madam chair I'm the daughter of
a three war veteran.
Special forces green beret.
He kept fire arms is training
arms all of this equipment all
of those firearms guns
everything imaginable and our
house he was the father of three
daughters.
He kept them I don't know how
many of you here remember the
all foot lockers.
In a metal foot locker that was
issued to him and it was kept
under lock at all times.
He showed us each daughter.
The safety.
Practices of.
Using fire arms and the duck of
all three doctors I was the only
one that was interested in
learning how to.
I use a firearm and so I grew up
understanding the importance of
gun safety gun storage and
witnessing it first hand.
I hate to tell the story because
it's devastating.
But I must.
Because it demonstrates the
importance of why I stand up and
strongly support and sponsored
this legislation previously and
currently.
My grandson's witnessed first
hand.
A ground.
A drive by shooting.
That left one person dead.
They were out on the playground.
And then the car.
With one of their friends that
had been picked up.
By their family member.
As they were after waiting to be
picked up in the school grounds
after school.
My grandson in whose class this
child was in.
Was in first grade.
I'm sorry second grade and was
seven years old.
He's now older.
That experience of having been
with his witnessed the shooting.
Having seen that that person's
body on the street.
And later having to be part of
the classroom support system for
his classmate.
Left a long lasting impression
and trauma that I'm not quite
sure madam chair members of the
committee members of the
audience whether he in fact will
be able to or when he will be
able to overcome the trauma
traumatic experience.
That child was with that parent.
The child was not.
Arm to fire arm used.
However he was in the family.
Where it was investigated after
investigation and it was found
that the fire arm and other arms
and ammunition.
We're in unsafe in open access
to everyone in the household.
So for me madam chair.
And members of the committee it
not only is it a personal.
Importance but it is also of
utmost importance every one of
us because everyone of us has
family members every one of us.
Have homes rent whatever our
place of abode is and we're all
concerned about safety.
Gun safety and that's what H. B.
line is all about it's about the
safe storage it's not about
anything else and I don't wish
to have the discussion
determined from the importance
of what in fact this bill is
about again madam chair this is
about safe guns safety storage
to prevent any future situations
that would take the life of an
innocent child any innocent
person caught in either the
crossfire or directly.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to Representative Herndon for
allowing me to help sponsor this
legislation thank you for all
all those here to give testimony
thank you.
Thank you Representative will
now hear from the district from
the U. S. attorney I'm sorry but
the attorney for the state of
New Mexico well Torrez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to participate in this it's
very important hearing I will
apologize to the committee at
the outset I'm actually double
booked it from Senate finance so
I may have to to take my leave
but I appear before the
committee and stand in support
of this bill not only is the
chief law enforcement officer of
the state but as a father and a
gun I have a number of firearms
in my home I received my first
farm when I was still a a young
boy
and grew up in a family that had
a long tradition of of hunting
and and using firearms when
whenever we were out visiting my
grandparents in in rural New
Mexico so I am very cognizant of
the importance of the right to
keep and bear arms and I want to
state unequivocally that this
does not infringe in my judgment
on any established case law that
has been articulated by the
United States Supreme Court
therefore reasonable regulations
of firearms that have been
maintained in federal case law
and I believe that this bill has
been carefully crafted to
balance the needs and interests
of gun owners and the broader
public safety demands of the
rest of society.
Simply put
Being a gun owner comes with
great responsibility it was a
lesson that was imported to be
imparted to me by by my by my
dad and other other members in
my family about how to safely
handle a firearm and I can tell
you that you know even as a
career prosecutor in the son of
a career prosecutor who has on
occasion had reason to worry
about self defense.
The idea of that weapons or
accessible for responsible gun
owners that can be used in self
defense is not incompatible
with the solemn obligation that
we have to protect children
children like Benny and and
other children across the state
who deserve and expect
adults in positions of
leadership to do everything in
their power to make sure that
they are made safe this is a
reasonable regulation it
provides for a narrowly crafted
solution and in my judgment will
do a great deal to encourage
more responsible gun ownership
and so I think the
representative for bringing the
bill forward and appreciate your
time and attention to this
important matter.
Thank you madam chair we will
now hear from.
From the Bernalillo county
sheriff John Allen.
A good afternoon madam chair and
representation of the committee
I'm here to promulgate
addressing gun violence is a
priority for the Berlin county
sheriff's office I was raised my
whole life with firearms in our
home one of the first things
that we were taught was gun
safety in the safe storage of
firearms one of the most
promising strategies in the law
enforcement want to one is to
make sure that we're preventing
not only a crime but also
something that could be
accidental and something that
can also take away a person's
life.
Law enforcement participates in
gun safety discussions and how
to prevent minors from accessing
firearms and that is a top
priority for the sheriff's
office as we get out there with
their community not only to
address the problems that we
have in our community with
crimes but also to educate and
make sure that the owners of
firearms store their firearms
correctly.
When the telephone goes off that
one or two in the morning and
you arrive at a crime scene and
you see a child that is deceased
in the back room or whatever
have any property.
It is very difficult to give a
death notification to any family
members to tell them that this
incident was a hundred percent
preventable.
But that firearm could have been
stored.
But that Pharm.D been put away
of the family went on a vacation
it is a vast importance to make
sure that that firearm store
safely so a child can I get to
that firearm hurt himself or
hurt others.
It is known that stays with safe
storage requirements have had
accidental shooting deaths among
children declined by almost
twenty five percent.
Even if we are under twenty five
percent it is important that we
put a dent into that number
because even one death is too
many when once again it is a
hundred percent hundred percent
preventable.
Farms are use in approximately
half of all U. suicides and a
study published in the journal
of the American medical
association evidence was
presented showing that state
child access laws lowered the
gun suicide rate.
Among teenagers by as much as
ten percent there's nothing more
devastating that have to inform
a family once again that is a
hundred percent preventable.
I'm encouraging the legislature
to pop the legislature to pass
house bill nine and make sure
that our children are safe thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Sure thank you madam chair will
now hear from the district
attorney Sam Bregman.
Okay let's stand up.
Thank you
madam chair thank you and to all
the members appreciate the
opportunity to stand in support
of this piece of legislation
as you all many of you know I
just recently got appointed was
given the honor by the governor
of the district attorney in the
accounting and that is truly an
honor but in truth the
a tremendous responsibility as
well a little bit about myself
one thing when it comes to this
kind of legislation of the last
few years I've been known to to
run a little bit of a cattle
ranch if you will and.
I have
I've owned guns most of my life
as well and obviously
had guns out of the ranch when
it's in these necessary for
predator control so that the we
don't have we don't have
livestock problem or anything
like that and also people
protection but I I truly respect
and and want the ability that
that farmers but also for
protection of my house and and I
know that so many people raise
and then when we bring this kind
of issue to bear they think well
wait a minute we're taking our
gun rights way that's not what
this piece of legislation is
about it's not even close to
that what it is about the I
think is when we think about the
tragedies that we already know
about and the horrific
experiences that people and
families are going through when
their loved ones were killed
senselessly because of of
something that could have been
prevented and the idea for one
second that someone could
recklessly leave a far or for
example on a coffee table for a
six year old to go R. at eight
year old or a ten year old girl
would take it somewhere
including the school or
something and create the kind of
harm they can do
the idea that we're not gonna do
anything to hold the person
responsible if you will
obviously the proof that it was
so reckless in their storage of
a firearm
I think.
District attorneys throughout
the state maybe the discretion
to be able to.
And and that's why this bill
support.
Nine.
Thank Representative Herndon for
for and and all the all the
sponsors for this piece of
legislation it's it's important
it makes sense nobody can
literally say that you don't
need to to store your firearms
responsibly.
You have to.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you district
attorney recommend madam chair I
last expert witness is APD
commander Blanco.
The.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Luke language I'm a commander
with the PD in the field
services bureau I oversee the
southeast area command in
Albuquerque police department is
in support of house bill nine we
are in full support.
Percent.
Can you hear me now.
The Albuquerque police
departments in full support of
house bill nine
we have data to show us
specifically in the southeast
the heights of Albuquerque the
southeast area command we had
over a thousand incidents of
aggravated assaults and that
includes domestic violence and
the the number one weapon that
was used was a firearm over
fifty percent involved a firearm
so between the aggravated
assaults we also track
accidental shootings and we did
have a number of accidental
shootings that involved both
adults and our youth as well
children so any strategy or tool
or
standard that we can put in
place to save the life of a
child to prevent another adage
each tragedy from happening
again in the future we need to
do again we are in full support
of house bill nine thank you for
your time and your service.
Thank you madam chair those are
all of my.
All of the.
Witnesses who have come before
us for you today to listen to
and I just to wrap up and to
close madam chair I simply say
to point to every single member
on this committee to please
remember that it's guns and that
disease that are now the leading
cause of death among American
children ages one to nineteen
when guns are not securely
stored and we ask you to please
do give it to pass the house
bill nine.
Thank you.
Experts.
People speaking will go to the
audience now and
It does we just raise your hand
those who are in opposition.
On the opposite side of a
mountain opposition more for
this questions I'm sorry you
don't get to ask questions but.
That's the problem I and those
who are in support.
Okay.
Thank you.
we are we have a list of.
from of the opposition that have
asked to speak and
we are going to limit to two
minutes each person because we
only have a few that have asked
to speak
let's start with.
Joe Culbertson.
The New Mexico.
Rose Association see here yes.
The second I think we need to
get you.
To that yeah.
Madam chair.
Also how to online.
We'll go to seeing okay and
we're we're taking.
Well everyone.
Do we have people on soon to how
many do we have.
And we'll find.
Okay Mr Culbertson.
Yes.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Joe
Culbertson
vice president at large for The
New Mexico cattle growers
association.
I think this bill is well
intentioned and and and mostly
what I've heard talk about is
guns laying around for small
children get a hold of and and
and accidental shootings things
like that I think it's also to
address shootings by older
minors in the schools that we've
had.
Across the nation which is a
terrible thing.
But I'm going I'm not gonna read
from this.
I want to say something else.
Of these things are very
terrible but I I wonder there's
a lot of pop really intelligent
people in this room and then
this legislature they can
address the mental illness we
have among our youth.
And
The.
What ever to be done that we can
address this not just don't see
any legislation haven't for
years in to really address this
problem.
These people these children yes
there they get a hold of again
the go and misuse it or they but
the these they will also found
out.
Over time when they interviewed
people they found out that these
young people have been texting
in.
In get on the internet in
signaling what they were going
to do ahead of time.
It be really good to see some
legislation passed in this body
that would address that.
And not just dressed guns
themselves.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Hi costs vero.
it is very loud okay.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon everyone the members
are from Meryl this for the New
Mexico council about this thing
I our primary opposition to this
bill is there is no specific
except working.
To inform the language regarding
consent and access is they
specially as it relates to the
words display rendition and
threatening and
without clear definition and
clear sense of personal
liability we cannot support
because.
Thank you Rhonda Vincent.
I can speak about as well thank
you thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am a
lifelong resident of leaking
County my name is Roy to fix
them I honestly believe then
with everyone here in this room
there's not one person in here
that our partners will have to
be spamming it's others that
have been subjects of such
weapons and I'm very sorry.
What I want to know though is is
representative Representative
this is about safety of our
children.
And what I want to have is this.
And hearing let restrictions
rustling ma'am alright alright
he's laying around at the bill
Reid is that leading accessible
fire on twelve of the apartments
are there other things in our
communities that allow the same
thing.
So I'm just asking for an
amendment we are actually
addressing with the two issues
are keeping our children.
I'm proud of my father taught me
to have I think my husband I
practice gun safety we want
children and number of teaching
our children I don't believe
that all of this is that our
that happens practice that the
that but I also know that things
happen and I know that there has
to be accountability.
Do not take that actions were on
their recklessness and I
apologize for that my heart of
these options if.
Once everyone.
I want to.
Well as far as.
It can only charge for something
for the actions of another.
There is a conspiracy I don't
understand how the rule of law.
Pertaining to this type of this
bill because I do not believe
you could be criminally charged
through the actions of another
and this is.
chair of the.
That
is as well gentler voice has to.
This is for us to the.
Okay.
Whether it's funding here you
seem.
Say your name again please
terabit so the national rifle
association Mexico state
director.
we agree with the ball thank
state on school gun ownership.
We just fundamentally disagree
on much and are in the firearms
industry support thank you
through educational not punitive
laws.
The national shooting sports
foundation to develop project
child safe which is been
implemented with city officials
in Albuquerque.
To distribute gun safety kits
and fire safety brochures with
trigger locks.
NRA's Eddie eagle gun safety
program has been taught to over
two hundred seventy five
thousand children in New Mexico
the safety message that if
things are going on supervised.
They should stop don't touch the
firearm run away and tell an
adult states should invest in
such programs as the local
counterparts.
Fire safety that is something
that will not be achieved
through education but that will
only be achieved through
education not punitive law.
House Bill limestone Education
or community outreach component
to it and instead attempts to
dictate how firearms are stored
in the home something that will
give criminals an advantage.
Owners thank you for your time.
we see.
My name is Louise Sanchez I'm
one of the owners the calibers
indoor shooting ranges and
I am so sorry for your loss
because I did grow up around
there that area in the and that
definitely affects me because I
still have family around that
area
Calibers we we agree with gun
safety and the reason we do is
because we actually teach
firearm safety and we sell gun
storage units to our customers.
But we're opposed to punitive
law I'm I mean we're actually
developing this law after an
accident occurs and there's no
substitute for education and we
all know that.
The exceptions builder lacking
for example there's an exception
for instances where a minor
gains access to a firearm to
legal entry into a person's
property but that exception does
not apply to cases were minor
gains access to a person's
firearm through any other
unlawful acts such as robbery or
carjacking.
And I think it's.
If we start going after the
after the adults and that's what
it is it's because it's us it's
not the child because we should
store our guns because like the
Attorney General this year open
and please offer I have a lot of
firearms also and we make sure
that we are firearms are secure.
The problem is is that what we
do at night.
And I'm just using that as a
perfect example.
We need access because because
of the crime in the Bernalillo
county or because I live in
Berlin county area.
At that point is not a time for
debate at that time it's a time
for we're if we're gonna protect
our family when it we're gonna
protect our family and we're
going to call law enforcement to
if there's an opportunity to.
We have the ability to educate.
And to make sure that these guns
are safely stored there's my
timer and I yield thank you
madam.
Taylor regions.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Taylor
Reagan's on behalf of New Mexico
will growers we respectfully
oppose house bill nine as it
stands to have a profound effect
on you funding for each sports
and competitions these
activities help to develop
responsibility sportsmanship and
self discipline and
participating youth as well as
their families instead of
punishing those who own and
utilize guns there should be a
further effort to educate and
support the importance of the
second amendment thank you for
your consideration.
Thank you Matt Lawson.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for taking the time here
today I guess I've learned in a
few short minutes that questions
to me objections speaking on the
right side.
I'm a staunch supporter of the
constitution as written
literally interpreted and change
some of you already know me is
that by the end of the session I
have a feeling a lot more will.
I came up here from Albuquerque
today because I always look
forward to the opportunity to
not of those things that are
reasonable because we do need to
reach across the aisle we do
need to find things that do not
violate the constitution read
this bill five times I can't
find any violations of the
constitution and it I don't
oppose it I do however have some
concerns that I don't believe it
adequately addresses the victim
of a burglary or robbery
someone I care about very
recently had their garage door
kicked in they enter their home
took their car keys open the
garage door and drove away in
the perpetrators were sixteen
seventeen years old
if there'd been a firearm within
reach in a single person's home
who as the bill says at
reasonably reasonably locked up
just by locking their doors
because there's no minors ever
going to that house
They wouldn't necessarily been
protected by this bill
The other thing the other
question that I had about this
is that it does not address.
On misdemeanor side of things
adequately in my belief
responsible miners who are
allowed to engage in hunting
without an adult.
Attached to them and to help
fifteen sixteen years old I was
going out in the back of you
know the back forty of of the
family's land and hunting
rabbits is raising a firearm at
a rabbit considered brandishing
or is there any exceptions for
this I believe in our rural
areas we do have the capability
for our uses to engage in
hunting sports.
I'm so those are my concerns I'd
like to see added to this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
We have a fifty fifty.
We'll go ahead and go to there's
three people on soon.
And if you could yeah first.
This person can't just yeah.
Jim go ahead.
Well I I understand what the
intent of the legislation
accidents happen as much as you
would like to you can't
legislate the removal of
accidents and I I sympathize
with everybody's lost somebody
I've been shot at myself just
for change in higher.
With the door gets propane and
one o'clock in the morning by
group of minors attempting to
rob or rape somebody you don't
have time to look looking at
state funded economic load and
then engage the target.
The police are on site after the
fact not before so you have to
be your own first response you
have to be responsible you have
to train if you have money is in
your house you have to train
them yes you to safety.
But I haven't heard anybody
mention any laws are already on
the books that cover taking care
of an adult to let something out
that was used in a murder or
rape.
I'd like to see that mention the
brought up to.
That's all I have.
Thank you.
The person that we have.
He.
Go ahead mate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm here in this
private citizen to again propose
house bill nine this year we
didn't hear last year nor again
this year of this bill would
actually protect children in our
communities and encourage
responsible gun ownership we're
still sure the criminal
penalties necessary and it will
presumably to turn negligence.
I submit the negligent will
continue to be negligent
regardless of their potential
liability under a law they do
not know exists there's no money
allocated to educate the public
in this bill the FIR in the
share count similar laws in
other states but ignore the
public average components on
their absent here.
Instead this bill seeks to swoop
down in the aftermath of tragedy
probing for criminal liability I
raising the specter of the bill
chills common unlawful practices
staging firearms in the home for
self defense right recognized by
the Supreme Court Heller
specifically holding that a
prohibition against rendering
any lawful firearm in the home
operable for the purpose of
immediate self defense violates
the second amendment.
If you Torres reference the
balancing of interests and
support those bills we gallery
exhorting the fact the Supreme
Court and grew and last year as
he knows determined interest
balancing tests in second
amendment cases to be unlawful.
For these reasons among others
committee is heard an
encouraging recommendation that
house bill nine do not pass
thank you.
Thank you next person lasts for
opposition a record gets
destroyed right is go ahead.
Get two minutes.
You know what so I wasn't
supposed to do opposition I was
act I'm actually for the bill
after re after hearing it.
Do the talking our way.
we were going to do is to
support do we have any
opposition that's fine we keep
having people raise the more
people use their hands.
we're gonna have to stop we've
got to our half hours.
So go ahead Sir with your
support will that will go to
people in time.
So my name is a funds orders I
just retired from the Bernalillo
county sheriff's department I
work with chair of Allen for
years I worked to get crimes
I've worked homicides I think
you and I both need more dead
babies and children of people
than anybody should see a
lifetime.
What I like about this bill is
that it finally gives law
enforcement the ability to
charge people who have you're
responsible children and
irresponsible parents my
children all shoot they'll hunt
they'll compete they never have
issues hi Committee farms in the
house they're good to go they
know how to defend themselves
and we're fine I'm fine with
that so long as this bill this
bill could be could have better
wording there could be some
things that bring in competition
and and maybe better for hunting
but even the way it's written
now it looks to me like it it
fairly defines it only if
they're using it in a in a
disparaging matter harbor
threatened somebody else when
they should.
So that's that's all I've got.
Thank you.
Okay now we'll go to the
Slower in those who are in
support I have read need Regina
Griego.
Can you hear me.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you in support of HB
nine my name is Regina Griego
and I am from Albuquerque where
I was born and raised in fact in
but I lost and I went to
Washington middle school.
I'm retired engineer and an
author.
And and now I speak on common
guns got common sense gun laws
ten years ago this very week my
life and the lives of many were
forever changed when a perfect
storm of events led to the
tragic death of five of my
family members all victims of
gun violence committed by my
trouble nephew.
My brother Greg and his family
were dedicated charge members of
Calvary and were beloved by the
community Greg was a fire
department chaplain and is known
for his barking laugh.
With a silly grin and sparkling
eyes my heart aches when I think
of him and his wife and their
three children including my
babies two years old.
There were signs of Family
distress and we didn't see them
or didn't pay attention.
I wish I'd been more vigilant
about what was happening in my
brother's household including
the fact that he kept eight guns
and ample ammunition all and
secured and therefore accessible
to any of his four children my
nephew was diagnosed after the
fact the trump trump trauma do
schizophrenic disorder and
severe depression and later
after medical scans he was found
to have dramatic brain injury.
He used to of those guns to kill
his family in a misguided
attempt to escape what he
experienced this trauma neglect
and isolation after seven years
of legal drama he is now serving
a life sentence plus seven
years.
Which means that we lost a total
of six family members.
I am convinced that without easy
access to these fire arms my
family's.
My family members would be alive
today.
My story is far from the only
one and it's only getting worse
especially New Mexico here
thirty three teens and children
died by gun every year.
You.
Might thank you.
It's we have Cheryl here's.
And I'm sorry for your loss.
Sure there is a severe.
Since.
Okay.
For sure our new generation of
course.
She is a restricted issues on.
Okay sure if you would raise
your hand that we can identify
you to put you on to.
Thank okay sorry.
Kathleen mostly.
She's active okay at.
Chairwoman for ari and members
of the committee can you hear me
fine first.
Would you please announce your
name.
Yes and speak louder.
All right good afternoon
chairwoman Ferrary and members
of the committee sponsor
Representative Herndon thank you
for your service first of all
thank you to the sponsor we're
proposing H. P. line unlawful
access to a firearm by minor and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support and even
request that the laws be
strengthened.
A child access protection
prevention law is a much needed
law in New Mexico I'm a survivor
of gun violence and as a nurse
I'm here for people survived an
attempted suicide by gun.
I lost my professor of
preventive medicine and clearing
when she was murdered in a mass
shooting at the university of
Iowa in nineteen ninety two.
This issue is personal to me so
when I read about shooting I try
to understand the circumstances
and especially how the person
got the economic I read about
the higher growth.
He had the courage to stand up
to a bully and the bullied had
parents who store their guns so
a minor child could access it
and you shut many six times.
As Regina said in New Mexico
thirty three teens and children
die by guns every year average
forty nine percent suicides
forty seven percent homicide.
And in incidents of gunfire on
school grounds eighty percent of
shooters under eighteen got the
gun from their home or the home
of a friend or relative.
This law is a child access
prevention law and they save
lives in one review of twenty
five states in as many years the
different types were reviewed by
outcomes.
Yeah.
This this law is a child access.
With nine percent reduction.
Access laws have a thirteen
percent reduction any child
could access long has a twenty
eight percent relative reduction
thank you Mr mostly you two
minutes is that.
Next we have a rant of the
school we.
Madam chair members of the
committee management.
Mexicans violence.
We are also for this legislation
we have to find contacts
provisions long passes right as
far.
Share we do have to
pass this law many Hargrove
might still be here with us the
two year old Rio Rancho might
still be here with us the four
year old in Clovis might still
be with us and the list goes on
and on.
Gun owners would lock up their
guns the teachers that APS right
now would not be afraid to as
they are today to go to school
because teenagers are putting
guns and knapsacks because they
feel the need to defend
themselves in school.
On average you're losing almost
what average losing three
children every single month half
of those are suicide but this
also doesn't include all those
who were injured.
Hi the majority of the work we
do at Mexicans to prevent gun
violence is with our youth and I
can tell you they are
frightened.
They are sad and they'll be on
confused why we as adults are
not doing more and their
community their communities to
keep them safe what house bill
money save every single one of
those lines no.
But it is one more tool in our
toolbox to keep our children
safe from gun violence and I
think we owe that to our
children thank you very much.
You.
All of the claim.
Yes my.
My I think you need the money is
not too inconvenient to market
can be reached.
Right tactics.
I she.
It's okay.
I'm Paul maclean I'm a resident
of Santa Fe a retired teacher
and vice president of New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
I taught in December for over
thirty years.
And as much as I thoroughly
loved teaching.
Every day I am thankful that I
am retired and no longer a
moving target in a school I also
get up every morning and say a
prayer for my grand children
that they will get through the
day without being chopped what
is wrong with the country or gun
violence has become commonplace
we wake up almost every day to
another tragic headline to
headlines in New Mexico recently
work and I quote study shows
major spike in use deaths from
firearms deaths due to guns rose
forty five percent for residents
nineteen years old and younger
in New Mexico.
The other headline read.
For young people gun violence is
a fact of life.
Pretty much.
No violence includes homicides
violent crimes attempted
suicides suicides unintentional
deaths and injury and mass
killings just imagine the
tragedies warded because a
weapon is not available to a
minor.
There are many things we can do
to prevent gun violence.
At a more gun deaths and injury
and child access prevention laws
are a step in the right
direction and one way to prevent
these tragedies ever free John
that is locked and secure is
that gun that will not create a
statistic.
Twenty seven states and
Washington DC have capitol
office.
Let's make New Mexico the twenty
eight state to add to that list.
Thank you.
I think we have a few more
people we need to ask.
Yes please tension with
somebody.
It is that we were able to take
more than half of our side.
So those who are in support of
the bill if you raise your
hands.
On to out soon.
If you want to.
We have six six okay
will give them one minute each.
The
person that is carrying Barton.
Terry go ahead.
Thank you members of the
committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to
address you we all know that we
can't legislate common sense
there's already built on the
Wilkes mills and in reports that
legislate for our children.
We know that we need to keep our
weapons safe everybody that owns
firearms know that we can't say
to penalize the body for
economic that's taken and used
illegally doesn't make sense
education.
Such as the eagle program
programs in New Mexico shooting
sports association the NRA
general of the program what's
got some America these are the
programs that I would just maybe
look into the sponsor of the
bill look into and see if it's
for that would be a better
opportunity than in that other
bill or another law it's on the
books and not been forced thank
you.
We're only taking people who are
in support now of the bill so
lower your hand if you're not in
support of the bill.
Please.
Yes yeah this.
Please.
Mr Guterres and please speak is
this possible.
And you have one minute.
Okay this the next person.
If that person is.
It is.
Barbara chatter G..
Our chatter G. are you in
support of the bill.
I am in support of the bill my
name is Barbara chatter G. I
have a almost fifty year career
in public health injury
prevention and the importance of
this bill in addition to the
many points that have been made
is a by passing it we set
community standards of what we
expect of gun owners to protect
their weapons from children
that's all I have to say and I
think you and I hope you will
pass this bill.
Thank you.
The next one is T. and that
thank Deanna Baker.
Please speak loudly have one
minute.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Tina Baker a resident of
Los crucis and I come before you
to increase the passage of HB
nine
as a family and a community we
try to offer safe and healthy
choices to our children we make
choices for their safety and
well being in mind every day we
asked them to consider the
safety of others as well
themselves as they move through
the world however when we read
about students taking guns to
school attempting or committing
suicide with a firearm we're
confronted with tragedies that
many of mentioned today that
could have been prevented and I
always think about my kids in
these situations and I also
wonder how did this kid get it
done and often it's from their
parents or guardian or someone
close to this child and I've
lived most of my life under the
belief that responsible gun
owners will go to great lengths
to avoid these tools from
falling in the hands of people
who shouldn't be using them but
current events demonstrate that
this is not the trend of
society.
House bill nine is a reasonable
intervention for gun owners who
are not responsible for their
firearm storage I ask that we
acknowledge the responsibilities
of gun owners in order to
protect innocent victims of gun
violence minors are already
prohibited from owning guns by
statute and can use them in
specific situations well under
supervision if a minor obtained
the gun illegally and threatens
our carries out violence with
that firearm the negligent owner
that guns should be held liable
I thank you for your time and
like would like to reiterate my
request that you vote in favor
of HB nine thank you thank you.
The next speaker is page thank.
H. nine.
Ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I need
a stage name and I'm a policy
analyst with New Mexico voices
for children here in support of
house bill nine in New Mexico
fire arms are the leading cause
of death for children and
teenagers and one third of you
suicides are due to firearms
research shows that enacting
laws like house bill money to
ensure safe firearm storage
reduce the risk of gun violence
by preventing unintentional
shootings and gun suicides this
legislative session let's help
keep our children safe by
passing house bill money so that
fewer children have access to
guns we strongly urge you to
support house bill nine thank
you.
Thank you.
The next speaker is support
which.
I apologize if I ever make.
For a.
Hello madam chairman miss Secora
Nefish New I am here as a
private citizen in support of H.
B. line culture changes slowly
and this is a quick step in the
right direction we need to be
safer in our communities we need
to keep our children safe thank
you very much thank you.
And our last person is Dennis.
Go ahead Dennis you have one
minute if you could talk to
speak very loudly.
Meeting.
Please I'm you.
Dennis could you I'm you so we
could hear you.
Thank.
I
you very much for patients
welding.
Zoom and worked everything.
Representative Thomson first.
Thank you madam chair feels like
we've been here and done this
before
I know that a lot of people
talked about education but one
thing we know about kids as they
are impulsive especially boys
and all that it means the
research shows that all the
education in the world goes out
the window when they see it at
actual god so it's great to
educate people I remember in
this very room a few years ago
we had a hearing I don't know
which gun bill that was and
there was that toddler who's
coming up here it's at security
was saying you know do you I
think he's okay and then when
his parents got up to speak they
said we keep guns in our house
but we've taught our kids you
know we keep them available but
we've taught our kids not
detection including our daughter
with autism I have a son with
autism and all I could think of
was talking about not to touch
the frosting on a wedding cake
but he would say don't touch the
cake don't touch the Kate don't
touch that and I was just so
fearful that that something
would happen in that family
because toddlers really are
impulsive and autism they can
say the words and it it doesn't
make the connection in their
head and I was just so worried
for that family the
representative Herndon and co
sponsors thank you for doing
this we have to protect.
Think about in this country the
leading cause of death for you.
I want to ten we we can't do it
anymore thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I want to make
sure that I understand this the.
So HB nine the goal is to
specifically so that parents
will not be charged with a
misdemeanor or felony if that
child branches and cost right
yeah Representative.
Madam chair representative lord
it's not just parents it's the
owner of our.
Okay thank you for that
clarification chair so basically
what we're trying to do so
anyone who on to fire.
We want to make sure that
they're not chart.
Well child should brandishing.
Madam chair Representative Lord
the purpose of the bill is to
require the fire arms owner to
keep it safely and the way you
question what you produce the
question did not presented in
that matter and I wanted to make
sure that everyone understands
the best the purpose of the bill
thank you madam chair
representative so this is a
providers or baseball bass or
alcohol meeting of the two got a
hold the line for the parent
steps in to get this this is not
only for the one to all the
firearms act Madam chair
representative lord the focus of
this bill is on firearms you are
correct.
So chair representative so they
got a hold of the current
alcohol they've got into their
cars are in the case this is not
applicable to us specifically
for the one two sacks rectifier
Madam chair representative lord
the focus of this bill is on
firearm and keeping them safely
stored and if they are access
because they are not safely
stored the farm owner will be
charged in that is with a
criminal activity and that is
the purpose of the legislation
and that is the simply focus of
it also.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanna make sure that the parents
should be charged and child just
R. make sure that that
could you please define what
negligent.
This regard means.
One of the bottom eight one.
Yes madam chair thank you for
the Madam chair representative
lord thank you for that question
negligent disregard was just not
caring about how they are
storing a fire on their started
in the manner in which a child
could have access to it so
that's negligent disregard for
keep in that state.
Madam chair representative so if
a law enforcement officer showed
up House situation happened how
with the note that the owner of
the testing here.
So Madam chair representative
lord if the if they
If a law enforcement officer
arrived at a home and a child
was killed our family member was
killed if the child had access
to the gun it was negligently it
was stored in the negligent
disregard of the fact that the
child was in the house it could
have access to the gun.
Okay so madam chair
representative so the basically
what what is going down to the
apps correct.
Madam chair representative Laura
was repeat the question.
Madam chair so Representative so
basically we're talking about
the access so what I'm getting
at is.
Madam chair.
Really has nothing to do with
that what you're saying this is
surely the access to the park
Madam chair representative lord
the access is very important but
the only way that access is that
it was and negligently stored.
Thank you madam chair
representative so that leads me
we're going to page two.
States that there are some
exemptions.
They will be violated if it's
often the container.
And I need to definition ninety
percent of locked container.
That was purely stored what does
that mean.
Kept in a location that reserve
person we care community plan
Senator what exactly does that
mean yes Madam chair
representative lord one of the
things that we that I've thought
about in the Sanchez thought
about was how would farms be
securely stored and again I I
gave the example of what
happened and low income families
for example secure storage may
be locked in a.
Cosmetic case with the key is
kept away from the cosmetic case
it could be stored in a matter
in a in any other way in which
it is an accessible by a minor
and so we didn't find that on
purpose because of the economic.
Because of the economic of
difference that occurs in the
state of New Mexico and
everybody can not home a
specific type of storage but
what would be looked at is what
did the person do it wasn't
reasonable under the
circumstances thank you madam
chair representative so a
question on that so I know who
brought that up before.
Grandmother and locking medicine
cabinet and the child access
weapons so what happens when one
point not survives and that also
is not Grumman looking on the
counter.
And how how would from approve
that that was actually locked up
in one respect one person or
another does not typically
stored in the state.
So that's not that the key how
does a long term that this
action was case were the grounds
negligent person to talk.
Madam chair representative
Lawrence thank you also for that
question within this the body of
this piece of legislation we
talk about the fact that a child
found a way to open our access
the secured storage unit then
they would not be charged that
is an exception to the in the
rules.
Madam chair representative what
is on page three but it's close
proximity.
Madam chair representative lord
as we talk to many people of
throughout the throughout the
state many
but I notice is that they like
to sleep with the done under
their mattress they like to
sleep with a gun in the
In the nightstand next to them
so you are in close proximity of
your are your firearm at that
point in time if you are in
close proximity of it in this
piece of legislation does allow
for us a
The method in which that would
be considered for not charging
the individual who was on.
So chair representative so this
is part work it's very.
This bill is that the.
We'll make sure.
That this gun is not accessible
to minors and one off of that.
They will be charged and then we
go through what that means.
We're saying.
That is.
And it's not locked up and it's
sitting on the nightstand of
that child would be taken going
kill somebody that.
I don't understand is it locked
up or locked this is part of the
tax.
So thank you madam I'm sorry
madam chair representative of
Lawrence it is really important
to look at the fact of the close
of the proximity of the person
to the firearm when you read the
first two pages of the of the
bill the bill specifically
talking about situations where
the person is not present with a
firearm if the person is present
parked in close proximity of the
fire arm and the child has
access to it the parent or the
owner is not going to be
is not going to be charge one of
the things that is also
discussed as part of this piece
of legislation is what happens
if you walk into someone's
someone's house Madam chair
representative lord and you have
that fire arm on your bills and
the child comes up to you and
takes it off of your bills again
that is an exception to the
provision of this legislation so
we have thought through very
carefully each one of the
exceptions that should and would
apply in making sure that that
we that the courts are looking
only at situations where a child
was able to access a firearm
because that was negligently
stored but in the long run madam
chair representative floor the
question is going to be if
there's a charge of eight the
court will be will be the
determiner of whether that was
reasonably Stewart.
Thank you madam chair person
that was well so I guess what
you're seeing is.
Because I don't know.
I don't know exactly close
proximity to jobs the still the
rest of the next on what they
see the steep.
So close proximity with the you
have got on first.
This but then I'm like it is
over there see in most parts of
the job is right there or is it
two feet away is it I don't
understand close proximity to.
So madam chair representative
lord again the purpose of this
bill is to look at situations
where guns are stored safely if
you're getting down to such
minute details what we stand the
close proximity and what does
that mean that is going to be
left up to a court to determine
whether that that gun in those
instances was securely stored a
weapon that there was something
else that was present I we do
think that looking at the way in
which this piece of legislation
was right that of the the focus
madam chair representative lord
was on fire arms that are not
securely stored and the person
the owner of the file is not
present.
Thank you madam chair
representative so if somebody
were to put that in the nineties
and falsely that would no longer
fall under close proximity to
talk.
Because of the long right so
Madam chair representative of
lord Act stated that is correct
one of the things again the
focus of this piece of
legislation is when someone is
and is not present with their
for our arms that and it has not
been securely stored and that of
the.
That the minor had access to the
economic then and they cost one
of two things and remember that
two aspects to this piece of
legislation one if the if the
firearms brandished ugh going
through a major public area but
no one is for and there is no
depth charts of calls within the
in the most that would be
assessed the maximum it would be
is this would be a misdemeanor
is up to the court and the jury
if there's a jury to decide the
second instances if that piece
of legislation it that guns use
to because seriously buddy Lee
are I'm sorry our our.
In the maximum penalty that
would be charge would be forced
to be felt.
I'm entertaining to lines down
that portion of the bill I'm
just trying to figure out this.
Close proximity and how I would
that's my constituents are gonna
say what's close process.
All I have no idea it's not
defined bills it is a whatever
my next.
I have no way to explain to them
in this part is extremely may
and I see that the point out our
lawyers by the questions.
Madam chair representative so.
This is again were very easy.
Maybe the pharmacist.
Okay.
So what I'm trying to figure out
it will speed in excess.
Charles.
We have this big close proximity
then they can use it for self
defense illegal entry but yet
they're supposed to be popped up
on the child I mean I just read
a headline but thank god
eleven because two people with
masks on with the intention of
harming these people.
So
how does the child get acces
minor get access to this
economic when it's locked up or
above this an awful because
that.
So Madam chair representative
lord.
One of the things that is
important to look at is that the
child has access to a weapon and
the child was the setting for
example the family if there was
a break in there was self
defense those instances this
piece of legislation would not
come into play is most important
to focus on the fact when a
child has access to this of our
own because it was negligently
store and they use it in some
manner in which you would not
expect us.
Which is not a reasonable way in
which it would be like taking
the two Washington middle school
and she can apply six times of
the playground I taking the gun
to school a six year old and
shooting a first grade teacher
so those are ways in which you
would expect the farm to be used
in the situation where someone
broke into the house and then
you are trying to defend your
family those are exceptions to
the rules and which this piece
of legislation would apply Madam
chair representative service
extortion of the topics access
to the fire if there is if that
option let's just take let's
take this scenario we have a
sixteen year old girl she was a
role I have a very good this
takes about a long.
She sixteen is also competitive
shooters as you know Saudis of
farm I'm not leaving you home
alone without a fire but based
on all.
She's not supposed to have
access is supposed to.
If somebody kicks the door and
and she's protect ourselves this
is making sense because the
parents.
Elector with the farm to defend
herself.
You're not supposed we have the
fire it's supposed to be within
your sanity locked up.
Now this I'm looking at a.
Rules for comedy more on.
It was possible don't NEC
limitation.
Also Sierra County.
L. madam chair Representative
Lord.
It does make sense and one of
the things that happens is we're
looking at the the way in which
this firearm was access and what
it was used for it was not used
to go out and take somebody
else's life it wasn't use it was
used for the purpose for which
it was described in this piece
of legislation in self defense
and so under those situations
the gun to be used in that in
that manner that is absolutely
perfect miscible use of the
firearm that the design is
negligently stored are the case
that you describe madam chair
representative lord with the
parents that I'm leaving this
line here with you the child did
not go out to specifically
pursue the death of bodily
injury of any particular person
but the child was doing was
defending their homes are self
defense which is perfectly
legitimate wait under this
particular legislation for the
grant to be used.
Madam chair representative going
back to.
Jump around going back to
grandma.
So much state run on.
Representative Nibert she wants
to have the out because right
whatever reason she has a flat
rate on.
She has run out and she let's
say has a C. T. nam probably
use.
Hold back on and those out and
intensive because
it.
The only answer.
Ms B. chart.
Madam chair Representative Lord
you're absolutely correct if
grandma knows that her child has
a mental disability we heard
representative Thompson talk
about her son who has a mental
disability I do not believe that
she would leave a gun laying
around because if that child to
that gun and went out and kill
somebody a calls but we she
would be charged because you are
aware that that child has a
problem and to leave the gun
accessible to them would cause
you to be
responsible under this piece of
legislation that is correct I I
agree to be more responsible but
what I'm saying is Madam chair
representative was able to do
not travel may be too late and
miss the game.
The conclusion is.
I really think about domestic
violence survivors you know
you're only in the past few
years.
One form that economic future
raised by and you need sixteen
year old daughter who's getting
the trouble and you want to
check it out as you told me to
stop and that guns out
and that can take a second
is that it is possible for being
in the situation that they are
I'm looking at testing violence
are traumatized restricted lives
I'm also looking at.
Eighteen months that they've
done a great job this is
eighteen months but they are out
of state.
Each at CYFD.
Mispronounced ecstasy like
Houston's.
Back with you know.
Here it's that is a piece of we
can't really process CYFD and I
don't see that as a solution
either.
The biggest problem I have is
the victimization of innocent
people who were just trying to
protect themselves I don't know
I haven't Stockert I also
feel sixty stopped several times
deference questions
Representative we get depressed.
What would be like.
And I have a gun to protect
myself that's extremely
problematic and that's a
problem.
So we have let's say.
eighteen months out of work this
woman is now we're.
after eighteen months of what
have you found we have four plus
we have.
Awesome.
Look at legal fees and and and
this is where unemployment here
Representative is that I feel
like we re victimizing people
should not be victimized at all.
All.
Here Representative Lord I
appreciate what you're saying
one of the things that you did
mention as part of that is that
a sixteen year old living in the
house and tribal so the grant in
state impose propose proximity
perhaps the the person who is
the survivor of domestic
violence they keep in their
purse they could keep it on
their on their poster on them
they don't have to lay around
where is troubled sixteen year
old could get access to it in
because that yeah a great bodily
harm to another and still
protect themselves as a survivor
of domestic.
Thank you madam chair
representative talk about is it
that next in they were sleeping
and that was that definitions
close proximity
that statistics are full that
was very interesting to state
that state sports laws.
According to a study done in two
thousand yes the L. school
longer fifty states these are
there's no decrease needed
juvenile accidental death or
suicide these laws are enacted
but it was actually increasing
crimes like rape robbery and
aggravated assault so
necrotizing look at bills are
trying to look at both sides of
what is happening.
And I would say right now
percent of the different they'll
have the team Lamport like what
they're doing they're doing SB
six three five two that's
because I've I've demographics
the focus is on advancing
towards and all and they're off
the tax three hundred fifty
dollars two people are states.
Another thing that we could do
in the state we've got billions
of dollars just longer I'm all
committees right now we're just
spending money left right so why
don't we take that money and you
have a child in the home parents
want to ridicule read done state
class our teacher this is what
happens in a lot of this is what
possibly happened this is what
to do with the white Sox I don't
know why we're not teaching kids
in school yes.
I'm looking cultural thing that
we can to make Mexico
investigate.
Rebates went taxes urging people
to what do that fifty two to
provide some support date if
you've got somebody that.
I want to pick up some
individual telephones to work at
that stage.
What I see this gun honesty as
the legal terms like need we're
gonna update all of them.
We always in the state every
time I every family understand
you I just needed a different
time and we took all these
billions of dollars your use
the.
Yes money on gas.
As educational tools I'd be
so that is all about look this
why you should not do this
usually does not.
After seeing the pictures that's
what it takes.
All of this big news on that.
The victimizing want to see what
happens when the tail.
Bills I don't like putting more
people in prisons that's right
based on this bill.
And that's all I have I.
Thank you Representative block.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
This is the Mike is very long so
I apologize on that.
That's okay so I just I my first
question is a previous bill that
was previously sponsored that
was the penny Hargrove Act and
of course was changed to big
word I believe in that word was
reckless to gin can you give me
a definition of what reckless
is.
Madam chair.
Representative for.
Representative lot one of the
things that we looked at when
this bill was written for the
second time is something to make
it clear the term reckless as
defined by the courts had a
higher standard than the term
negligent have the standards
which would
which what which was not
necessarily at a level that was
so high that was high to prove
if the if the gun was left out
in a child could easily access
that it was negligence and to
put a high a high standard and
right on it.
Would
Would not create the deterrent
that this bill is and will
implement once it is passed so
that's the reason why the
negligent term and if you look
at the if you look at the case
law right now the case law talks
more about the negligent aspect
of storage we're so then the
recklessness acts that aspect of
storage so we're looking at X.
the series of bills and what was
used in those series of bills we
heard that there were at least
twenty we would be the twenty
eight state that would have the
state gun stores act focused on
child access prevention.
Okay thank you madam chair
members and the Representative I
appreciate that so going back to
Representative lords comments
regarding locking up.
The firearms so in the bill
you're on page.
To line twenty two as.
A firearm that was kept in a
locked container and was either
securely stored or kept in a
location that a reasonable
person would believe to be
secure one of team I find.
So this is.
And so this would have to be
locked up.
And.
Securely store location at a
reasonable person can get to.
Is that correct it says you are
right Representative Madam chair
representative
What it says locked in the
container and securely store and
so you are absolutely correct
that that is the way it reads
right now our cat is also
important that the second part
of the sentence is also looked
at our captain indication that a
reasonable person would believe
would be secure so one of the
our standard it doesn't have to
be locked in a container.
Okay well I guess I might be
reading it wrong but.
From where I'm sitting it looks
like it says has been locked in
teacher.
And with other securely stored
so a lot of container.
And securely stored.
Or the location that a
reasonable person would lead to
be secure one of ten five minute
so it's just a.
Grandmother let's get back to
the simple to grandmother if you
put it on the top of her closet
state and the kid is you know
four years old he can't reach
all the way up there would that
be covered in this bill yes that
would under those circumstances
Madam chair representative blot
I still want to it's important
to point out that yes under
under the way in which this
piece of legislation is written
you are having matters in the
house and you are putting it on
your in the attic top so we
would not expect a child to have
access to it then that provision
that says are kept in the league
location that a reasonable
person would believe to be
secure would be applicable way
of applying the statute and that
person would start.
Okay so then.
Let's just say.
Myself if I keep a firearm.
Right next to my bed in New York
it's not locked but it's in
close proximity as the
legislation states.
Would I be in compliance with
this law or this bill.
Yes you were Madam is here
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair I apologize I forgot
to go to the terrible.
Did that on the floor earlier I
appreciate your being with me
here so you know I just want to
make sure that people have close
access to their fire on because
I know certainly there's a lot
of sketching you because out
there I don't know where they
are definitely not my district
is getting but you know you
definitely need to be in close
proximity to your firearm
because there may be something
that's very life threatening is
one two three seconds you need
to respond and so I'm glad that
you to certify that I just wanna
make sure that the judge doesn't
have such discretion whereas the
they're able to just well as and
and then also says or in the
same sentence I could
technically charges and lock it
up and someone didn't get that
far so Madam chair
representative a few more
questions here.
Let's go back to gun safes so if
this would mandate gun states.
Would also be prudent to put it
appropriation on the bill to
provide through the state gun
states to the approximately
eighty thousand legal gun owners
in the in the state of New
Mexico for the yeah.
So Madam chair representative I
thank you very much for asking
that question I should tell you
the rest of the story with
respect to this piece of
legislation one of the things
that I have absolutely committed
to doing what's this piece of
legislation is passed to serve
as a deterrent some people
negligently storm this our arms
is to engage in a in a thirty
three County trip talking to
people all over the state about
this piece of legislation and
how to in store there are safely
but not only that I've been
working with the City of
Albuquerque and with respect to
a young man by the name of angel
Garcia who works for the.
Prime Representative unit and we
have been collecting gun locks
so that when we go around the
state and we talk about this
piece of legislation so that
everyone knows about it and we
talk about the importance of
keeping and state I'd safely
stored away from minors we will
give out a free gun locks to
every single person and one of
the things that I will also
share with you as I have been
going out in the community and
talking to community supporters
at places like makes the
Presbyterian church they have
already given out of thousand of
those governments in a in an
attempt to help make sure that
we keep that children state and
also utilize in this piece of
legislation as a deterrent for
people not keep in the farm
States so there is a bigger
plants and we didn't have to
have it in the legislation but
this is a it was going to show a
collaboration of a private
public partnership that people
say don't often doesn't work it
will work and that's the plan
that's a going to this and you
hear it from me right here
Romero that that's the.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I'm and I
certainly commend those folks in
the private sector.
Biting the state devices and for
folks who do want that you know
I know as a gun owner.
Most of us are very cognisant of
keeping our families safe
because the last thing we would
ever want is for someone else to
get hurt and it our fault and so
I certainly would not want to
stigmatize gun ownership with
this debate and the certainly
there are many people in rural
New Mexico the need to be right
there with their time I can
think of folks who are right
outside my district needs.
And they need that shock and
right next to that front door
because let's just say a cleanup
that comes and attacks the steep
or chicken or something what
will they do they have to get
out there and stop that attack
and neutralize it so that's I'm
very concerned about certain
legislation like this that is
being marketed at least as of
taking away someone's rights and
I've read that repeatedly from
the Attorney General and from
other individuals thank this is
totally constitutional but I you
know I do look at our New Mexico
constitution I read it quite
often and it's very bluntly what
I've I've read it here
article two section six of the
constitution says
no shell no loss of rich the
right of the citizen to keep and
bear arms for security and
defense for lawful things
recreational use for other
purposes it goes on further to
say no municipality or county
self regulate in any way.
An incident of the right to keep
and bear arms.
Madam chair general lady
Representative so
I just want to reconfirm that
our state constitution is very
strong when it comes to our
second amendment and we need to
protect and defend our gun
owners because after all these
folks are the ones who keep us
safe you know and I think it's
very important that we don't
stigmatize gun ownership.
I will go on with my points
here.
Your in previous committee Madam
chair representative you said
that it is the intent of the
minor who accesses the gun that
intended that minor is what
determines if the parent or
guardian is charged is that
correct Madam chair
representative to block that is
not correct of course not the
intent is the access the minor
access in the gun and then using
it in a manner that causes great
bodily harm or death.
If that is the intent was never
one of the focal point of this
piece of legislation and that
word is not used at all in here.
Okay.
So then if the if the generally
madam chair.
Representative if the.
Youngster.
Get our arms unless the state
get it from a locked container
let's just say they broke
enrollment status they take it
to school and included in the
back.
And let's just say they
accidentally dropped the
backpack floor and discharge the
firearm.
That child did not intend to
shoot but they did get access to
that done.
What would be the protocol for
charging the parent and child
with St.
Her somebody the on to repair.
So madam chair Representative
Lara one of the things that I
point out to you with respect to
the example that you gave the
child broke into the state for
the locked area apps with the
gun so that is an exception to
the rule the purposes of
charge in the an individual that
is specifically mentioned within
this piece of legislation okay
thank you madam chair and
representative so let's just say
my other
Scenario where I had in mind
it's like drawer.
And I go to work I forget to put
it in a lock box while I'm at
work and my my child comes home
get the firearms and then the
next day the same thing happens
in previous an area yes in the
suit another child that results
in bodily harm.
But I've been be negligent so
Madam chair representative block
and in those instances you
forgot to to remove your gun you
negligent kept it in a manner in
which a child had access you
cannot forget when you decide to
be a gun owner you are very
responsible for dangerous items
it is your responsibility to
keep it safe that's very
different from when the child
breaks into the the last lot
storage area and takes the time
to go to school.
Okay so previously out of chair
representative you said that it
would be okay I did my visited
one didn't.
Didn't lock it up is on the new
was there or if it was on the
top of the the self on the.
Closet.
But what I'm hearing what you
just said is it was but I forgot
to take it down and I know there
are many parents in the state of
New Mexico who are very busy
right now they're really
fighting hard to keep their
families together trying to make
ends meet.
Can't get to school rising gas
prices you know the cost of aids
is missing I mean probably
sometimes I would just the last
thing the thinking of is well
that going to keep the order
stated nine.
I wonder if my kids going to
grab that after the get this
because they're looking for
something that I may have told
them to pick up for me.
In that instance though from
what I hear Madam chair
representative is that I would
still.
Be liable for that child.
Shooting another child.
So madam chair Representative
block if the gun is can't are
the farms captain probe close
proximity to you your sleep you
have it under your pillow you
have it under your under your
mattress I heard that many many
times been that is an exception
to the rule and this and I also
want to emphasize that again we
have a we have a court we have a
jury if that if that charge
actually goes to whether or not
that a person is going to be
charged and that but if you do
we thank you leave a gun and you
know you have a four year old or
six year old we still don't know
at the six year old status
teacher that they gonna do the
parents forget leave it out so
that was negligent disregard to
the fact that a child could
access the done so you did it
when a person decides to own a
firearm you have a
responsibility and this piece of
legislation I just want to
indicate and emphasize No Way
affects a person's second
amendment rights in any way nor
any right under the New Mexico
constitution.
Madam chair representative so
going back to another point that
I had I I was listening to the
courts corrections and justice
committee over the summer where
I believe previous pretty this
piece of legislation a gap and I
heard a very interesting point
from then Representative on my
assistance center Maestas this
is the only piece of legislation
that you've never seen.
that proposes a sentence or
something based on.
Not their own actions but that
another person can you please
opine on what Representative now
Senator
My states.
Representative and we now Madam
chair representative to block it
would be difficult for me to
think about what Senator Maestas
was part of what I can tell you
is that under situation this
piece of legislation requires
and that you got on to do
something specifically to
negligently store of fire or
where child could have access to
it and anything else that he was
thinking about I'm sorry but I
don't know the answer to that
thank you madam chair and
representative I yeah I'm not
gonna make you be Senator
Maestas today so I appreciate
your answer there so.
Let's just go back to.
The US Supreme Court cases
Heller so DC V. Heller and in
that case can you please give me
a summary of how.
The ruling in that case is
different from what this is.
What we need to do that bill not
that are and.
Sponsor would not have.
Okay you madam chair and
representative.
Well I believe does tie into the
bill in my opinion
Madam chair representative
however I will.
I'm going all right
Warplanes in this bill I believe
it's on page.
It's three.
Line thirteen.
Nothing section shall be
construed to preclude explains
pursuant to any other section or
any.
Civil action for damages.
Can you explain to me what this
passage means.
Madam chair representative blot
yes so if there's any other law
that someone wants to use to
bring a civil action for damages
because they were harmed that's
different from a criminal matter
then nothing in here is to
preclude that from occur.
So if there is if you use that
shop and you madam chair
Representative block if you were
side by a with a firearm that
was have been negligently stored
and accessed by the child there
was nothing to preclude you from
also suing under the civil
matter for purposes of obtaining
devotees.
Okay so thank you madam chair
and representative so I would
just think of a scenario the
state there's a.
A couple that is separated and
one of the parents it's the
children get their parent.
Does not and let's just say they
want to get back into their
domicile which is not their
names on the deed of the house
but was it one of those parents
thanks that is a state for that
other parenting into the
proceeds.
And they they direct their child
that they can use legal force
to.
To stop that Vigil let's just
stay in this scenario that child
ends up shooting.
The other parent.
And then under this this clause
that we just went over.
If let's just say the the
parents the one has begun it's
not going to be liable.
The other parent file a civil
suit against that other parents.
For allowing the child to have
access to that fire they are the
parents so Madam chair
representative blot let's look
at the facts near yielded to
disperse.
The one parent gave the gun to
the talents that if the father
or the mother which everybody
has come to the door you to them
that's a problem.
So Matt Madam chair
representative
a plot.
That would absolutely be a
situation of negligently having
leave in a gun in the hands of a
child with a head access to so
that's basically what happened
in Michigan in the case that
occurred there with the child
who took the gun to school and
cause severe damage and death
two people the parents gave the
gun to the child instead use
this for purposes of resolving
your differences that was one
four thank you madam chair and
representative you know I agree
I think that was wrong that that
happened.
Which it we so I'm gonna go a
little ways up here on page
three.
On your bill at first I here is
one seven.
And it says but we will need
persons are able to get up it's
our online nine since training
course prior to budget our
proven violations.
So can you tell me how health
prior is.
Permissible in this legislation
for taking such a training
course.
Madam chair so madam chair to
block thank you again for that
question one of the things that
we we're looking at very closely
as did a parent or a an owner of
the fire on take a firearm
training course or safety
violations of course and if they
did we were saying that the
court could use this as a
mitigating factor in with
respect to whatever they is
going to happen it is also
important to emphasize that.
Throughout this piece of
legislation what I find it is
the maximum that could be that
could occur with respect to how
a judge made into a sentence at
the do that wanted to do that
the judge has a great discretion
to go any way in which they
wanted based upon the evidence
that's presented so I I
presented to you I if you
present evidence that you take
it whenever you to get you to so
I I don't know that they had to
be a time frame it's with
respect to this piece of what
okay thank you madam chair.
Does this also include a hunter
safety courses.
So Madam chair representative
but this piece of legislation
does not refer to our eight
anyway with that the bond
anybody's ability to engage in
hunting so if you want to use
that firearm for hunting and the
and the money to use the fire
funding and I going out causing
great bodily harm to set to end
in to a someone else and not are
they killing them so it's really
important to understand that
distinction because this piece
of legislation is not addressing
those we understand that there's
a different way and with minors
and individuals in rural areas
may utilize firearms in the that
consideration was absolutely
taken into consideration.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative so when you say
this bill on page it's three
states.
Evidence that the person
attended a firearm safety
training course I'm just making
crystal clear that that would
also meet hunter safety training
so Madam chair representative
black as I understand hunter
safety training it also includes
safety with respect to the fire
on when it is not being used so
the two are not mutually
exclusive so I presented to you
also okay thank you madam chair
representative so.
I guess pivoting to.
A point that Representative Lord
made regarding access to this.
Deadly weapon.
What is your legislation
excluding things such as nine.
Or any other kind of substance
like rat poison or something
else that could also have great
bodily harm if not death to
another individual.
Madam chair representative black
thank you.
One of the things that is
important to remember is that
what law does not so every
single possible incident and if
that were the case we wouldn't
have a plethora of laws that we
do have on the books right now
so it's sometimes it takes a
step process in order to make
sure that we are keeping
children safe in this case we're
looking at guns I would
recommend but Representative I
mean Madam chair representative
blot thank you might introduce
the next piece of legislation
regarding eight eight nine our
rat poison or something with
this with our Madam chair
representative blot focuses on
gun safety and protecting our
children in that regard thank
you madam chair and
representative well I agree with
you and many of your aspects of
that response I think that we
need to make sure the
information to our students and
their parents to ensure that
they have safety in our great
state because right now it's
it's a very violent state that
we live in especially if you go
through Albuquerque's see a lot
of violence you hear on the news
all the time another homicide or
something else and I think it's
legislators we have a duty to
ensure the protection of our
constituents we need to make
sure that everybody's State and
we need to put that in our
education system so I would love
for the program to maybe top in
schools about how you can be
safer at home and maybe don't
take up that kitchen knife and
take it to school or that that
firearm did reduced but this is
so hyper targeted toward gun
owners that I fear that it it
does advise that stigmatize gun
ownership because it is so
hypertonic and no one is
disputing whatever respect that
this poor family went through
the loss of their stuff no one
should ever have to go home
without a child and so we I'm
I'm sure we all agree on that
aspect that we need to make sure
places are states in our
community center all of our
children need to.
The state at school especially
that's the most important place
so I would also submitted
mission.
Security a top priority in
schools where we have aren't.
Folks who were there that can
prevent some kind of shooter or
any other kind of problem that
could have ended another child
like benefits like so on that
same point.
Regarding alcohol also be argued
such as knives or anything else
if you leave alcohol out Mr
state child.
Takes your car fridge over there
sixteen is that their license
and they want to take the car to
car out for a joy ride they take
some alcohol and their needs
right.
And they kill somebody I have
statistics here from the
department of transportation the
state that alcohol involved
crashes there were two thousand
two hundred thirty seven in
twenty nineteen eight so do you
know how many at folks are
victims of this state gun
violence that is mentioned in
this bill per year in New Mexico
specifically Madam chair
representative blot one of the
things that I would just say to
you that you will not see a four
year old from call you could see
a four year old have access to a
gun killing another person with
respect to the the data and
statistics another reason to
focus on the secure storage of a
firearm is looking at the fact
that thirty three children every
year in the state of New Mexico
are harmed in some way I our own
if you look at all we have to do
is to look at what happened.
What happened at the place
called El Dorado high school
they had to ultimately put in a
mental health and wellness room
because the children there a
high rate of children were being
killed as a result of suicide
they had access to eight are on
that was and still work I know
that Madam chair representative
lot one of the questions that
was raised was regarding the
mental the mental health of our
children I do want to note that
there is a bill that has been
introduced that looks at the
mental health and wellness of
our children so that they do
have a place to go that is also
something that we have
considered very strongly not
only do we want parents to store
guns safely but we also looking
at these mental health and
wellness rooms in every middle
and high school so that is
students are the most only
challenges stress they do have a
place to go and have someone to
talk to so we're looking at a
bigger systemic picture into
consideration.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative another question
on a different topic here I'm
looking at the fiscal impact
report to happen to you.
Madam chair representative.
I'm sorry I do not have a copy
of the fiscal impact report
about okay.
would be able to get the word
yes we did.
Thank you Chris.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so regarding the
cost to county jails I see here
according to I'm sorry excuse
madam chair representative but
what they need looking ups on
the first page of I. R..
On the first page on on that
little box.
It says that cost the county
jails in fiscal year twenty
twenty five would be point to.
Million dollars.
My reading it correctly.
Representative.
Madam chair representative I
don't think so I think this
nineteen thousand.
Dollars in nineteen thousand.
Yes in nineteen thousand thank
you as much as the previous bill
intact so good job there but
still you know we're still
spending more money on
incarceration if folks are found
liable for this so you know I'm
I'm also in agreement
Representative Lord.
I don't want more people to be
packing or jails especially
folks who are fathers mothers
parents and we certainly
wouldn't want that to happen so.
I guess there are many many
different aspects of this bill
that I just don't understand
such as one point Representative
Lord talked about.
If the kid can get the gun and
it's in a storage container they
can't physically get the gun so
the bill also says that.
If the use of result that's
that's fine but they still got
the got the lock box and so.
You know it just it just doesn't
mess with me unfortunately you
know I think this is a lot of
work to put more exceptions
especially regarding.
Hunting and like four H.
programs where children are
under the supervision of adults
and they are getting those
skills but we also need those
protections especially the state
and game and fish has a program
to do just that and I would hate
for the taxpayer to then be
liable since we don't have
qualified immunity now.
And and so I just think it's a
very very slippery slope we're
going down this legislation I I
do not like to stigmatize gun
ownership especially since New
Mexico's I believe it's the
fourth or fifth highest per
capita gun ownership rate in the
nation so unfortunately I'm not
able to support your legislation
but I appreciate your efforts so
thank you madam chair at.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative heard within an
all attendees at for your
persistence I know this bill has
been worked on for many years
and to those who have
participated in this process hi
my committee for all of the work
that you put in including the
result of what we see in the
bill today I just have a couple
technical more so comments.
Because I'm gonna see this bill
again and judicial the Judiciary
Committee and look forward to
hearing from my so is there
thanks to all the questions and
then answer for me today
First I just want to comment on
the fact that I did learn having
to try to figure out what the
standard was for children
accessing firearms today
in our state is that they have
to be under the supervision of a
parent guardian for somebody
that already
Basically somebody that knows
how to use a firearm or they
need to have a license to do so
and our certificate from it game
and fish so we're we have a
standard since nineteen fifty
three.
About what children should be
doing with firearms in a legal
way so I think that helps
clarify I think a lot of what
this bill does which is just set
these guardrails around
accessing guns and they should
be so one of the questions I did
have on
the bill and this came to our
attention through our analysis
was on the the miners abilities
that the phrase minors ability
The suggestion to look at it as
Basically a person negligently
keeps our stores a fireman
manner that allows a minor to
access the firearm the ability
to do something can be
fake or make US and so there's a
suggestion to work on that
language about what that what
that looks like so we could sort
of clean up that and I know it's
it's throughout the building in
it's on page one line twenty
five.
Madam chair it's on page two
line twelve.
Those are the only areas that I
find it so if we could just get
that phrase age what's and I
have language for you if you
want to speak off thank what
makes for
that's helpful.
The other
Question that I did have was on
section it will page three
letter T. of the bill on this
the firing training course I
guess I'm just curious as to how
you see that working.
To support the negligence charge
or perhaps mitigate the charge
right now I see it as sort of
looking at hi this is meant to
help those who never wanted the
trial to get access to it or is
it mental health with you know
prosecutor looking at they were
trains they knew what they were
doing and they didn't do it so I
guess how do we re how are you
with us is to read that and what
is some.
It is the idea behind this.
Madam chair representative
Romero I'm not quite sure
C..
It's in the if they attended a
firearm safety training that it
could be a mitigating factor is
that what you asked me what do
we mean yes the mitigating
factors for the prosecutor or is
it for the potential leave cues.
The stuff.
Madam chair Representative
Romero.
It I think it is important that
if the individual who owns a
firearm actually took a K. gun
safety of fire arms safety
course they still made in the
state The of course to consider
that as a mitigating
circumstance so we did require
the court to do so but it could
be considered that that and we
thought that was important
because the person was
are had taken the state to.
Of course and they were working
on making sure that they were
keeping those that might madam
chair raise the standards like a
recklessness verses just
negligence is that the idea well
it would be that perhaps if
there was a situation rural
route Madam chair representative
Romero the purposes of this
piece of legislation we set a
maximum standard in each case
and so the gun and so for
Negligent making a firearm I'm
sorry they had taken a safety
course report may consider that
as a mitigating factor and
instead of implementing and
enforcing a fourth degree felony
maybe they would implement a
misdemeanor so that's what I
mean not to raise the standards
but to determine maybe that the
standard that is at stake here
but the highest may not be
implemented.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for clarifying
that I guess that just means
that we're and we this if you
have the knowledge and you know
what to do and you did that that
that helps us understand what
negligence was to in those cases
we really appreciate that all
otherwise I think those were the
confusing sort of pieces and
other case law we do you know
what close proximity means I
think we're okay with with how
to look at that and see with
locked container safe storage
things that we hold our you know
Reforms of government to folks
to to be able to do that so I I
appreciate you know the work
that you put into this I also to
the question about
Be able to hold folks
accountable who may not be your
time with four they are your
child we owe a duty to care of
everybody we go it just want to
insure everyone hears States
people have to keep you safe
that are in charge of this
building that are in charge of
the state of New Mexico the
different places that you go it
is your responsibility to act
response to one another and I
think this gets us to a place of
putting that tool in the toolbox
of the levels of care that we
should have with deadly weapons
with fire arms and when they're
when they're building this use
so I really appreciate the
thoughtfulness about adding to
that slate of of opportunity
when we're talking about access
to a gun all right now my
understanding is that you get a
background check but if you're
over the age of eighteen there's
not a lot more than that which
means if you don't have a
criminal record and you are
eighteen years old anyone can
access these firearms so we
don't set a standard high for
her perhaps the yield in other
places but if there's the state
access for children and minors
eight I absolutely agree with
how we can try to keep people
safe and thank you for your
efforts manager
thank.
In the coming thank you madam
chair I move with due to.
The table and chair set and.
We already have a motion.
For it to pass.
Substitution.
Okay we do have the table and
motion let's.
Take.
Yes to table the two.
Yes
Representative walks yes the
table.
Lord yes.
Representative Romero no.
Representative Thomson.
Vice chair review to table madam
chair yep to table.
Okay so we madam chair we have
the both teams have to table is.
Two DS and three knows ocean
does not pass thank you for.
Myself so.
Okay
so we will go back to the motion
of the past.
And it was.
First and seconded and we will
take.
Representative block no.
Representative Lord.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
I chair Rubio yes.
Madam chair yes.
K. vote of
Two passed do Pat you have a do
pass vote of four to two.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
She
to yeah.
This
is.
Texted.
Representative.
The.
These.
Yes.
She might be working.
Right they.
Thank you.
Can't hear.
With this I can just mail.
One.
We.
It
looks like the house and the.
It is very.
One.
We have very.
Education.
I really appreciate your.
This bill.
Some other needs require public.
I appreciate that out into the.
As.
Was it for the other bills.
If you were here for the other
bill if you could please
take your station outside.
We will be hearing
house bill thirty one in just a
few minutes the
Bill sponsor is on her way.
Yeah.
Sure.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
Sure.
Thanks.
To to.
Introducing thank you.
Okay.
Watermelons.
Just.
Thank you.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay okay.
Yeah.
I haven't been.
Doing anything so.
It's just like to.
Could
tell you.
So.
Two thousand.
Chair.
Cheers.
When.
Yeah you can come back we.
The issue.
She said.
What about does it yeah okay
it's apples orange issue.
So basically.
Someone just needs to go ahead
on page.
We we we didn't recessed so they
chose to.
Interesting.
I'm just saying it comes in a.
Just because we don't have to
wait for.
I just want.
Okay if you would like to go
ahead.
Representative Thomson you're
feeling it for.
Terry to secretary.
Yes I am madam chair that's how
we do things in the house we
pinch hit for each other she's
in another committee so at and
we have a great expert here so I
will just say that this is
Name change our house bill
thirty one Representative
Chandler is the sponsor and I
have an expert witness who will
be my expert witness.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is sherry Weinstein little bit
about me I spent nineteen years
as a prosecutor here in Santa Fe
at the first initial district
attorney's office I spent six
years after that working for the
administrative office of the
courts as the deputy director of
the magistrate Division I
retired in twenty fourteen and
began to do volunteer work legal
volunteer work at the
transgender resource center of
New Mexico in that capacity I
had many participants and I help
to do name changes for and the
issue about publication has come
up in that context it also comes
up when we have to Mr violence
survivors human trafficking
survivors and people who have
been stopped this is a very
simple bill this statute now
requires if you want to have
your name change in the state of
New Mexico you must publish a
notice of the hearing and in
that publication it will say
what your old name was what your
new name will be and it has to
be published in the newspaper
and there is a great risk to a
lot of people to have that
happen whether you're domestic
violence survivor or a
transgender non binary person or
anybody else there could be
reasons for people to
Be antagonistic to towards you
if you have to publish your name
J. to newspaper it also is
modernizing this bill of
modernizing the law this
Is antiquated this statute has
not been touched since nineteen
eighty nine which is prior to
the internet and now there's no
reason to publish this kind of
notice in the newspaper every
information is accessible on the
internet people have social
security numbers we can track
people down that way and so
that's what this.
Bill does and I would stand for
questions.
Thank you
anyway we'll go to the audience
is there anyone in opposition.
Creation.
Eight thousand four.
Okay how many people would like
to speak.
Since we don't have Committee
was getting two minutes.
Good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Victor
American on this on the advocacy
associate for EQ NM quality New
Mexico which is the LGBTQ
advocacy organization in the
state so this antiquated law not
only creates additional burdens
financially and administratively
but it also puts people in
danger especially trans gender
individuals and survivors of
domestic violence who seek a
name change
this requirement dates back to
pre social security numbers and
was intended to prevent people
from awaiting their debt we now
have more modern systems in
place to track people down even
if they change their name which
is why this requirement is no
longer necessary and so that's
why I ask you all to support
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee hi Christine Armstrong
the director of advocacy for the
changed under resource center of
New Mexico up thank you for
having me here I'm here in
support of HB thirty one and
then change shaped yield and as
an individual I belong to to
hardest hit communities of this
name change shaped requirement
has a domestic violence survivor
and as a trans gender non binary
individuals as a community
organizer I work with
transgender gender non
conforming and non binary people
on a daily basis and all who
have the privilege to have a
name change are heartened by
this specific requirements with
the physical abuse mental abuse
financial hardship or beyond
its best the publication where
amended this is undue burden and
at worst a detriment to people
sixty.
And give them safety is a social
detrimental health we must
removed publication requirement
of the name change process as
such I urge you all to support
this thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Kayla
herring and the director of
public affairs for Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains and we are proud to
support this piece of
legislation because we support
all New Mexicans being able to
live there full authentic lives
including by their chosen name
of regardless of without having
to deal with unnecessary
barriers myself and my siblings
have also faced this barrier and
it has proven to be difficult
because of the security and
privacy components as well as
the financial burden that this
puts on people removing this
barrier to letting people live
their lives by their chosen name
will open up that place of joy
for people of all income levels
across the state thank you.
Hello I'm Janet Williams with
Santa Fe now and are we to stand
in support of this bill because
we feel like it protects women
especially as well as
transgender thank you.
Madam chair and lease and
gentleman of the committee my
name is Christopher le Roy I am
the public policy officer for
the ark of New Mexico we
represent people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities in all stages of
life and one thing I would bring
to the attention to committee
members is that individuals with
disabilities are seven times
more likely to be sexually
assaulted by a family member
that and are individuals who
don't have disabilities the
level of domestic violence is
even higher at a higher rate
than the seven times for sexual
assault and the situation this
would allow for individuals who
have been sexually assaulted or
been treated with domestic
violence to be able to shield
the change of their name to
their new name and insulate them
somewhat from the perpetrator of
the attackers
consequences thank you very much
all our stands in strong support
of this bill.
Thank you anyone else in support
from the high.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
Rafael get signed the executive
director of the commission for
the status of women and for all
the reasons that you have heard
we stand in support of this
bill.
Thank you and I think we have
one person on scene you need it
we.
J..
Would you go ahead.
And yes thank you good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is jade Wasco
and I'm with the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs we fully support house
bill thirty one the existing
legal statute places unnecessary
burdens on survivors of domestic
and sexual violence seeking to
change their name for security
or personal reasons this is
especially true for individuals
in rural areas and low income
individuals house bill thirty
one will protect survivors
safety and privacy as they heal
from their experiences and as
they further take control over
their story their identity and
their lives for these reasons
and the reasons are mentioned
particularly about the
importance of protecting it from
chance people we just vote do
pass on house bill thirty one
thank you.
Chaves.
Anything else you might like to
act up to the committee.
Madam chair no I don't have
anything to add at this time
thank you
Okay Representative Lord.
The question is.
Name your staff mesti.
So it just for clarification.
So this is more in it to be at
fourteen Representative is that
correct in and they can change
the name of that eighty rental
or any guardian.
Madam chair representative lord
no we're not changing the that
this is already in the statute
if you're fourteen and older you
can change your name without
parental consent under fourteen
you have to have at least one
parent.
managers and that was.
So in the state.
Like us on the state right now
is yes ma'am terms and you can
change your name if you're
fourteen over but we're changing
this visit that they don't need
to parental consent for that
they don't have to pay for.
So this bill actually does two
things the first the major thing
is we're repealing forty eight
forty dash eight dash two which
is the publication requirement
for everybody the second thing
that if you look at the bill
section B. of what you have in
front of you that says that
if.
A child under fourteen years old
will be jeopardized
I their personal safety will
jeopardized then they the parent
can ask the court to not
required notice not publication
notice to the other parent so
for instance if you have a
domestic violence situation and
say it's the father who has
abuse both the mom and the child
and the mom the child are now
away from the abuser and they
want to change their names if
that child would suffer danger
by perhaps the father seeing
that in the newspaper then they
can ask the court to say please
do not have to give notice to
that parent that we're doing
yeah I I think mentors ozone
which and also for the bucs are
so the other bills and they did
the tension of this one so
thank you to this office.
Thank you Representative walked
thank you madam chair and
representative I just had a
question regarding that so this
bill would allow minor under
fourteen to legally change her
name without speaking to a
parent first no.
and madam chair representative
that hello all right now is if
you're under age fourteen
you have to have a parent.
What this does is it allows
one pair the court to not
require notice of the name
change second parent if there is
some reason for personal safety
reasons to not allow that.
Okay so and then I'm looking at
some analysis I have here.
NMSA forty yes yes one and then
NMSA forty tested just three
assists the New Mexico courts
already have the power to waive
the publication requirement it's
believed to in danger the
petitioner so I guess my
question would be is I guess
that is that accurate and then
why was that this legislation be
necessary to starting in their
thank you madam chair
representative blot I'm that is
instruction forty dash eight
dash two which is what we're
repealing
and.
That allows it within the
discretion of the court requires
more legal filings and I will
tell you from my experience you
may not of heard my introduction
but I've dot have helped a lot
of participants
and folks do name changes and it
requires most people who do this
on their own without lawyers it
requires more legal
documentation more motions to be
filed which we know it's very
difficult for some people out
there to be able to do that on
their own I think it's also just
An antiquated way to do this on
the in the general population to
hire more process for most
people who do this kind of
legal action I will tell you
that twenty two states now and
might be one more at this time
do not have any kind of
requirement for publication.
And the.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative is New Mexico one
of the state's.
Does not require.
Shaped and chair representative
about that that's what the point
of this bill is is to have no
publication.
Okay and then so can you tell me
how many miners change their
name last year twenty twenty two
were the most recent statistics
state New Mexico Madam chair
representative block I actually
don't have that
but it that's necessary for you
I'm sure we could get it from
the administrative office of
courts okay.
So and then how many do you
know.
All regarding this Madam chair
representative how many were
required to publish
notification.
Madam chair representative blot
hi I don't know I would say
probably most people around the
state are required to do shaped.
Sounds good.
Well those are the questions
that.
Madam chair representative thank
you.
We have a motion for G..
Of the thirty one.
There any objections.
So.
The NMAA
Three
cheers Committee.
This.
Yes yes.
Yes.
This.
No yeah.
I just.
Yeah.
Again.
But.
Once.
Yeah.
I.
There's.
Is that.
News.
