Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation offered by the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you
And uh I called the attention uh
to my colleagues of the prayer
that I'm going to recite that is
sitting on your desks if you
wish to follow.
And I offer this prayer today.
to honor and remember all those.
Especially during these times
that are periling.
In their daily life.
For us
This is the prayer of the farm
workers struggle.
Show me the suffering of the
most miserable.
So I will know my people's
plight.
Free me to pray for others.
For you are present in every
person.
Help me take responsibility for
my own life.
So that I can be free at last.
Grant me courage to serve
others.
For in service there is true
life.
Give me honesty and patience.
So that I can work with other
workers.
Bring forth song and
celebration.
So that the spirit will be alive
among us.
Let the spirit flourish and
grow.
So that we will never tire of
the struggle.
Let us remember those who have
died for justice.
For they have given us life.
Help us love.
Even those who hate us.
So we can change the world.
Amen.
gentleman from Kari Grant
Hidalgoerrazas lead us in the
Pledge of allegiance.
I played
And the gentle lady from
Torrance and San Miguel,
Representative Gonzalez lead us
in the pledge to the New Mexico
flag.
Play ball.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Good
morning, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
With a recognition certificate,
I believe, and also a
performance.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and if I may.
I have um a brief interjection.
Of my guests today.
They are from Tierra Adentro of
New Mexico.
Tierra Adentro of New Mexico was
created to ensure quality
education in the arts and
academics for our children.
While facilitating a deep
understanding and practical
application of New Mexico's
cultural roots and traditions.
We succeed at addressing the
critical need for generational
continuity of New Mexican
culture through academics as
they state Spanish language, art
and arteria.
Our educational philosophy is
founded on the principles that a
well rounded education includes
the study of academics, art and
artesania. These disciplines are
hands on creative and
intellectual by nature and this
perspective provides students
with a positive sense of
identity and belonging
regardless of their background.
And Mr. Speaker, are they gonna
come in before we read excuse
me, um, Mr. Speaker, I did
prepare a certificate that if uh
the clerk could please read
clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session, recognizes Tierra
Aintro of New Mexico Charter
School.
Whereas Tierra adentro of New
Mexico Charter School was
created to ensure a quality
education in the arts and
academics while facilitating a
deep understanding and practical
application of New Mexico's
cultural roots and traditions.
And whereas, educators at Tierra
Adentro of New Mexico Charter
School, understand the critical
need for the generational
continuity of New Mexico's
culture through academics,
Spanish language, art and art
artisiana.
Which are reflected as the
founding principles of Tierra
Adentro of New Mexico charter
schools, educational philosophy.
And whereas the disciplines of
academics, art, and artisania
are hands-on, creative and
intellectual in nature and
provides students with a
positive sense of identity and
belonging, regardless of their
background.
And whereas all students at
Tierra Adentro of New Mexico
Charter School, take a
flamenco-based dance class once
a year, beginning in 6th grade
and continuing through 9th
grade. Anne Wearez on February
20th, 2025, students from Tierra
Adentro of New Mexico Charter
School performed a flamenco
dance on the floor of the House
of Representatives.
Now therefore, be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to the
students of Tierra Adentro of
New Mexico Charter School for
their outstanding flamenco
performance in the House of
Representatives on February
20th, 2025.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you and I will now
introduce.
Sierra Adentro flamenco dancers.
big round of applause.
Thank you Tierra Ventro for that
wonderful performance.
Thank you, thank you. Another
round of applause please before
the exit bravo bravo.
Oh.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and.
Big big problems to their two
teachers, educators, coaches,
dance instructors, Ms. Elena and
Ms. Joanna, thank you, thank you
guys for being here and thank
you for blessing us with that
beautiful art form Tierraro,
everybody.
Thank you and.
Mr. Speaker, if I may add,
I just wanna make sure that
everybody recognizes um them
when you are out to uh assess
and uh your contributions, uh,
as we move forward with our
capital outlay and then finally
Mr. Speaker, for those of you
that don't know back in the day
I used to be a flamenco dancer.
And I wanna do this again when
my get fully recovered. I'll be
dancing thank you.
Right, we're gonna start a
dancing caucus. I think there's
a karaoke caucus. Maybe we can
have a dancer caucus. I will not
join the dancing caucus.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I would gladly
started dancing caucus with
representative Patricia Patricia
Reba Caballero, and we will
start with the flamenco festival
for
members, I too, um, and was a
performing artist and flamenco
arts, Mr. Speaker, and, and
Elena is one of my dearest and
one of my oldest friends and I'm
so excited to see what she's
still doing and, and, and her
continuation with the art form
and with what the school has
become and I just wanna say I
encourage everybody to listen to
what representative uh Roy
Capelao said when we're looking
at our capital outlay because
Mr. Speaker,
I've been, I've been trying to
address a question that I think
some of us or some of our
members have had about me and
why I have such an array or um
diverse um
way of addressing uh different
subject matters and holding and
compartmentalizing them the way
that I do and
The only, the answer I came up
with as I was thinking and
contemplating that was because
I'm a dancer.
And we have to use both sides of
our brains and, and we train in
uh through technique and through
training, and I think that
That lends me to why I, I have
such a diverse, uh, um, array
of, of ideas and thoughts and
and uh legislation, Mr. Speaker,
so that's the only answer I can
come with, so all of our
artists, all of our dancers, all
of those that participate in the
arts, you might find yourself,
um, thinking or feeling the same
way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady, gentle
lady from Bernard Le Romero.
I'm sorry, gentleman from Bern.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
so we have a certificate, so I'd
like to recognize some folks
that we have here for um the
McKinney Vento program. So, um,
up on the rostrum, Mr. Speaker,
we have Priscilla Valdez. She's
the community, uh, family,
community liaison specialist at
a Trisco Heritage Academy High
School. So if you'd stand up,
Priscilla, welcome to the house.
And then we also have Crystal
Wilson, the director for
Albuquerque Public Schools Title
One McKinney Vento program. So
welcome to the house. Welcome to
the house. Uh, the McKinney
Vento program, Mr. Speaker, is
federal program to help students
that are experiencing
homelessness, um, attain an
education and maintain those
rights. So, um, these women do
very, very important work at the
school that I teach at at the
Trisco Heritage, um, along with
our
district at Albuquerque Public
schools, um.
Mr. Speaker, also, Mr. Speaker,
I believe you have a list of
folks up on the, uh, the gallery
to also recognize. I do
gentlemen. I'd like to recognize
in the gallery we've got Mr.
Anthony Lovato, principal at
Arisco Heritage Academy we've
got Sharon Torres resource
teacher, APS Title One Star
Gonzalez resource teacher APS
Title One Lina Villegas
community support liaison Cathy
Duran community school
coordinator. Welcome.
come to the house. Please rise
to be recognized.
Glow Jaguars.
Again, Mr. Speaker, these folks
are intimately involved in
making sure that all of our
students, um, are the best that
they can be in school and there
and being all that they can be
so that hopefully one day, one
of them will take our positions,
hopefully in the near future.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. You heard it
here first in the near future.
Are you talking about next year?
Mr. Speaker, we do have an
election coming up next year, so
the sooner the better.
Well, you heard it here first,
folks. Breaking news.
Gentlemen from Colfax Mora Rio
Riva, San Miguel and Taos,
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I'm excited
to, uh, say today is Mora County
Day, so.
Let's give him a round of
applause.
Are there chicharrons in the
building,
a tamale and uh I think there's
vegetarian for those of you that
don't eat meat, but Mr. Speaker,
uh, I'm proud to introduce, uh,
some of my friends and guests,
uh, Mr. Joseph Weathers, he's
the MOA county manager. Welcome
to the house.
Mr. Speaker, we also got uh
adelita and sinia. She's the
Mora County Chief Procurement
officer. Welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, we also have
Romaldo Pino. He's the Mora
County treasurer.
Welcome to the house.
We have Mr. Brad Senna. He's the
Mora County planning and zoning.
Welcome to the house.
And Mr. Speaker, we have some
guests up on the top if uh you
don't mind introducing them? Not
at all, gentlemen. We've got
guests of Representative Sanchez
for Mora the in the gallery Mora
deputy sheriff Moises Coca,
welcome to the house.
We've got John Romero, Mora
County Road Superintendent.
We've got Ruthie Castellon and
Mora County finance director
Monica Monragon, Mora County
Road administrative assistant
and Travis Vil Mota County IT.
Welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, I also want to
yield to, uh, Ria Luhan. She
also has some guests from Mora
County Young lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, we have Joey
Romero from his Mora County
undersheriff. Welcome to the
house.
We have Brenda Casados, she's
the Mora County EMS director.
Welcome to the house.
Bernadette Chavez, she's the
Motor County EMS paramedic.
Welcome to the house.
Ella Ariano, she's a more a
County Chamber of Commerce.
Welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry.
Uh, we do have, Mr. Speaker, to
the gentleman. Mr. Speaker, I'd
like to ask the clerk to read
the certificate, if you don't
mind.
Leurk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session recognizes.
February 20th, 25 as Mora County
Day in the House of
Representatives, whereas Mora
County was created by an act of
the New Mexico Territorial
Legislature on February 1st,
1860. The total area of 1,934
square miles. And whereas the
town of Mora is situated at an
elevation of 7180 ft in the
Sangre de Cristo Mountains and
whereas Moore County communities
include Mora.
Wagon mound and Waros, and
whereas Mora County encompasses
many spectacular scenic areas,
as well as charming towns and
shops and celebrates many
community festivals, including
the annual Mora Fiesta, the Mora
Main Street Fall Festival and
Wagon Mound Bean Day.
And whereas Mora County is home
to several historic landmarks,
including the Mora Valley, which
has a long history dating back
to the Spanish colonial period
and the historic town of Mora
has seen a significant
historical preservation efforts
that showcase the unique
architecture and history of the
area. And whereas Mora County is
home to a rich mix of Native
American and Spanish heritage,
and the county is notable for
its preservation of this
cultural legacy, including
efforts to maintain historic
sites.
Traditions and local festivals,
as well as the preservation of
traditional arts such as
weaving, pottery, and local
music.
And whereas Mora County has a
long history and tradition of
agriculture and in recent
decades there has been a growing
emphasis on ranching practices,
including the support of small
scale farmers and ranchers who
prioritize sustainable land use,
which helps to maintain Maura
County's rural character.
And whereas morera County has a
particular dedication to its
military veterans with a vibrant
veterans of foreign wars
community recognition of Purple
Heart recipients and plans for a
new veteran's memorial Anne
Wearez, a new community center
is being finalized and watch us
and whereas local assets and
points of interest in Mora
County include the Cleveland
Roller Mill Museum, the Mora
National Fish Hatchery, New
Mexico State's university's John
T.
Harrington Forestry Research
Center, Murphy Lake State Park,
Coyote Creek State Park, Fort
Union National Monument and
several historic churches and
whereas Mora County is rich in
culture, resilient and strong,
and the people of Mora County
remain steadfast in their
efforts to regain economic
stability and growth as they
recover from the devastating
fires and flooding. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February 20th.
2025 be proclaimed Mora County
Day in the House of
Representatives.
Gentlemen, I'd like to add a
couple of names of uh good
friends of mine from Water
County, uh, northern New Mexico
College, Hector Balderas, who I
know is a friend to many of us
and a mentor to many of us and
uh attorney Antonia Royal Ma,
whose family is from up north,
and she's been working
tirelessly to help support the
victims of these wildfires up
there. Uh thank you for bringing
this forward. Congratulations
Mola County Da.
And deliver my chicharrons to my
office, please.
Room 104.
Generated from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, um, in honor of
McKinney Vento Act. I have two
students who are identified
under that, and it's also West
Side Day. There are West Side
students from Representative
Romero's Arisco Vista Heritage
Academy High School, uh, let me
introduce them too they're both
16 years old, Brandon, if you
can stand up, Brandon Gonzalez
is 16, he's in 11th grader to
Trisco Heritage Academy. Uh,
when he graduated,
it's gonna be, he's gonna pursue
a career in culinary arts
because he enjoys the art of
cooking and bringing warmth to
others. He's a a snowboarder and
his favorite books are Harry
Potter and Perry Percy Jackson's
series and my other stand up.
And my other guest today from
Marisco Heritage also 16, a 10th
grader, moved to the United
States from Chihuahua a year
ago. Um, she plans to continue
her education in college and be
a diplomatic interpreter. Her
hobby is dancing. It happens to
be K-pop dancing because while
we waited an hour for the
session to start. I've been
teaching them Korean, her
favorite K-drama is Snowdrop,
and she is just
A pleasure to meet if you can
give them a warm welcome.
Welcome to the house.
from
gentle lady from.
All those amazing counties.
Thank you, Speaker. I know
you're talking to me if they're
amazing.
I'd like to introduce two
students from the APS McKinney
Vento program as well.
On behalf of Representative
Gurola and I. The first is
Andrea Villa. She is a proud
freshman at the University of
New Mexico and alum of Otrisco
Heritage Academy High School.
She has chosen to pursue an
education at the University of
New Mexico and is studying
diplomatic interpretation and
plans to own her own business
one day.
Welcome to the house.
The next student is Valeria
Gonzalez. She's also a freshman
at the University of New Mexico
and an alum of the Crisco
Heritage Academy High School.
She's chosen to also study at
the University of New Mexico
where she's pursuing a career in
professional animation.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez.
I
Gentle lady from Valencia,
Representative Mirabal Moya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also
have a couple of students from
Marisco Heritage, uh, for the
McKenny Vento, um, um, they're
part of that project, so if, uh,
I'm gonna, my first one is
Brianna Bowie stand up.
She is a senior at uh Arisco
Heritage High School. She's a
part of the family center and
internship.
Welcome to the house.
And then also with me is
Jacqueline Valdez.
She is a sophomore slash junior
because she is graduating early,
so obviously she's on it right
there, um, at a Triscoll
Heritage Academy, and she is
also a part of the Family Center
internship. Welcome to the
house.
And as they walk out of the
gallery, Carson student council
was in the gallery till about 10
seconds ago including.
God's Romero.
Who turned 10 on Monday, Gus
Romero is the son of our
colleague Representative Andres
Romero, welcome to the house,
Kate Carson and Gus Romero.
Gentlemen from Valencia,
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also
have the distinct honor of
having two students uh with me
from Matrisco, um, academy and I
must say Mr. Speaker, that I've
had dozens of uh shadows over
the last years. These are among
the most impressive, definitely
a credit to your school and a
credit to our public schools for
New Mexico so my first guess is
Miss Sophia Villarreal.
She is an 18 year old senior.
From uh Heritage Criscoll
Heritage Academy.
Uh, she will be graduating this
year, and when she graduates.
She will want to pursue a career
in nursing at the University of
Texas El Paso at UTEP. So, uh,
Miss Sophia Royal Vio Royal.
Welcome to the house.
My next shadow is Miss Jade
Romero.
Uh, Jade is a 17 year old and
she's actually a 11th, 12th
grader because she'll be
graduating almost a year and a
half early, which is a huge
testament because when I was a
senior I loaded Coke machines
for my class. So, um,
She, uh, will be again
graduating this year 2025.
And she wants to continue her
education in college pursuing a
career in art and professional
tattooing and so, uh, again, as
I said, Mr. Speaker, these are,
uh,
Very fine examples of, of our
kinds of students and our hope
for our future and I will also
say Mr. Speaker, that they did
hand me an envelope that
basically outlined and talked
about the challenges that many
of our students face with
McKenny Bento. I appreciate it
and I have taken notice. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Katherine Hidalgo
and
Grant, Representative Terazos.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
want to announce today as my
son's twenty-seventh birthday,
27 years ago today, he was born
with gastroschisis.
Where there's stomach is outside
of their body.
And I did not expect that.
Nobody, not even the doctor did,
and I remember just pausing for
a minute and waiting for him to
say boy or girl because we
didn't even know if he was a boy
or girl and at the time you
didn't announce any, any, the
doctor quietly said he's a boy
and then he turns around and
tells me he's going to
Albuquerque, which
I know that means he's in
trouble, so today I'm
celebrating his life 27 years.
God's blessed me with him and so
I just wanted to share that with
the body. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Happy birthday to your
son, gentlemen to sing.
Happy birth.
To you, happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, dear Louise
Happy birthday to you.
N.
El Cuatro.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Sandoval, Representative
Hernandez. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, I ask unanimous
consent that House Memorial 23
be removed from the speaker's
table and made the next order of
business.
It is so ordered that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing O Memorial
23 on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment, or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the memorial.
Mr. Speaker, today is Rio
rancher day in the house.
welcome to the house.
I have some guests up on the
rostrum that I would like to
introduce, uh, first Rio Rancho
Mayor Greg Hall.
Welcome to the house, Mayor
Hall.
Uh, city councilor Nicole List.
Welcome to the house.
Uh, city councilor Deborah
Dabson. Welcome to the house.
Uh, Rio Rancho school board
president Amanda Galbraith.
Welcome to the house.
And rearrange the school board
member Beth Miller. Welcome to
the house.
The president of the Rio Rancho
Regional Chamber, Jerry shallow.
Welcome to the house.
And the chair of the chamber,
Aaron Dominguez. Welcome to the
house.
I also have members from
Leadership Sandoval who have
been uh going through the
program for the last, well, I
don't know where you guys are,
but 10 months.
6 months out of their 10 months,
um, these individuals have taken
the time to brush up on their
leadership skills, learn more
about Sandoval County and really
um are pillars of our community.
Fantastic. Uh, welcome to
Leadership Sandoval and thank
you for being here. Round of
applause for you.
And Mr. Speaker, can we get the
chief clerk to please read the
memorial.
Clerk to read.
House Memorial 23.
Introduced by Representatives
Joshua Hernandez, Cullen, and
Kates, a memorial declaring
February 20th, 2025. Excellence
in Rio Rancho Day in the House
of Representatives, whereas the
city of Rio Rancho began as a
retirement community called Rio
Rancho Estates in the early
1960s and whereas the city of
Rio Rancho became an
incorporated municipality in
1981 and whereas Rio Rancho is
the 3rd largest city in New
Mexico now with a population.
of more than 110,000 residents,
and whereas Rio Rancho is the
fastest growing city in New
Mexico, and whereas Rio Rancho
has experienced significant
economic growth with median
household incomes increasing
from $54,000 in 2020 to more
than $85,000 in 2024.
And whereas Rio Rancho is
nationally recognized as one of
the safest cities in New Mexico
and among the safest in the
Southwest based on crime rates
and community surveys. And
whereas Rio Rancho boasts a top
rated public school district,
the Rio Rancho Public School
District, which is celebrating
30 years of quality education
for the community in 2025.
And whereas Rio Rancho has been
recognized in several prominent
publications for its livability
and family-friendly environment,
including livability.com.
Quoting Rio Rancho was featured
in the top 100 best places to
live in the United States,
highlighting its affordable
housing, excellent schools, and
abundant outdoor activities.
Fortune magazine quoting Rio
Rancho ranked 35th in Fortune's
best places to live for
families, emphasizing its
developing economy, tourism
sector, and numerous parks and
trails. Money magazine, quoting
Rio Rancho has been recognized
multiple times as one of money's
best places to live in America,
and 24/7 Wall Street, quoting
Rio Rancho was featured on its
list of America's 50 best cities
to live, citing exceptional
public schools and crime rates
well below the national.
average.
And whereas Rio Rancho has a
growing business community that
includes innovators in many
industries such as Intel,
Electrosonics, Insight Lighting,
aero parts manufacturing, air
cell component solutions, green
the technologies, NTX Nature's
toolbox, stainless motors,
Presbyterian Rust Medical Center
and other prominent businesses
and it's home to the University
of New Mexico Health Sciences
Advanced Center of Excellence
for O.
orthopedic orthopedic surgery
and rehabilitation.
And whereas Rio Rancho continues
to lead an education with an
excellent public school
district, and expansive higher
education opportunities at the
University of New Mexico Health
Sciences Center, Central New
Mexico Community College and New
Mexico Highlands University.
And whereas through all of its
innovation and growth, Rio
Rancho can truly be called the
city of vision. Now, therefore,
be it resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico that February 20th,
2025 be declared excellence in
Rio Rancho Day in the House of
Representatives, and be it
further resolved that copies of
this memorial be transmitted to
the mayor of Rio Rancho, members
of the Rio Rancho City Council,
the Rio Rancho City manager and
the president and chief
executive officer of the Rio
Rancho.
Regional Chamber of Commerce.
Is there a debate on the
memorial, gentle lady from
Sandoval and Bernalillo
Representative Cates. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Does, uh, the
gentleman from Sandoval.
I do. I thank you so much, um,
Representatives, um, Hernandez
and Colin for bringing this bill
forward and having me sign on to
it as well. Thank you very much.
I too am a proud resident of Rio
Rancho. You know, Rio Rancho,
um, I always say we are, uh, a
small town big city and I very
much appreciate that, whether it
is our mayor, our city council,
economic develop our chamber of
commerce, our public school
system which my children.
both my children are graduates
from, um, we're all team
Sandoval and I very much
appreciate that. So thank you
very much, Mr. Speaker. There is
further debate the gentle lady
from Sandoval, Representative
Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentleman and friend from
Santa Clara County yield.
I do.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Speaker, we of my
family, uh, we moved to Rio
Rancho in 2002 when my husband
took a job transfer at the Intel
facility and we had only planned
on being there for 2 years, but
of course, like the New Mexico
way that we ended up staying
quite a few years later.
It is a wonderful community to
raise your family in, um, it has
absolutely terrific schools. I'm
honored to have served two terms
in the Rio Rancho school board
that is uh actually celebrating
the 30th anniversary and uh they
are just a testament of what we
can really do with education in
New Mexico.
And we also have the, as they
said earlier that we have
members from the leadership
program here and I also
graduated from the program. It's
an excellent.
And I think I believe
representative uh Hernandez as
well, it's an excellent program
and um you learn a lot about our
city and state in that program.
So I just want to say, uh, what
a great community we have, uh,
it's extremely safe. We have
great leadership in our
community and I am very
fortunate that both of our
daughters have decided to stay
in Rio Rancho. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate, gentle
lady from Bernalillo,
Representative
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, uh, kind gentlemen,
will you yield?
I will.
Thank you to my neighbors in Rio
Rancho. I just wanted to
acknowledge the certificate and
welcome all of uh the Rio Rancho
folks that are here today with
us, um, when I was city
councilor, I challenged Mayor
Hall to create a new knob Hill
and he took me up on it so the
area around McMahon and um
And uh McMahon and Unser has
really developed really nicely
on both sides on Albuquerque's
side and on Rio Rancho's side
and if you haven't been there,
guys, go take a little uh visit
because it it is truly the new
Knob Hill, um, I also wanna
mention that Mayor Hall and I
and the counselors, uh, work
together, um, along with the
regional chamber of Commerce to
build West Side Boulevard and
I'm very.
proud of West Side Boulevard and
I'm going to challenge some of
our West Side legislators to uh
put some of their money over to
Albuquerque to landscape West
Side Boulevard now that it's
built, uh, Mr. Chair, I know I'm
probably not supposed to
advocate, but I just thought I'd
throw that one in, um, Mr.
Speaker, um, also, since we're
talking about West side, um, and
Rio Rancho, we have a
legislative reception tonight
for West Side Day and that is
going to.
Be from starting at 5 o'clock at
Coyote Den in Santa Fe, and we
want to welcome all of you to
visit us tonight and, and just
uh talk about how wonderful the
West side is. Thank you, Mr.
Chip Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. He is there for the
debate, Rancho day sing no
gentlemen to close.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. So
we also have a rearrange your
day reception at Urve Wine Bar.
Um, I wanna thank everybody for
coming out for Rio Rancho Day,
um, and with that, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
of the House that the records
show that all the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative.
There's been a motion to all
members of the House President
and voting in the affirmative,
see no objection. It is so
ordered. We are on final passage
of house Memorial 23. The vote
is now open.
The vote
is now closed by a vote of 69 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Memorial 23
hasulli passed this house.
Congratulations. Rear rancho
day.
City of Vision I got it right.
City of Vision Rear Rancho.
Anybody up there from Rio
Rancho?
Rise to be recognized.
Congratulations on your day.
Other announcements, gentle lady
from Burley, a Representative
Anaya. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'm always glad to have a
shadow, uh, with me, and today I
have David Cooper and David is a
freshman at UNM, although he's
originally from Las Cruces. Uh,
I actually believe not a
minority leader he is in your
district, uh, meet David, um, he
is majoring in political science
and communications, uh, and he's
also right in the middle of
propping.
Prepping for mock trial, so he's
gonna be here, he's gonna be
out, but he is a nerd like the
rest of us and loves the
legislative process. He's also
pretty funny, so come and talk
to him and thank you Mr.
Speaker. Welcome to the house.
We have guests of Representative
Doo's in the gallery. These are
6, 7th, and 8th graders from
truth or consequences Middle
School, is that you guys stand
to be recognized. Welcome to the
house.
My favorite gas station in TRC
is the Chevron across from the
McDonald's.
Um, still there, the bathrooms
look the same as they did 34
years ago when my grandfather
drove us up to Albuquerque for
the first time.
And I still stopped there just
to
You know, take it back.
Beautiful community thank you
guys for being here. Good to see
you all.
Folks, just a little runner show
we're gonna do um a lot of intro
today. Today is the last day to
introduce your bills, uh, so if
you have bills that are
outstanding out there on the 4th
floor, go get them from council,
bring them down. Today is the
last day to introduce bills
we're gonna be doing a whole lot
of that today, um, we are going
to take up a little bit of 3rd
reading. We've got 3 bills on
the agenda today, um, and then
we'll be done for the day. So,
At this point, seeing no other
announcements, I'm gonna go to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we go
to that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
Yeah
you
clerk to read.
House Bill 473 introduced by
Representative.
Brown, an act relating to school
security personnel providing for
assistance school security
personnel who are registered
level 1 or Level 2 security
guards pursuant to the private
Investigations Act and
establishing qualifications,
providing that retired or former
commissioned peace officers or
registered Level 3 security
guards pursuant to the private
Investigations Act may be school
security personnel admitting the
private investigations Act to
provide the applicants for
registration as a security.
as a level 1, level 2 or level 3
security guard may be employed
by a school district or charter
school, making conforming
amendments. House Bill 473.
House Bill 473 have been read to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
What was the
House Bill 474 introduced by
Representative Zamora, an act
relating to license plates,
creating a trail life USA
special registration plate,
allowing for the cessation of
special license plate issuance
under certain conditions, making
an appropriation. House Bill 474
have been read by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance.
Committee.
House Bill 475 introduced by
Representatives Brown,
Lundstrom, de la Cruz, Jones,
and Hoffman v. Hill, an act
relating to transportation,
creating the transportation
Trust Fund, making annual
transfers to the state road fund
for providing state matching
funds for federal grants,
distributing a portion of gross
receipts tax revenue
attributable to the sale of
electricity to the
transportation Trust Fund,
amending distributions of the
motor vehicle excise tax.
Mending certain sections of laws
2021 through 2024 to require
certain unexpended general fund
capital outlay appropriations to
revert to the transportation
Trust Fund, making an
appropriation, House Bill 47545
have been read to us by titles
or printed and referred to the
house transportation, public
works and capital improvements
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
I
House before '76 introduced by
representatives Gonzalez,
Parajon, and De la Cruz, an act
relating to trade practices,
enacting the price fixing
prohibition, consumer
transparency and Tax Fairness
Act prohibiting network
interchange price fixing,
prohibiting interchange fees on
tax and gratuities, creating
penalties. House Bill 476 46 I
read twice by title is printed
and referred to the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 477 introduced by
Representative Lundstrom, an act
relating to taxation, amending
the lodgers Tax Act to provide
an exemption for members of the
legislature in a county where
the state capital is located
during a legislative session.
House Bill 477.
House Bill 477 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 478, introduced by
representatives Doo and Joshua
Hernandez, and acts relating to
alcoholic beverages, revising
criteria for the transfer of
certain liquor licenses. House
Bill 478.
478 haven't been read to us by
title is or printed and referred
to the House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
How's Bill 479 introduced by
representatives Armstrong and
Dow, an act relating to
licensing, enacting a new
section of the uniform Licensing
Act to prohibit non-physician
healthcare providers with a
doctoral degree from using the
title of doctor in any form of
advertising or communication in
a clinical setting without
identifying as a doctor or a
specific profession, providing
for professional discipline.
House Bill 47947.
9 have been read to was by title
is order printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 480 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to license plates,
creating a suicide prevention
special registration plate,
allowing for the cessation of
special license plate issuance
under certain conditions, making
an appropriation. House Bill
480. 480 haven't been re by
title is or printed and referred
to the house transportation,
public works and capital
improvements Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 481, introduced by
Representative McQueen, an act
relating to natural resources,
providing that owners,
operators, or leases with a
current or prior prior interest
of or control of an oil or gas
well facility, pit, or
installation of immobile surface
equipment shall be responsible
for reimbursing the oil
conservation division of the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department for
plugging and abandonment costs
and other associated costs.
House Bill 481481 have been read
to us by titles or printed and
referred to the house energy
environment and natural
resources Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 482 introduced by
Representatives Herrera, Cates,
Gonzalez Abeda and Lara, an act
relating to water creating a
community water and wastewater
system assistance pilot project,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 482.
House Bill 482 haven't been read
twice my title is or printed and
referred to the house
agriculture aseas and water
resources Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 483 introduced by
Representative Block, an act
relating to government
prohibiting enactment or
enforcement of any law,
ordinance, policy, or rule that
restricts the use of plastic
bags by a grocery store. House
Bill 483.
House Bill 483, haven't been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
How's how's Bill 484 introduced
by Representatives Duncan,
Montoya, Henry Armstrong, and
Joshua Hernandez, and acts
relating to taxation, exempting
tips from the income tax. House
Bill 484.
House Bill 484, haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house, labor, veterans, military
affairs Committee, the the House
taxation and Revenue Committee.
House Bill 485 introduced by
representatives Lord and Block,
an act relating to public
schools enacting the school
Marshal Act, providing powers
and duties requiring
qualifications, training, and
law enforcement certification
requiring the New Mexico law
enforcement standards and
training council to develop a
school martial training course,
allowing school marshals to
carry concealed weapons. House
Bill 485.
House Bill 485 haven't been
written twice by Tidal is
ordered, printed and referred to
the House Education Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 487 introduced by
representatives Torres
Velasquez, Senator Linda Lopez,
Representative Royal Caballero,
Gurola, and Mirabel Moya, an act
relating to Hispanic education,
including the protection and
preservation of New Mexico's
heritage Spanish language and
culture and other elements in
the purpose for the Hispanic
Education Act requiring the
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council to meet at biannual
Hispanic Education summits allow
per diem and mileage for council
members. House Bill 487.
I built 487 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
government elections in Indian
affairs Committee.
House Bill 486 introduced by
representatives Lord and
Gonzalez, an act relating to
children requiring criminal
background checks and sex
offender registry checks before
returning a child to a person,
including a parent, legal
guardian, or custodian. If the
child is in the custody of the
children, youth and Families
Department because of abuse or
neglect, requiring criminal
background checks and sex
offender registry checks before
placing a child in foster care
with a relative of the child if
the child is in the
custody of the children, youth
and Families Department because
of abuse or neglect. House Bill
486 486 haven't been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 488, introduced by
Representatives Torres
Velasquez, Senator Linda Lopez,
Representatives Roy Ball
Caballero and Gurola, an act
relating to public education,
providing that bilingual,
multicultural education shall
use students home or heritage
language. House Bill 488. House
Bill 488 haven't been read twice
by title is overprinted and
referred to the House Education
Committee, the the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
How's, how's Bill 489 introduced
by representatives Torres
Velasquez, Herndon, Senator
Pope, and Representative Anya
Nonu.
An act relating to the black
education liaison, assigning the
duty of linking to an online
reporting portal, providing that
information submitted to the
portal is confidential. Changing
white papers to policy briefs or
position papers. House Bill 489
489 haven't been read twice by
title is ordered, printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House before 90 introduced for
representatives Torres
Velasquez, Herndon, Ona Narnu,
Little, and Royal Caviero, an
act relating to public schools
requiring changes to school
discipline policies, providing
additional care characteristics
that are protected from
discipline, discrimination, or
disparate treatment, making
reports on the online portal
relating to behavior of students
or school personnel
confidential. House Bill 490.
haven't been read twice by
title.
His order printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House 491, introduced by
Representative Henry, an act
relating to construction
industries, licensing private
inspection companies, allowing
companies to provide private
inspectors for governments and
for contractors and homeowners,
requiring the employment of
certified building officials,
limiting employment of
inspectors, clarifying
provisions of the construction
industry's Licensing Act, making
technical amendments. House Bill
491.
House 491 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 492 introduced by
Representative Borego, an act
relating to state government
establishing the planning bureau
within the economic development
division of the Economic
Development Department,
providing duties requiring
interagency and
intergovernmental collaboration
and coordination, making an
appropriation. House Bill 492
492 haven't been read twice by
title is or printed and referred
to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee. The the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 496, introduced by
Representative Garrett.
House Bill 493 introduced for
Representative Borego an act
relating to public finance,
enacting the public finance
Accountability Act, creating the
public finance Accountability
Fund, establishing funding
criteria and grant management
and oversight requirements
enumerating duties of the
Department of Finance and
Administration, making an
appropriation. House Bill 493.
493 haven't been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House.
Creations and Finance Committee.
House before 94 introduced by
Representative Alan Martinez, an
act relating to taxation,
amending claiming exemptions for
veterans. House Bill 494.
Yeah.
House Bill 494, haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House La Veterans Military
Affairs Committee, then the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 495 introduced for
Representative Anya Arnu, an act
relating to liens imposing
restrictions on liens imposed by
a service provider, amending
sections of chapter 48, Article
8, NMSA 1978, amending a section
of the motor Vehicle Code
regarding rights of subrogation.
House Bill 495.
House Bill 495.
Haven't been read twice by
title.
subrogation. That was before 95
have been replaced by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee.
Ben's the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 496, introduced by
Representative Garrett and act
relating to crime increasing the
penalty for a felon found in
possession of a firearm. House
Bill 496 496. I've been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
consumer and Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 497 introduced for
Representative Brown an act
relating to public records,
revising the inspection of
public Records Act, providing
exemptions from inspection,
revising deadlines, designating
additional records as law
enforcement records, providing
additional definitions,
providing the procedures for
requesting and denying requests
for public records, revising
provisions related to
enforcement. House Bill 497.
How's your 497 have been read
twice by title. It sort of
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 498 introduced by
representatives Doo and Joshua
Hernandez, an act relating to
alcoholic beverages, revising
criteria for the transfer of
certain liquor licenses. House
Bill 498.
498 haven't been written twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the House commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
I think
House Bill 499 introduced by
Representatives Doo and
Armstrong, an act making an
appropriation to the Board of
Regents of the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and
Technology to pay for
operational expenses of a
student success center. House
Bill 499. House Bill 499 haven't
been read to us by title is or
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 500 introduced by
Representative Alan Martinez, an
act relating to citizens
substitute care review,
providing for submission,
review, and resolution of
grievances against the children,
youth and Families Department
pertaining to substituteive
care, def defining terms in the
citizen's substitute of Care
Review Act.
Providing for staffing of the
substitute of care advisory
council, providing for rules
pertaining to volunteer members,
providing access to and
requirements for confidentiality
of certain records and
information, changing reporting
requirements, amending,
repealing, and enacting sections
of the NMSA 1978. House Bill
500.
Houseville 500 haven't been read
twice by Tidal is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 501 introduced by
representatives Doo, Alan
Martinez, and Henry, an act
relating to public school
personnel, enacting a new
section of the school personnel
Act to require school employees
to report to a school
administrator, if a student is
experiencing gender incongruence
at school and requiring
notification to the student's
parent, defining terms, allowing
a parent to give direction and
permission for the development
and implementation of a response
plan. House Bill
101.
As will 501 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 502 introduced by
representatives Herrera, Kates,
Gonzalez and Lundstrom, an act
relating to Esequio rights and
water rights, designating
asekiar rights and water rights
as material facts in real estate
transactions. House Bill 502 02
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Agriculture a Seas
Water Resources Committee, hence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 503 introduced by
Representatives Lujan and
Herndon, an act relating to
domestic relations, providing
that parents participating in a
domestic relations mediation
program shall have the right to
be represented by council and
have council present at advisory
consultations, priority
consultations, evaluations of
mediation, making conforming
amendments. House Bill 503.
House Bill 500 3 haven't been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 504 introduced by
Representatives Parajon, Joseph
Hernandez, Cadena, and Senator
Charlie and act relating to
taxation, excluding receipts of
a prime contractor that are
derived from operating a
facility in New Mexico
designated as a national
laboratory by an act of Congress
or from operating a research
facility in New Mexico that is
owned by the state from certain
gross receipts tax deductions
for manufacturers. House Bill 5
4.
House 5004 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Thence the house taxation and
revenue Committee.
House Bill 505 introduced for
Representative Parajon and
Senator Cedillo Lopez, an act
relating to opioids.
Requiring retail pharmacies to
keep stocks of certain types of
drugs that treat opioid use
disorder, requiring wholesale
drug distributors to report
instances in which the
distributors do not fill orders
for
Buprenorphine made by retail
pharmacies requiring reports,
providing penalties. House Bill
505505 haven't been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 506 introduced for
Representatives de la Cruz,
Terasas, Gallegos, and Duncan,
an act relating to taxation,
creating the hotel renovation
income tax credit and the hotel
renovation corporate Income Tax
Credit, House Bill 506.
Is 506 have been red twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
then the house taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 507 introduced by
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
an act relating to license
plates, creating an Albuquerque
isotopes special registration
plate, allowing for the
cessation of special license
plate issuance under certain
conditions.
Making an appropriation. House
Bill 507.
Is 507 have been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the House
Transportation Public Works and
capital Improvements Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 508 introduced by
Representative Pettigrew, an act
relating to rules requiring
state agencies to hold
additional public comment
periods when substantial changes
are made to proposed rules.
House Bill 508.
Is 508 haven't been read to us.
My title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
How's, how's Bill 509 introduced
by Representative Pettigrew, an
act relating to government
transparency, enacting the
transparency and government
Contracting Act requiring
certain procedures for providing
the public with information on
government contracts, providing
for the enforcement of the
transparency and government
Contracting Act providing for a
directory of information within
the Sunshine Portal. House Bill
509. 509 haven't been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the house.
government elections and in the
affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 510 introduced by
representatives Bloch and Doo,
an act relating to elections
providing duties of boards of
registration requiring county
clerks to develop and administer
educational programs for boards
of registration, requiring
information relating to the
cancellation of a voter's
registration to be reported to
boards of registration,
requiring the boards of
registration to certify the
cancellation of any voter
registration, requiring boards
of registration to meet
quarterly.
510. 510 haven't been read twice
by titles or are printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 511 introduced for
Representatives Doo, Henry, and
Alan Martinez, an act relating
to taxation, creating the retail
center renovation income tax
credit and the retail center
renovation corporate income tax
credit. House Bill 511.
Is 511 haven't been addressed to
us by titles, or printed and
referred to the House of
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
house taxation and revenue
Committee.
House Bill 512 introduced by
representatives Armstrong, Alan
Martinez, Mirabalmoya, Duncan,
and Murphy, an act relating to
higher education, enacting the
medical residency loan repayment
Act, granting loan repayment
awards to certain medical
residents and medical fellows,
providing for contracts,
contract cancellations, and
contract enforcement, creating a
fund, making an appropriation.
House Bill 512 512 haven't been
read twice by title is or
printed and referred.
to the House Education
Committee, that's the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 513 introduced by
Representative Cullen, an act
relating to organ donation
requiring a space on license
application and license renewal
forms and application forms and
renewal forms for public
assistance benefits and services
for applicants to a state to a
desire to make an anatomical
gift requiring the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
revenue Department to maintain
applications with those
completed statements in a
statewide donor registry.
House Bill 513.
House 513.
twice by titles that are printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee.
That's the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 514.
Introduced by representatives
Anaya and Parajon, an act
relating to crime, amending
definitions in the probation and
parole Act, providing procedures
for sanctions for technical
violations for a parolee who
violates the conditions of
release or probation, providing
for the development and
implementation of a graduated
response system for probation
and parole violations. House
Bill 51414't been written to us
by title is order printed and
referred to the house.
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 515 introduced by
Representative Terasas, Senator
Ramos, and Senator Diamond
Brantley, an act making an
appropriation to the Board of
Regents of Western New Mexico
University to create and support
a men's baseball program. House
Bill 515.
How will 515 haven't been
written by title is or printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 516 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
making an appropriation to the
Supreme Court to convene a task
force to study the gaps in legal
services for victims of domestic
violence and to make
recommendations for the design
and implementation of
cost-effective legal programs to
address those gaps. House Bill
51616 haven't been read to us by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 517 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to health enacting a
new section of chapter 21 NMSA
1978 to require public
post-secondary educational
institutions to provide free
condoms to students enacting a
new section of the public school
code to require school districts
to provide free condoms to
public secondary school
students. House Bill 517517 have
been read to us by titles or.
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 518 introduced by
representatives.
Anaya Senator Harramio, Senator
Hamblin, Representative Parejon,
and Senator Stefaniks, an act
relating to public holidays,
designating the 4th Tuesday of
January of each odd numbered
year as lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and expansive
day. House Bill 5018. 518 have a
mid red twice by titles or
printed and referred to the
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 519 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to cultural affairs,
creating the board of directors
of the African American
Performing Arts Center,
providing that the board of
directors shall operate,
maintain, and staff the African
American performing Arts Center
and exhibit hall in consultation
with the Cultural Affairs
department, transferring
functions, personnel,
appropriations, money, records,
equipment, supplies, other
property and contractual
obligations.
House Bill 519. 519 have been
read to us by toddlers or
printed and referred to the
house rural Development, land
grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
I'll spill 520 introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero,
an act relating to subsidies,
creating the the sustain the
family's trust fund for future
issuance of subsidies for lower
income residents for the purpose
of assisting those in New Mexico
who are most disadvantaged as a
basic right. House Bill 520,520
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs Committee.
Then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
The lady from Bernard, Mr.
Speaker, I'm going to go to the
next order of business Committee
reports.
Clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to has been
referred Senate Bill 1 as
amended has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in Senate Bill
1 as amended. All those in favor
and if I was saying a.
Bona, the SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
11 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 11 do
pass, respectfully submitted
Doreen Y Geigel's chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We're an
adoption unfavorable committee
report on House Bill 11, but a
favorable committee report in
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11, all those in
favors and if I say no.
Mona
The eyes have a committee report
adopt it.
Yes
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 101 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted,
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption report on
House Bill 101. All those in
favor sign if I by saying a.
I suppose.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 102 has had it under
consideration report some
recommendation that it do pass.
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
102. All those in favor say aye.
I suppose.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 104 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption adoption of a favorable
report in House Bill 104. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
All the suppose nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
resources Committee to has been
referred House Bill 390 has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and that's referred to
the appropriations of Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair adoption
for an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
390. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
I suppose, nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker
And now being 11:59 a.m. I'm
movedly adjourned until 12:01
p.m.
Mr. Speaker, I asked the
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended and that the
journal shows that all all
those.
present in this meetings this
morning's session in our present
and this afternoon session. It
is ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules will be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
written in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
business committee if there is
no objection, it is so ordered.
Welcome to Legislative day 8, 52
more to go.
General lady from Bernal Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I now move, we go
to the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered
announcements, members, I have
an announcement. We have a stack
of bills, uh, we were gonna keep
going through introduction for
the next.
However long it takes, but I've
got to get all these bills in
today. So, uh, while we do 3rd
reading, if you wanna get your
bills jacketed and filed here
will stay, well, I guess I'll
stay. You don't have to, but
I'll sit here reading bills
until we finish, so get those in
today. Today is the last day.
Uh, announcements generally from
Catherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. The Republicans will
have a short caucus.
Following the floor session in
room 318. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.e announcements lady
from Berlio. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Health and Human
Services Committee will meet at
8 o'clock tomorrow and we only
have 2 hours, so be there on
time and be prepared to be
brief. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from.
Donana. Mr. Speaker, you're
consumer and public affairs
Committee will meet 10 minutes
after, um,
Well, immediately after the
Republican caucus.
Members take note, gentle.
Mm
Lady from Bernardo.
Hold on, gentle lady from
Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, just
wanna announce that Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
will meet and did I understand
that there was a Republican
caucus? OK, so we will meet 10
minutes after the Republican
caucus at uh.
Whenever that is in room 315
thank you gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr. Speaker, I believe we go to
the next order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation. no
objection.
It is so ordered.
Generally Leo. Are you ready? On
item number 9 on the temporary
calendar.
Thank you. Sorry, I'm sorry, not
the temporary calendar.
Apologies.
Oh, I'm sorry, we're not gonna
go to that one yet because we
have to wait.
Until
1:15.
Um, let's go to the.
Uh, gentlemen from Bernalio, are
you ready on item number 27.
Mr. Speaker, yes, could you get
me to that point, please?
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill 193 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 193 would allow our
legislative education study
committee to study um early
childhood as well as issues
relating to higher education. So
with that, Mr. Speaker, I'll
stand for questions. There is a
debate, gentlemen from Otero
Representative block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentleman from Burn Leo,
please yield. Mr. Speaker, I'll
yield to the gentlemen. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I just had a few
questions on this one. I just
wanted to make sure I, I
understand what we're requesting
the LA LESC do regarding early
childhood, are they gonna be
working with the department or
EC ECD, I believe, to see what
they're doing, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, that's part of
the intent of this bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. And I had another
question about the technology
resources, they would
potentially need to handle this
data collection, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do we know if they
will have adequate resources in
their budget to continue this
work, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
currently, yes, um, but it's
something that should this bill
pass and get signed, something
that uh we would pursuing
increasing um the amount of
staffing as well as um fun.
funding for our legislative
education study committee to
compensate for the added
responsibilities.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That's
all I had. Appreciate it, Mr.
Chairman. See no further debate,
gentlemen, to close. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I move that House
Bill 193 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 193, the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 56 in the affirmative, 2 in
the negative House Bill 193 has
passed this house.
gentle lady from Berne Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I we go to the next
order of business, introduction
House Bill 521, introduced by
Representative Block.
An act relating to tourism,
enacting the agritourism
Promotion Act.
Limiting the liability of an
agritourism operator in certain
circumstances. House Bill 521521
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Rural Development
land grants.
And Cultural Affairs Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
No
How's House Bill 522 introduced
by Representative Garcia, an act
relating to labor providing an
annual cost of living increase
to the state minimum wage rate
beginning in 2026, providing
that certain tipped employees
receive an hourly rate that is
25% of the prevailing hourly
minimum wage rate plus tips,
requiring that public contracts
provide for increased contractor
and subcontractor reimbursement
and worker wage increases in.
In accordance with and
concurrent with state minimum
wage increases, adding a
definition of consumer price
index to the minimum wage Act.
House Bill 5222 have been reward
by title is or a printed and
refers to the house, Labor
veterans, Military First
Committee, then House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 523 introduced by
Representative Lara Gurola,
Silver, and Rubio, Silva and
Rubio apologies, an act relating
to public schools, limiting
disruptive third-party access to
public schools. House Bill 52323
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Judiciary.
Committee.
House Bill 524 introduced by
Representative Dixon, an act
relating to advance purchase
commitments, creating a program
for the awarding of advance
purchase commitments for the
purchase 3 or more years in the
future of low emissions cement,
concrete, asphalt binder, or
asphalt mixtures. House Bill
524524 haven't been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committe.
There's a house commerce and
economic Development Committee.
House Bill 525 introduced by
Representative Dixon, an act
relating to correctional
institutions, adding second
degree homicide by vehicle to
the definition of serious
violent offense. House Bill 525.
Is 5:25. Haven't been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 526 introduced by
Representative Parajon and
Senators Hamblin and Charlie, an
act relating to elections,
providing for the registration
of qualified residents who are
16 or 17 years of age to vote in
regular local elections,
municipal elections, and special
local elections. House Bill
526526 haven't been read twice
by titles or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 527 introduced by
Representative Parajon, an act
relating to insurance enacting
new sections of the healthcare
purchasing Act. The public
Assistance Act and the New
Mexico Insurance Code to require
coverage for an adequate supply
of medical cannabis to treat
debilitating conditions of
qualified patients providing for
direct payment to of two
cannabis retailers or
reimbursement to qualified
patients. House Bill 527.
House 527 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 528, introduced by
Representative Parajon and
Gonzalez, an act relating to
internships creating the high
school internship grant program,
creating the high school
internship grant program fund,
making appropriations. House
Bill 528.
I was 528 haven't been read
twice by titles or reprinted and
referred to the House Education
Committee then House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 529 introduced for
Representative Parajon, an act
making an appropriation to the
civil legal Services Fund to
provide civil legal services
relating to housing. House Bill
52929 haven't been read to us by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Judiciary
Committee, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 530 introduced by
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to invasion of privacy,
amending section 30-37A-1 NMSA
1978, being was 2015, chapter
42, Section 1, to provide that
the crime of unauthorized
distribution of sensitive images
includes the distribution of
sensitive deep fake images
defining sensitive deep fake
image creating the crime of
threatening to distribute
sensitive images and providing
penalties.
enacting a new section of
Chapter 41 NMSA 1978 to provide
that a person may maintain a
civil action for libel, slander,
or invasion of privacy based on
the publication of sensitive
deep fake images and limiting
certain defenses and allowing
recovery for certain types of
damages, providing for claims
arising from crimes related to
invasion of privacy or the
digital exploitation of children
and allowing recovery for
certain types of damages.
House Bill 530 House Bill 530. I
haven't been twice by titles or
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee.
Then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 531, introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to medical education,
creating an escrow fund for the
establishment of a college of
osteopathic medicine that is
required for pre-accreditation
requiring the college to submit
student data, making a transfer
from the tobacco settlement
permanent fund to the Santa Fe
College of Osteopathic Medicine
Escrow Fund. House Bill 531. 531
have been read twice by tilers
or printed and.
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 532 introduced by
Representative Sanchez, an act
relating to public schools
requiring each local school
board and governing body of a
charter school to develop or
adopt guidance for student water
safety, requiring that water
safety guidance be provided to
parents of each student at the
beginning of each school year.
House Bill 532.
House Bill 532 haven't been read
was by title is ordered, printed
and referred to the house
consumer and public affairs
Committee.
That's the House Education
Committee.
House Bill 533 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to corrections,
amending the restricted housing
Act, expanding the age limit on
solitary confinement, reducing
the number of hours and days an
inmate may be held in solitary
confinement. House Bill 53333
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 534 introduced by
Representatives Torres Velasquez
and Thompson, an act relating to
children, creating a trauma
enforced practice using
autobiographies to teach
children to retell their stories
to support language and
emotional development. House
Bill 53434 haven't been read
twice by Tidal.
His order printed and referred
to the House Health and Humans
house health and Human Services
Committee the the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 535 introduced by
representatives Lord and Block,
an act relating to emergency
powers, providing that a
declaration of a state of
emergency pursuant to the all
hazard emergency Management Act
or the Public Health Emergency
Response Act terminates after 90
days unless the governor calls
the legislature into special
session.
To address circumstances of the
emergency, amending and enacting
sections of the NMSA 1978. House
Bill 535. 535 haven't been read
to us by titles that were
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 536 introduced by
Representative Anaya, an act
relating to insurance
prohibiting health insurance
billing information from
disclosing particularly
sensitive healthcare services
that are provided to people
covered by the insurance. House
Bill 536536. I've been read
twice by title is old printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 537, introduced by
Representatives Lara and Eleanor
Chavez, an act relating to
higher education, requiring
postsecondary educational
institutions to designate higher
education liaisons for students
experiencing homelessness,
prescribing duties, making an
appropriation. House Bill 537.
Yes
Isville 537 have been read twice
by titles or printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 538, introduced by
Representatives Dixon, Small,
Duncan, and Senator Scherer, an
act relating to taxation,
creating the industrial
decarbonization production,
corporate income tax credit,
creating the industrial
decarbonization Investment
corporate income tax credit.
House Bill 538. 538. Haven't
been there twice. My title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the house energy, environment
and naturalsources Committee,
thence the House tax.
and Revenue Committee.
House Bill 539 introduced by
Representative Latta, an act
relating to special districts,
creating the Camino Real
Regional Utility Authority,
providing powers and duties,
providing for the issuance of
revenue bonds. House Bill 539.
How will 5:39.
Having been read twice by Thalis
or printed and referred to the
House government elections and
the Indian Affairs Committee.
The the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 540 introduced by
Representatives Sarato, Aanarnu,
and Abeda, an act relating to
elections establishing
eligibility requirements and
procedures to fill a vacancy in
the office of Representative and
in the office of senator,
requiring boards of county
commissioners to establish
procedures to fill vacancies.
House Bill 540,540 haven't been
read twice by tidal disorder
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 541, introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
an act relating to public
finances, providing that the
state treasurer may invest
sinking funds or money remaining
unexpended from the proceeds of
an issue of bonds or other
negotiable securities of the
state in certain ways. House
Bill 541.
Is 541 haven't been read twice
by title.
His order printed and referred
to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 542 introduced to
representatives Bloch, Mejia,
and Doo, an act relating to
taxation, creating the
childbirth income tax credit.
House Bill 542542 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
Denzel House Taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 543, introduced by
Representatives Montoya,
Vincent, and Jones, an act
relating to health care,
clarifying consent requirements
for minors receiving health
care. House Bill 54343 haven't
been read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 544 introduced by
Representatives Montoya and
Jones, an act relating to
licensure, providing for
expedited licensure for
professional and occupational
boards. House Bill 544.
5:44 haven't been read twice by
titles or reprinted and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 545 introduced by
Representative Montoya and
Henry, an act relating to
taxation, creating the gas and
electric bill income tax credit.
House Bill 545.
How 5:45 haven't been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the house consumer
and Public Affairs Committee,
the the House taxation and
revenue Committee.
House Bill 546 introduced by
Representative Montoya, an act
relating to horse racing,
amending and enacting sections
of the horse racing Act,
creating the state racing
commission nominating committee
requiring members of the state
racing commission to be selected
from a list of qualified
nominees created by the state
racing commission nominating
committee, providing for the
employment and qualifications of
an executive director of the
State Racing commission. House
Bill 546546 haven't been.
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 547 introduced by
Representatives Montoya and
Reeb, an act relating to
criminal sentencing, requiring a
judge to only consider
aggravating circumstances for
the alteration of a basic
sentence of a person convicted
of a serious violent offense.
House Bill 547. House Bill 547
have been by titles or printed
and referred to the house
consumer and public affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 548 introduced by
Representatives Small and Dixon,
an act relating to taxation
enacting the oil and gas
equalization Tax Act, House Bill
54848. I haven't been read by
title is printed and referred to
the House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I'm, I now move to
go to the next order of
business, 3rd reading of
legislation.
Members
We are going to continue.
On 3rd reading, I will call your
attention to supplemental
calendar number one on your
desks.
Gentle lady, are you ready? On
item number one.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, when you take
me to that point, that all
action necessary for placing
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3 as
amended with an emergency class
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment, or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So we
are here to talk about the
proposed New Mexico Behavioral
Health framework as outlined in
Senate bills 12, and 3, which is
designed to expand and enhance
behavioral health services
throughout the state by by
establishing sustainable
funding, regional planning,
crisis response systems, and
improved service coordination
for behavioral health.
The Senate Finance Committee
substitute the Senate Bill 3 in
particular establishes a
strategic framework,
accountability protocols and
de-silos the state's behavioral
health system.
It connects all the various
behavioral health dots
throughout the state and for the
first time takes a systematic
approach to behavioral health
that connects all points of
care.
The Behavioral Health reform and
Investment Act, which is number
3, establishes behavioral health
regions, enables all behavioral
health stakeholders to have a
voice and results in the
development of reasonable plans,
regional plans, and the
completion of sequential
intercept mapping that will
identify all behavioral health
assets and gaps. The regional
plans will be reviewed and
approved by Behavioral Health
executive Committee, and, uh, it
will then such committee will
then make funding decisions
based on the needs of our
communities that have been.
strategically planned throughout
those communities. Data
collection will be required,
performance measures will need
to be met, and if they are not,
then the
can shift to a different
regional priority. It also sets
us on a path to address the
licensing issues and behavioral
health and ensures we move
toward a towards a universal
credentialing system for
behavioral health and for
providers to qualify to bill
Medicaid.
The Behavioral Health Reform and
Investment Act allows a
bottom-up grassroots approach,
grassroots approach to really
tailor out behavioral health
needs to our communities because
those communities will be able
to identify what they need, plan
out how to optimize their own
regional system and be
accountable for delivering
behavioral health services for
the people of New Mexico.
Behavioral health finally has a
road map to strategically
address the mental health and
substance abuse needs throughout
our state. And with that, Mr.
Speaker, I stand for questions.
There is.
gentle lady from Berle and
Torrance
representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I
have an issue, um, first and
foremost, I don't have the bill
at all in my paperwork. Does
anyone have a copy of the bill
that I could have, Mr. Speaker.
Well, while you get the copy of
the Belgian lady, I will go to
the other debater and then we'll
come back to you. That sounds
great, gentle lady from Santa
Fe, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would,
I didn't know I was next in
line, but I will, um, will the
general lettering from, uh,
Bernalio Guild. I yield, Mr.
Speaker, to my good friend from
Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Uh,
gentle lady, um.
Thank you, um, to those bringing
forward this this piece of
legislation it's, it's really
important. I feel like.
We're addressing, um, and would
you agree that we're addressing
behavioral health in a, in a, a
very different way than we've
ever done.
Mr Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes, I
am incredibly excited about
this, these 3 bills, this trio
of bills because we are finally
addressing the mental and
behavioral health crisis that
our state has been facing, I
know since I have been here and
before, um, for the first time
in a systematic planned way that
uh.
Entails accountability and
empowers our communities to meet
their needs in a way that they
see fit.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I appreciate that. What
are the, what are the
significant
Differences in this piece of
legislation that we are, how we
are addressing this, uh, this
crisis it's is different from
what we currently have
structurally in in state
government, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady from Santa Fe. So
what we've done in the past is,
um, we have been really good at
appropriating money for mental
and behavioral health, but we've
really never had a plan.
How are we the best spend this
money. How are we to ensure that
this money is uh guaranteeing
and returning results. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
the first time that we have had
a framework and we have
empowered our agencies and this
newly formed committee to
utilize the money that we've
appropriated in a way that we
are pretty sure will guarantee
results, and if it does not
guarantee results,
it empowers us to shift the plan
so that we can continue to work
until we do have results. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, how would
those
Those plans that are in this
piece of legislation.
Um, address the crisis.
Mr. Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, General Lani
from Santa Fe, so, um, like I
said before, this bill requires
Regional planning. So we'll have
an oversight committee, which
will then um break down into
regional committees which are
required to put together these
plans and in these plans, they
will specifically have, uh, they
will include a phase plan for
the continuation and expansion
of behavioral health services
and the identification of gaps
in services, which is really
important, Mr. Speaker, General
Leni, and also identify no more
than 5 state funded priorities
per phase, we can ensure that
what we are, um, the things that
we're trying to change will get
changed as opposed to the
scattershot approach that we've
had before. Um, it will identify
local resources to help offset
the cost of each priority. It
will create a timeline and
performance measures for each
priority and create a continuity
of care plan for each region.
Consider a language access needs
for services in each region. It
will establish a plan to obtain
federal, local, or private
resources to advance the
priority. It will.
include an appendix. This is
huge, Mr. Speaker, gentlelani,
include an appendix of the with
a list of all behavioral health
services in the region and
finally identify how regional
plans will optimize leverage or
reinforce reinforce coordination
with the Medicaid program, which
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I know
you've been working on this
issue for many years, you know,
that Medicaid gives us a 3 to 1
match. So, um, utilization of
those funds via Medicaid is
huge.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. General,
is there any current existing
regional planning that is in
place in our state, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you. Yes, um, for that
question. So, we do currently
have the uh behavioral health
collaborative, which was uh
Similarish committee comprised
of behavioral health
stakeholders, members of
government agencies, um,
everyone who's been involved
with this issue. However, over
the last
Past few years, uh, the
collaborative is
Uh, in a sense gone defunct.
They've stopped meeting, uh,
folks who were a part of that
collaborative didn't show up and
they produced no tangible
results.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I appreciate that
response. I too have that that
similar concern, um, are there
any other local, um,
Planning a regional.
Um
Constructs across our state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, well,
I, I can't speak to, um, you
know, various private
organizations or nonprofit or
non-governmental organizations
that are working on this issue,
um, we have not had anything to
my knowledge, and I've been
working on this issue for quite
a few years as well. Um, we have
not had anything near this
comprehensive.
Ever in the history of our
state.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
generally, I do agree. I think
this gives us some framework of
I'd say um more definite
framework than I've seen before,
but I would also, um, argue that
there is, there has been, there
have been.
Uh, regional collaboratives
formed in.
Mr. Speaker, uh, General Lee,
are you familiar with the Health
councils across our state?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
have heard of them, yes.
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
say that our health councils
have, uh,
Have constructs in a framework
for regionalization and give a
road map to a lot of what
This piece of legislation will
fortify, if you will, and I
would.
I would ask, do you think that
they would be a big part.
Of how we are going to um really
solidify that regionalization
and use what opportunities or
use what we have already in
place to really establish
In a, in a more comprehensive
way, which what the
The the behavioral health
collaborative was not able to
do, Mr. Speaker, lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
agree with you. We definitely
should not reinvent the wheel
and um I think the
Intent with this bill is to
continue and fortify the work
that has already been done and
help kind of refocus it in a way
that will tangibly produce
results, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I think baked within
this plan and I would like to
reiterate, um, as we go through
if we were to, when we pass this
piece of legislation and start
promulgating rules for it, we
would, um, contemplate inclusion
of uh
Of those committees and ensure
that any large stakeholder has
an opportunity to share the
information they have and take
part in the regional planning,
which again is what's so cool,
Mr. Speaker, gentlelani, about
the regional planning is that
each stakeholder on the ground
will have the ability to
Put their input in that
particular plan pertaining to
their area.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I just
would like to say, Mr. Speaker,
and
And maybe uh there's need to
know that there has been a lot
of efforts across our state to,
to really enhance and really
regionalize a lot of the
The behavioral health issues
that we, we have and, and why we
are in crisis right now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, they just
haven't been funded adequately,
even though we know that we have
put forward, I think about or
just over a billion dollars even
in this last fiscal year towards
behavioral health.
What
How would we ensure that.
This plan would be better than
what we have.
We have done in the past, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generallani. So, um, with the
creation of the commission,
there's accountability, and so
the commission will be in charge
of putting together the regional
commissions, which then put
together their plan and that
plan has to be submitted every 5
years, um, and it will have
legislative review. We will also
receive quarterly updates from
the commission as to the status
of the funding where it's going,
what's working, what's not
working.
another um great mechanism built
into this plan, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that we have the
ability to shift funding from
one region to the next if that
region is not producing results
or if there's a snag in their
plan and all of that information
will be included in these
reports, again, have to come to
the legislature for this per
this legislation, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, will the, this
commission
uh
It sounds like they would have
oversight. Where, what agency
would, would they be under Mr.
Speaker general lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlelii, so, um,
it's, there's a combination of
agencies. I would, I would.
State that the administrative
office of the courts is in
charge of coordination, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, especially
at the beginning of the planning
phase. So AOC will be charged
with um communing the committee,
identifying the regions, uh,
with the boundaries of those
regions are who
Who the regional planning
committees will be comprised of
and so AOC will be the ones, um,
kind of leading the charge, but
they will also have um the
advice and consent of the health
authority, uh, as well as the
Office of the Superintendent of
Insurance. Thank you, gentle
lady, uh, Mr. Speaker, would
they also be overseeing who
would be receiving funding, Mr.
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so no,
AOC will not be charged with um
expending the funds that that
will go to the commission, which
is comprised of the health
authority, AOC, the regional
planners, uh, other stakeholders
and the office of the
superintendent of insurance once
they meet, they will be the ones
in charge of um pushing funding
to where it's identified to be
needed again.
According to the plans, as we
receive those plans and we make
adjustments, um, based upon
those plans.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
just.
For me to, for understanding
clarification.
The commission that will be
created under this legislation
would meet twice a year or how
many times a year, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
will meet minimum quarterly.
You
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
and
Who would then
Uh, approve the applications of
if you will, I'm not sure what
that process would be. Could you
walk me through that process of
applications from the different
parts of the region for to.
That they would put forward for
their needs and their different
areas, Mr. Speaker, General. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that will
be approved by the overseeing
commission.
Thank you
Mr. Speaker, generally, so how
will they get those um those
needs met if if they're meeting
quarterly, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speakerian lady, so in the
beginning they
Quarterly is just a minimum. Um,
they can meet more often if they
see fit. I imagine uh especially
in the beginning, Mr.
Speakergenlady, as we're rolling
this legislation out, they're
going to meet quite a bit.
They're going to need to. So,
um, quarterly is probably once
the, the car is running and
warmed up and well oiled, but I
anticipate there will be a lot.
More interaction, especially in
the beginning.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally, what is the criteria
for the application process for
the
For the, the needs.
Mr. Speaker, General Liddy.
Mr. Speaker, and lady, give me
one minute to identify that in
the legislation, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, the
requirements of the plan can be
found on pages 6 and 7 across
pages 6 and 7 in the legis in
the legislation which will then
uh be.
Tweaked according to need at
this time, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, you're a, a very
smart, capable woman. I, I don't
think we need to take up time
reading, uh, 2.5 pages, but all
of the requirements are there.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, General, is
there a, a cap of amount of
funding in that criteria.
Mr. Speaker Delaney, uh, that is
dependent upon whatever this
great body appropriates.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally. So,
With that said, does that mean
that if
If we appropriate a million
dollars, if you will.
And all that million dollars can
go to just one.
When, uh
One project if you will, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I,
I, I mean, I think
At the very
At the very least, we have 5
projects and most 5 projects
we're gonna identify, um, not to
get into um.
Speculation, but if the
committee were to find that one
particular project is deserving
of all the attention and all of
that funding, I suppose that
could happen, although I think
it's um very unlikely given the
broad spectrum of needs
throughout the state.
Thank you
Mr. Speaker, gentleman,
I would hope so, um, so where is
there oversight within the
commission to monitor those
monetary um requests, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
what's so great about the setup
of this bill is that all of the
all of the funding requests will
be reviewed by the legislature,
at least on a quarterly basis.
Mr. Speaker General and
So the commission would
And correct me if I'm wrong, the
commission would then would, uh,
have a list of all the projects
and all the the regional needs
throughout the state they would
go through an approval process
and then it would be vetted
through the legislature and the
legislature would then deem
which projects would be um.
Accepted, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no. So
the review will be after the
fact. It's up to the commission
to identify the projects and the
priorities and then they will
report back to us as to what
those are.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady
again, um, so the oversight
really is within the commission.
Is that what I'm hearing, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I,
I think it's more fair to say
that the immediate oversight is
with the commission, but if the
legislature were to see
something troubling within a
report on a plan or um you know,
not seeing the results that we
would like to see, then we are
of course at liber at liberty,
Mr. Speaker Generallani, uh, to
make tweaks to the legislation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
Malay, uh, and those reports
would.
Come out quarterly as well
according to the meetings or how
often would those reports be
given to the legislature, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, those
reports will come out uh
quarterly via the legislative
Finance Committee updates.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Do those reports go to any
other um state government
agency?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they'll also go to the
healthcare authority and the
administrative Office of the
courts.
You, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
So, the way I'm understanding
this piece of legislation is
that the AOC will be the, the
fundamental um agency that will.
We
set up the constructs of the
commission or hold.
The meetings and the framework
and be the uh in other words,
the administrator of, of this
commission, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker General Lei?
Mr. Speaker, gentlelani,
although administrator is not,
not specifically used AOC will
be in charge of, let's say,
directing the commission, uh,
especially in the earlier, the
initial establishment phases,
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, General Lady, what
Current, um.
Process or constructs exist at
the AOC that.
Well set them up for success,
Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlelani, um, I,
I think you'll remember that
when we brought ourselves into
special session, uh, last year
we created a pilot project, um,
through, I think it was a $3
million appropriation and that
infrastructure will be expanded
upon and utilized um via this
piece of legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General.
That $3 million that we did
appropriate to the AOC during
our special session
was to set up.
Or expand pilot programs across
the state for the AOT, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, Delaney, I believe
it was just the first
traditional district, but yes,
for AOT.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady with
AOT then be the.
The mission if you will, or the
The purpose, if you will, of, of
why we're setting or where you
are going to set this commission
at the AOC, Mr. Speaker,
generally, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, no. AOT is just one of
many aspects that this bill
hopes to address.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, um.
Oh
So I'm a bit confused, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, because it
was referenced that.
Because of the, the funding that
we gave during the special
session of that $3 million but
this was the beginning of what
is to be expected of the AOC
with this new.
Uh, legislation, Mr. Speaker,
General, can you, can you help
me out here? I'm, I'm having a
more explanation there, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so, um,
what AOC did with the pilot
program is they were able to
identify, not only identify
needs to implement um AOT
through the first judicial and
also identified gaps and gaps in
coverage is, I, I believe, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, one of the
biggest challenges that we have
faced with mental behavioral
healthcare throughout the state,
especially as it relates to say,
uh, intensive outpatient
therapy, right? Or
also can also be known as AOT.
So the AOC has proven itself
capable of uh utilizing and
setting themselves up with a
framework to identify these gaps
and figure out where the
coverage needs to go to fill
those gaps.
Mr. Speaker, General later.
Those gaps that are that have
been identified, I, I believe.
So
we had a special session in
July.
And
They received the $3 million
funding.
And you're now, so they've had
months to create this, this, um.
This process or the you know to
prepare for this legislation. In
other words, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker Jalani, uh, my
expert informs me that they
actually launched 3 weeks ago in
anticipation for the roll out of
this legislation. Speaker
General lady.
Again, I'm confused because
their rollout was specific to
what we, we gave them the
funding for for the AOT
specifically or not, how is that
different from what the.
These past 3 roots have been in
relationship to this legislation
that it's just been that we're
just debating today, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, more
services, more people, more
regions.
Mr. Speaker, generally, are you
saying that they already have a
regional plan that they that
they've been working on since
July, Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, as it
pertains to this legislation,
no, the plan they had pertained
to the $3 million pilot program
that they did before that was
just um specific to AOT.
She could generally and that was
um that was important, that was
really important work that they
did and that we tasked them with
and that I believe they were
already through their um their
commission on behavioral health.
We're already working towards
and and really coming together
for many, I'd say years in
planning and development of how
they wanted to pilot, um, what
they're doing and then we gave
them the funding they gave them
the ability to um move forward.
With their planning. Now what
we're addressing now with this
legislation.
Is additional to what they're
doing. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, as
I understand it, um.
Without that funding that we
were so generous with and is
leading us to a better place and
and moving in in all sorts of
legislation that is before us
this session, um, how is that
related, their, their pilot
programs that they've been
Um, moving forward with how is
that?
Different or the same to what
this how does that compare to
this legislation and, and how
would they
Then now Taylor, what we're
gonna task them with, with what
they're already doing, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so the
pilot program was solely in the
first judicial district and
pertained only to AOT. So with
this legislation, it will be
rolled out across all judicial
districts or however way the the
regional committees will be
divided and it will pertain to
the provision of all mental
behavioral health services as
identified by need.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker lady. So
currently they are addressing uh
the issues through AOT and
through um their concerns
through the judiciary system
with with individuals who have
behavioral health needs.
And substance use disorder and,
and those sorts of things
because through their purview as
in the the judicial
ran branch of government that
that was their concentration and
saw the need there and and are
able and capable of expanding
that the current particular
pilot programs that they have
with this legislation would do
would expand their scope.
To all behavioral health issues,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
gonna remind you that, you know,
the AOC is just one party that
will comprise the entire
committee, so you will also have
input from the healthcare
authority and OSI and other
stakeholders and those people
that are brought in from, you
know,
providing services on the
ground, so, um, AOC is just one
party of what is envisioned to
be a multifaceted commission.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. General
Lady, so they, they currently
AOC has a behavioral health
commission.
Addressing the issues that are
before them through the through
their their.
The scope of practice, if you
will there their mission as
being the the judicial system.
And we're now going to task them
through this legislation to
oversee or to create a new
commission.
For all of behavioral health.
I'm just trying to get a bigger
or better picture of this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker Jelani, the
Healthcare Authority will be the
entity overseeing it. The only
thing the AOC is tasked with is
convening everyone in the
commission. They are the cat
herders, so to speak.
Thank you. So with this, this
new commission replaced their
current behavioral health
commission that they have in
place, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
no.
Thank you. So Mr. Mr. Speaker
General Le did that commission
will continue their mission and
what they what how they're
addressing um the behavioral
health and and other issues
regarding behavioral health.
Through the judicial system, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes.
Thank you.
So this new commission though
will take on.
What did, what additional
Um, issues regarding behavioral
health that they're not already
addressing through their current
commission Speaker General Lady.
Mr. Speaker Jelani, um, that can
be found on pages 4 and 5 of the
legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So then
I would, I would say that they,
we are going to be tasking them
with
A whole, a whole list of 2 pages
worth of news.
Um
behavioral health issues that
They've never really
dealt with before, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I want to remind you again that
this is the, um, the entire
executive committee of which AOC
is solely one party. There are
many, many parties. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I
just, I'm just trying to get a
clearer picture of this because
they
they will be the, the entity
that will be meeting and
convening and bringing all of
these other.
Um
Officials from
State agencies together and I'm
just getting clarification on
that because
They already have a behavioral
health commission that needs uh
a regularly and reports out and
now we're giving them a new
commission. I'm just saying, I'm
trying to understand this better
because.
It's not duplicative from what
the answers you gave me
previously, I'm trying to say,
what is the enhancement for them
to be doing this, Mr. Speaker,
generally.
Mr. Speaker Jimli, so I'm gonna
assume that we're still talking
about AOC.
Mr. Speaker General, yes. OK,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, AOC will continue to have
their commission that deals with
mental behavioral health as it
relates to criminally criminal
justice involved individuals.
Those are people that are going
in and out of drug court. Those
are people that are dealing with
issues that have led them to the
courts, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so what we're doing with
this legislation and the
creation of this commission is
we are expanding.
mental behavioral health
coverage to everyone, not just
those that are within the court
system. So it's a very important
distinction to make.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, that, that that that that
helps me and I just want the
public to understand that that
is exactly what we're doing. We
are, we are establishing a new
um paradigm if you will, for the
AOC in connection as you as you
the bill illustrates with other
state agencies, but they will
fundamentally be.
The commission that will convene
that will
Um, drive, if you will, the, the
issues that we have around
behavioral behavioral mental
health in our state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
That's correct.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
Thank you.
I appreciate that and I just
want that to be clear because um
We are shifting to paradigms as
you, as you mentioned in um I'm
shredding and I'm
Cautiously
Reviewing how we're going to do
this through this piece of
legislation, um, I have had
concerns and I want to put that
on record. However, I feel like
we we deserve a chance to see
how we are going to improve.
Our behavioral mental health
systems in our state.
I will be weighing in and
following this very carefully as
we develop as this develops, I
am.
Aga treading very carefully in
how we're going to do this
because
The AOC though they are
wonderful and they're doing
their, they've done incredible
and will continue to be
incredible work and we have put
our faith in them as we have as
our dollars as our values are
following our dollars to them. I
hope that this is, we're going
to see the return on the value
and we're going to have the
oversight and we're going to
really monitor how this uh
proceeds, Mr. uh Speaker General
Lady as this unfolds, and I want
to commend all those who put all
their work and effort into this
piece of legislation and say
that this is.
It's pivotal to our state right
now and how this unfolds because
we have been devastated by the
collapse of our behavioral
system and myself is many, many
of us probably here have been
directly affected by what has
happened in our, in our
behavioral health systems.
And last services and lives have
been lost and I just wanna say.
Thank you for bringing this
legislation forward. uh, thank
you to those sponsors who have
been really working on this and
I just hope that we we come to
um
To find that that this is, this
is uh the best way that we need
to address this, but maybe it's
not. I don't think it's perfect.
A lot of the things that we do
here are not perfect, but this
is one of those issues and one
of those topics that we really,
we really, really, really want
to put uh the time and effort to
protect those, especially those
most vulnerable and um
Without Mr. um Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I yield back.
There is further debate the
young lady from Bernalio and
Torrance Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for the patience
really also realized I got the
bill but not the substitute. Now
I have the substitute. So Mr.
Speaker, General Lani from Bern
Leo County, will you please
yield your time.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady from
Bertollio and Otero, I believe I
do, yes.
It's Torrance County. I
apologize.
Mr. Speaker's space since I got
this new district, everybody's
like, what's that other district
she has? So Mr. Speaker Delaney,
the one thing I noticed since I
do have the substitute and I do
have the bill. It went from 16
pages to 8. Can you just give me
an overview of what was changed
or what was removed or how it
was streamlined, Mr. Speaker and
gently.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think you meant to say it went
up from 8 to 16.
Hold on, Mr. Speaker. Don't. So
I'm looking at, OK, so I have a
substitute. Can you read me the
202 number for what we're
working on right now so I have
the right one, Mr. Speaker
Delaney. Mr. Speaker
Generallani, 230522.5. Perfect.
I have that one right here and
you are correct because I was, I
had that, I had a substitute, I
had amendments. I have a
plethora of material on this.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
going in the opposite direction,
we were from 16 to 8. Can you
kind of summarize where we
started with this project and
where we ended up with the
um 16 pages, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so,
um, what the Senate Finance
Committee substitute did in
particular was uh established
the strategic framework, put in
place the account accountability
protocols and uh the siloed the
state's behavioral health
system, all of which were
identified as current problems
that we are facing.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I know when I first saw, I know
that SB 12, and 3 are all tied
together and in the FAR mentions
that SB2 has the finances, so is
it still at 1 billion or was
that amount changed, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker Jimlini, so right
now it's $200 million as the
down payment for the behavioral
health fund Trust.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
it's hard because I want to ask
questions on that just a little
bit I know it doesn't, it's not
in the bill, but it is the bill,
right? So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so eventually the goal is
to get to that 1 billion mark.
Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
correct.
I just want to make sure because
I know there's been quite a few
changes on this as it moves
through. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, on
Our first page
It's says a bit on line 2.
Behavior health region means a
geographic area of the state
that is designed who I'm sorry
if I missed that, who is the
person that is going to
designate these areas, how many
areas will they be and where,
who's gonna map that all out,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
administrative office of the
courts.
And Mr. Speaker, generally, do
we have any idea of how they're
going to map that out, how, what
region's gonna be where or what
What metric that they're going
to use is, I mean, are they
going to divide Berleo County
up? Are they how are they gonna
take it to my district of
Torrance County and the East
Mountains, so they'll get a
population they're looking at,
uh, finances, what uh what are
they looking at when they make
this map, Mr. Speaker Ginni.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
going to correct myself, um,
from what I said earlier, so
it's not just AOC I mean to say
it's AOC, but that is one party
of the executive committee,
which will be in formation, um,
those regions have yet to be
defined, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but I, um, have reason to
believe that one of the reasons
why AOC was selected for this
role is they help oversee the
judicial districts in our state,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, which
if
so see fit, perhaps that's how
the regions will be divided as
per judicial district or
something else.
Interesting, Mr. Speaker and
generally I, I'd really like to
see how that gets divvied up
because in my Torrance County is
not as affluent as my Berlo
County, so it'd be interesting
how they're going to end up
breaking that down. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady on the
2nd page on C, we go through
this whole list of our
behavioral health stakeholders,
which means, well, all these
people here CCYD is here. We got
a lot of people involved. Are
they going to have an equal
weigh in and how this process
works or does
one have more say so and
decisions than others or how do
these all play out in section C
here.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I,
I believe they will all have
equal say as they are all equal
members of the, they're all
stakeholders they're all equal
members of the oversight
committee.
So Mr. Speaker and General
Laney, um,
I do have, I'm not, I'm just not
gonna say it. I do have a
concern about one agency in
there because we've had quite a
few issues with them, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and that
does give me some great concern.
I'm just gonna say it, CYFD, uh,
gives me some some contention on
them being involved because we
have got so many issues with
them. I just want to make that
as a statement. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um,
When we look at on page 2, 23
disproportionately impacted
community. It means a community
of population, people which
multiple burdens include mental,
so they, they have more things
going on is, is what I
understand inequity, poverty,
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
do you have any metrics on how
that is going to play into that
and is that gonna play into when
they make the maps. What
specifically are they looking
for when they talk about
disproportionately impacted.
communities, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
um exactly how the funding
decisions will be made based
upon that definition.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and Delaney,
specifically on this, so what
they're looking for is specific
areas that are
disproportionately impacted,
which means well.
Are they OK, so we, let's go
back to community, Mr. Speaker,
young lady. So when you talk
about community, would that mean
like in let's take Albuquerque,
it wouldn't mean all of
Albuquerque it might mean a
specific zip code or specific
area. I don't want to mention
it, but I think one comes to
mind that's right in Albuquerque
would that then be the community
or all of Albuquerque, Mr.
Speaker and young lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, the, the
Example, my expert is giving me
is let's take Bernalio County,
for example, um, and the, um,
large unhoused population that
we see in Bernalillo County, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so, um,
one would assume that if a
priority was identified, that
priority would probably seek to
address that population.
The most or be be prioritized
above other needs because
they're that particular
population is the most
disproportionately affected in
that region.
OK, and I completely understand
that part, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but would it narrow
it down to a specific.
Without saying it, streets that
cross each other that have a
very high incidence of people
not only sleeping on the street,
but actually doing drugs and
having mental issues on that
specific street corner, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, no.
My brain is processing that Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. I kind
of wish it would because there,
you know, we have some very rich
areas. I know people like Satish
and I'm so used to niche areas
that are very specific.
On cross streets. OK, so what
I'm trying to get at Mr. Speaker
Delay.
I
Walk with me on this if we say
that because Albuquerque has the
biggest
population with the most people
with a number of issues, does
that mean they're gonna be
prioritized over Torrance County
who actually does have as many
issues as just smaller because
of less population, Mr. Speaker,
and young lady. Mr. Speaker, and
lady, that is the beauty of this
legislation and that each region
identified will be in charge of
putting together their own
strategic
Plan. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, if the region that
encompasses Torrance County,
identifies one particular
priority issue that they want to
address, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, they are empowered through
this bill to do so.
OK, Mr. Speaker, John, it leads
me to another question. So if
let's say in my Torrance County,
I know that we have all these
stakeholders, but who is the
specific stakeholder for
Torrance County that says these
are the local issues.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, each regional council will
have their own convening of
stakeholders, right? So Mr.
Speaker lady, I'm assuming it's
gonna be um agency officials
that um give are in charge of uh
giving services in that
particular area. It's gonna be
the service providers in that
particular area, um, just
depends on, on who
That committee has on it helping
to address and make those
decisions to best fit that
region.
And Mr. Speaker, generally, that
would work, but if you look at
smaller communities like Corona
where they don't have anybody
there at those type of
facilities. I do get concerned
their voice may not get heard or
I have all the way to launch,
you know, there's not very many
people out there, but I want to
make sure that there's equity in
this.
So I'm thinking about what you
just said, because it would work
for like a whole county, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but it
doesn't work for a specific
community. We do have a lot of
isolated rural communities. I
see that as possibly being a
problem if they don't have a way
to represent themselves so they
can say, hey, in Corona we have
a very, I'm not I'm picking a
city. I'll just make up one in
Smithtown, um, I don't think
there's a Smithtown in New
Mexico. We have a high incident,
we only have 300 people, but we
have 250.
addicts. I, how does that play
out in that bill, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady for them having
representation for their needs.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
you know, just trying to stay on
the bill here, that's precisely
why we are empowering these
regional commissions so that
they can study that issue to
ensure that our most rural areas
are best represented. We will
find those folks in the
commissions will be empowered to
give them a voice.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when it, when we move on on page
3 and it talks about generally
recognized standards for
behavioral health.
That covers a lot in psychology,
so that could be anything from,
which I love, cognitive
behavioral therapy to um
Any kind of sideline therapy, I
mean, I don't want to minimize
art there because that's
extremely therapeutic,
especially for kids, PTSD and
stuff, but
How do we know if in one
district they say, OK, we find
that cognitive behavioral
therapy is the best for PTSD
borderline, uh, etc.
But in that region, they decide
to do a different therapy that
doesn't help with those issues.
Who's overseeing that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
think the commissions will be
tasked with with
Deciding which types of
therapies they want to provide
in a community, I think that
they will be tasked with
identifying gaps in the types of
therapies that do not exist in
these communities.
Thank you Mr. Speaker Duley that
that that leads to another.
A little troublesome part for me
because I understand we want to
find the gaps, right? I
understand what the bill's
trying to do and I get all that.
I just.
Have an issue, for example, and
not to pick on one over another,
some therapies work better than
others, and cognitive behavior
therapy is one of the ones that
works really well.
So I'd hate for a regional area
to pick a therapy or find a
therapy or find a therapists
that are treating patients in a
way that isn't necessarily the
best way to treat them, but
moving on, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, on this part on page
4, we're talking about the
sequential intercepting
intercept mapping.
Is that so when they're going to
make the map and the diversion,
is this another map within the
map where they're looking for
because we're trying to find
Disproportionately impacted
communities and then within that
is this map to identify
resources and gaps within that
specific.
Are the general area, not the
whole state, but in that general
specific area. Is that correct,
Mr. uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm sorry you lost me.
So Mr.
Speaker John League,
so in the whole plan of this is
to make the areas right with
geographic areas. We have, we're
looking for disproportionately
impacted communities and then
within that we also have
sequential intercept mapping.
Maybe she just explained that so
that I'm fully understanding
what that means cause maybe I'm
not fully understanding that
terminology.
Sure, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
happy to. So sequential
intercept mapping means a
strategic planning tool that
helps communities identify
resources and gaps and develop
plans to divert people with
mental health disorders and
substance misuse away from the
criminal justice system and into
treatment. So the sequential
intercept mapping is
The guiding light that we will
be utilizing within these
regional.
Committees will then be putting
together a plan to
Best
Do the sequential intercept
mapping, that makes sense. No,
that does, and Mr. Speaker
gently, that's actually the
question I was asking in a very
convoluted roundabout way, so I
think for lazy laser point on
that I should just asked that
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um,
I'm not gonna read all this
because we have on page 4, we
have this health executive
committee.
And we have all these different
people that are on there. Can
you just give me an overview of
what's, if you can, what their
roles are going to be and when,
how often is this committee
meeting, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, Jim lady, I,
I think we already addressed
that in the gentle lady from
Santa Fe's questions, but they
will be meeting at least once a
quarter and um they will be
comprised of representatives um
from all of these designated
stakeholders.
So Mr. Speaker and generally,
I'm trying to, I want to
understand the layers that we
have, so we have a lot of
stakeholders and then we have a
regional area. So the regional
area then comes in with all
these.
Executive committee people to
discuss everything that's going
on or how does that play out,
Mr. Speaker, young lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
just like a corporation has,
let's say an executive
committee, um, then there are
different departments. Think of
it that way.
Actually makes sense that they
do understand that. So, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, so
we have this whole section on
page 5, which you just explained
on the sequential.
Mr. Speaker, Joe Lady.
On page 6, we have a behavioral
health stakeholder receiving
appropriations pursuant to the
behavioral health reform and
Investment Act. Can you explain
that briefly to me so that I can
understand what this means with
the, with the stakeholders
receiving appropriations
pursuant to the behavioral
health reform and Investment
Act.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, SB one.
Is, uh, what creates the
Behavioral Health Trust Fund,
SB2, uh, is, was just the
vehicle to appropriate those
funds into the general
appropriations Act and SB 3,
what we're debating right now is
the plan for the distribution of
those funds. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and generally, that
makes it makes sense. That ties
into the SB1 and the SB2 because
I knew there was going to have
to be.
A part in there. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when I look on 6,
the regional plan, it looks like
they're looking for behavior
health gaps.
Um
So when it talks here about
identifying no more than 5
grants or state funded
priorities per phase. Can you
explain to me what that means
and why there's only 5 grants
and how that plays into this
bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, one of the faults that we've
had with this scatter shot um
approach we've had before this
bill is we gave, we we
appropriated a bunch of money
for mental behavioral health
services, but there was no plan
attached to that appropriation.
So the money kind of ended up
going where it was gonna go, and
we didn't identify particular
priorities specific priorities
that we would task ourselves
with achieving kind of sort of
like what we do here in the
legislature, right, with capital
outlay is we want to make sure
that projects are fully funded,
fully executed, so we can get
tangible results from them. So
that's exactly why the limit of
5 projects was proposed so that
we don't have the same scatter
shot approach. Got it, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Yeah,
that's, that is very annoying
when it comes to capital outlay.
That's why I try to work with
everybody to get one thing
funded instead of giving, you
know, $50 to a $5 million
project because then nothing
gets done.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
when we're talking here on page
7, identify how regional plans
will optimize leverage or
reinforce coordination with the
state Medicaid program program.
How does Medicaid pay uh play
into this and do we have any
oversight with this with
Medicaid, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so a large, I'm sure you know
this, a large um percentage of
our, of our population here in
the state is Medicaid eligible
and utilizes Medicaid services
in some way, and Medicaid allows
for a 3 to 1.
not
for service reimbursement, so
this plan, this bill essentially
tasks the committee with
figuring out a way to optimize
that match, so that we could get
the biggest bang for our buck.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I appreciate how you
answer the question so that it
makes complete sense. So Mr.
Speaker, generally on page 8 on
line 4 it says the healthcare
authority and consultation with
the Legislative Finance
Committee and the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee shall determine
baseline data collection points.
Can you explain to me what we
mean by these baseline data
collection points, Mr. Speaker,
John Lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I,
I, I think that's exactly what
we're tasking, um, LFC and um.
The legislative Health and Human
Services Committee to define
what the baseline data would be.
OK, Mr. Speaker gentle lady, and
are they with this bill is there
a portion in here where they
come back and report to us so
that we can also see how things
are moving forward.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
absolutely, on a quarterly basis
because I think Mr. Speaker,
generally I think I saw in one
of my notes that the last
committee hasn't reported in
over a year, so that's very
problematic. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, a few more
questions on this.
When
part of the interrupted and
there's there's been a request
for a gentleman to remove their
coats.
Please do so.
Thank you. Please continue.
You can remove your coats that's
what you said.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. Sorry I
was just reiterating so they
could hear. I wasn't trying to
overspeak you.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, so, um,
Smart was, OK, so this is a
really important part on page 8,
I noticed on 3 public feedback
to that, does that mean that
these meetings will be open and
that people from the public
could actually show up if they
lived in, let's say a small town
of Smithtown that I'm making up
that they can show up and say
hey we have an issue with this
and be able to present that to
the committee, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so any behavioral health
stakeholder, uh, that wants to
attend these meetings can
request to attend these
meetings.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and um.
One of the questions I had is if
somebody
How does it play out with the
courts, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, because they have to be
involved in some way if somebody
gets sent to diversion instead
of, you know, you got busted,
you were shoplifting, but you
were alcoholic or doing drugs at
the time. So we were sudden
diversion. How does this play
out with what's set forward in
the courts about how to send
somebody to a diversion program.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
this legislation would it
advance and increase the number
and level of services that would
be available for such diversion
programs.
So Mr. Speaker and John lady,
because it seems like 12 and 3
have had a lot of thought put
into them. Do any of those have
anything on how we are going to
get because as we expand this,
right, we're gonna need more
nurses and doctors and
psychiatrists and behavioral
health people, have we thought
about how we're either going to
recruit them or how to get more
behavioral health therapists
into New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker Jim Lady, I'm so
glad you asked the question
because another great part of
this bill is it requires, uh,
statewide credentialing so one
of the another issue we've had
is that credentialing has been
different for, let's say each uh
Medicaid provider and so we've
had a bottlenecking of those
people who providers who want to
come into the state and be
credentialed to work through a
through a service or provider.
and they have to wait forever in
order to do so. So this will
standardize that credentialing
process so that there's just one
standard to meet, and so that
should really help speed things
up and make the process easier
for those wanting to provide
services within the state.
And Mr. Speaker in general, I do
appreciate that. I know that
when I was in health community I
could have sworn that we passed
reciprocity for just about
everything under the moon and
the stars, isn't that already in
place that we can just accept
people that come here, uh, where
they have reciprocity with other
states and behavioral health and
how does that change what's in
here versus the reciprocity we
already have.
Mr. Speaker, Jelani, um, I'm
being told that's different
because Medicaid requires a
different type of annual
recredentialing.
OK, Mr. Speaker, so were we
talking earlier we're talking
about Medicaid credentialing, is
that where we're interested
because it is very complicated
and there's a lot of therapists
that don't take Medicaid for
that reason. You're talking
about streamlining for someone
to get on Medicaid. Is that what
I'm understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's correct. Uh,
perfect. OK, because I thought
we're talking about Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, about, um,
doing the credentialing for a
bit, but now I see what you're
saying. You're saying about
foreign and therapy, but do we
have another plan, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady?
like how we're just in in
general going to get more
behavioral health therapist to
to graduate college, stay here,
or to get people to move into
New Mexico as this demand
builds.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
addressed on page 9, section I.
Number 2. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
Dela.
Mr. Speaker, young lady, um,
just a few more questions
because
After a while, I get tired of
speaking.
So I'm just a young lady, um,
One of the issues that on the
It was on a fiscal impact.
It talks about the bill as a
companion sent a bill to which
provides the appropriation for
several grant programs and the
implementation of the sequential
intercept model which we all
just learned about that bill
includes a clause referring to
this bill with the Associated uh
listed this is LFC introduced
version of the general
Appropriation Act of 141 million
and we've
On the next page.
On when we go on to page 4, it
has significant issues, um, Mr.
Speaker, it says the Behavioral
Health collaborative.
Which originally meant was that
that was a part of was talk
about only meets one time a
year.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
with that bill was originally
passed before, did they have
timelines that they were
supposed to meet as well and
didn't, or was it just there was
no timelines for them to meet.
Mr. Speaker Jelani, one thing,
uh, to note is the significant
issues were all addressed in the
committee substitute and uh I
don't think the FIR was updated
to um include that as your with
regards to your question on the
collaborative, that's outside
the four corners of this bill.
I'm not, um, in, in a position
to be able to opine on that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, hold
on one second.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I think that's all the questions
that I have right now because
it's, it's not just the one
bill.
I'm sorry
Yeah
Reson Bach was just pointed out
that this fiscal impact is from
21925 and it is a synopsis of
the Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate.
Bill 3. Do you have that in
front of you, Mr. Chaney Joy?
It's updated to 1925.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
expert tells me that the
synopsis is updated, however,
the significant issues, um, is
kept.
are kept grammar.
OK, so Mr. Speaker Delana, what
you're saying is that the
significant issues were
addressed even though they're in
this, but they're still in it,
they just didn't remove it. Is
that what you're saying, Mr.
Speaker, De lady? Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's correct. OK.
So, Mr. Speaker Jelly, just to
make sure on this, so when the
healthcare authority raises
concerns about the single state
agencies designated overseeing
coordinate behavioral health
services from the state. This
regulation allows them to access
federal funding grants and then
they have a series of questions
in there on page 5. So Mr.
Speaker, generally, those were
all
and the substitute or the
updated bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct.
So Mr. Speaker Delay, thank you
while you allowed me to ask all
the questions. This is a very,
very in-depth bill with a lot of
money, um, I know there's a
billion dollars that needs to be
put into to make that run, Mr.
Speaker Delay, with the amount
that they're putting in.
Right now, because I know, I, my
understanding was that it was
going to be a billion dollars
and then there was going to be
um.
Money from that and interest
that was gonna be usable for the
project.
So the last question I have is
can you explain to me if we've
gone to, I'm sorry the amount
that you told me, was it $400
million as a down payment is the
400, what is the $400 million
going to do if my understanding
was correct, we needed the
million dollars to be put into a
reserve somewhere to gain
interest. So what does this down
payment get us out of this bill,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
Senate Bill 1 is the goal of $1
billion. Senate Bill 2 is the
down payment via the general
appropriations Act for the trust
fund that will generate the
billion dollars.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, so I wanna
make sure I understand because
these are 3 bills tied together,
how they work. So SB one is the
goal of $1 million SB2 is the
400 million.
And then SB 3 deals with putting
the money in the trust, but if
we're only getting the 400
million right now, what are we
doing with that to start this
project if we need actually the
billion to make it work, Mr.
Speaker Jelani. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so with the um down
payment in Senate Bill 2, that
is designed to get services
started and for the committees
to convene and for the plans to
be put together and while the
plans continue to be honed and
submitted for review the trust
fund will accumulate interest
and so, uh, the system is
designed to be self-sustaining,
however, the down payment will
cover what we foresee to be the
first phase of what we, uh,
assume will be a multi-phase
continued approach.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I think that's all the
questions I have. I do worry
about somebody getting into
those funds later because I've
seen so many funds set aside and
somehow it needs to be taken for
something else, so, uh, thank
you for answering all my
questions. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There's further debate, gentle
lady from Grant Hidalgo, and
Sierra Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to, uh, my
friend from all those counties,
just 3 counties. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. Is, is,
is this a crime bill?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I don't know what you mean by a
crime bill, but mental behavior
health is a very important part
of how we address public safety.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. I
started off when we came to the
floor. I only had 0.3. So I, I
just got 0.5, but while I was
looking at 0.3 I, I saw, um,
some pretty significant changes
on the first couple of pages. In
the first version, we listed
administrative offices of the
courts in this version, I'm on
page 2, section C. These are
the, um, behavioral health
stakeholders. Office of the
courts is now listed public
defender department is listed to
attorney.
Generals, offices listed.
Can you explain to me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, why it was
necessary to add these specific
stakeholders.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
were added because um all of
them interact with our criminal
justice system and so it's
incredibly important for them to
know and be apprised of what
services we have where.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. When I was
looking at version 3, it felt
very local and it was aligned
with the judicial districts. Uh,
how many, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, how many judicial
districts do we have in the
state of New Mexico, Mr. Speaker
Ginellini, 13.
13 judicial districts and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, then on
page 7, line 2, section 2, this
says that we will identify more
than 5 grants.
Or state funded priorities per
phase. If there are 13 regional
districts, how will they
determine only 5 grants to be
awarded.
Mr. Speaker, gen lady, so, um,
going back to the bill, we, I
wanna take you to section 4
subpoint D, which is entitled A
Regional Plan.
So for each regional plan, they
will identify no more than 5.
Grants or state funded
priorities. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentle
ladies. So in the first couple
of versions of the grant, I
mean, of the bill that I was
reading, um, I was really
tracking it looked like, and it
felt like that each of the
judicial areas under the
direction of the Office of the
court, the administration of the
courts would have these regional
meetings with key stakeholders
and behavioral health providers
and in their region, and I, I
guess my
assumption was because it was
the Office of the courts and
because of the, the, the way it
was formed that this was going
to be very local, and now I'm
looking at the amendment where
it creates
The
It looks like we took it
straight back up to the, to the,
to the state level. So the
behavioral health stakeholders
mean, well, first of all, the
stakeholders are everybody. Uh,
so,
The stakeholders on page 2 are
now representatives through the
administrative Office of the
courts, Public Defender
Department, District attorney's
office, the behavioral health
region behavioral health service
recipients.
Anybody who's a recipient,
behavioral health service
providers, anybody who's a
provider, behavioral healthcare
advocates who, who, I mean,
that's, that's Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, could I be
considered as a legislator, a
behavioral health care advocate.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
mean, it's not behavioral health
care advocate itself is not
defined within the bill, um, but
I believe the intention is to
make the stakeholder inclusion
process as broad as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So it's
much broader than it was in
prior versions. So now I'm
imagining rather than sort of
like health council, you know,
hospitals, behavioral health
providers and key stakeholders
in a, you know, I don't know, I
was envisioning 30, 40 people in
in a judiciary district. Now
it's in a government facility
where the entire public would
come because
We all want to see improved
behavioral health outcomes, of
course, then it keeps going and
now it's healthcare authority,
CYFD, um, higher education
institutions would be within
behavioral health regions. I, I,
I suppose no one's being left
out, so all universities will be
present.
Specifically, University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Center,
what is their specific and
unique role that they're listed
differently, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
you and Health Sciences Center
is um.
A large provider of mental
behavioral health services
throughout the state. I know
that you're familiar with
Project Echo. They've helped,
um, ensure rural access to
mental behavior healthcare, so
you and them um does a lot to
offer mental behavioral
healthcare. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you, gentle
lady. Law enforcement, law
enforcement agencies, local
jails, detention centers,
behavioral health associations,
local behavioral healthcare
providers. So now I'm
envisioning a, a, a
The largest facility that's
available in the area where the
meeting will be held and
hundreds of people coming to
give input. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is back now. What's the new
vision is for this. It's gotten
a lot broader, so regional
meetings with any, the public,
the public.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
while the vision for it is to be
as broad and inclusive as
possible, realistically we would
imagine between 30 and 50 people
would show up each meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, Gina lady. Now that
the definition of region, I, I
had this assumption that
regional was tied to a judicial
district, so I had envisioned in
my mind 13 regional meetings,
but what is the definition of
regional and how many meetings
would there be?
Mr. Speaker Jelani, um, region,
the regions have yet to be
defined. That's one of the roles
that the executive committee is
taking on and um they have to
meet at least once a quarter.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Now this is the
biggest change that I see in the
substitute that was presented
today on page 4. The biggest
steps today I see is that it's
no longer up to the local key
stakeholders and people who know
and understand the community
most, the folks who reflect the
culture, the heritage, the
ethnicity, you know, diversity
of the local community. Now, on
section 3, I'm on page 4, line
6, the new material is
behavioral health executive
Committee. Now that behavioral
health executive Committee is
Now the Secretary of Health
Authority director of Behavioral
Health Services Division of the
Healthcare Authority, the
director of medical assistance
division, the director of the
administrative Office of the
courts and 3 behavioral health
experts designated by the
director of the administrative
Office of the courts. So now it
just got really far away from my
rural community. I feel like,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
does the voice of the local
community where the key
stakeholders are, make it to
this level.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so the
executive committee is um is
tasked with the creation of the
regional districts, what makes
the most sense and how to divvy
those districts up they are by
no means um in charge of
identifying the priorities of
those regional districts or
committees, and they by no means
are going to be dictating what
best fits those communities,
what projects they're going to
prioritize, all of that will be
left to the local level.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you point me to the section of
the bill that would give me some
rest, you know, assure me of
that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
looking at page 4,
Line 22, review and approve
regional plans and establish
funding strategies and
structure.
Based on approved regional
plans. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, but I don't
know how many regional meetings
there's going to be.
And, and I, and it and it, it
appears that it's very, very
heavy on courts and correction
because the people who are named
that must be present to engage.
I mean, it, the representatives
that we're going to work really
hard to get there are mostly
Office of the courts, public
defenders, district attorney,
local jails, detention centers,
law enforcement agencies and the
public who choose to show up.
University of New Mexico Health
Sciences specifically named, and
then the general public who
choose to show up if this is
held, let's say it's
in Las Cruces and folk from
Socorro and Sierra and Demming
and Luna and Hidalgo and
Catherine, and they all come to
this regional meeting. Gosh,
those meetings, the the capa we
know our local capacity.
And that seems very far away.
And then to take that up even
higher to an executive letter
level where people designated by
the executive goes very, very
far away from what originated as
something that was to identify
local community gaps, local to
me.
Means
With, you know, where I live,
work, go to school, where, where
I have community. So, um, so,
but you, you referred to, to
page 4, the behavioral Health
executive Committee, which is
all people who probably are in
Santa Fe. Um, they are going to
designate the behavioral health
regions.
They are going to review and
approve the regional plans, and
they are going to establishing
the funding strategies.
So again, it looks to me like
we're setting up a fund. If I
look at Senate Bill 2, because
they kind of go together. We're
gonna put a billion dollars and
draw down from it annually, and
we're going to give that
authority to the behavioral
health executive Committee,
which is comprised of the
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority Director of Behavioral
Health Services Division of the
Healthcare Authority, the
director of the Medical
Assistance division of the
Healthcare Authority, director
of the administrative Office of
the courts and 3 behavioral
health experts.
Designated by the director of
the administrative Office of the
courts. They will be the ones
who designate the behavioral
health regions, review and
approve the regional plans,
establish a funding strategies
and the structure based on
approved regional plans that
they're going to approve. So
there
And on page 5.
Section 5, line 3, they're going
to establish project management
strategies that shall be led by
project management at the
Healthcare Authority, a project
manager. So, um, it, it feels
very far away, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Do you, do you think that the,
do you think that these dollars
will reach the local community
when only 5 grants will be
awarded.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, so
I'm
just
again, just make the correction,
it's 5 priorities per region,
not 5 priorities for the state.
Just I want to make that very
clear, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but that's the beauty of
the plans having to be brought
to the legislature and the
ability for Mr. Speaker, General
lady, each duly elected
representative from each
district will have an
opportunity to review these
plans.
Have input and say as it relates
to their particular constituency
and course correct if needed and
necessary, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm glad you brought up
the body because that takes me
to page 8. On page 8, line 4,
section F. The Healthcare
Authority in consultation with
the legislative Finance
Committee and legislative Health
and Human Services Committee.
shall determine the baseline
data and collection points and,
and have the reporting. If I
look there on page 8 and then go
to page 9, then it says on line
3 section H, that starting in
May of 2025, continuing through
December 25, the ministrative
Office of the court shall
provide appropriate interim
literature interim legislative
committees and healthcare
authority, but it doesn't list
those and I wrong in assuming
that who they're going to report
to is the legislative Finance
Committee and the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
mean one can assume that, but um
it, it, it can also go to courts
corrections and justice as well,
um, it's left broad that
language is broad for that
reason.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady in
broad language.
I learned my lesson on broad
language with with the plans of
care for babies born exposed to
substance. I learned my lesson.
I don't like broad language. So
it, there's 14 committees of
this body, it only mentions two
that I can see in the bill and
I'm missing a place where it
references other committees that
will report, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker Delini, uh, your
attention, I bring your
attention to page 9, line 5,
shall provide the appropriate
interim legislative committees
appropriate interim legislative
committees.
could be
Deemed any committing it's
appropriate corrections,
justice, health, human services.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you. Um, so,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, on
page 9, and we're really
throughout the document, it says
higher education institutions
within behavioral health
regions.
shall coordinate with the
healthcare authority and, and on
and on. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, which
Um, higher education
institutions will fall outside
of a behavioral health region?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
each higher education
institution, um, which also has
branch locations throughout the
state will participate in each
region. So throughout
utilization of those branches,
each region will have uh the
ability to access services
throughout from those higher
education, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so every, every
single higher education
institute.
will coordinate with the
healthcare authority.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's the same pipeline that we
use for workforce development.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
a yes.
Mr. Speaker, and lady, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Um, when we, on the bottom
of page 9 and the top of page
10, it looks like we're going to
start promoting, um, career
pathways, and, and of course, we
need high, this is a high demand
workforce we absolutely need to
promote career pathways. I'm
just wondering, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, you know, it, it
feels so after the fact. This
bill feels so heavy on after
someone's been involved in the
courts, after someone's been at
risk.
After someone's had an
identified risk factor, a
diagnosis, um, inequity, etc.
and I'm just wondering, when we
talk about high demand jobs, are
we talking about nutritionists,
life coaches, pastors, um,
teachers, folk, PT, OT,
chiropractic. I mean, there's
many ways to prevent behavioral
health diagnoses, I'm sure, I
mean, how, how are we deciding
which
Types of career pathways help
people.
Have a healthy life.
And avoid, it looks like to me,
involvement in the criminal
justice system. Are we, are we
only focus on, focusing on folks
after diagnosis in those jobs,
or will we be talking about the
ways to never end up with those
types of diagnosis or barriers
or substance abuse.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'll
direct your attention to page
10, line 5, making
recommendations to the
legislature to better address
the behavioral health workforce
needs of the region, so, uh,
again, enabling these
commissions to tell us based
upon the needs of their
particular communities, what
that workforce should look like
and who they need. So if they
identify chiropractic care, then
they're gonna go after
chiropractic care in that
community.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is not, if I read it, did I
misunderstand? We're still under
section 8, and this is all the
roles and responsibilities that
we're handing over to the
healthcare authority, which is
the, the healthcare authority
and the folks that are
identified, uh, that are mostly
at the executive level.
Mr. Speaker, lady, so we're
actually looking at page 9, line
15 or handing it over to the
higher education institutions
within the behavioral health
regions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um,
So section 5, behavioral health
service standards.
We're now getting into standards
of care.
In this bill. This bill is now
getting into behavioral health
standards of care as I read it,
and it's saying that this
healthcare authority, those
several at the executive level
in 3 chosen by the Office of the
courts, they're going to consult
with other state agencies that
have behavioral health programs
and provide the administrative
office of the courts with init
initial set of generally
recognized standards of
behavioral health services for
adoption and implementation.
Does, why are like, um,
medical professionals, the
Social Workers Associations,
other people that are setting
standard of care, I don't see
them listed here as folks that
come together. We're giving us
authority to state agencies.
Why, why would we do that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker Delini, the
generalized recognized generally
recognized standards of care are
from those associations
directly.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
then why do we need to adopt any
if they already exist.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
can speak from what I've learned
over the years that I have been
involved in this issue and that,
um, one problem we've been
needing to address for a while
is the availability and
standardization of recognized
standards of care and that you
have some providers that are
working from one model and
others that are working from
another and we really were, we
needed to standardize what the
population could expect to
access.
And so this is one way of doing
that.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
by that decision being made by
folks who live and work outside
of my district and having a
different worldview and a
different perspective of my
district and choosing a best
evidence-based model or a best
practice than what my local
regional community would pick
that brings me concern.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, um,
The, the finance committee
And the healthcare authority
shall provide the administrative
office of courts and initial set
of evaluation guidelines for
behavioral health service for
adoption and implementation of
regional plans. So again, this
healthcare, it, it just, it,
this.
Now we skip to the legislative
finance Committee.
And the healthcare authority
setting the initial set of
evaluation guidelines. Is that
Explain to me
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
why?
Why we switched to that. So, so
legislative Finance Committee
will now come in based on a
standard set by this smaller
group of people and then create
the standards and guidelines for
us to review. Is this a growth
fund?
Mr. Speaker, generally, it is
not a growth fund, and this is
again initial. You got to start
somewhere.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, OK, that's as
far as I got into the new one.
I, I
I would, did this remove the
role of the superintendent of
insurance in the substitute.
Mr. Speaker, Generallani, yes it
did.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what do we do if the plan
doesn't work?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
that's precisely why we received
the plan, uh, reports on the
plan on a quarterly basis and
the plans have to be filed every
5 years, so the legislature can
reconvene and do its business
and if it's not working, we can
change the plan. That's the
beauty of the democratic
process. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and uh
it is, and turning the tide and
in a place like this is like
turning the Titanic. So it
sounds really, really nice in
theory, but it's, it's really
hard to turn the tide.
Um,
Mr. Speaker, I do have an
amendment that I would like to
introduce. I do believe that you
have it.
Gentle lady, I believe I do.
Will you kindly read the I would
like a roll call vote, please.
Please don't interrupt me, uh,
uh, gentle lady, please read the
number on the bottom. Oh, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, but just
please finish till I finish
speaking. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. The number is
0.231175.1.
We got it, uh, it'll get passed
out and we'll post it online
here shortly. Standby. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker in a minute.
I am informed that the amendment
being proposed is online.
And I see our.
Diligent sergeants at arm.
Passing it out. Sergeants at
arms.
Is a plural in case you're
wondering, Sergeants at arms.
Has the amendment been passed
out?
One more.
Gentle lady to explain the
amendment. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Um, the
amendment does one thing.
Everywhere where we see the word
administrative office of the
courts. Um, it is replaced with
Healthcare Authority. So the
purpose of the substitute is to
remove the role of the
I, this is, I'm I'm in freshman
mode. Do I say something
specific? No,
you're counterpart back here. I
don't know what's going on, but
she's signaling.
OK.
It's online you guys wanna pull
it up online? There you go. The
gentle lady's gonna let you
borrow her copy.
Share with the gentleman from
San Juan too. Oh my gosh, I'm
like I don't have another one.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady.
When I'm looking at this, I
guess my
We've invested a lot of time and
a lot of money as this body
trying to destigma.
Take away the stigma that goes
with behavioral health
disorders.
We have tried to make our
children, our families, our
communities, our elders, our
veterans, folks understand that
there are times in our lives
when everyone needs access to
behavioral health services.
The focus should be early and
immediate intervention.
By placing this within the and I
feel that by placing this with
the administrative office of the
courts.
That we are putting a very heavy
burden on
This feels like a crime bill
looks like a crime bill, puts in
Some stigma.
And places a burden on the
administrative office of the
courts that they haven't done
before, but this is right in the
wheel front of the healthcare
authority. So, Mr. Speaker, um,
this simply, not simply, I mean,
this is where the final hearing
of this bill, but I'm suggesting
that the administrative office
of the court should remain
neutral and that we should
remain focused on prevention and
early intervention. And with
that, I mean, I don't really
have much else to say about the
amendment.
Gentle lady from Berlio, is this
a friendly amendment, Mr.
Speaker, it unfortunately is not
a friendly amendment.
Right, there is debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Otero Representative B block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind gentle lady from
all those beautiful counties
yield. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentleman from Otero
County. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I'm just
reading your amendment and so
you said pretty much it strikes
out.
Where it says AOC or
administrative Office of the
courts and just gives it to the
healthcare authority. Is that my
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
General lady. Yes, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, it does. It
doesn't reduce their role in
engaging in the regional
meetings or going to any
participate as any other member
of the public would.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I think we talked a
little bit about destigmatizing
behavioral health, and I think
that's probably something that
we all can agree on, I hope. And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess when, when we're looking
through the lens of behavioral
health and tying it directly to
the justice system, do we think
that that could actually lead to
more people not wanting or, or
taking advantage of our
behavioral health services.
Because there's that justice
factor, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
we don't know that it wouldn't.
I don't have specific data on
that, but I definitely have
A, a feeling that having so much
emphasis on courts and folks who
operate within the world of the
courts would make it difficult,
um.
If a local community wanted to
focus on prevention and early
intervention.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think that.
That's a very interesting point
to make because we're talking
about trying to make sure that
things are not
Localized regarding the the
court system and actually
putting it somewhere.
That
Behavioral health services are
provided, such as the healthcare
authority. And so, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we, we created this
new health care authority that
has a lot of different roles,
and I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if you could just
comment a little bit about that,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think that the um the healthcare
authority is where this belongs
and that they should be the ones
managing it and have the heavy
say. I definitely feel like
every other part of the bill
where the administrative Office
of the courts, district
attorneys, law enforcement
officers, um, I mean, I
I can't even remember who all
else that in the, in the, um,
the world of courts and court
systems are listed, should be at
the table, um, but I think that
there's a broader world of folks
who are critically important in
the early stages of life, child
growth and development,
adolescents, juveniles, and also
on the, on the, on the end of
life or our veterans that it's
completely outside the court
system and it seems to have a
whole lot of emphasis on the
courts and it feels like a crime
bill. I'm being told.
But it's not a crane bill, but,
um, it, it, that's the way it
feels. And so if the if the
focus becomes narrow, then we
will be intervening later rather
than intervening earlier.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I think that that is
something that is worth noting
because when I was listening to
the debate earlier, I, I forget,
I think it was the gentle lady
from Bernalillo and Torrance. I
think one of the answers to one
of the questions that I heard
was, uh, the AOC would be taking
the lead on these meetings and
then I'm looking at the FIR
which I had a question about,
and I saw Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it says they'll coordinate
regional meetings, the AOC would
be directed to coordinate these
regional meetings. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady,
Since I, I guess the way I see
it, since all this money, a
majority of it is flowing
behavior health wise.
the healthcare authority that it
would make sense to put the
healthcare authority as the
entity in charge of facilitating
these meetings, would you agree
with that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I think it's definitely the most
appropriate entity. I feel like
the office, the administrative
office of the courts, that's the
judicial branch. We are the
lawmakers, we are the
appropriators, including them.
And having their say and their
and their input is critically
important, but how do they
remain neutral in this? And are
they helping us build a
diversion system? Are we
building, I mean, like,
everything we need to support
someone who is involved in crime
and court are the, are not
different than an individual
with a behavioral barrier, with
a mental illness, with, with a
life crisis that's not in the
court system. So I'm very
confused as to why, um,
Administrative Office of the
courts, which is the 3rd branch
of government which should
remain neutral, is taking a lead
on this. I, I thought it was
tied to judicial districts, but
it's not. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I don't understand.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee, and I, I share your
confusion on where it actually
is supposed to be taking the
role as so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
The way I see it, like you said
earlier, when it comes to
behavioral health, we're trying
as a, as a body to
provide services to people.
And when we're providing those
services, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, we want to make sure that
the people have an open door.
And so when it comes to people
who may have behavioral needs.
I wouldn't want to assume that
that individual who has those
needs.
Needs to be
Or has a history of justice
related incidents, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, exactly. So if the
ministrative Office of the
courts is at the table. So
in-house Bill 2 and I believe
Senate Bill 2. There's
substantial money for homeless
and um for for housing. If
administrative office of the
courts, uh, would say that the
barrier for this person to
reduce their recidivism rate or
to be in recovery is
housing, they, the office
administrative.
The administrative office of the
courts doesn't have to oversee
this.
Humongous endeavor in order to
be involved in the public or
have a seat at the, there's
still got 3 seats at the
executive office at the
executive level to have a say in
what that would look like.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I,
I, I think we're on the same
page. It's just, it doesn't, I
don't understand why they're
there unless we're creating a,
unless this is really a criminal
justice reform bill that is
creating alternative sentencing,
that is designed to, um,
I
I but I don't understand because
everybody in this room wants to
prevent anybody from becoming
just as involved in the first
place.
We don't want people to have to
go to jail and have some sort of
a court order in order to get
the help they need. So I'm not
understanding why the
administrators Office of the
courts takes the leads.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I think that's my same
concern.
I think when it comes to where
these monies go when it comes to
actually helping people or
attempting to help people, and
it could, there's a case to be
made that potentially some of
these dollars that we've already
spent, I think we spent $2.5
billion over the last two years
just in behavioral health, and I
think if we have behavioral
health being focused on actual
health care.
Rather than
The justice system, which is,
you know, a lot of moving parts.
It's not just
Behavioral health in the justice
system. It's everything. So when
it comes to all the different
needs that we have in our
communities justice wise.
Healthcare, I don't think.
Please that significant role,
maybe it does in some, in some
ways, but I think Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it could also, like
you said,
push people away. OK, I'm not
gonna get services because
people are going to associate me
with being involved in the
justice system and maybe I'm
trying to better my life. Maybe
I'm trying to, to get clean or
to get the services I need to be
an adequate and integral member
of society again.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the way I see this is we're
trying to lump together courts.
And health care, and I think in
my opinion, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and please correct me if
I'm wrong.
That could potentially push
people away from the very
Resources were attempting to
give them.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that that is something
worth noting, and then I'm just
looking at the FIR on the actual
bill, which we are amending in
this amendment, and I think the,
the AOC had some comments on
there about what it would take
to manage, but it also says that
the, the healthcare authority.
is already planning to implement
a centralized credentialing
system for all provider types,
etc. So it looks like the HCA is
already taking kind of a
leadership role when it comes to
this kind of
Implementation of this, however,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
still is.
Started and the nucleus of the
project, so to speak, would
already be a AOC in the bill. So
I guess I'm just very confused
as to why we're putting AOC in
there and when we take out AOC,
what do we intend to do when it
comes to the healthcare
authority now being the, the
main driver of this, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, they would assume the
roles that we provided to the
administrative Office of the
courts and continue with the
roles that were given to them
within the existing language.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and also I, I would love
to know for the body on the FIR
which is on page 5 at the bottom
of page 5, there's two
paragraphs from AOC and it says
that AOC would have to create a
new division staffed by
experienced professionals
specializing in behavioral
health data and public policy,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
way I see it is we are actually
duplicating what HCA already
does, so that we would need to
create a brand new department
further bureaucratized.
Healthcare in the state to put a
new department in AOC for
behavioral health care, which I
think would also be an
additional cost to what we're
already spending when it comes
to behavioral health. Could you
just comment on that for me, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
hope that we could put as many
dollars as possible directly to
the folks who need it most.
Right in direct services right
into the folks who are
underserved and need this growth
in capacity, not a
s t r ative oversight,
evaluations. I mean, it's all
over this document. But I, I
hear you, I hear what you're
saying.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and then the last thing
that on this paragraph that I'm
reading, it says that they would
need to specifically and
carefully tailor all behavioral
health activities at AOC to
avoid constitutional conflicts
with executive and legislative
functions and authorities. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think your, your amendment, the
way I read it, is it's trying to
fix a problem. One, we're taking
away a constitutional potential
constitutional crises that would
go forward when it comes to.
behavioral health being under
AOC number one, and then it also
would just streamline the
process. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, do you think that it
would, it would help achieve
that a parent constitutional.
Maybe be problem.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have a lot of concern about the
judicial branch, which are not
the appropriators or the
lawmakers being the ones that
are setting the standards for
this. They would be at the table
like any other community, the
public, and according to the
rest of the, the bill unchanged,
they still have a very heavy
role in input, um, and
implementation, but I do believe
that this change will help it
remain neutral. The last thing
in the world, the state needs is
more lawsuits.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, well said, I agree with
you. I think that when it comes
to litigation, we want the
fewest amount of litigation for
our state and we also want to
make sure that people feel like
justice is being served and
people deserve to understand
that they have a voice and they
have a seat at the table, and I
think we should have all
stakeholders involved, like you
said earlier, but I also think
the people leading the charge
regarding behavioral health care
should be people who literally
have the word healthcare in the
department upon which they are
created for.
So I think that could be
something potentially to
consider for the body, and I
would just also note this also
addresses some of the concerns
that I heard earlier in the, in
the debate about whether whether
tying these two together would
be
Potentially good. I think Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this could
bring more folks into the
conversation. This could create
more collaboration between
departments. This could also
help alleviate some of that
strain, that behavioral health
need in a new office in AOC and
it could also create a better
Open door for people to help
want to get involved in this
program they would want to get
involved when it comes to these
meetings because if we're having
open meetings and they're
they're.
kind of uncertain who is the
person facilitating them, I
think, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it's probably, I would go to a
healthcare meeting more than I
would go to a courts meeting, at
least that's just for me. So,
Mr. Speaker, generally, I don't
know if you want to comment on
that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't,
I don't have a comment on that,
but
The meeting being conducted by
the administrative Office of the
courts. If you're court
involved, um, you know, many
family members, extended family
who've been involved would be
ready to sign up and give input
because maybe they don't feel
like their voice is heard. Um,
so who knows who would show up.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and yes, that's one of my
big, big concerns on the bill
along with many, many other
things in the bill, but I think
it would be, it would make it a
little more palatable for folks,
and it could be a good thing to
keep people from being pushed
away. And I think it could
potentially be a good thing. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I just
urge you all to just read the
amendment.
Consider it wisely.
And vote your conscience, and by
that I mean vote yes for it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative
Supinsky.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Donana
Sierra and Secorro yield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, of course I
yelled.
Thank you. Um, you know, gentle
lady, this amendment, uh, as I
looked at it, I thought was
really interesting and I think,
you know,
I, I think like you, I share a
passion for making sure that
community-based services are
available before someone gets
involved in the criminal justice
system and gentle lady, is that
part of why you brought this
amendment forward to look at the
community-based services. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, it's
part of the reason I definitely
want us to focus on prevention
and early intervention,
strengthening families, parents
are the number one indicator of
students' outcomes, you know,
child outcomes. So if we can
help those families before
they're ever court involved.
But I, it equally important is
keeping the courts neutral,
keeping the judiciary branch out
of the work that we do here,
providing input, yes, and
expertise absolutely, but
leaving it to this body to make
these decisions and making sure
we have no
question of neutrality with our
judicial branch.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
are you, I appreciate that, and
are you familiar with what
percentage of individuals that
go through our criminal justice
system suffer from substance use
disorders.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
am not that this amendment would
not preclude one single one of
them from benefiting from the
services.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that and, and part of
what I look at is that 65%
conservatively estimated.
Uh, of the folks going through
our criminal justice system who
end up incarcerated in either in
county detention facilities or
in prison are suffering from a
substance use disorder even and
and even a higher percentage of
those individuals have a mental
health disorder, um, or struggle
with mental health issues and so
To me, gentle lady, when I look
at this bill, one of the
essential points is the
involvement of the
administrative office of the
courts.
For that reason, gentle lady,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
are you familiar with specialty
courts, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, on your point first, I
would say that I would have
thought that the percentage was
higher of the people who are
involved in the, in the judicial
system or have been involved in
the courts, but there's 2
million people in the state of
New Mexico and this should be
inclusive of all. So I was
thinking more of the general
population and all the
population, and making sure that
the focus is on preventing them
forever being part of that, of
the, the
I don't know what percentage of
New Mexicans are, are court
involved. But tell me about
specialty.
Tell me about the specialty
courts, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Courts vary in their offerings
from judicial district to
judicial judicial district, but
there are specialty courts all
over the state that deal with
veterans that deal with people
who do not have housing, that
deal with teens, that deal with
substance abuse, drug courts,
um, sort of on and on and on,
and there are places where the
courts can innovate and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, one of the
reasons that I appreciate the
role of the AOC in the planning
process is because it is
essential.
For the success of those
specialty courts for AOC to be
driving some of this process so
that they can understand what
services are available in
communities so that we can avoid
some of the criminal justice
consequences by incorporating
those services into the courts.
So for example, if you were to
go into a drug court, you might
be able to get a conditional
discharge or you might be able
to get uh your sentence
suspended if you complete all of
these conditions and you.
get that chance at success, you
go to a treatment program, you
get counseling that you need,
you satisfy those conditions and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, one of
the reasons why, uh, I have such
a hard time with this amendment
is because we are removing
administrative office of the
courts from the stakeholder
process, so the amendment.
Page 2, line 5.
Completely eliminates the
administrative office of the
courts, and that is not because
Um
And, and gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, the eliminating the
courts means that those
stakeholders that are involved
in the judicial process that can
maintain neutrality while having
a seat at the table can convene
these planning groups and
maintain that seat at the table,
eliminating them entirely from
the stakeholder process is of
great concern to me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
because it's also an additional
level.
of accountability. So, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
would you agree that having
another branch of government
like the legislature, like the
courts looking at how these
health services are provided in
community is good for the people
of the state of New Mexico. Yes,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
absolutely agree, and I was just
informed that that was a mistake
from the drafter who wrote the
amendment. And if you look
throughout the rest of the
document, they are not removed
and input on page 5.
they remain the folks who are at
the table and appoint the three,
behavioral health experts
designated by the administrative
Office of the courts. So you did
find the one page where the
drafter made a mistake and I
would definitely agree with you
that it should be put back
there.
So it's a mistake on the
amendment?
So there is the drafter made a
mistake on the amendment, yes,
you might want to withdraw it at
this point, gentle lady. I'm
not.
I'm not going to withdraw the
amendment. So you're gonna keep
it as is with the mistake?
We can. I'm open to amending the
amendment, we don't. I'm not
going to withdraw the amendment.
OK. The, the Office of the
courts remain.
So just for the um for the bo's
information, we will continue
debate on the amendment.
Uh, we know that there is an
error in the amendments, so just
keep that in mind, uh, gentle
lady, back to you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen. I'm
going to read the section where
the administrative office of the
courts is not specifically
listed because it's in the exact
same section where everyone in
the world is allowed to come to
these stakeholder meetings. So
right now on page 2 in the
substitute behavioral health
stakeholders means
representatives from that is
where they removed um
Office
What, what did they strike?
Online 5 after the first
occurrences.
This is where they list public
defender, district attorney's
office, behavioral health region
Behavioral Health Service
recipients, behavioral health
service providers, behavioral
health care advocates, any
person who's from the
administrative office of the
courts could be in healthcare
advocates. Healthcare authority
Department of Health, Children,
Youth and Family Services
Department, University of New
Mexico Health Services Sciences
higher education institutions
within behavioral health regions
Indian nations, tribes and
pueblos, local and regional
governments, they could fit
there too. And all other
appropriate.
and local agencies,
non-governmental entities
including school districts,
local and regional law
enforcement agencies, local
jails, detention centers,
behavioral health associations
and local behavioral health
collaboratives. So Mr. Speaker,
I do, uh, support this amendment
even with that line there
because it is clear for the
broadest of the language and the
testimony of the of the of uh
the gentle lady who is carrying
the bill for consideration that
no one is excluded as a
behavioral health stakeholder.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so to
be clear, if this amendment is
adopted.
Administrative office of the
courts is completely removed
from this new behavioral health
reform Act behavioral health
reform and Investment Act, is
that correct Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, no, they have accidentally
been omitted from the broad and
specific definition of
behavioral health stakeholders,
which includes
Anybody and everybody including
the hero health advocates,
they're their role in
administration changes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I would submit to the body that
uh the removal of administrative
office of the courts, and I'm,
I'm looking through the rest of
the bill, Mr. Speaker, uh, and
gentle lady and administrative
office of the courts no longer
appears in any part of this
bill.
Um, and one of the things that
happens, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is sometimes when uh when
folks are trying to understand,
well, what was the legislative
process on this understanding
that we have specifically
removed administrative offices
of the courts, I think would
indicate to all of these
community stakeholders that the
intention was that AOC be
removed from participation in
this process, and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I have a huge
problem with that because I want
the courts to be a tool for
recovery. I want them to be
involved in this process and
really have the opportunity to
say, here's some things we can
do through the judicial process.
Here are options that we have
and also to educate the
administrative office of the
courts on this is the spectrum
of community-based services that
are available because they are
going to be hearing from all of
the other stakeholders that the
gentle lady described, including
behavioral health associations,
local behavioral health
collaboratives, health councils,
all of those.
individuals are very well suited
to have direct access to say to
the AOC hey, I've been calling
for services for my child and I
can't find them. This is
something that the
administrative office of the
courts needs to understand and
know, and so, gentle lady, I
cannot support this amendment. I
think it's a flawed amendment,
um, and, and I, uh, generally
would encourage you to consider
withdrawing it, but I would
request that the body stand in
opposition. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
further debate on the amendment.
The gentle lady from Berne and
Torrens Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll be
very brave, um.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
we, gentle lady from Donana
Sierra and Seoria will yield
your time. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I landed the lady to
the gentle lady from Berna Leo
in Torrance. We speaker and
gentle lady, I'll be brief. Did
you know that people don't
wander off the streets, uh, they
don't wander into specialty
courts off the streets that they
had to be convicted and
sentenced to specialty courts.
Did you know that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I'm learning a
lot about specialty courts
today. OK, so Mr. Speaker,
generally, we want to do is
clarify something because
somebody had said,
That people can wander off the
streets. They don't, they have
to be convicted. They have to be
sentenced and that's how they
find themselves and specialty
courts it really has nothing to
do with that isn't like an
optional thing where someone can
say, oh, we're gonna send to
specialty courts and they'll
handle it, saying that they can
handle behavior health just
because they have the special
courts does not make sense at
all. So Mr. Speaker Dela, I just
want to make sure that everybody
understood, you can't just walk
in and say I want some care in
the specialty courts and that's
all I had to say. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
for the debate on the amendment,
the gentleman from Santa Juan,
Senator Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady yield? Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So, um,
Just briefly with that omission.
How would you see the, uh, your
amendment being interpreted, um,
Mr. Speaker and generally at
this point, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if I need to read
every page of the amendment, I
will, um, the administrative
offices of the courts was
inadvertently struck as someone
specifically named as being
requested to attend the regional
meetings, but as was stated by
the um sponsor um prior to me
asking those broad questions,
those meetings are open to
everyone.
And there's no exclusive
language, and the the role of
the Office of the courts other
than the administration and
oversight and convening the
means remains, um,
They remain engaged in that only
the healthcare authority takes
the primary role. So even in the
commissions that are being set
up, the key stakeholders, the
regional meetings, the
administrative Office of the
courts, their duty of oversight
changes throughout the rest.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So the amendment
was meant to take the oversight.
Uh, provision away but not to
exclude Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady participation. Mr. Speaker,
the, the, the amendment, even
the mistake doesn't.
preclude them from anything.
Then the where the warning is,
is in the description of the
types of people that they like
to see attend the regionally
convened meetings that are open
to the public and there are
specific folks that they hope
will attend and as the sponsor
suggested, none are required,
and who will attend regionally
as separate and the given the
heavy responsibility that still
remains with the administrative
Office of the courts and their
involvement throughout the
document that remains, they
would be there and they're not
excluded.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So the, uh the way
I understand the amendment.
Mr. Speaker, generally, the way
I understand the amendment as it
reads right now, they can
attend, but all that they were
admitted from was a special
invitation, let's say, in the
amendment. The reality is they
can attend. Their role was going
to be changed in your amendment
in the first place to not be the
main administrator of
Uh, the bill, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, they
were left out by mistake.
They were struck from being
specially having a special
invitation to the public
meetings that will have broad
and open in a government owned
facility advertised and promoted
regionally. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we are not listed
specifically. Legislators are
not listed specifically. I
attend, intend to attend. And
yesterday when we heard kind of
about this overall Senate Bill
12 and 3 that work hand in hand.
Um, the sponsor, Senator Munoz
said this won't work unless
you're engaged.
at your local level unless you
as a legislator are attending
and participating and folks in
the audience shook their head
and including the expert witness
that we all have to engage. So
no one's excluded from the
meeting.
But among the 20 plus folks that
are specifically mentioned as
getting a special invitation,
the administrative offices of
the courts was omitted in one
section.
So thank you for that Speaker
and gentle ladies. So I, uh, the
omission of asking legislators
to attend, uh, would you read,
uh, intent?
In that that uh that uh
legislators are not wanted at
that meeting, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, absolutely not. And
just like um I'm gonna call
myself a behavioral health
advocate and attend those
meetings, I would assume, um, or
as someone impacted by
behavioral health and issues,
um, our coalitions, uh, we have
in our community, we have the
juvenile justice advisory court.
We have the, uh, we have our
behavioral health coalitions, we
have various um child welfare
coalitions and focus
fo lk s from the administrative
Office of the courts attend all
of those, so they're included in
many other ways through
association and advocacy.
As are we.
So thank you for that, Mr.
Speaker and and gentle lady, for
that, I would encourage the body
to endorse this and pass this
amendment because, um, if we
were to read into the fact the
omission of legislators not
being specifically invited, um,
as some sort of intent to not
have us there. I think that
would be a mistake in the same
way, if the uh Office
administration of the courts is
not specifically named. That is
not meant to deter them from
coming. Thank you, Mr.
speaker.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I move to
table the amendment.
Alright, members, we have a roll
call on this amendment.
We are on a motion.
And I'm going slowly, make sure
a board operator can get on
there. We're on a tabling motion
for house floor amendment number
1 to Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3 as
amended with an emergency
clause.
A vote of yes and the amendment
would have been tabled.
He would have known were back on
the amendment.
The vote is now open.
What it's about clothes.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 28 in
the negative, House for
Amendment number 1 to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 3 as amended with an
emergency clause has been
tabled.
Gin lady, back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Um,
I, I feel
That this, you know
There, I don't think there's a
member of this body who does not
believe that New Mexico is not
dealing with a health care
crisis.
In my heart, and I'm going to
vote my heart on this.
Because this is where I spent a
lot of my life is on the
prevention side and the early
intervention side and making
sure that children are born
healthy, um, that they're safe
and secure with their families
that they have all the early
interventions that they need and
they enter kindergarten ready to
succeed and that at the very
first, uh, notice of any sort of
barrier to that student success
that we provide an immediate
intervention.
Um, that they graduate from high
school on time.
They have the skills they need
to refuse risky behavior. They
have a post high school goal in
mind.
And that they're able to achieve
their personal goals. You know,
that is my dream for New
Mexico's children. This feels
like a really good intention,
and I believe that everyone's
heart, you know, is in a good
place that's presenting this,
but ultimately it falls flat,
it's too late when folks are in
the court and this type of a
bill to me is like looking at an
empty gas gauge and putting a
band-aid over the empty and
expecting your car to continue
to drive. And for that, Mr.
Speaker, I'm going to have to
oppose the bill. Thank you.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Berna Leo, my
friend, uh, Guild.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Lee County.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that you started, uh,
your bill introduction talking
about
Senate Bill 12, and 3.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady last
night when we were listening to
this and house appropriations.
Um
One of the senators mentioned
that
There's another companion bill
that goes along with this, which
was House Bill 4 with respect to
the criminal competency piece.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, all
of these bills are intended to
address immediate and critical
issues the state is facing with
regards to public safety and
mental and behavioral health,
yes.
Thank you very much. I'm just
trying to wrap my head around
how each piece connects, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady earlier
you very eloquently defined
what, 12, and 3 dead, and I
didn't get the chance to write
that down. I was curious if you
could do that for us again,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, my friend,
absolutely, so Senate Bill 1
establishes the trust fund for
the mental behavioral health.
Senate Bill 2 appropriates the
down payment for that trust
fund, which is that then to be
folded into the general
Appropriations Act, House Bill
2, and we are on Senate Bill 3
which creates the plan and the
guardrails for utilization of
those trust funds.
Thank you very much, um.
It helps come together with
that.
I would like to understand a
little bit more offline because
it's not specific to this, how
the criminal competency fits in.
the whole thing. But, um,
Back on, on this.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
have a
philosophical question for you.
If I understand Senate Bill 3
correctly.
It has
Appropriations, some of which
are non-reoccurring.
That go through year 2028, 2029.
In my understanding that
correctly?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentleman
Finley County, can you ask the
question again? I'm, I've lost
track.
I would be happy to.
If I compile everything and with
the fact that this
This part creates the plan and
the guardrails. If I read in
Senate Bill 3, some of the
appropriations.
Um
Go all the way in the 2028 and
2029. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
because some of these grants can
be for 4 years at a time.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that. And Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, would you agree
also that it, um,
Holds the administrative office
of the courts and healthcare
authority responsible for a
majority of it.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen know what
is the healthcare authority that
is responsible for it.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
maybe I read page 6, line C
wrong.
With respect to collaboration.
And I, I don't want to read the
whole section. I can, but it
does seem to say that the
administrative office of the
courts and the healthcare
Authority shall collaborate and
we can, I can read the whole
section. I don't think we need
to.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from Lee
County, just because they're
collaborating doesn't mean AOC
holds any money.
Oh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I wasn't talking about the money
piece. I'm just making sure that
we understand. And my point on
this, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady is
When I look at all the aspects,
all 4 bills.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand that as a body that
we have a tendency to
appropriate.
Recurring monies.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm concerned because I feel
like we're appropriating some
non-reoccurring money that
actually go beyond.
January of 2027.
Which will be.
A new executive.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so the
non-recurring money is for the
actual infrastructure of the
program and recurring money is
for the Medicaid match, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I am on
the same page as you, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies, some
of that non-reoccurring money
does not get spent until after a
new executive has been elected,
placed into office, and will not
be spent for the 1st 5 months.
Of, of that whoever that person
is, would you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, there are things that many
of us may disagree on, most of
us agree that we do not incur
non-reoccurring funds from one
executive to the next. From one
legislative body to the next.
When we can, we can, when we can
do, not do so.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
thank you for your question. So
here's the answer. These funds,
again, which are for 4-year
projects will be appropriated to
the health care authority as
part of this piece of
legislation, so essentially all
of that money is looked at as
being appropriated right now as
part of this act is part of this
session.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand that, but
When those things happen and
when we go into budget
discussions just as we did this
year with reauthorizations.
And bars
Um
There was pretty good debate on
whether or not some of the, some
of the reauthorization should
take place and it concerns me
that by that time.
We may be in a conversation in
January of 2027 on whether or
not we want to continue an
authorization for something.
It goes through June of that
year.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
just like we had those
conversations this year.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
The the money would not
It would revert rather than
being subject to reauthorization
and so the point of giving the
money to the healthcare
authority for expenditure in
these plans is that the money is
out there and it will be shifted
around to the various regional
committees as necessary as per
the performance metrics and
everything else that we've
talked about in this bill, um,
so again, the money can't.
It, it, it can be shifted
around. It's already out. It
can't be called back.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
hear your answer, but I also
realized that the healthcare
authority is one of the
organizations, one of, one of
the departments in the state
that has a tendency not to be
able to spend the money that's
appropriated and continues to
ask for extensions with that.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
I'm gonna move on because one of
the things you just talked about
was performance.
And while Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I don't necessarily agree
with all the context of the
amendment.
One of the things I can say.
is the AOC is one of the two
organizations, 2 secretaries.
That actually sit in the green.
That gives me hope that maybe we
have a department that will stay
accountable.
Out of that, out of the rest of
these, besides corrections.
The majority of them, including
the healthcare authority which
we're fixing to throw a whole
bunch of money to didn't didn't
seem to be able to get anything
right.
And that's concerning.
With with me and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I understand the
healthcare authority is only
1.5, 2 years old.
that we can go back through
prior books with
All those departments with
individual scorecards that did
the same thing.
Could never get out of the red
and the yellow.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
it's concerning that we look at
this, so I, I, I want to
continue on.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I think we can both agree that
just within the last couple of
years.
This legislative body has thrown
North of $2.5 billion towards
behavioral health.
And that needle hadn't moved at
all going forward, if anything,
it's backed up.
Can you agree with that as well?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, while
I'm, I'm don't have statistics
right in front of me. I will
agree with your point that in
terms of tangible improvements
that I myself know about, uh,
we've put a lot of money out
there. We're still waiting to
see benefits come back, although
I do think that there have been
some benefits, and I do think
that the needle is shifting in
the right direction, but this is
a way to shift it quicker.
Mr. Speaker and young lady, with
respect to the companion bills
on this.
The uh testimony has been we've
thrown billions of dollars
towards this and the needle
hadn't moved at all.
And so, if I understand how the
trust starts in the agreement on
the trust that was going to be a
billion dollars in an
appropriation, and the decision
instead, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady was to count a billion
dollars out of reserves.
Two words, the uh Behavioral
Health Act.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
sorry I didn't follow your
question on that either and
gentle lady,
Senate Bill 1 started the
commanding build the bill that
funds all of this started with a
$1 billion appropriation started
with a huge appropriation, the
appropriation was taken off and
the decision was made that we're
going to take, we're gonna
allocate a billion dollars out
of reserves.
Towards the Behavioral Health
Act.
Fund. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
appropriation.
Has been struck from this bill
that decision has yet to be
made, that is for our
appropriate our appropriators
are, I like to call them our
budgeteers such as yourself to
make.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, I'm not sure that
And we got to that where, where
I was trying to go with this.
Yes, there's an appropriation
piece of this Senate Bill 2's
got a significant amount of
money in it.
Um
And some of which is in the
budget, some of which, if I
understand correctly, is still
not in the budget. Irrespective
of that.
Should Senate Bill 1 pass.
1 million $1 billion inside of
our reserves.
will be
counted towards the behavioral
health fund.
And we'll start drawing
interest.
So that by June 30th, July 1st
actually of 2026, there can be
up to $200 million in interest,
uh, incurred.
Or received that could be added
to anything beyond.
July 1st, 2026.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, right
now that appropriation is
actually at 0. We are waiting
for the uh finalization of the
budgeting process to be able to
finalize what that number will
be.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so you're suggesting to me or or
or informing me that how much
out of the
Reserves
will actually be allocated in
Call
Behavioral Health fund.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that has yet to be defined. It
is whatever the appropriators.
Finalize in the general
appropriations Act.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, that is not the testimony
we received last night and.
HAFC, but I'm gonna take you.
At face value with respect to
the words because
The same experts sitting there.
That beside you that was sitting
there last night.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
concerns that I have.
With this.
With where we're going with
this.
And part of the testimony from
one of the senators last night.
With respect to the
appropriations piece of this.
When you look at all three
Senate bills together.
Was that we're not sure that
this is gonna work.
And if the money that we're
allocating is going to be
allocated to the right places.
That's why we want the freedom
to be able to flip it and flop
it wherever we want.
But the key words in there.
Last night we, we're not sure if
this is gonna work.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we have spent in an appropriated
over $2.5 billion over the last
couple of years and going
through uh the end of this year
and next year, um.
And we have another plan that
includes 4 bills.
Hospital 4 Senate Bill 1, Senate
Bill 2, Senate Bill 3.
And we're still not sure if the
amount of money that we're
fixing to do in Senate Bill 2 is
gonna work. That was the
testimony we received last
night.
That's the concerning part for
me.
And I was hoping today.
Actually, I was hoping Senate
Bill 3 wouldn't come up today,
Mr. Speaker. I needed more time
to prep for this, but I was
hoping today to hear something
that eased my mind, ease my
heart.
That I could go back to 31,000
people and say, you know what?
This is gonna work.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when, when
The people that are presenting
the companion bills to this or
sitting there going, we don't
know if this is gonna work or
not.
But we're gonna do something.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
That's the concerning part for
me, because we have this book of
all these things that we don't
know if they're gonna work or
not.
And we never hold the the
departments accountable.
We just keep giving them pay
raises, adding more people.
Every year, year after year.
We get another report of all
these departments, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, they're in the
yellow, and the red.
We don't hold them accountable.
We don't have true hearings.
We get filibustered during
interims where the meetings in
an hour long in the department
secretary has talked to us for
150 minutes in the, in the, the
committee gets 10 minutes to ask
questions.
This is very concerning to me
with where we're going with the
amount of additional money we're
wanting to put towards this.
And I do appreciate your time
and your effort today.
I appreciate your words. He
said, I just don't, I still
don't have that comfortability
that sits there and says, you
know what, they got a good plan.
Let's give it a try.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the
time. Thank you, gentle lady,
for your time.
from Montero, Representative
block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind gentle lady from
Bernlio County, please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman who actually is from
Ontario County.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
General. I was like, wow,
Bernalillo County shifted
really, really far down the
state.
Noah, earlier in the debate,
someone said uh Bern Leo and
Otero and I was like, wow,
those, those two are a little, a
little far from each other's
gerrymandering. I know. I wasn't
here for the gerrymandering
process, so you guys, it's all
your fault, just kidding, Mr.
Speaker, maybe not.
So, Mr. Speaker, I just had a
few, I, I write on my bills a
lot. I write a lot of words and
stuff. So I just have a few
questions. I'm just gonna skip
through the bill now.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I know on the first page
of the bill, line 22 to 23, I'm
on the substitute, thankfully.
So it says
Accordance with subsection B of
subsection 3 of the Behavioral
Health Reform and Investment
Act. Do we know what the act
says regarding this portion
talking about behavioral health
regions.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
it is talking, it is referencing
back to section 3,
The behavioral health executive
Committee, so, um, specifically
subsection B designate
behavioral health regions, um,
that's gonna be done by the, the
executive committee.
OK, that helps me a lot. OK, so
then going forward on the bill,
page 3.
We have on line 6.
Under F, it says clinical
practice established by an
evidence-based source. I'm
wondering, is there a definition
of evidence-based source? Are we
talking about peer reviewed, uh,
what kind of sources are we
looking at regarding that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, from
Otero, so earlier the uh gentle
lady from um the three counties,
Sierra and such asked uh about
the standards that um I
referenced or that are produced
by like our social worker
associations, evidence-based is
defined by those healthcare
associations, doctors, social
workers, nurses who work in this
specific area of care, so they
determine what
um
Defined as evidence based.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So I don't know, I
have no idea how many of these.
Associations there are because I
know, for example, there are,
there are some
That are
national or regional. I'm just
wondering who, who would be
included in that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, these
are national associations. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. And then on that same
page, I'm gonna go to line 9.
It says associations and
relevant federal government
agencies. I'm, I'm wondering
which ones are these? Which
government agencies are we going
to be looking for information
from.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
that's Medicaid.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally, so only Medicaid or
would it be Department of cause
that Medicaid goes through US
Department of Health.
I believe
And so I'm just wondering, is
any other federal governmental
entity that we have to ask for
information from Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, HHS.
Health Human Services.
Got it. OK, so there's is a
little different than ours on
the state level. They don't have
a healthcare authority on the
federal level.
Bummer. OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, going to page 5,
D
on starting on line 11, going to
page or line 13 on page 5, the
behavioral health executive
Committee shall report on a
quarterly basis to the
legislative finance committee.
On the implementation. I'm
wondering why they don't also
report to LHHS as well, since on
page 8 of your bill.
You have LHHS determining
collection points.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, that
is because in section 10, LFC,
um, starting in subsection B has
a bunch of accountability
measures that they specifically
have to meet that uh our
associated with the LFC.
That they will then uh that
information can matriculate down
to the other subcommittees like
Health and Human Services, but
LFC has to is the is the one
that has to meet all those
accountability measures and LSC
staffs, both of those
committees.
Perfect. OK. Well, that, that is
helpful.
OK, so continuing here on, on
your bill, so we, we established
the LFC has all these.
Financial components then on
section 4.
I see online 17 to 18 on page 5.
It has the AOC coordinating
regional meetings and it says
complete sequential intercept
mapping.
And I, you may have given a
definition of what that mapping
looked like, but could you just
tell me a little bit about that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, page
4, line 1 sequential intercept
mapping means a strategic
planning tool that helps
communities identify resources
and gaps and develop plans to
divert people with mental health
disorders and substance misuse
away from the criminal justice
system and into treatment.
OK, got it. OK, so we're having
the justice system divert people
away from the justice system
since AOC is the one that
coordinates it, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, that's actually
one of the reasons why we have
drug courts.
OK. All right. Sounds good, Mr.
Speaker, generally. I don't know
if that sounds good. It just
sounds like a good answer. So
I'll take it.
Take your word for it. So
continuing on this page, it says
on the last line 25, nothing in
a proposed regional plan.
Jeopardizes the state Medicaid
program, what would, what would
be something that could put our
Medicaid dollars in jeopardy,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if those
programs are not meeting those
standards, that could
potentially put our Medicaid
reimbursement funding at risk,
which is precisely why we have
those standards, because we
don't want to lose, we don't
wanna lose that 3 to 1 match
match.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are we
currently losing any of those
funds now.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and do we have any
kind of reporting currently?
On these kind of metrics other
than what we just send to
Medicaid to determine
eligibility.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
right now, yeah, that is all the
information that we have and
that's actually one of the
reasons for this legislation is
it will widen the amount of data
reporting that we as the
legislative body will have
access to.
All right
OK, and then on the same
paragraph it says,
If it does jeopardize
Medicaid program.
It is void. Who voids it? Is it
the AOC? Is it the commission as
a whole? Who, who is the entity
that voids whatever that that uh
change would be. Mr. Speaker,
and the executive committee.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then.
And be on page 6, it talks about
behavioral health stakeholders
receiving appropriations. Do we
know how much?
How many appropriations
specifically go to AOC currently
and how many would go with this
new change.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
are 2 appropriations that are
currently going through to AOC
via Senate Bill 2, and that will
help them establish the initial
stages of this program.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I know this is,
it's kind of, I don't want to
call it a pilot, maybe it is a
pilot, I'm not sure. Is this
recurring to AOC?
Because they have the initial
startup costs and then they
probably have costs associated
with the meetings annually. So
could you just tell me a little
bit about that?
Mr. Speaker, and that's the
point of the trust fund.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle Lee, and I guess I.
I kind of got confused with you
and the gentleman from Lee, how
much is gonna be in the corpus
of that fund.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so right
now there is a $200 million
non-recurring appropriation that
will go as the down payment,
which will be in the general
appropriations Act and then
eventually the that will then go
to fund the trust fund, which
will, the corpus of which is uh
hope to.
Grow into the $1 billion figure.
Dependent upon finalization of
the appropriations process.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So that 200 million
would be initial just to start
up and then the, the billion,
does that come from the general
fund? I don't sit on LFC, so I
don't really know where that
would come, but do we know where
we're looking for that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, that
is the, the beauty and the
complexity of our appropriations
process. There are a number of
funds that uh contain money and
so it's up to the appropriators,
the budgeteers, to um identify
the sources of money that they
want to appropriate specifically
towards this cause. It could be
through the general find it
could be through other more
specific funds. It could be
through
reversions. I mean, there's a
whole number of things where
money comes from that they can
choose.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
I, I guess my question on this
would be, I know currently the,
the state receives Medicaid
dollars and a lot of other
dollars that go toward
behavioral health, I think last,
maybe it was 2 years ago, there
was a report from LFC that said
it was about a billion dollars.
Annually. So any of those
dollars that we, that we get in
from the state, could we utilize
those to fund the trust fund.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
OK, OK, that, that gives me a
little more of a an overview of
what that looks like. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, then on
the same page, page 6, it says
submit annual reports starting
on line 8.
On the plans and share relevant
data as requested by a
legislative interim committee.
uh, why are we not specifically
saying which one because I know
we already had LFC and then LHHS
was mentioned.
Prior on page 8. I'm wondering.
Why doesn't it specify which
committee would request that
data since it seems like
something that LHHS probably
would request. Would any others
potentially request it and why?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I mean,
that's precisely I think why we
have included that broad
language and that mental
behavioral health touches most
of the critical aspects of our
lives in this state. So, you
know, it's um I think
appropriate and logical to
assume that health and human
services would want to see this
information. It could be
relevant to what courts and
corrections, courts corrections
and justice can be looking at.
Um, the legislature, what we do
here is all
Encompassing and so I think by
naming specific committees or
interim committees, we would be,
um, taking away opportunities
for committees to do their work
if it pertains to what we're
doing here in this bill.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I just was
under the assumption that.
They probably would be able to
request the data from
one another
I'm not sure how that could
work, but I don't know. I just
was thinking in the, the uh in
the.
To try to be more efficient. We
might want to try that. And then
it says committee, do we know if
the committee has to vote to
request this, or can the
chairman of the committee
request it immediately. I'm just
wondering how does that work
when it comes to the specific
data.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, any
member of any committee can make
a request to see this
information, um, transparency is
a good thing.
I agree, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So any member, including
advisory.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, any
committee what?
I'm sorry, advisory members,
would they be included?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yeah.
one.
Alright, it's on the record, Mr.
Speaker. I'm gonna be requesting
lots of data because I'm an
advisory member on LHHS, so.
That will be happening, Mr.
Speaker, um, OK Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, have at it.
I like data actually, Mr.
Speaker. It's very fun. So.
Yeah, not for a lot of people,
but for me, Mr. Speaker, it is.
So to continue on the same page
here, I'm on line 16 now. It
says mapping and supplement the
mapping to ensure complete
behavioral health coverage to
regional plan finalization. How
do we determine.
When we achieve this, and what
about outcomes? Are we, is
achievement based upon outcome
or just access.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
right now, um, we are looking
at, we've already started
collecting data on the gaps in
coverage, right? And so, um,
what each regional committee
will be tasked with doing is
looking at that data that is
identified those gaps, looking
to supplement those gaps so that
we have services, the um the
sequential.
intercept mapping process takes
2 years and so within that two
year period of time, we're
expecting for the services to be
filled in and then we can start
to look at outcomes as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I guess my, my
question was gonna flip over to
the next page then regarding
that because I, I have
underlined here on page.
7.5 to 6 service gaps in a
behavioral health region are
large enough to warrant more
priorities. So with the 5
grants, we could shift
resources, is that kind of what
I understand with that language.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so, um,
this language, when we look at
behavioral health gaps that are
large enough to be considered
like a behavioral health desert
that can be identified
specifically as one of those
additional priorities because
access to care clearly would be
a top priority, I think for any
regional committee to address.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I, because
I hope that that's the case, but
the way I read it,
This could potentially mean
larger counties and cities like
Albuquerque or Santa Fe or
Bernalo County, they could get
more than rural based upon need.
And so I just want, like if
there's 1000 people who need
access in Bernlow County and
there's.
Let's just say 45 people who
need access and.
Otero County
How are we going to
Mix between those two. How is it
by per capita metrics or
Something else, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so it'd
actually be the opposite. So in
those rural counties that, you
know, have a lot of land and
few, fewer people, um, those
specific counties not only lack
services, they look, they lack
the infrastructure that could
even lead to the provision of
those services. So the lack of
infrastructure is seen as an
additional priority warranting
more attention. So in counties
like Bernna Leo where we have
lots of folks in
in need of these services, we,
we have services there already,
right? Like the infrastructure
is, is there or is better than
it would be, let's say, in, you
know, Quay County, so, um, that
lacking of infrastructure would
lead to additional
prioritization.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then on the
other side, on balance, of
course,
I wouldn't want those folks who
are in Bernelio County or larger
counties who may need it, they
may have a more, a bigger need
when it comes to per capita.
Mm
Cass, for example, how would we
ensure that those people would
also get equitable access when
it comes to.
These behavioral health
services, since they would
already have some kind of a
rudimentary.
Framework.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I want
to draw your attention to page
12,94, subsection 2 shall be
equitably distributed for all
eligible priorities identified
in each regional plan and shall
prioritize funding behavioral
health services for
disproportionately impacted
communities, so, you know, the
funding will be equitably
dispersed at first, but remember
we have these mechanisms built
into the bill that allows for a
shifting of money in the event
that let's say
um, the plans are in some
regions aren't going according
to plan, but in other regions
they are and so we, we need the
flexibility to be able to shift
funding so that again, we can
meet the requirements of the
bill and get those inequitably,
um, disproportionately affected
people, um, services access.
Cool. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, generally, and I'm
reading that portion, and so I
know we have 5 districts or 5
regions. How are we going to
chop this state up in regions.
Do we have a map or something,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we do not
have regions yet. We each region
gets 5 priority projects the
regions have not been drawn up
yet.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and would it be
just, uh, how would that be? I,
I'm just wondering how would we
draw them up in a fashion that
would be suitable because I know
when it comes to redistricting,
like we actually talked about a
little earlier, uh, we have the
PEC which has 10 districts, we
have 70 districts here in the
house. We got 42 in the Senate.
How are we going to do that? Is
it kind of a, a redistricting
process or or a districting
initial initial districting
process, or is it going to be
based upon counties? What do we
envision when it comes to how we
chop up the.
All 33 counties divided by 4.
Are we just gonna go?
Chop in the middle, have one
central, and then the rest is
just around it. I'm just
wondering how that works. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen from Otero,
so that is one of the precise
tasks that is given over to the
executive committee. That's why
we're asking all of these folks
with specific expertise to sit
on that committee and, and, and
contemplate the best way to put
these regions together, whether
it be by judicial district as
was originally contemplated or
some other mechan
ism that makes more sense.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I, I guess I would assume.
That it would probably be the
latter since judicial districts,
we said there's 13, and there's
only 5 districts here, so, or 5
grants, right? So I guess maybe.
Maybe that could work. I don't
know. Uh, we might just double
them up, I suppose, when it
comes to judicial districts,
although I know some are really
large.
But another question I had
actually regarding the last.
Statement you had about page 12
equitably distributed. Are we
counting people who live in the
county.
That is adjacent to that
district who gets services from
the next adjacent district, so
if I was living in where I live
in Almogordo and I was going
over to Las Cruces and that was
maybe in a different district.
How are we counting that when it
comes to need and and
prioritizing those individuals.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so right
now, um, you know, there are a
lot of counties and towns that
take advantage of services and
Larger, more urban areas, um,
and so that's actually one of
the things that will be taken
into account and factored into
the regional planning process,
um, is, you know, how many
people do that, how often they
do it, how close these services
are, whether or not it's through
telemedicine, whatnot.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I know we're
utilizing Medicaid data.
Potentially, and so what if,
what about people who do not use
Medicaid. How are we gonna count
those people if we don't have
the federal data with Medicaid
dollars.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
Medicaid is just one element
that factors into the data that
will be used to put these plants
together and then later used to
better hone these plans. So we
can also talk about where we
know the avail availability of
services, um, can be, and later
where it should be, um, that's
why there is a requirement in
this plan for services to be
reported because that's actually
an issue that we've had in the
past is we just don't know what
we have where, um, and so
data is just one type of data,
um, but we are looking to
supplement it with additional
data from those folks who are on
private insurance plans or
uninsured as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I think that would
probably be good to, to get that
data. So I'm glad that's,
that's.
essentially part of this and
then I'm, I'm gonna go back to
page 8.
Or maybe I'll go to page 7, Mr.
Speaker. Let's see what we got
here. Oh, actually, let's go to
page 7.
Line 12.
We say the word sustainability
plan. I, I didn't see where that
was in the bill. Was it defined?
And what is that, what is a
sustainability plan versus
A
I think we
A sequential intercept map.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from
Otero sustainability plan is not
defined in the bill. However,
uh, one of the reasons for the
triad of bills that we have
talked about is
Just for that sustainability,
the trust fund would guarantee a
sustainability of services once
they are stood up and the
ability to maintain and sustain
services is definitely one of
the things that we want these
plans to consider, and that ties
into a whole number of other
things like workforce
availability and all of that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Yeah, that I just,
I just was wondering because
when we're looking at
sustainability, I know this is
kind of, I don't know if we're
using the word pilot projects or
not, but it's, we're just trying
to figure out if it'll work. And
so is this fund going to be set
up with.
Who, who is overseeing the fund
when it comes to the
Actual investments is that the
state Investment council.
Mr. uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
it's the State Investment
council, yes. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and is the
plan then to just put, I think,
a billion dollars in the middle
of it and then.
Every year once we've accrued
interest, whatever interest is
accrued, we're gonna spend all
of that or how, how does that
work? I know, I know trust funds
work in different ways in the
state, and I just want to make
sure we're understanding because
like the, the early childhood
trust fund.
We've passed legislation in the
past to increase the amount that
we're drawing from it.
I think it was 200.
50%
Of what we initially withdrew
from it last time and I'm just
wondering how, how that works
and does your legislation in any
way give guidelines about that
and if it doesn't, how do we
envision what that could
potentially look like.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
right now it is capped at 5% of
whatever that yearly return is.
OK, 5%. OK, that helps a lot.
And then, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
So I guess I will go to the next
page here then and.
I'm seeing on line 22, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady from Bernna
Leo, it says.
Starting on line 21, uniform
responses to data requests may
be a legislative committee, the
legislative or the
administrative office of the
courts or an executive agency.
Which
Another, another question
regarding which one, which
agency and which committee are
we trying to
put in here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Otero, anybody.
So if they want you know
specific data, uh, pertaining
to, you know, detoxification
centers or whatever, anybody
would be able to request and
review that data.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
and I guess my question
regarding that is because it's
not a specific committee.
So if I, if I'm looking for data
that, that the Health and Human
Services Committee has, and I
put in information request with.
LESC, for example, and if they
don't have that data.
With this, how would this
address that? Would they just
say, oh, go talk to LHHS and
kick the can down the road, or
were they just, would they be
the ones that provide the
information to LHHS, get it from
them, and then through their,
their interim committee, give it
to the individual because it
doesn't really say, it just says
uniform responses to data
requests made by a legislative
committee.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as we've
discussed before, one committee
that you know is sure to have
that information is going to be
the legislative Finance
Committee.
OK, so I would assume, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we would
just defer them to LFC and just
say LFC's got the data, but did
they get the Medicaid data? I'm
just wondering who, who actually
gets that I know it goes from 8.
goes from healthcare authority.
And then Healthcare Authority
just gives it in a package to
LFC. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
that is precisely LFC's job is
to um gather all of that data on
any expenditure throughout the
state from all agencies.
And hold and analyze that data
for which they often release
very informative and detailed
reports. I said, I'm sure you've
read them. I rather enjoy them
myself.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Got one
right here. It's volume 2, very.
Very dense
Very good stuff though. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, on
page 9 at the top.
We're talking about online 1 to
2 services described in the
behavioral health reform and
Investment Act, what services
are described there?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the,
this is the, the behavioral
health reform and Investment
Act, so we're talking about
services being talked about in
this bill.
OK, sorry, I just, I didn't know
that we drafted bills that
reference themselves inside of
the same bill. I didn't, is that
common practice to reference
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I am not
a bill drafter. I would not be
able to answer that question for
you. OK, sorry, just very
curious. I thought that was
interesting because
It's saying pursuant to this
act.
Do something regarding certain
regions in the act. So I don't
know, it just seems a little
confusing to me, but I'll
continue here on page 9, says Of
AOC.
shall provide the appropriate
interim legislative committee
and healthcare authority a
monthly update. Why didn't, why
didn't we just make the LHHS
for, for that one cause that
seems pretty, pretty.
blatant when it comes to that
data.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they are
LHHS is one of the appropriate
interim legislative committees.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what other committees would be
appropriate other than them and
LFC regarding this. Why didn't
we just say LFC and LHHS. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I mean,
again, we're all about
transparency, right? And so, um,
this is an issue that touches
the lives of many. I, I'd say
most New Mexicans on a daily
basis and so it could become
relevant in the work of any
interim committee, um other than
just those that you would think
about on the top of your.
so we want to make sure that
this information is accessible
to everybody who needs it,
depending on what they're
discussing at the time.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I'd be inclined to
support and agree with that, but
I think it's a little.
I don't know. I, it just seems a
little, it needs to be more,
more tight. And then when it
comes to this section as well.
We're talking about the AOC
continuing through December 21st
of this year, the AOC shall
provide the appropriate interim
committees.
A monthly update and status of
sequential intercept mapping and
regional mapping, and I guess
this sounds to me like it's just
an update, but is there any kind
of rulemaking that would go into
effect with this legislation.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so, um,
with this language, this is how
We would be updated on who's
meeting, where they're meeting,
how often they're meeting, what
they're putting in their plan,
how their plan is proceeding and
so this is exactly how we hold
the regional planning process
process sores feet to the fire.
OK, but regarding specific rule
making like a, I don't think AOC
does any rule making.
Do they? I know HCA does, but
does AOC make rules? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, any agency
that is affected by a statute
passed by this body, um, can
have or need to promulgate a
rule.
OK, that helps me on that one.
Thank you.
For that answer, and then, and
then going to the next page,
page 10.
I'll start on line 5.
Making recommendations to the
legislature to better address
the behavioral health workforce
needs of the region. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
delve into that a little bit for
me regarding the specific
workforce needs, does that mean?
Everything when it comes to
restaurants that we need staff,
does that mean just nurses or
doctors or ancillary workers
regarding healthcare, does that
mean technicians, how are we
determining that because it
could be very broad in a sense,
if it's something in a smaller
town or community or county that
doesn't necessarily have all of
those infrastructure needs
initially, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, John and, so we are
leaving that up to the higher
educational institutions in that
area to, um, to dive into what
those workforce needs should be
for that particular area. And
again, we're within the, the
scope of mental behavioral
health services, right? So one
those higher educational
institutions are the ones that
are best equipped to evaluate.
what workforce development needs
to happen again, to achieve what
it is we're trying to achieve
here, which is ensure mental
behavioral health services are
available throughout the state.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so does this mean
both community colleges and
universities.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, it
does. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, because I
know in our town in Almogordo we
just started a new nursing
program at New Mexico State
University Alamogordo and what
could that potentially fall into
this need, because I know nurses
are
Super needed everywhere, but
regarding behavioral health
specifically, would they be one
of the divots that we would, we
would look to or
I mean, would it just be
specifically behavioral health?
Would it just be things such as
uh needing doctors,
psychiatrists, things like that,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it would
be any provider that the higher
education institutions such as
your community college
identifies as being necessary to
the delivery of mental
behavioral health services, be
it a nurse or otherwise.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then lastly,
maybe I'm on section 11 and 12
at the end of your bill.
And we're repealing section 24A.
3
One NMSA from 2004. Could you
tell me, Mr. Speaker, generally,
why we're repealing that and
what that does specifically in
the legislation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Otero, that is
the Behavioral Health
collaboratives that we were
speaking about previously, that
is now defunct.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and this would just
replace that and would it, is it
currently defunct as it is
today.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I, it, there's no specific
language in this bill saying
this bill will replace the
behavioral health collaborative,
but I think that this bill is
meant to take over a lot of the
same functionality that the
collaborative was once tasked
with. So in order to restart all
of the work that the
collaborative was doing, we are
baking all of that into this
bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that does help me a
little bit so this
collaborative, I just wonder, is
it, is it a healthcare authority
right now or is it Department of
Health? Where does it currently
reside?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, it,
it was a collaborative, right?
So it was created um to bring
together representatives from
all sorts of agencies throughout
the state. Um, it was
Created via statute. So, um,
it's kind of an independent body
in and of itself.
I hate to be the bearer of bad
news, but we are at times, so
gentlemen, I'll allow you to
finish up your comments and then
I'm gonna go to the gen lady
from Santa Fe. Thank you so
much, Mr. Speaker. I would, I
appreciate that and I was at the
last page of the bill,
thankfully, so that, that worked
out, I guess, but I just would
love to address to the people to
look in your LFC binder or your
book on volume 2.
Page 284 because it does talk
about outcomes when it comes to
behavioral health and currently
it looks like outcomes are kind
of low, 17%, 19%, 15%, 19% from
FY 24 to 26 respectively. So I,
I don't know how much this could
affect this. I don't know how,
how successful we will be with
this, but, uh, I do have some
concerns still, so thank you,
Mr. Speaker and thank you gentle
lady for your great answers to
the questions and the very
cordial debate.
Young lady from Santa Fe Mr.
Speaker, this matter having been
under consideration for 3 hours,
I moved to close debate a motion
to debate those in favor say
aye.
I suppose 8.
Yeah it's habit debate is now
closed.
Gentle lady from Bernalio.
Too close.
Mr. Speaker, thank you to the
Bonnie for a good and colorful
debate on an incredibly
important bill, uh, for our
state. So with that, I move that
Senate Finance Committee
substitute to Senate Bill 3 as
amended with an emergency clause
do now pass. We are on final
passage of Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 3 as amended with an
emergency clause.
32nd clock.
What about clothes?
The vote on closed by a vote of
44 in the affirmative, 23 in the
negative.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3 as
amended without an emergency
clause has passed his house.
leader from Donana, you're ready
on item number 3. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Can you get me to that
point in House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 10 on
final passage has been taken. It
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
House Bill 10 establishes the
enforcement bureau within the
regulation and licensing
department and grants its law
enforcement authority to
investigate and enforce
violations under the cannabis
regulation Act and with that,
Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
There is the debate generally
from Catherinescorval
andresentative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the gentle
lady from Donana Guild. I do
yield to the gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, um,
I just wanted to talk a little
bit about um, uh, a
superintendent who's asking for
actually more work and how we
all, all the time in uh
legislative finance committee
when I was on there or
appropriations that we um had
agencies, um, ask for more.
money, but it wasn't really for
more work. It was for other
things. They're always asking
for more money, but this is an
actual thing that we really need
in the state of New Mexico. Do
you agree with that, um, madam,
uh, Mr. Madam Speaker, uh,
gentle lady.
Uh, gentle lady, I do agree with
that.
Thank you, uh.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I just think that one of
the things that's important for
New Mexicans to remember is that
when we pass a law and we need
authority, um, to do things
right.
And we ask for funding for that.
I think it should be given in
this instance, particularly uh
with uh Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I yield my time. Thank
you.
There's further debate, we'll go
to the gentle lady from Bernna
Leo and Torres Representative
Lord.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, uh,
will the gentle lady from
I can't see my
From a bunch of really awesome
counties or one county or
Donana from Donana, please yield
your time.
I do yield to the kind lady.
Thank you, um.
I just want to ask a question
real quick because I know we
passed, we passed the marijuana
bill before and so I call it
marijuana and pot because that's
from my era, um.
We had some issue with having
teeth, is that correct in some
of our laws, is that correct?
That is, uh, Madam Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, that is correct.
And Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
that's to correct this bill is
to correct those issues, is that
correct? That is correct, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
I just want to stand up and say
that I appreciate this because
we had a whole lot of issues in
Torrance County. We had the
issue where we did have the
Chinese slaves that were finally
removed. We had two women that
were trafficked.
Um, and the issue with that is
that for lack of a better word,
the, the gentleman that was
running the the farm in
Out there in Shiprock, which I
did not know that he was using
Navajo children as well as
indentured servitudes and paying
a very little money, which is
heartbreaking.
Um, but he basically gave the
state the middle finger and said
I'm not going to comply. I'm
gonna keep doing what I wanna do
and I'm hoping so much that this
is gonna work that I actually
signed on to the bottom of the
bill, so I just wanted to say
thank you for bringing this
forward.
There's further debates, the
gentleman speaker from
Bernalillo County.
Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, gentle ladies.
Lady yield, please. I do yield
to the speaker briefly, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, thank
you for bringing the bill
forward. I carried the original
2021 package along with several
of my colleagues and I said at
the time, this is an evolving
document. We will need to come
back and make some fixes. This
is one of those fixes. Thank you
for bringing it forward.
Seeing no further debate, gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Madam Speaker, uh,
today, um, I asked that we, uh,
I, I move I do pass on house
commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for HB 10.
We are on final passage of
house.
Uh, let the re
Sorry.
We're on final passage of.
has consumer and economic
development committee, uh,
Substitute for House Bill 10.
The vote is now open.
10.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 68 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative, house, uh,
consumer and economic.
How's commerce and economic
development committee, uh,
substitute for House Bill 10
does now pass.
We did it, we did it.
Oh
Turn it on.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
House Bill 549 introduced by
Representative Dixon, an act
relating to criminal law,
creating the crime of unlawful
carrying of a firearm while
trafficking a controlled
substance, providing a penalty.
House Bill 549 549 haven't been
read to us by titles or printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 550 introduced by
Representative Dao, an act
relating to procurement,
broadening the scope of
distribution of information
relating to sole source and
emergency procurement contracts.
House Bill 550. 550 haven't been
written to us by title.
His order printed and referred
to the house consumer and you
can house commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 551, introduced by
Representative Zamora, an act
relating to gaming, amending
requirements and procedures for
liens on winnings for debt owed
to or collected by the
healthcare authority. House Bill
551.
I was 551 haven't been read to
us by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 552 introduced by
Representatives Ferrari.
Thompson
Silver
Anaya
And Eleanor Chavez, an act
relating to health care,
enacting the medical corporation
Accountability Act requiring
hospitals to disclose
information on their ownership
structures requiring the
healthcare authority to report
to the legislature on
information gathered from
hospitals prohibiting private
equity funds and hedge funds
from interfering with the
professional judgment of
healthcare providers. House Bill
552.
552 haven't been read to us by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 553 introduced by
Representatives Vincent.
Mason
Gallegos
Dixon
And Senator Bobby Gonzalez, an
act relating to timber enacting
the timber grading Act,
providing for in-state
structural timber grading
certificates, providing for the
use of structural timber that is
graded and labeled in state,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 553. 553 haven't been read
to us by title.
I ordered printed and referred
to.
The house energy environment and
natural Resources Committee, the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 554 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero
and Parajon, an act relating to
housing, allowing accessory
dwelling units in residential
zoning districts, allowing
multi-family housing and
commercial districts and areas
near transit. House Bill 554.
Is 554, haven't been written
twice by Tidal, is order printed
and referred to.
The house consumer Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 555 introduced by
representatives Henry.
Block
Hall
And Mehia.
An act relating to licensure,
requiring that a license to
practice massage therapy issued
under the massage therapy
Practice Act shall contain a
photo of the license holder.
House bill 555.
As well, 555 have been read to
us by title is sort of printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 556 introduced by
Representative Doo, an act
relating to public school
personnel, including community
health workers in the definition
of and licensure requirements
for instructional support
providers. House Bill 556.
I will 556 haven't been read to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, the the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 557 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to marriage, allowing
marriages to be conducted via
telecommunication, House Bill
557.
As will 557.
Haven't been read twice by
title, his order printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 558 introduced by
Representatives Bloch and Doo,
and Act relating to sexually
oriented material harmful to
minors, prohibiting sexually
explicit material at public
schools, defining terms and
providing for enforcement,
amending section 30-37-5 NMSA
1978 being laws 1973, chapter
257, Section 5 to remove
exclusions and defenses related
to schools for the crimes
enumerated.
in chapter 30, Article 37 NMSA
1978, making conforming
amendments, House Bill 558558
haven't been read to us by
idlers or printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 559, introduced by
Representatives Bloch and Doo,
and Act relating to child
custody, amending the animusA
1978 to prohibit a court from
considering a parent's
affirmation of the parent's
child's gender identity for
purposes of custody, prohibiting
a court from determining custody
of a child based on certain
parental decisions related to
the child's gender identity or
gender affirmation, providing
definitions, House Bill 559.
As well 559 have been read to us
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 560 introduced by
Representative Chetfield, an act
relating to public education,
enacting the workforce readiness
and student engagement Act
requiring establishment of
workforce readiness programs
requiring evaluation and
reports, making an
appropriation, House Bill 560.
House Bill 560 haven't been read
twice by tilers or printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 561 introduced by
Representatives Terrazas.
Jones
Tao
Armstrong and Senator Ramos.
An act relating to housing,
imposing requirements on housing
for migrant and seasonal
agriculture workers. House Bill
561.
House School 561 have been
written by titles or reprinted
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 562 introduced by
representatives Terrazas, Jones.
Tao
Armstrong and Senator Ramos, an
act.
Making an appropriation to the
healthcare authority to increase
Medicaid reimbursement for
independent rural health care
providers. House Bill 562. House
Bill 562 having been read to us
by Tylers or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 563 introduced by
Representatives Henry and
Montoya, an act relating to
construction prohibiting codes
and rules that require providing
electric vehicle power transfer
infrastructure.
Or electric vehicle capable
parking spaces in residential or
commercial construction House
Bill 563.
House Bill 563. I haven't been
there twice by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 564 introduced by
Representatives Murphy, Block.
Montoya
And Henry, an act relating to
economic development,
establishing the New Mexico-
Ireland Trade Commission. House
Bill 56464 have a minute was by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 565 introduced by
representatives Lord.
Mason
block
Hall
And Vincent
An act relating to firearms,
providing that the required
waiting period for the sale of a
firearm does not apply to a
buyer who is a certified law
enforcement officer or a
commissioned law enforcement
officer with the power to make
arrests. House Bill 565565
haven't been read to us by
tilers or printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 566 introduced by
representatives Lord.
Mason
Block
Paul
And Vincent, an act relating to
firearms, providing that the
required waiting period for the
sale of firearms does not apply
to a buyer who is not
disqualified from possessing a
firearm and who is a certified
law enforcement officer, a
former or retired certified law
enforcement officer, a
commissioned law enforcement
officer or a law enforcement
officer of an Indian nation,
tribe, or pueblo. House Bill
56666 have been met by idlers or
reprinted and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee.
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 567, introduced by
Representatives Mason and
Pettigrew, an act relating to
motor vehicles, providing for an
additional oral fluid test to
determine if a person was
driving under the influence of
an intoxicating liquor or drug.
House Bill 567.
House Bill 567 have been
readized by toddlers or are
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 568 introduced by
Representatives Borego and
Sanchez, an act relating to
taxation, creating the home fire
recovery income tax credit,
House Bill 568.
Housesville 568 have been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house rural
Development land grants and
cultural affairs Committee, the
the House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 569 introduced by
Representatives Johnson and
Lundstrom, an act making an
appropriation for the Navajo
Gallup water supply project
Regional Waterline Beacon
Beastie 9 N 9, my apologies,
cutter lateral 371 Interstate 40
project. House Bill 569.
House Bill 569 haven't been read
to us by titles or reprinted and
referred to the house
agricultural asse as Water
Resources Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 570 introduced by
representatives Jones, Thompson,
and Joshua Hernandez, an act
relating to insurance, amending
and enacting sections of the
prior authorization Act to
prohibit the imposition of prior
authorization requirements for
certain covered services and
prescription medication. House
Bill 570.
Housesville 570. Haven't been
met twice by idlers or reprinted
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 571 introduced by
Representatives Doo, Andrea
Romero, and Henry, an act
relating to land use,
designating municipalities that
adopt voluntary planning and
zoning strategies designed to
increase New Mexico's housing
inventory, providing technical
support to municipalities
enumerating duties of the
Department of Finance and
Administration, House Bill 571
571 haven't been read twice by
tilers that are printed and
referred to the House Rural
Development Land Gran School
Affairs.
Committee then the House
government elections in the
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 572 introduced by
representatives Mejia, Block.
Terrazas Zamora, and Montoya, an
act relating to elections,
making the act of a person
knowingly soliciting another
person who is not a United
States citizen to register to
vote or to vote in this state, a
4th degree felony, providing
that including with a
solicitation, a disclaimer that
a non-citizen should not
register to vote or should not
vote in this state is not a
defense to the violation,
providing for a fine. House Bill
572.
Is 572. I haven't been there
twice by titles or printed and
referred to as consumer and
Public Affairs Committee then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 573, introduced by
Representatives Mejia, Block.
Terrazas Zamora, and Montoya.
An act relating to elections
prohibiting the Secretary of
State or a county clerk from
sending notifications of
eligibility or potential
eligibility eligibility to
register to vote in this state
to persons who are not citizens
of the United States. House Bill
57373 haven't been to as my
title as it were printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 574 introduced by
Representatives Gurrola, Silva,
and Lara, an act relating to
unfair business practices,
amending the unfair Practices
Act, adding providing
immigration consultations or
services without holding a
license to practice law or
without being under the
supervision of a licensed
attorney, including holding
oneself out as a notario or
notario publico.
To the definition of unfair or
deceptive trade practice. House
Bill 574.
How 574 have beenized by title.
His order printed and referred
to the House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 575 introduced by
Representative Cerrado, an act
relating to state employee
benefits, amending the
contribution percentages for
state employee health benefits,
amending the group insurance
contributions for school
districts, charter schools, and
participating entities in the
public schoolsur Authority.
House Bill 5755 haven't been
read to us by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 576 introduced by
Representative Lord an act
relating to adopted children,
providing adopted children with
free admission to state-owned
museums and state parks, camping
passes and fishing licenses.
House Bill 576
576 by title is order printed
and referred to the House of
Rural Development land grants
and Cultural Affairs Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 577 introduced by
Representative Jones, an act
relating to transportation,
creating the towing services
oversight and advisory board,
providing duties, House Bill
577. House Bill 577 haven't been
read to us by title is order
printed and referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 578, introduced by
Representative Jones, an act
relating to health, enacting
that every mother matters act
defining terms, creating the
pregnancy launch program to
provide no cost services to
pregnant people and new parents
requiring licensed health
facilities and healthcare
providers to make a resource.
Access offer before performing
an abortion providing for
compliance and enforcement,
requiring reporting. House Bill
578578 been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 579 introduced by
Representative Jones, an act
relating to health care,
establishing the New Mexico
resident physician recruitment
program providing funding for
University of New Mexico
resident physicians to do
rotations at non-university of
New Mexico hospitals and clinics
within the state to be exposed
to broader recruitment
opportunities, an appropriation.
House Bill 57979 I've been by
titles or reprinted and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the House
Appropriations.
Finance Committee.
House Bill 580 introduced by
representatives Lord De la Cruz,
Pettigrew, Henry, and Sanchez,
an act relating to license
plates, creating a separate
special share with wildlife
registration plate that depicts
elk, allowing for the cessation
of special license plate
issuance under certain
conditions, making an
appropriation, House Bill 580.
I was 580 haven't been read to
us by title is or printed and
referred to the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements Committee,
the the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 581, introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to the
environment, requiring the
Department of Environment and
local agencies to complete all
inspections on existing sources
owned or operated by permit
applicants before the issuance
of operating or construction
permits for new or modified
sources to such applicants,
establishing a periodic
inspection program in 2025 that
shall use the best available
technology requiring the
department and local agencies to
increase permitting fees to
implement.
The inspection program requiring
the department to report to the
legislature in 2026 and 2027
regarding the inspection
program.
Oswell 581 haven't been read to
my title is or printed and
referred to the house energy,
Environment, Natural Resources
Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 582 introduced by
Representative Cerrado, an act
relating to construction
enacting a new section of the
construction industry's
Licensing Act to require the
construction industry's division
of the regulation and licensing
department to develop and
establish statewide procedures
and templates for construction
projects requiring permit
applications, requiring
authorities with jurisdiction to
adhere to the procedures and use
the templates established by the
division requiring online
electronic application access
completion.
and submission options requiring
specific timelines for decisions
for applicants submitted
electronically and automatic
approvals for applications if
decisions are not timely issued,
limiting county or municipality
zoning authority over certain
developments requiring rule
adoption. House Bill 582. 582
have been read twice by titles
or printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 583 introduced by
Representative Block, an act
relating to foreclosure,
restricting the sale or
assignment of redemption rights.
House Bill 58383 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
Last call for bills.
Last call for bills.
Going once.
Going twice.
We're done.
Oh
Oh
4
The gentleman from San Juan just
in case he's wondering what
we're doing. He's probably live
reporting right now.
We are about to read in the
generic bills.
OK, and to save a little time
for the staff, we are going to
read them in one fell swoop.
They're not gonna be printed.
They're all gonna go to the.
House rules in order of business
committee.
But we're gonna do them all in
one fell swoop so that we don't
sit around for 3 more hours
doing this.
All right.
House bills 18 584 and 585
introduced by Speaker Martinez.
House bills 586, 587 588
introduced by Representative
Sapansky.
House bills 589 590, and 591,
introduced by Representative
Hochman V. Hill.
House bills 592 593, and 594
introduced by Representative
Armstrong.
House bills 595, 596, and 597,
introduced by Representative
Alan Martinez. House Bill's 598
and 599 introduced by
Representative Ortez, House Bill
600 and 601 introduced by
Representatives Small.
House Bill 602 and 603
introduced by Representative
Gallegos, House Bill 604 and 605
introduced by Representative
Ferrari.
House 606 and 607 introduced by
Representative G. Andres Romero.
House Bill 608 and 609
introduced by Representative
McQueen, House Bill 610 and 611
introduced by Representative
Johnson.
House Bill 612 and 613
introduced by Representative
Thompson.
House Bill 614 and 615
introduced by Representative
Chandler.
House Bill 616 and 617
introduced by Representative
Royal Caballero.
House Bill 618 and 619
introduced by Representative
Cerrado. House Bill 620 and 621,
introduced by Representative
Lente.
House Bill 622 and 623
introduced by Representative de
la Cruz.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety and
welfare.
House bills.
Great. House bill's 18 584,
585, 586, 587, 588, 589, 590,
591, 592, 593, 594, 595, 596,
597.
598 599, 600, 601, 602, 603,
6004, 60 5, 606, 607, 608, 609,
610, 611, 612, 613, 614, 615,
616, 617, 6018, 619, 620, 621,
622, 623, haven't been written
twice by title or or or not
printed.
And referred to the house.
Rules
In order of business.
Committee
And just so you all know we're
gonna now introduce the big
giant capital outlay bill.
House Capital outlay request,
fifty-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025, introduced by
Representative Lente.
House capital outlay requests.
They're all in.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I may we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business are
their announcements.
Committee meetings.
Members, we will be having
Saturday floor session. We're
still working out some
scheduling with committees that
need to meet on Saturday as
well, so.
Uh, clear Saturday will either
be here for floor in the morning
or in the afternoon. We will let
you know as soon as we know.
Gentle lady from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. The consumer
and Public Affairs will meet um
15 minutes or as soon as we can
after the Republican caucus
finishes any other
announcements? Your lady from
Donana. I'm, I'm sorry, from
Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after conclusion of the
Republican caucus.
note any other announcements.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, the Food Depot, uh,
will have a legislative
reception tonight at 20 at 12:22
Sila Road here in Santa Fe from
5:30 to 8:30 p.m. that is,
that's where the Food Depot is
located if you need to Google
that and they'd love to have us
attend if we can. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning. The
House will send in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
