If anyone is here for House Bill
one.
Turned it off cause I was, um,
if you're here for House Bill
125, the liability waivers for
conservators, um, that bill has
been just wanna make sure you're
not.
Um, sticking around for that.
So we'll go with House Bill 17
commission on reduction of
grocery costs, uh,
representative Little.
Anytime.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, members of the
committee. Very happy to join
you, uh, on a Saturday morning.
Um, I'm here this morning to
present uh the commission a bill
on the to establish a commission
on the reduction of grocery
costs.
Um
In about October, brief quick
story. I was in a line and
getting picking up groceries,
had to check them out myself. I
have, will do if I absolutely
have to. But um,
I remember thinking after I was,
uh, got my receipt and saw the
total price for 3 bags was $78
and some change.
And I remember thinking, what in
the world did I get in here? I
had a small container of
detergent and thought maybe I
ran it through twice. Well, the
other people standing behind me,
other customers felt the same
way. They stopped to talk to me
and we were just chit chatting
about this, and lo and behold,
here this session, here comes
this idea for the commission on
the to examine the prices of
gross, price of groceries,
because I remember thinking
there were elders behind me on
fixed incomes.
There are families that are
raising children and like my
nephews are well over 6 ft tall,
14 and 18 years old and.
Um
Require a lot of groceries to
keep them going. So I remember
thinking uh of the families in
our district and I'm wondering
how are they managing this if
we're also as empty nesters.
challenged by this, uh.
That of the
Extreme
It seems extremely high cost of
groceries.
So brings me to this.
Then this is a commission, a
nine-member commission that will
directly address the rising
costs of groceries. It'll create
a special commission to identify
and study the causes causes of
grocery inflation.
They'll study grocery prices,
make recommendations for
reducing costs and report its
findings by November 15th of
this year. It will begin
immediately followed if this
bill passes, the commission will
be established shortly after the
legislative session is over.
Uh, it does include an
appropriation of 400,000.
To the economic development
department, which has been
secured and uh well they, along
with the New Mexico Department
of Agriculture will work to
support the work of the
commission.
So with that, I'm happy to go
into details and it's time for
questions. Thank you.
OK, thank you. Well, um, go to
the audience. Is there anyone in
opposition, OK? Is there anyone
on Zoom?
OK, um, we'll go to the audience
again. Is there anyone in
support?
OK. Would you like to speak?
Wait, wait, we need to get you a
microphone.
You could state your name in
just one minute, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sergio Mata Cisneros,
and I work for Northern New
Mexico's food bank, the food
depot, and I'm also here in
representation of the
Association of Food Banks of New
Mexico. We stand in support of
the commission, uh, according to
US Census Bureau report, there
are 228 full service grocery
stores when the average is
Um
5000 gross
One grocery for every 5000
people, the state of New Mexico
should have around 400 over.
Over 440 grocery stores, um,
given our population, so we look
forward to um this commission.
Um, is there anyone on Zoom?
Judy, go ahead.
One minute, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Judy Messel speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
conference of churches.
We stand in strong support of
House Bill 17. We appreciate
it's fair and systematic
approach to reducing food costs
for New Mexicans. We especially
appreciate exploring how more of
our locally grown foods can
enter our markets, reducing
transportation and other costs.
Thank you.
No. OK.
All right, we'll go to, did you
have anything else you'd like to
add?
No, I'd be happy to stand for
questions though. OK, thank you.
Um, we'll go to the committee,
uh, Representative Lord.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So I do
have some questions on this to
try to understand.
So, as you know right now, as
the speaker said yesterday, I'm
very angry that it's hard to get
eggs, and I know we had the bird
flu and they killed millions of
birds. They killed 15 so. So,
And going through this, how
would we?
Address that issue because it's
an important issue because we
use eggs for bread, we use bread
for, I mean, we use eggs for a
lot of things.
What would this board be able to
do when we have a bird flu and
we've called so many chickens,
how would the board be able to
do.
Anything to try to figure out.
So this board will be comprised
of 9 members who are subject
matter experts in different
areas. And one of the things
that they will do will be to
examine.
Issues such as that that what is
happening through the entire
food chain from where it's
produced to when it gets into
our grocery carts and into our
homes. So I don't.
I don't have a response on
Not being in subject matter
expert in that area, but I uh I
looked to this group to be able
to provide recommendations. The
end result will be that
recommendations will be made.
Um
In November, uh, to.
As the bill indicates this our
legislative body, the interim
committee, and the appropriate
agencies who can deal with these
specific issues. So my sense
would be, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, that this would
probably, this issue would
probably go.
And thank you, Madam Chair. Is
the Department of Agriculture on
any of them that are on the
present to them to talk about
these are the solutions.
I believe it's my understanding
that uh they will be presented
with this recommendations and
they will, they will examine
that and take action following.
OK, Madam Chair and
Representative, I think one of
the big things too is also like,
like I didn't know one of the
biggest costs also on the
environment is when we ship
things on a ship and then we
bring their So Mountain Charibs
and is there.
And you may not know this. Is
there any possibility of having
to push, I know we want to do
local.
Grown, but
With our lack of water, there's
still gonna be things we can't
get, like there's certain things
we can grow here and there
should be that for horses, but
that would be because it
requires so much water. When
they look at the things, are
they gonna take that endocrine
things and we're like, we can do
meat.
And we could do pigs, and we
could do chickens.
In New Mexico, and that would
actually be fees and.
But then they would also have to
be on top of that, sorry, I'm
thinking the whole process
through I'm sure there'd have to
be.
OK, if we decide we want to
raise meat and pigs and eggs.
And make it primarily.
For sale for us to.
I'm thinking you may not know
the answers, what, how would we?
Then make that happen. I guess
we'd have to come up with
another bill then, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative, yes, that's
gonna exact that's exactly what
I mentioned, so that they will
recommend, there will be
recommendations on what next
steps might be.
When the agency receives it.
Forgive me, I didn't want to
make it sound like the
commission will tell them what
to do. But given the issue that
was identified, such as the
infrastructure.
Because it's, you're right, it's
not just transportation, it's
cold storage and the
distribution systems that are
that all have it and are a facet
of this entire issue, um.
To examine and take a doing it
locally.
I'm putting
All were food that's grown here,
the food that's grown in Mexico
and produce and feed.
We also
Not only I would look to have.
An impact on the prices in a
positive way, but also sustain
those that.
Our farmers and ranchers and.
Poultry producers and so on.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, I'm.
Especially when it comes to the
cold storage, that's something
that's super important that I
learned about in Idaho because
potatoes, they put the potatoes
you buy in the store usually a
year old.
Because they go in the sort of,
well, for the restaurants get
the larger potatoes and then we
get the leftovers from the
storage, but.
We would also have to set that
up too, where we have storage
facilities, places to age the
meats, uh, storing the meat, uh,
the slaughterhouse for all those
animals too, and then.
Um
The storage to make it more
internal.
I met him chair representative,
so when they're looking at.
In our statement I'm sure, do we
have laws already for price
gouging on food?
It's my understanding those go
through the um.
Consumer protection arm of and I
may not be, uh, have the correct
title through the Attorney
General's office.
OK, Madam Chair representative,
does that apply to bigger stores
here, do you know or to smaller
stores, they're way more
expensive because they're close.
I
Believe that they will be
examined those issues that come
forward, but that would be part
of what
I'm sure, so I agree with you on
the local, I agree with you on
the trans um, and then we have
to seriously look at what we
Um
I just, I have to go look at
this. I'm gonna look this up law
regarding price gouging.
Cause that's
An interesting thing because I
live in the East Mountains and
we have one grocery store and
there's a product and I just
don't want them to be affected
to where.
There ends up being more
penalties for them.
A man chair representative.
And then the appropriation is
$400,000.
And that's in the excuse me,
yes, it is
representative. OK. And this is
for
The one year, or sorry, fiscal
year 2025, so it's gonna be
2025, 2026.
And this is just gonna be a one
time thing or this board, Madam
Chair, this, uh, commission will
And will be uh ended look to be
ended in the uh the spring of
2026. OK, Madam Chat resent
that's all the questions I had.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, may I respond
to, just to give you some more
information as I was looking
through my notes. So, Madam
Chair and Representative, you
were asking about the laws to
protect consumers and they,
that's part of what this
commission will do. They are
gonna assess the current state
laws, um, to ensure that they're
adequately protecting consumers,
um, such as taking a look at
things such as price gouging or
examining the rapid increase in
the prices of um house.
staples.
Thank you. And and I don't.
I don't have an issue with that.
I just have.
I don't know how that's gonna
get. I just don't want penalties
for my little small. It it's a
blessing and a curse because
sometimes when you really rural
and it's the only store that's,
you know, for some places there
isn't between.
So I could see how they're
coming into play. I just don't
want to
penalize.
The blurred. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Good Lord, it's block.
No, we, we usually go by blurred
because we kind of come as a
team a lot, but thank you, Madam
Chair, and representative
Little.
Uh
Now I lost my train of thought
with my question. No, madam
Chair, uh,
So, I, I'm looking at your bill
when it comes to who is going to
be put on the commission. And I
think we spoke about earlier
that these folks would need to
be industry experts, but I
didn't really see anything
regarding requirements for
Line of work therein. Could you
go into that a little bit for
me, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative, they will be uh
the uh economic development
department will be developing
along with the uh the members
will be comprised of 3 members
appointed by the governor and 6
by legislative councils, so
there will be a process by which
will be established by the
economic Development department
to identify individuals, not
just subject matters in those
areas.
also
With the stakeholders that are
involved as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, I only
ask that because
I, I do want to make sure that
we have actual grocers.
On the board because
When it comes to different
stores, there's local stores,
like there's one right across
the street here from the
Capitol, which is more of a
Mom and pop grocery store versus
an Albertsons or a Kroger's,
Smith's, which does have a lot.
Different business model and
they they have cheaper prices as
well. So I would just love to
just consider both of those
folks.
Because
We all know how important.
The prices of things are to
people and we don't want people
to be paying an exorbitant
amount of money for something
that they shouldn't be.
Uh, so, Madam Chair
Representative, my other
question was about the national
trends. I know that commodities
are
Searched and
They are tracked by the USDA and
I'm just wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, would this
committee or commission rather,
with this commission be studying
those national trends.
As well as just state trends,
because I don't know if we track
on the state level as closely
those kinds of commodity prices,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative,
this commission will consider
it, we'll consider those trends.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. And
then I was wondering because I
You know, a difficult times to
call for interesting solutions
to things. And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I will give just
me up in session as an example.
So, my first year in session, I
was like, OK, I'll come to Santa
Fe, and I'm gonna buy groceries
in Santa Fe.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I started doing
that and I didn't really have
much time. So then I did.
A
Delivery service meal kit kind
of thing. I think it was factor
and every plate and I tried them
all. And so it depends on the
prices of those as well, that
really made me determine this
session just make meals at home
and then do it.
Beforehand, like on a Sunday
when we're not in session,
hopefully we never are in
session on Sunday, but if we do,
I make, make meals then and then
I, I serve it for the rest of
the week. So the question here
is, is this also going to create
an
A component
In
Consideration to teach people
how to utilize cheaper
ingredients and make things from
scratch more, which does indeed
lower the price of groceries.
At least it has for me. And I'm
wondering, is that something
that we're also considering
where you can swap different
kinds of ingredients to make
cool things. I've even, I threw
in like what ingredients I had
and chat GBT or whatever, and it
told me, oh, you can make this.
And I was like, OK, let's try it
out and it actually didn't burn
the house down. So that was
cool. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering, is that something
that we're also considering when
it comes to educational
components.
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't think that's gonna be
especially a focus of this
group, but I think that the
commission will uh
In their examine, it's more
directed to uh
The factors that are involved
with the prices of groceries,
but you raise a very good point
that I think there uh my sense I
would dare say that there would
be an uh an entity that would be
um
others who will see the value in
doing that.
And it's certainly something I
can raise with them. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. And,
and I also think when we're
considering these things, I.
In my experience, at least in in
Santa Fe.
I've gone around to different
grocery stores and seeing
different prices for things. And
they've varied significantly
between grocery stores
sometimes. So if I go to Walmart
and something's more expensive
about Walmart and I go to
Smith's, something is less
expensive at Smith's. I find, I
just want to know how we're
taking that into consideration
because I know some grocery
stores have sales and things,
and that reduces prices and then
just regular items if something
is $10 at Walmart, and then it's
$12.
Some other grocery store, maybe
another Walmart down the road, I
don't know. Uh, how is that
going to be considered between
different grocery stores in the
same.
City, but the exact same
product,
Madam,
what I'm looking at is what
we're looking at uh.
My co-sponsors Silva and Sapasky
are looking at is that they will
take those into consideration as
well.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. And I
think that's, it's, it's a good
thing to consider. I do have
some concerns though, regarding
two things, uh, one is the
timeline on this. I know it has
an emergency clause, and I know
that we're trying to start it
immediately, but it's my
understanding that this
dissolves in the spring of next
year. Is that, is that correct,
Madam Chair Representative?
Yes, that's the anticipated
date.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I'm just
wondering because I
I like the idea of it. I do not
like the idea of creating a new
board to do something or a new
commission to do something
cause.
I would love to use the
resources we currently have, but
I also think that timeline is so
quick.
That
At least in my district, by the
time we even get our capital
outlay money from this year,
it's gonna be halfway through
next year.
And so, or at least halfway
through this year and maybe
November, December. And so I
just want to understand since
this is advisory from my
understanding.
How meaningful an impact are we
expecting to have based upon
what the goal of this
legislation is, Madam Chair,
Representative.
What's behind it is the impact
to the consumers of the state.
It is in everyone's interest to
get this done quickly because
we're all increasing grocery
prices, so it's definitely one
that I would say we have.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Knight, I think.
You know, me too, right? We all
eat food. We all have to deal
with this. I even heard this guy
the other day was telling me
that people are now renting.
Chickens
To people, and they could have a
chicken temporarily that lays or
a couple chickens that they get
that that lay eggs, cause eggs
are just so expensive right now.
And so, I mean, I, it is getting
dire. I do not disagree with you
on that one. And I, I just want
to make sure that we're making
the best impact, especially with
the dollars that we're gonna
appropriate on this. So I will
continue to listen to our debate
here, but
I think we, we all agree on one
thing at least, that we want
lower grocery prices, and we
want it to be fair for
everybody. Although I know in
some communities like mine, we
do have a few grocery stores,
thank God. We have Albertson's,
we've got Lowe's, we've got
Walmart, we've got a Walmart
grocery store, which is even
cooler. And so we got so many
different things, but if you
just go up the mountain 20
minutes to Cloudcroft, they,
they have a couple small mom and
pop places and their prices are
significantly higher, but it's
because they have to truck all
the.
all that stuff all the way up
the mountain. And it's just so
rural and how do you make a a
business work if you're not
allowed to increase costs a
little bit just for that reason.
So I, I do think it's worth
looking into, but I think maybe
if we could utilize some current
EDD funds and then talk to folks
around the state government
currently, I think that could
also be a solution instead of
having to have a new
appropriation, but, but I
definitely thank you for the
idea, and I thank you for
wanting to be
committed to lowering the cost
because I too agree with you on
that, so thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representative
Little, or should I say Madam
Weis too a little. Appreciate
it.
Madam Chair, I move would you
pass. We have a few more.
Representative Romero, uh, Madam
Chu, thank you. uh, thank you,
Representative. I just wanted to
say thank you for this, um.
One of the things that we saw in
the notes here, um.
And again, it is part of the
dire across, um, the spectrum
there's a look at some of the
economics and certainly the fact
that 1/6 of our farmers.
Um, funding, um, for our, um, as
it gets to the grocery store
through those different
products. So I really, really
appreciate, um, hope that this
is something.
valuable to New Mexicans, um, I
wish it was sooner, I wish we
would have known what the future
would hold back in 2022 when
inflation started going up, um.
OK, thank you, and I have a
quick a few comments and
questions. Um, the, um,
Food farm policy groups, um,
have been, you know, working
hard to.
Um
Network and provide information.
I hope they'll be on your
commission.
And um.
and also uh Kendall Chavez
probably will be one of the
governors uh appointees who
helps coordinate the legislative
efforts for all of the different
projects that help.
And New Mexico grown is one of
the um
Initiatives that um.
It is being um supported with
different bills to
bring uh
fresh.
fruits and vegetables as well as
meats and from our um ranchers,
and I was wondering why you left
out meat in the.
Consideration.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Actually, meat is, can also be
included. It was not a finite
list, but those were examples
that were listed in the bill.
So, um
That it will be included.
They will be included.
OK, great. Um, we have a motion.
Do I hear or do pass and um
seconded by Representative
Thompson.
Is there any objection? You
would take roll.
Representative block. No, ma'am.
Representative Lord
explanation.
Rep Representative Thompson.
And I'm vice chair, yes, Madam
Chair. Yes.
And I also just wanted to point
out that it does have an
emergency clause so you can get
started in that year.
Doesn't get ahead of you. So
we'll have to watch for that
vote. Thank you.
You, oh, I'm sorry. Um, you have
a due pass, um, the vote of 4 in
favor and two against on House
Bill 17.
And explain your vote,
um, I love the idea. I love the
concept. I would rather.
To me, this is too slow.
That I would rather see an
urgent. I would rather see a
bunch of volunteers come
together and say, we love this
state, we're all going to come
meeting and talk about this and
move that through because the
advisor board that's gonna come
back to us next year with bills
and that's just too long. Uh, I
would rather it have far more
urgency. The other issue I have
when I looked up.
Uh, my issue is on number 4 on
page 3 when we talk about the
price gouging. I have a small
store and the finest $20,000. I
want that to affect my grocery
store. I can't vote for
something that's gonna might
seriously affect my local
grocery store. But thank you for
the idea and if you can push it
through faster if somebody else,
bunch of people to get together
that love the state who want to
make a difference this weekend.
I think that'd be much better
and then we have a special
session to talk about it. Thank
you, ma'am Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I appreciate the
support and I'm looking forward
to your help too, to move this
forward quickly. Thank you.
Thank you. And for those who um
might not have been here. We are
rolling House Bill 125 and so
we'll go to House Bill 406
victim recovery for incarcerated
Representative Her.
Representative Herndon, whenever
you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm before
you, uh, bringing before you
House Bill 406. This is intended
to provide reparations to
incarcerated people who are
victims of crime.
Which, uh, reparations are
available to them under the
under the victims of Crime Act.
I have with me today my expert
witness who is Larry Tackman. He
is the
I have Frank Suia. uh Larry was,
uh, it looks like him
looks different.
Uh, he's the director of the
Crime Victims Reparation
Commission.
And uh with that, Madam Chair,
we'll stand for, OK, Madam
Chair, my expert would like to
make a
Madam Chair members of the
members of the committee, Frank
Zubia director for the New
Mexico Crown Victims Reparation
Commission.
Um, our commission consists of
two primary missions. We provide
compensation to victims of crime
across the state. In addition,
we are the organization that
provides funding to 192 programs
statewide, both federal and
state appropriation.
Um, those programs consist of
any victim service organization
like crisis centers, domestic
violence shelters, uh, casas
court appointed special
advocates, um, any organization
that provides direct victim
services to victims of crime,
our organization funds those.
Um, HB 406 proposes changes
needed to extend victim
compensation to incarcerated
persons.
Sorry.
Sorry,
um, incarcerated persons,
historically, um,
Currently, the institutions
where they are housed are
responsible for expenses
associated with sexual assault,
physical abuse and other forms
of abuse. This bill recognizes
the rights of all crime victims,
including those who are
incarcerated.
This would align with the
national best practice.
Such as the prison rape
elimination Act, which our
organization, um, administered
for
Almost a decade, uh, statewide.
This bill would also provide
rehabilitation, public safety.
And justice and ensuring
equitable treatment while
maintaining safeguards.
Providing access to victim
compensation for incarcerated
persons does not negate criminal
accountability.
But ensures that victimization
is addressed equitably.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I stand for questions.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition?
OK, is there anyone on Zoom in
opposition?
OK, um, are there people here in
support
went on Zoom.
Hey, there's one person on Zoom.
Go ahead.
2, OK.
Alexandra Taylor.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor,
executive director of the New
Mexico Coalition of Sexual
Assault Programs, which leads
the statewide sexual violence
prevention and treatment efforts
in New Mexico. We appreciate the
sponsor and CVRC for seeking to
modernize the Victim of Crime
Act to be of service and not
further penalizing those most
vulnerable. Over half of people
living in New Mexico have
experienced sexual violence and
through the New Mexico sexual
assault helpline and our sexual
assault service providers.
We serve over 500 individuals
each year who are currently
incarcerated in accordance with
Priya, who have experienced
sexual violence through hotline
support, advocacy support, sane
exams, and emotional support. In
our recently published crime
victimization report, those who
were ever incarcerated had the
highest victimization rate at
69% of experienced sexual
violence.
important change will create
access to resources for those
who are most at risk of
experiencing sexual assault.
Thank you.
OK. Next we have N.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee sponsor. My
name is Natine. I am a
disability advocate and a person
with multiple disabilities and
that brevity of time and also my
voice, I sta support. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Nat. Um, OK, so we,
do you have anything else you'd
like to add before we go to the
committee?
No, madam Chair, we're ready for
questions.
Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative.
Thanks for bringing this bill.
Um, I'm just um I don't know.
Can you just describe, so when
someone, or what that process
looks like.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, um, we have an
eligibility eligible eligibility
process. So you you submit an
application to our compensation
program. We were the first
state, Madam Chair
Representative Romero to change
eligibility requirements where
you don't have to cooperate with
law enforcement.
Um, first day of the nation. So
we were setting the trend to
make sure that all of our crime
victims had um easy access and
less barriers, um, primarily are
victims of sexual assault and
domestic violence or intimate
partner violence. Um, you can
now report to a licensed medical
provider, licensed mental health
provider or a tribal health
provider, as of 2018. Um, you
apply and those are all the
eligibilities that you just
disclose.
Um, that information to a
licensed professional and
ultimately you're deemed
eligible.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So upon
release with some
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, um, if, if you would
allow me to provide you with the
story. Um, and, um, Southern New
Mexico Correctional Facility
down south several years ago,
there was um homicide within the
prison system.
The family was referred to our
organization for assistance.
Unfortunately, because the um
The victim was incarcerated at
the time or at the prison, we
could not provide assistance to
them.
Um, the family was indigent.
We ultimately then reached out
to the Department of Corrections
and asked whether they had any
resources for the family to bury
their loved one. They did not.
So ultimately what ended up
happening was the family ended
up taking a loan to bury their
loved one.
Um, this would allow for in that
particular case, Mr. Romero, the
family to apply to our
organization and then ultimately
assist the incarcerated
individual at the time.
Who's also a victim.
Um, that we could provide burial
or funeral services for the
family.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thanks for, uh, the story, um.
To, to think. I know that we've
been trying to shore up all, and
I recognize too that through our
analysis that there's no um
Anticipation
What fund that is available. Can
you, um, just see how that
helped me with how that Madam
Chair, representative Romero,
um, there's two other states in
the nation that allow for
individuals that are
incarcerated to access funding
from their compensation program,
IA.
Um, and, um,
I know
Um, so those two particular
states, we reached out to them
to find out what the impact
financially would be if we were
to change or modify our existing
statute. Um, they have less than
1% of individuals that are
incarcerated actually apply.
Uh, most of the resources are
provided by the institutions
where they're currently
incarcerated, either in jail or
prison.
Um, the only time that those
individuals would access or um
Usually for counseling services
after they're released from
prison.
I, I don't know if that answered
your question or not. That's
helpful. I don't, I guess I was
just ending that we, my from
previous years, um, to my
recollection that we didn't have
um
Overall, and I was just.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, um,
I, I want to thank all of the
legislators here in the state of
New Mexico, um, you all have
been incredibly supportive, um,
from 2018 to now, there has been
a 76% reduction in our VOA
funding, uh, and that's a
significant amount of money. We
went from $22 million and we're
down to a little bit over 4.5.
In just federal appropriation.
Um,
this body has appropriated state
appropriation to make sure that
we can meet the needs of all
crime victims in our state.
Currently, there's um both LFC
and DFA recommendation is to
support, um,
$500,000 for care and support,
which would specifically address
this particular issue because
care and support is direct
financial assistance to victims
of violent crime. Um, and Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Romero, we keep coming to the
table to make sure that we're
able to meet the needs, um, we
were, uh, we're being very
strategic on how we now um
access both federal and federal
funding, um, we're
We
Um
We're being cautious, Madam
Chair, and Representative
Romero, um, we
Historically our organization
was able to fund programs to
give you an example.
For up to 4 years now our
contracts are year to year
because we just don't know of
the sustainability with regards
to funding.
Madame Chair Represented Romero.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, um,
for federal funding right now.
Um, that said, um, I just have
one final question. When we're
looking at the
Opportunity for us to prevent
and especially in the
incarcerated state, and I know
it's not the bill, perhaps, um,
but
Do we know why this happened?
situation, I mean.
It should be a controlled
environment was.
Troubling and
And I know that, you know, the
the idea of prevention isn't.
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero uh.
We, we work closely with all of
our service organizations and
part of their missions is to is
to provide prevention. Um, we
also work closely with the
Department of Corrections. Uh,
we are part of their um
curriculum for both new officers
or new classification officers
for those institutions, um,
with, uh, we try to educate.
And try to provide as much
information from the onset, um,
unfortunately, Representative
Romero, I can't give you an
answer as to why it happens, um.
Not within my realm. I
apologize.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative expert. So,
Weirdly enough, I very much
agree with the Representative
Romero. I think that
This is
I, I just don't understand how
this is continuing to happen in
our state when it comes to
people incarcerated.
Getting
Attacked while incarcerated.
It just blows my mind. And I
know that there's a lot of
cultural things.
In the media, they like to make
light of it, but I, I don't
think, I don't think it's
something to be made light of it
all.
Whatsoever. So, Madam Chair,
Representative, my first
question is,
I don't know too much about the
CBRC.
So can you tell me what year?
I began and what was the impetus
for its creation, and I know
we're going really way back or
maybe not, I have no idea how
long it's been here, but could
you just go a little bit into
that for me, Madam Chair,
Representative, expert.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, uh, we were established
under the Reagan administration
back in 1981.
Um, the funding that we started
or this state started receiving
was VOA funding, which is
Victims of Crime Act funding.
That was the initial funding
that was the premise for also
creating the statute and also um
in uh our enabling statute to
provide services to victims
across the state.
Um
Our primary mission.
Representative Block was to
provide direct financial
assistance to victims of violent
crime.
Um, we ultimately what ended up
happening is that we were the
Um, kind of an anomaly because
we became the administering
agency also for federal funding,
historically.
Only until recently did our
organization become the
administering agency for um.
State appropriation, but um um
we continue to and I.
One of the things that I um
Um, a kind of
Enjoy doing as part of my work
is that our state has set the
standard on a national level to
be one of the compensation
programs that provides access to
all victims of crime,
irregardless of their race,
gender, whatever their situation
is and, and this particular bill
would actually be the best
practice to ensure that all
victims of crime have access to
funding.
Um, historically, our funding,
um,
Representative Block, um, for
every state dollar that we
expend on a victim of crime, we
get 75 cents from the federal
government.
Um, one of the things that um
I failed to mention because I
don't think it was um.
It, it, it's um, it, it had a
premise initially we were
instructed by Office for Victims
of Crime, um, to amend our
existing statutes, uh, their
recommendation to all comp
programs on a nation on a
national level was, and I'll
read it to you verbatim, victim
eligibility considerations, and
this is Office for Victims of
Crime Department of Justice,
Criminal history, a state may
not deny compensation.
because of the victims or
survivors incarceration.
Probation or parole status prior
criminal history or sentence.
Um, this administration
currently rescinded that rule
change.
But we want to continue to
ensure that New Mexico is the um
A of the state that leads with
regards to making sure that
everyone has access to victim
services, um, Madam Chair
Representative Block, I don't
know if I answered your question
or not. You did, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I, I
really appreciate it. I just
wanted to make sure we
understood where it came from
because I was trying to find it
this morning and last night, and
I was going to all kinds of
different websites and federal
programs and things. So that's
good to hear. So in 1981, I
believe it was, and then Madam
Chairs representative, we talked
about the
This is all, I guess, in
executive action when it comes
to
The
Rulemaking and who gets what. So
Madam Chair Representative
regarding folks who are
incarcerated.
Would
These funds be 75 cents on the
dollar.
refunded by the federal
government or matched, so to
speak.
Currently
With what we spend on
incarcerated.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, we don't spend currently
any anything on incarcerated
individuals. Our, our
compensation program. So, um, to
answer your question, we don't
get any kind of federal match
with regards to that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and, but if this
does pass.
Would we be refunded in any way,
shape or form by the federal
government for folks who are
incarcerated.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, yes, we would. So anytime
that the state that one any time
that we expend state
appropriation irregardless of
the individual's living
situation, um, I don't want to
minimize it, but that's what it
is. Um, we would still receive
75 cents from the federal
government.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, because I think
there was a comment earlier
about the current administration
rolling something back and so I
just wanted to make clear that
if they did roll whatever that
thing is back and I haven't read
whatever order or
promulgation or whatever it may
have been, that would still be
in effect. We would still
receive matching funds for any
funds that we distribute.
Even if that individual was
incarcerated, right? Madam Chair
Representative Block, there
would, that's a Congress, so
Congress actually implemented
1981 the Voca, um, so that
wouldn't necessarily be a um
Well
I don't want to misspeak, but
we, we don't anticipate that um
there will be any change with
regards to receiving 75 cents
for every state dollar.
Expended.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, pardon me. And
then I'm looking at the FIR
here.
And I just found this to be an
interesting statistic.
Uh, I believe it said meta study
shared by CBRC estimates that
18% of offenders
Experience physical violence
during incarceration.
22%.
Uh, sexual violence.
And it says this subset of those
released would be eligible to
apply for benefits under 406.
So,
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
wondering, number one, how would
these individuals prove that
this happened to them, cause I
know a lot of the time, Madam
Chair, representative, when it
comes to being incarcerated.
It appears to me that it's a
pretty
Closed loop
When it comes to the the prison.
And so if you, if you show
To the authorities or to the
wardens that you have been.
physically
Or sexually violated that could
potentially
Further
Complicate your living situation
in prison because people could
see you as a target, right? And
so,
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
think these numbers are probably
pretty low. These are probably
just the ones that were reported
or that had a medical incident,
something that had to be
reported. So I'm wondering,
number one, how do they
prove that they were a victim.
And then number 2, how will
these individuals receive that
compensation if it wasn't
necessarily.
An official report. Madam Chair,
Representative Block, uh, again,
I want to go back to my original
statement of our, our
compensation program, I did away
with you having to disclose or
provide a report to law
enforcement. Now you can
provide, you can disclose your
incident, whatever that is, to a
licensed mental health provider,
a licensed medical provider, um,
or a tribal health provider in
order for you to be deemed
eligible.
So
we are hoping that those
incarcerated individuals would
disclose the incident to a
medical provider who would then
ultimately document and then we
would ultimately have that
verification from the
institution where those
individuals were at.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and then
a couple more questions. So that
medical provider, could it be a,
just a counselor licensed
counselor, Madam Chair
represented.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, yes, that could be a, any
licensed counselor, therapist,
psychologist, um, and they could
disclose that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
representative. And then another
question on this. What is the
statute of limitations when it
comes to reporting this to the
CBRC.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, uh, again, back in 2015,
we revised, so individuals um
and the new revision is
reasonable time. So that's open
to interpretation, um, as far as
like how we make that
determination. So we, we find
out, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Block, that a lot
of our crime victims um
throughout their lifespan get
triggered at various points, so
they access services and
that's why we were created to
make sure that they had the
ability to access funding should
the need arise.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and expert, OK,
that, that helped me a little
bit on that.
I will continue to listen to the
debate.
I'm, I'm very torn on this one.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
trying to get.
Thank you, Representative
expert.
So I had to go back because this
address crime victims
reparation. OK.
So what I need to know on this
bill representative expert, is
this.
Are we looking at
For incidents that happened
outside of a jail or any
incarceration or just incidents
that happened.
Within prison system.
Or could this be somebody who
did something outside who is
eligible, then gets arrested.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker.
I'm sure, Madam Chair, who's now
Speaker, apparently.
I'm sure
let him share representative
Lord. This would be just
amending the ability for
individuals that are
incarcerated. So the incident
would have needed to have
happened while they were
incarcerated, because ultimately
anyone, if there is a any kind
of abuse, whether that be sexual
or physical in an institution
that they're technically
ineligible. They can't apply.
This would give
them the ability to apply for
our services only after release.
Uh, some man, that's what I was
trying to get it. So somebody if
there was a, let's say a DB
incident and both were at fault,
that does happen and then they
end up both incarcerated, that
eligible then for, or would they
the comp the compensation
because it happened outside.
And then they were incarcerated
afterwards. OK.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
um, in our statute, it also, it
says causal or contributory
factors. So our agency would
take that into account. So if
the
Victim
had any causal behavior with
regards to what happened, we
would have to, our commission is
having to take that into
account.
I don't know if that answered
your question or not, yeah, and
what I'm trying to get at um
Madam Chair.
Our represent an expert if let's
say there was a DV situation,
it's.
Uh, two partners. They both are
beating each other up, that does
happen or one beats one up and
then the other one beats, and
they both got hurt and they both
apply.
For this crime victims
reparation Act.
And they both go to jail or
prison.
Are they both eligible to still
apply for this and
$20,000 would they still be
eligible for that, even though
it happened outside and then
they're now incarcerated.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, I, I, I, um.
I want to make sure that I
understand they, once you're in
an institution, it's the
institution's responsibility to
provide medical or um any kind
of other assistance, um, our
service providers don't have
access. Um, I know that most
individuals would have access to
Priya. I mean, they can make
telephone calls and they can
correspond, but not necessarily
we could, we couldn't directly
provide services, um, as we
would have to at that point.
uh, lean on the uh
The institutions where they're
currently incarcerated. Also,
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
um.
Our commission is a payer of
last resort, so that's part of
our uh enabling statute as well.
So we would work with those
institutions to ensure that
they're accessing whatever's
currently available before they
access our resources. OK, so man
representative when I'm looking
at here when it talks about
awards up to 20,000. It's
looking for all the different
care like medical, dental,
mental health, all that. So
since that would be happening in
the institution that would not
be applicable.
OK, yes. No, thank you. I was
trying to wrap my head around
this works. So, Manure
representative. So if
So if someone gets harmed and
they do, and I think I agree
with Representative Block
because you're labeled a snitch,
which could be a death sentence
in prison.
Um, so if you do go in and you
have, you are now a snitch and
it's gonna get out very quickly
cause nothing is everything,
it's almost like I'm in the
prison system. Everybody knows
who's doing and doing what, so I
would imagine those numbers to
be much higher. So when we're
saying that when somebody gets
harmed and talks about rape and
other things that do happen and
and what is in there.
When we talk about.
Giving them a reparation, if
you're talking about if what you
just said is correct.
That the medical, dental, all
that stuff is covered.
In the prison system already,
where does this now step in
representative Representative,
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, this would
only take place after they're
released. So if there are any, I
guess, ongoing expenses, whether
that be medical or dental, that
would be only after they're
released from their institution.
Um, it, it wouldn't necessarily,
we again, we're, uh, we worked
in unison, so if someone has,
um, just to give you an example,
um, Madam Chair Representative
Lord, um, if, if someone has
personal insurance, Medicaid or
Medicare. We, we have those
institutions or those insurances
pay first, and then we consider
any other expenses that that
insurance or those insurances
don't cover.
OK. Thank you, um, the experts
saw that Medicare, Medicaid,
health insurance, all those
things come first and then you
come in at the last. OK, so,
While someone is in prison.
Man
Represent expert if they're in
there, you're talking about when
they get out.
So what if they're in there for
life in prison has expert.
But
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
again, we, we were limited on
the resources that we can
provide to someone who's
incarcerated. We just don't have
the ability to provide those
resources, um, so if, if someone
has a life sentence, um,
obviously they wouldn't be able
to access any of our funding
into they're released.
OK
The chairs. So is there mental
health counseling in jails and
prisons?
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, I, I, I don't know that.
I, I, I, I know that they have
classification officers, they're
not licensed mental health
providers. I, I don't know
whether individuals have access
to mental health services in
institutions. I, that's not
within my wheelhouse, Madam
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
it's kind of a big question that
I have because if part of mental
health counseling and somebody's
in there for life, they're kind
of missing the.
Cause I don't think there is any
kind of mental health
counseling, and I seriously
doubt even if they did, you
might not have access to it.
And
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
I know that they have, um,
incarcerated individuals have
access to a telephone, and I
know that um through our Priya
project, which is now
administered through our sexual
assault coalition, um, there's a
hotline so you can actually talk
to someone with regards to the
incident, but aside from that
telephone contact. I I I don't
know what other.
Potential solution individuals
that are incarcerated have.
There is, I, I will have to dig
to find any type of mental
health.
jails, especially for the
short-termers. uh, Madam Chair
Representative expert. So I was
looking how the war awards are
determined.
And I, I know you're looking for
things like is there health
insurance, which, by the way,
Medisure representative, how
does it work if they're in
prison and they're working for,
is that, that wouldn't be a work
comp on that.
Madam Chair Representative Lord
one.
Um
Currently, the crime victims
reparation Commission receives
15% of inmate wages, and that is
our 3 of our revenue source. To
answer your question, um, we
wouldn't, I, I don't know how
to, again, it's uncharted
territory for us with regards to
trying to make that
determination whether that
individual would be eligible for
loss of wages, um, I, I, I
couldn't answer that, but
Great
question. Yeah, it's, it's, it's
an interesting question because
they are technically working
slaves are not indentured
servitude, they actually are
attracted. um, Madam Cherry is
an expert who decides who's the
board that decides cause it
looks like eligible depends on
several factors, but who?
is on that board that makes that
determination of Madam Chair
Representative Lord, Currently
there's 18 enumerated crimes,
um, and, and they vary, there's
currently proposed legislation
to do more for law enforcement
officers. Um, we're also,
there's also legislation, um,
House Bill 231 um to lower the
threshold for victims of
assault, simple assault, simple
battery, um, criminal sexual
contact which is not one of our
enumerated crimes. We have it
for minors, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, but we do
not have it for adults, um, and
then armed robbery. So they
would have to fit one of those
18 enumerated crimes in order
for for us to deem them
eligible. And then again, we
would then work with there any
collateral sources before then
we start accessing the resources
that we ultimately provide. OK,
so Madam Chair, it has to be one
of these crimes either and.
Then you would review that, look
to see if there's other
insurances. Those crimes, they
don't have any insurance.
I'm trying to figure out how to
accept this, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, um,
Um, my previous statement with
regards to causal behavior and
contributory factors would be
considered at the time of
deeming someone eligible, um,
because that's also part of our
statute. Um, and again, we, we
are an agency that only provides
compensation for expenses that
are directly related to the
incident. Um, we, we don't give.
Um, there is no compensation,
Madam Chair Representative Lord
for um
Um
expenses that we cannot
substantiate. So, um, like uh to
answer one of your previous
questions, um, you, um,
Loss of wages, right? We could,
we would have to get
documentation that that
individual wasn't working for a
particular part of time or
whatever, um, and it had to do.
With um with um the incident.
I'm sorry, did you?
No, madam chair, thank you, uh,
Madam Representative. So, Madam
Chair, represent expert, so, so
if I'm understanding correctly,
there really is no.
payout per se, you're paying
for.
Medical, dental, counseling,
funeral no word to make proper.
OK, so there's, there's no award
of a set amount of money. It
specifically goes to pay for
medical dental
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
we, we, uh, I mean, if I could
provide you just a quick
scenario. So if you're seeking
mental health, um, and there's a
copay, we pay you back your
copay.
Um, so you, you, your insurance,
your primary insurance would be
responsible for for that. If you
choose not to utilize.
And, and that's your right. You
choose not to utilize your
primary insurance because you
don't want a particular, um,
either diagnosis or stigma,
right? You can utilize us at
100% for that mental health.
That's, but that's a
conversation, Madam Chair um
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
that's a conversation that we
typically have with our victims.
OK, ma'am represented expert
because when I first saw this,
now I understand how, how would
that all work out? And I'm like,
Madam Chair Representative.
Lord, we are an agency that
provides reimbursement after
expenses. So, um, and, and uh
although Madam Chair
Representative Lord, we have uh
a lot of our victims are um
Um, don't have, I guess what I
would refer to as dispensable
cash. So we've partnered up with
10 nonprofits across the state
to expedite payments if there's
a need to address a particular
issue.
OK, Madam Chair, I have 2 more
questions, um.
If
Can a person who's incarcerated,
can they do a lawsuit.
At some point, let's say they
were raped against the prison,
the guards or whoever, and they
do a civil lawsuit for any
injuries obtained or in prison
or out of prison. Can they sue?
The reason I'm asking is
because.
Could this stuff be bundled into
that civil suit. Any of the
medical care, dental.
Madam Chair Representative Lord
um.
Also in our statute is if there
is a civil settlement, we stop
payment immediately.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. That's
what I was trying to get at
because I'm trying to see
overlapping of, OK, the suit,
and then they're getting this
and they're gonna get it wrapped
in Mounts and the last question
I have, would we prioritize our
non
Incarcerated victims over
incarcerated when you're in,
you've been released already or
you're still.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
I, I, I don't think I understand
the question,
Madam Chair, would there be any
prioritization of, let's say
people that are already already
or is it all equal playing
ground, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, it's, it's
an equal playing ground. OK,
Manchur is a representative and
experts all the questions I
have.
OK. Thank you. I just have one
question. Um,
With the
Projected behavioral health.
Funding, would you all be able
to um apply for a grant funding
under some of this new
behavioral health, um, money.
To be able to provide for, you
know, situations like this.
Madam Chair, uh, uh.
Um, we, we, we.
I don't know. Um, we're always
looking for um historically our
organization has always access
um discretionary funding from
the federal government, not
necessarily from the state. Um,
um, we've been incredibly
successful, a lot of our uh
initiatives were with federal
funds, Madam Chair, uh, and not
necessarily uh state
appropriation, but, um, like we
tell all of our service
organizations, diversity as far
as funding is good.
And accessing any funding is
good as well. So I'm not saying
no, Madam Chair, because I'm
sure we will make efforts to
apply to make sure that we have
what we need to meet the needs
of our victims.
OK, great. Thank you. Um, what
is the will of the committee?
I'm, I'd like to move a do pass.
OK, it's been moved and
seconded.
Um, is there, are there any
objections? OK, so we'll take
roll call.
Representative Block. No, ma'am,
with a quick explanation.
As
Representative Romero.
I'm sorry?
Thank you.
Representative Thompson? Yes.
Representative Lord,
Lord. I learned my lesson from
the other night.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, yes.
OK.
Um, you have a due pass, um,
with a vote of 5 to 1 and on
House Bill 406 and
Representative block to explain
his vote. Oh thank you, Madam
Chair. So the only reason I
voted against this is number
one, I'm scared about how much
funding we actually can have in
our fund to get this to victims,
and then another thing is I, I
believe from what I heard, folks
who were victimized.
Who were never incarcerated
would be prioritized alongside
people who were incarcerated and
did something to be
incarcerated. So I just had some
concerns about that, but I, I
definitely want to pass this
along, and I, I will see on the
floor if I'm a yes, I may, may
just be, but usually if I'm
just, if I have a gut feeling
to, to vote no, I usually do,
and that's what the gut told me
today. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of.
Next we have um house Bill 418
mobile home rental agreements
and landlords, uh,
representative Potter Home.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
I'm here today with uh my two
experts, Maria Grego, the
director of economic equality at
Center on Law and Poverty, um,
and Professor Elizabeth Elia,
uh, and she's a UNM professor
and also the co-founder of the
housing law nonprofit.
Um, we are here because there is
a housing and homelessness
crisis in our state and one of
the most affordable uh stocks of
housing are manufactured homes,
um, at any given time us in New
Mexico we're ranked in the whole
country where either #1 or #2 in
terms of the percent. So what
this bill is here to do today is
to balance the rights of
landowners while also
strengthening the protections of
manufacturing. I'll turn it over
to representative uh.
Yeah.
Yes, thank you, um.
Madam sponsor, thank you members
of the committee, Madam Chair,
just very briefly, I am um
Here as an owner and tenant of a
mobile home.
I can personally attest to many
of the overreaching conditions
that this bill aims to correct?
And also offers more protections
to mobile home tenants, so I'm
very, very proud to join, um
Representative sponsor on this
bill. Thank you and we're ready
for whenever you're ready.
Yes, unless you're, are you
ready to go to the audience.
OK. Um, we will go, um, to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition?
Um, take 5.
I think there was just 4.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors, and we have some
concerns with the bill,
um, I would note just a few of
them for you. Uh, the first one
is that the bill mandates a a
minimum 24 month initial rental
agreement. We believe that that
is unnecessarily restrictive. We
can think of situations where uh
someone coming into the mobile
home park might want a shorter
term, and so we don't quite
understand the reason for
mandating the the
2-year initial rental agreement.
We also noted that in the
reasons for uh eviction, they're
adding in uh concepts of
materiality and substantial uh
termination of the lease, those
necessarily add questions in
terms of what is that standard
for uh achieving or getting to a
point of the, uh, the
termination. And then finally,
there's a a requirement that's
going into the language uh that
adds a twelve-month notice.
Before changing the use of the
land, we think that's
unnecessarily restrictive. We
have other concerns. We will be
talking with the sponsors about
this. Thank you very much. Thank
you.
Next, is there anyone else who
wanted to speak in opposition.
Or you just raised your hand?
OK. Um, is there anyone on Zoom?
Joanne,
go ahead.
Joanne?
Go ahead.
OK. Yes, my name is Joan De
Michael. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm a homeowner and a
55 plus land lease manufactured
home community and Silver City.
I first became aware of New
Mexico's mobile home park Act in
2022 when I found out that our
community landowner had sold the
land under our home without
giving us notice or an
opportunity to purchase it, and
it didn't feel right. That was
the 2nd time I had that feeling.
The 1st is when I was
considering
Moving to the community and
asked to see the lease and was
told that there wasn't one.
Instead, I was given 4 pages of
rules to sign and told I could
stay forever as long as I follow
the rules. So when the person I
had the oral agreement with,
suddenly sold the community land
and moved away. I finally read
the Mobile Home Park Act, and it
was apparent immediately to me
that the law regulating these
land leased communities is
inadequate and unenforced.
Since then, I have learned more
and more that that's true.
So please support House Bill
418, so abuses can be
investigated. Laws can be
enforced, and residents can have
some sense of security.
Thank you.
Alright, uh,
Um
Is this in uh the next Zoom
person is this an opposition or
support?
Kathleen, it's gonna be for
The opposition.
Uh, I am in, uh, Kathleen and I
am in support, so I will wait if
you're wanting to do that first,
Madam Chair, to do opposition. I
apologized.
All right. Um, is there anyone
in opposition that would please
raise their hand on Zoom.
It's like I have low.
Um, who's still raising their
hand.
Go ahead, Flo.
Flow, go ahead.
Is it my turn? OK. Yes, madam
chair and representatives. My
name is Florence Dean.
I live at Desert Palms No Home
Park, and Almaordo.
I stand and just.
You're gonna have to turn off
the speaker on your computer
because it's just that going.
OK, sorry.
Go ahead.
OK, well
Um
Flow, just a second. We're gonna
go to the audience. Is there
anyone in the audience who's in,
Hey, would you like to speak?
OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Arturo Castillo and I'm the
director of Equity and Culture
at Conservation Voterss New
Mexico. As climate catastrophes
continue to rage on and the
unhoused population continues to
increase, we must do everything
we can to prevent any more New
Mexicans from being forced out
of their homes and onto the
streets where they will suffer
the most as a climate crisis
worsens.
Conservation voters stands in
strong support of this
legislation as one of the many
steps we can take to provide
stable housing for our most
vulnerable New Mexicans.
Stable housing is not only a
human right, it is necessary for
our most vulnerable communities
to be engaged in the already
exclusionary political process.
Thank you.
You. Anyone else in support in
the audience. OK, we'll, we'll
try Zoom again, and we have 4
people, OK, and you'll be
announced in one minute, please.
Uh, first up is Felice Ria.
Elise
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Felice Riel. I'm a trial
lawyer in Albuquerque, New
Mexico, and I support House Bill
418. It is common sense changes
that um reflect the very
practical realities that are
attendant when a person needs to
move their mobile home. It's
obviously much more difficult to
move a house or a mobile home
than it is to just pack up
personal belongings. So
again, as um I'm a trial lawyer
from Albuquerque and I support,
and I encourage everyone else's
support as well.
OK.
Uh, next is gonna be Kathleen
Flynn. Kathleen?
Thank you. Uh,
Madam Chair and representatives,
I appreciate this hearing and
addressing this issue. I am in
favor of Hu's bill for 18 and
have written committee members
with shorter short statements.
Uh, I'm a retired chaplain
serving Santa Fe, St. Christos,
or Chris St. Vincent Regional
Medical Center until my recent
retirement, finding affordable
housing in Santa Fe was.
possible. I used my savings to
renovate and occupy a fixer
upper mobile home in Silver
City. Nicely settled in a
peaceful senior community, I
still worry about an
unreasonable, um, or, or, or,
uh, I'm sorry, I still worry
about a new owner with ideas of
repurposing my leased land, my
housing investment site. This
bill and House Bill 442
safeguards against sudden and
powerless loss of by eviction. I
have faith the New Mexico
legislature will do the right
thing to assure senior citizens
stability in what is often their
last home. Thank you.
OK, next we have Sherry Dodson.
Go ahead sir.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Cherie Dotson and I am a
volunteer advocate for AARP New
Mexico. The high cost of housing
is a significant barrier to
age-friendly housing access and
the stability for many 50 plus
renters and homeowners,
especially for those on fixed
incomes, HB 418 will provide
much needed protection for older
New Mexicans who live in
manufactured housing and mobile
homes. For these reasons, AARP
supports.
HB 418. Thank you.
Thank you, Sherry.
Next we have winter El Torres.
Go ahead, winter.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres, and I am
the founder and CEO of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion.
A couple of years ago, I my
organization delivered the book
evicted to all of the members of
the legislature, and of
particular interest in this bill
or pointed to in that book is
There is has been a nationwide
effort of private equity funds
to come in and purchase up
mobile home parks, and they know
that that they will have to push
folks out. Most folks cannot
move their mobile homes, and
then therefore that mobile home
becomes the property of the
New owner and they get to rent
it out over and over again, and
often it's substandard, um, in,
in substandard health
conditions. We have as a
Representative Parajon
referenced.
One of the highest rates of
mobile home ownership, and that
is very so for our seniors.
We are seeing the highest rise
in homelessness among our
seniors and in the West Side
shelter in Albuquerque, we have
approximately 200 seniors living
there. Um, this bill will help.
Yes, this bill will help.
This pill will, will help with
um housing and homelessness.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right. Up next is Arlen.
Arlene, go ahead.
Arlan, go ahead.
Yes, can you hear me?
Yes yes we can.
OK, thank you. Uh, so good
morning, Madam Chan
representatives. Uh, I'm
speaking in favor of this bill
and the other bill that's on the
committee agenda today. I am 78
years old. I live in a 55+ uh
manufactured home community, a
small one in Silver City. I have
been here for 10 years, 5 years
ago, I had a knock on my door
and was handed an eviction
notice.
When I asked the property
manager why I was being evicted,
what she said was, I don't know.
I'm only the messenger. You have
2 months to move.
I was traumatized, frankly, I
did manage to stay after
pleading with the owners. Uh, I
felt like it was a retro
retribution for something that I
really had no uh involvement
with.
So, um,
I am living in a 1962.
Uh, Amish built trailer, which
is a lovely home for me, but it
is not movable.
I do not have resources to pay
rent in Silver City anymore, and
I
urge you.
To please forward this bill to
protect the senior citizens in
this great state. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. And that was our.
Yeah 4 more, yeah, we usually
just take 5.
OK.
Do you have anything else before
we go to the committee?
She's like, Dad.
Um, yeah, um, my expert, Madam
Chair would like to present
quickly.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh,
again, my name is Maria Grego.
I'm an attorney and the director
of economic equity at the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, um, and I'll just add
on a few things to uh what
Representative Parajan um
mentioned when she introduced
the bill.
Uh, manufactured homes provide
the largest source of
unsubsidized affordable housing
in the United States.
Um, and in New Mexico,
manufactured homes make up a
much larger portion of our
affordable housing stock.
Um, 15% in New Mexico compared
to the national average of 5%.
Um, manufactured homes, uh, also
represent more than 30% of the
housing stock in 11 New Mexico
counties.
And mobile home parks provide
essential affordable housing for
uh low income families and um as
you've heard today from the
commenters, they're a, a great
option for um many seniors in
our state.
In fact, about 1/3 of mobile
home, uh, park community
residents are over the age of
60.
Uh, many of them living on
Social Security.
And with the median income, um,
for Social Security recipients
at around 24,000 per year, um,
homeownership and mobile home
parks uh remains one of the few
viable housing options.
Uh, the New Mexico Mobile Home
Park Act was um originally
enacted to uh recognize the
inherent vulnerability
vulnerabilities of uh residents
who own their homes but rent the
lots on which their home sits.
Um,
They are not like apartment
renters if they get evicted,
they have to move their entire
home, uh, which can be very
costly, um, can cost, uh,
Uh, roughly between $5000 to
$10,000 to move.
Um, so, uh,
We're here to, um, present, uh,
on this bill today to ask that
you, you pass this bill
represents uh multiple um
provisions that strengthen the
Mobile Home Park Act to serve,
um, our state's residents.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you. We have first uh
Representative Block.
You so much, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representatives, experts,
so.
I do have some questions.
So, starting off, I'm just gonna
be on page 3.
Starting on line 12.
And so Madam Chair, represented,
we're talking about termination
notice.
was served to cure any violation
or remove any mobile home from
the premises, Madam Chair
Representative, I did have a
question from somebody
constituent who
They wanted to know.
What about substantial
violations or violence.
And what about when a community
gives a written warning and 2
weeks to cure, and then a second
written warning.
And an additional 2 weeks and
then a final warning.
That the 30 days will be issued.
And I'm just wondering how, how,
how that all works with this
change in the bill, Madam Chair
Representatives, experts.
A Madam Chair, I'll allow.
Uh, my experts to answer that
question.
quite technical.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Block for that
question. Um, so I just want to
point out that the um
opportunity to cure actually
already exists in state law, um,
unfortunately, the way the act
was originally written, um, it
was not made clear, so I just
want to point out that the uh
Mobile Home Park Act is intended
to um supplement the um uniform
owner resident Relations Act and
the uniform owner residentation
uni uniform owner resident
relations Act, um, applies
unless there's a, a direct
contradiction, um, and so right
now, um, under the uniform owner
resident Relations Act, you, you
current, the residents currently
get 7 days to cure. Um, we are
simply expanding that uh to 30
days.
Um, under this bill, again
recognizing that um because
someone owns their home, rents
the land. It's very difficult to
move that home, um, should they
be evicted. So we are giving
them every opportunity to, um,
to cure, should they get a, a
violation notice.
I don't know if my co-sponsor.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. OK, I
understand that. But what if
it's something that is such a
grave violation that
That people are complaining,
people don't want to worry about
that and so it could be
something that
was, I don't know, an, an
obscene painting on on the
dwelling or something that is
Detrimental to the health and
well-being of the community, and
it wants to be
Out as soon as possible, and the
owner is refusing to change it.
And so when it comes to those
very
Specific
Complaints, how are we going to
now
Change the law to allow them a
whole month where we would be
having to traumatize these
people for an entire month
rather than just a week, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Elizabeth Elia, um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
thank you for that question.
The, the amendment like my
colleague Maria explained, um,
does give a 30 day right to cure
for violations, um.
It, it doesn't change the fact
that residents who own their
homes and rent the land that
they, uh, that the home is
installed on are subject to the
rules of the community. So to
the extent that the rules of a
community provide um remedies
for violations, those remedies
would be available in an
instance like what you're
suggesting, um, the, the
equivalent I think example would
be a condominium or or town home
community where
if a person violates the rules
of the community.
That can't be allowed to go on
forever. They wouldn't be here.
But the rules of those
communities acknowledge the fact
that
The resident
Owns a substantial asset and has
the right to some sort of
protection over their home and
that asset. In this case, it's
the unit on the land itself.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives, experts, but I
just want to be clear. So, are
we saying that if the current
agreement with the tenants.
Is more restrictive than what
we're proposing in the law. So
let's just say it's 7 days in
the current agreements.
Then
It would
Default to the 7 days in the
current agreements.
Or it, it wouldn't be mandated
to be 30 days. Is that what I'm
understanding, Madam Chair
Representatives, experts.
That's correct. Once the law has
changed.
OK. Um
I'm sorry. Just to clarify, I'm
sorry, I apologize, Madam Chair
and Representative Black, uh,
no, the law would not give.
Of, of a mobile home park
manager, owner, the chance to,
to, to use the rules of the
community to change the law.
They'd be subject to the law.
Um,
The
Uh
The, the, any rules related to
the community would need to be
in compliance.
OK, understood. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representatives.
And then I have another
question. This is probably like
an annoying question that I have
for you, and it's on page 4.
And someone flagged this for me.
And it's on line 12. It says a
landlord that uses the rental
agreement containing provisions
and attorney told me that that
word, that needs to be who.
Have we considered that change.
Sorry to be such a grammar
person, but not me. I'm gonna
blame an attorney on this one.
Could you just comment on that,
Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, Representative, can
you repeat your question?
Yeah, on the, on the line 12 on
page 4, this is a landlord that
uses, and according to the
person that I talked to, they
said the word that it refer that
usually refers to things that
are inanimate, not human beings.
So,
The word that needs to be
changed to who.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that suggestion.
OK, sounds good. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative.
Sorry, sorry to be so annoying
with that question. I knew it
would be super annoying because
it would be annoying if that was
on my bill, and someone was
like, come on, one word, OK. But
Continuing on the actual meat of
the bill.
I see, Madam Chair,
representatives.
That we are
Making changes regarding 47 10 5
A B and C.
And so that would be.
on section.
3
Can you just tell me what these
changes are because I know we
struck a bunch of language page
5 and 6. Can you just give me
some more information on what we
struck and what we replaced it
with, cause it just says
pursuant to provisions of the
Mobile Home Park Act on that.
Can you tell us the page again?
I'm starting
on lines.
23.
And then I guess it goes all the
way to page 7 at the end of line
13.
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative Block
for that question. Uh.
Representative Bloch, most of
these changes are to clarify
that in order to terminate a
tenancy, uh, the uh violations
um on behalf of the tenant must
be material. So, um, they can't
be, you know, just
A small, um, infraction because
again, we are trying to ensure
that um mobile home park, uh,
residents, um,
Get as much due process as
possible that they are not being
evicted for, for minor
infractions, uh, because of the,
their home. So an example would
be um
If we're talking about, um,
material, uh,
A material violation versus a
non-material yard, uh, neat and
tidy.
Non-material violation might be
just a couple piles of dog waste
that can easily be picked up
versus a material violation
which would be storing.
hazardous waste, um.
You know, construction
materials, um, things that uh
present uh health and safety
hazards and can't easily be
moved. So we just wanted to be
clear that it has to be a
material violation.
And then, uh, Representative
Block, uh, with regard to all of
the language that's struck on
lines 10 through 16 on page 6,
that was really just because um
that's a very, uh, wordy
redundancy of a provision that
already exists in the law, um,
so, um, that's just talking
about rule changes, um, and rule
changes are already spelled out
very clearly in the Act. So this
is just striking that to get rid
of the redundancy and just
saying rule changes that are
done in.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, that, that
clears that up a little for me.
And then I guess is material and
immaterial.
Are these two defined somewhere
in statute what that would mean
or I just want to be clear so
that folks who are renting out
know, OK, what, what's material
versus immaterial, and where's
the line of delineation on
those, Madam Chair
Representatives, experts.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block material and substantial
in this context would be
determined by a judge.
Perfect. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representatives, so I'm
looking at my analysis.
Um
I'm just gonna find my next
question, which I had right
here. So,
I think Madam Chair,
representatives, I'm gonna, I'm
gonna go to the, the end here
for a minute, the end of the
bill page.
15
Starting on section 7, going to
the end of the bill.
And we're talking about private
remedies, civil penalties
enforcement. So, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
And experts, I see that now we
changed it from May.
Have charged the civil penalty
not to exceed $500 to Xiao.
be liable to the tenant for 2
times the amount of total
monthly rent. I'm wondering why
that kind of seems overly
punitive in my opinion,
especially with rent prices.
Skyrocketing. So can you just
tell me why we changed that from
May and then why did we change
it to?
A much larger amount.
Mostly, which I would assume
most people pay more than $500
in rent, Madam Chair, at least
in my community.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this is twofold. Um, number one,
this is part of the
strengthening of the act, um,
but also this is to allow this
is a much better provision to
allow for inflation for many
other different factors to the
economy changes, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. What was the
last date that this act was
amended?
Madam Chair and representative
in the 90s when we were born.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. We were born in
the 90s.
It's a good, good, good decade,
I think, Madam Chair.
Yeah, yeah, we are the youngest
ones in the legislature right
now, so we've got a young
people, 28 year old caucus right
now, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, and then, 00, I
did see going through the bill,
I'm sorry to flip around so
much. I'm gonna go online.
15 on page 11. This is under
section.
5, I, I believe.
And we're taking out two words.
And after
That follow the word from online
15. Do you know why we took
those two words out and will
that make any substantial
change, and if so, what change?
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, this is part of the cleanup
that we've been doing on this um
on this act, there were quite a
few um small changes that needed
to happen, Madam Chair and
Representative.
OK, thank you. And I think it's
good to have.
clarity on on those.
OK, another one on page 8 that I
marked. It, it's at the top of
the page.
Starting on line 4 to 5.
It says
So it strikes out the words of
forcible entry and detainer
action, and then it.
Inserts in lie thereof an action
pursuant to Section 47-10-4
NMSA.
And as the court shall issue the
writ of restitution that's the
current language. Can you tell
me what, what that means and how
would that change it from
forcible entry and detainer to
whatever sub subs or section
47104 says, Madam Chair and
representatives.
Madam Chair, Representative
Black, um, this, this is another
example of language cleanup, uh
47-10-4, which is part of the
Mobile Home Parks Act.
Law is, uh, the, the name of the
action is an action for
termination, um, and then then
applies, it refers to Uora. So
this is just clean up.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and then I got
some other thing from somebody.
Let me see, it says section 4.
Revises the notice period for
non-repayment of rent from 3 to
30 days.
And, and I don't even know what
page that's on because this is a
very long section, but it's on
page 7 according to my good
friend here from Torrance and
San Bernnalio wait, where are
you from, Madam Chair? Oh yeah,
your, your, your name plate says
other counties. So, anyway. OK,
sorry. So I'm wondering, OK, 30,
why did we change it from 3 to
30 and
Would that
Potentially
create a situation where
The landlord could
Risk
Continued
I'm trying to find the right
word that's very careful. Um,
how would that affect the
landlord? How about that, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
what this section does is, is
actually not for the really
great landlords, we have a
really a lot of really, really
great landlords in our community
who have mobile home parks are
run by um small families, for
instance, um, but this is really
to ensure that um that we're
just establishing a standard,
um, in my experience as a
paralegal at legal aid, uh, you
know, 30 days is pretty normal
for really great landlords. Uh,
but for some of the ones that
we're trying to evict people.
necessarily, we just want to
ensure that there is a standard,
Madam Chair and representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I guess
that would bring me back to
That the question I had before
regarding something that was so
grievous, something that was
needing immediate attention.
With this restrict that landlord
from being able to repel that
individual from the premises, if
it was something of grievous
nature.
representative. Madam Chair and
representative, that's a great,
great question. Uh, this only
applies for non-payment of rent,
not to any of the other
provisions you're talking about.
OK, perfect. So when it comes to
something that's violent,
violence, for example, what was,
what would the bill change, not
in this section, but where would
it change it timeline wise for
eviction for something that was
extremely violent, where they
needed almost immediate removal
of this person and the off the
premises.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you, uh, for the question.
Um, again, we are just simply
expanding the time frame for
material violations. Um, there's
nothing in current law that
would allow for immediate
removal of someone um from a
park, um, or an apartment
complex if there was something
violent, um, that would require,
um, calling the police, that
would probably remedy, um, the,
the situations you're concerned
about if someone is, you know,
if there's a domestic violence
situation, for example,
um, all and have, and that
person would likely be, um, so I
think that would um accomplish
what you're concerned about.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, I guess so, but
When it comes to that, if they
get arrested and then they get,
they get bail and then they're
right back in the community
again, which our state, but we
don't have bail, so they get.
Released following detention
pretrial.
Which is what we call it. So I
guess if you had a comment on
that.
Please let me know.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question.
Yeah, criminal law provides for,
for, uh, safety and security in
those situations. So for
example, um, a restraining order
is something that anybody might
be able to obtain if they, if
they were in danger from
somebody else. That doesn't need
to be contained in the Mole Home
Park Act or, or URA.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but how would
this individual get their
effects from the mobile home
park within 30 days if they did
indeed have a
an order from a court that was a
restraining order against
somebody who lives in that same
park and they couldn't
physically get near that
individual in that community.
How would that work?
Representative, I'm not sure
that's part of this bill. OK,
Madam Chair, I just, I'm
wondering because it says 30
days, we changed it to material
that appears to me to be a
material violation or could be.
And so I just, I just want to
understand how would that work?
Because if they need to pick up
their personal effects from the
premises within a month.
How would that be done if that
individual could not physically
be in contact close by that
individual, and that is the
change that we did make from the
previous timeline, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you again. Again, that's
something that would be governed
by criminal law and that a judge
issuing a restraining order
would be able to navigate.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I think.
I like
Some of the things in the bill,
I am very concerned about,
number one.
The amount of money that
Has remedies on section 7, I
think that is overly punitive,
especially with the rents that
are upwards at least around here
of $2000. So that would be 4000
that would be out of pocket from
that landlord. Another thing,
Madam Chair Representative, I
did have concerns about is that
timeline, the longer timeline
does give me some pause,
especially regarding specific
events that could traumatize
residents, and then also that
technical change on page 4. I
feel like that needs to be
ironed out a little bit.
So
And also the curing of
violations. I feel like that
could be tightened up too. So I
do have more questions, but I'm
gonna just leave it there for
now and listen to the rest of
the, the debate, but I really
appreciate you guys and your
thought process behind us. Thank
you, Madam Chair,
Representatives, experts.
Thank you, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative experts, uh, I'm
looking at.
Section 4710-3, the tenancy.
Mobile home and it says no
tenancy of the lease or rental
occupancy or space in a mobile
home park shall commence without
a written lease or rental
agreement. So Mountain Sha
representative leases are
already required because people
called in and said they didn't
get a lease. So leases are
already required. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
Madam Chair and Representative
Yes.
OK.
And the man represented when I
read section 4710-3. It says
they must be given a notice, uh,
And it has in here and loss of
30 days. Um,
some 30 to 60 days. So there's
already um
Provisions in place to give
somebody a 30 day notice in a
mobile home park when I look at
section 4710-3 in um section C.
Is that correct, Madam Char?
As a tenant shall be given a
period of not less than 30 days
from the end of the rental
period to generation
notice, Madam Chair
Representative, are you on page
3? No, I'm actually looking up
the law since this applies to
this. It's 47-10-3, tenancy
requirements is what I'm looking
at, because it's all pertains
into people already must have a
written lease. You can't just go
in and they go, OK, a handshake
and you're in, they have.
I know those people probably
violate and you don't honor
that, but we already have that
agreement and then we already
have the 30 day notice is what I
see here.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
it's notice to remove, not to
cure. OK. So ma'am chairing
representative though in our
state we have.
Eviction laws, is that correct?
Representative, yes. OK, so in
the state of New Mexico somebody
can remove for non-payment or
rent, lease violation lease,
etc. Is that correct, Madam
Chair and Representative?
Manor.
So I just want to make sure
those things are already in
place because some of the people
that were calling in and made it
sound like there was nothing
written in that, and that's not
correct.
So my representative on page 2.
Am I understanding that what
you're doing.
Cause normally when you go to do
a lease on anything, it's a 1
year, 6 months, whatever they
agreed to. But now you're saying
that are we mandating 24 months.
lease on the land.
In a trailer park.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
no shorter than 24 months. OK.
So Madam Chair representative,
are you familiar that under this
47-10-3 that there can be month
to month.
Rentals and that month to month
rentals are on.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, yes, and this doesn't
prevent month to month rentals,
uh, after the these could become
month to month rentals. I
represented, that's not with the
states. This states in here that
if somebody has a month to month
rental that notice to month to
month rentals.
can happen, but my question is,
in mobile home parks, there are
some people who have long term
tenancy, but I've also seen just
1/5 wheel in there. What happens
to the person who's 1/5 wheel
who decides that they want to
rent there for 3 months and
they're snowbird. What, how, if
it's a mandatory.
24 months, how does that, is
there going to be an exemption
and where?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Lord, um, these
laws would not apply to 1/5
wheel or another recreational
vehicle at the mobile home park.
Manufactured homes that
traditional represented what
happens if somebody has a
military order and they're only
here for a short period of time,
are they now in violation
because they're not staying for
the 24 months.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I believe then you were a would
kick in.
The uniform owner resident
Relations Act.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
I, I see what you're trying to
make it so that nobody can move
out for a while, but I also feel
that might penalize some people
when if they decide they want to
move out of that trailer park
because they don't like it.
If they moved next door to
somebody who's cooking meth.
And they want to move or there's
somebody's dogs barking all the
time. You've now locked them
into a 24 month even though I
understand what you're saying, I
think that people should have
the freedom to be able to get
out of a lease without hoops or
looking at a lawsuit for
violating the lease. So, um,
Madam Chair Representative, are,
are there, I know that we have
walked me through.
Walk me through the eviction
process that we have now and how
you're changing that for mobile
home parks because it looks
like.
There's a longer periods for
some people to.
Get in compliance rental, but
explain to me how this
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Lord for the
question. Uh, so an example
would be, uh, for the
non-payment of rent context, um,
currently, um, if somebody if if
rent is due on the first of the
month, for example, um, and on
the 2nd, they didn't pay it. The
landlord could give them a 3 day
notice, um, and they would have
3 days, so by the 5th of the
month.
Um, to pay the rent, um, and if
the res the rent was not paid by
the 5th, the landlord could, uh,
file an eviction case in court.
Um, so,
The proposal that we have is
that, uh, tenants now have will
now have 30 days uh to get
current on rent before the
eviction case. And then the only
um additional time period would
be on the back end, um, so
should the court rule in favor
of the landlord.
Um
Right now, uh, a sheriff would,
would come to the home within 48
hours. This would give 10 days,
you know, time to um arrange for
removal of their home, find a
new location to park the home,
etc. OK, so manager
representative, what landlord
protections are in place for
somebody who bought this
property, bought the land,
because it's a weird situation.
We got you don't own the land
and so what happens to the
landlord? How are they protected
if there's a very, very long
process and they can't make the
mortgage.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, thank you for the
question. Um, the time period
here would be like, like my
colleague Maria explained, it
would be a 30 day notice to
cure, and then, uh, and then the
ability to file eviction
proceedings which usually 7 to
14 days and then that, that
would be the time period that an
owner would need to potentially
wait before they regained
possession of the land, um, as,
as described.
So far in this hearing, um,
most, most manufactured homes
can't be moved, so the, the
tenant usually will forego the
equity they have and the
landlord will end up with the,
the home, which often in parks,
they resell the home to the next
resident.
Um
So, uh, that, frankly, that's
part of the business model of
mobile home parks, generally
speaking.
Mentor represent very scary that
anything can happen, but Madam
Chair Representative, my point
is, since we're extending this
period, I'm trying to look for
balance and fairness if somebody
buys the land and they're
getting by with that with the
rent. They now have how do we
protect the landlord as well
because they're in a situation
where if they can't make their
payment, then everything goes
belly up and everybody gets
harmed. So man representative,
is there any exceptions to this
extending of the 3.
day to 30 day process if
There is anything illegal
activity, if they're cooking
meth or something, does this
still apply? Do they still have
to go through the same, Madam
Chair and Representative, uh,
this would be that would then be
part of the criminal aspect.
OK, Madam Chair,
and representative can you show
me anywhere where it says.
That if this person is booking
math or did something horrible
to something, to someone there.
Where they get removed. This
does not apply that they're
exempt. Can you show me the
exemption part.
To where if it's a criminal
behavior that they don't.
I'm trying to prevent the
landlord from having to be stuck
for Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, thank you for the
question. There is no exemption.
There is, and I'm sure in here.
No, ma'am, there's no exemption.
OK. I would seriously like you
guys to think about that because
as a landlord, I'm chair
representative.
I get it. Somebody can't afford.
We don't want to throw them out.
We're trying to help preserve
them, right? That's the whole
goal of this. I'm also trying to
find the fair and balance of
people don't want to be there
for 2 years, they have to move
whatever, and then I'm looking
at this longer process that
there's no exemption because if
somebody had raped a senior
citizen next door. We don't want
them in that trailer park.
So I'd still like to consider
that something that egregious.
Sorry, this is not applicable,
you don't get to wait, you, you
did something horrific, and we
want you out. So that's one of
the things I would consider, um,
Man represent so on I was just
looking at um.
The analysis.
On from the mortgage authority.
And it was a question I had on
this. Oh, OK. Increase the time
allowed for a tenant to be
evicted in case of zoning
changes from 6 to 12 months,
round share representative, so
that would be like a statewide
mandated.
Zoning change and I thought each
county had their own ability to
be autonomous and make.
Manor of them because I'm, if,
if a county says, OK, we're
changing the zoning for this
area, that means this law would
then bypass that and it would be
a state.
That would determine zoning now
Merione, help me understand
this.
It was in the, sorry, it was, it
was in the.
New Mexico mortgage Authority, I
think it's on the 2nd page. It
was in the bill summary.
They weren't disagreeing or
agreeing to it. It was just
something that I noticed in
there about the zoning changes.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, thank you for that
question and the opportunity to
clarify.
So what's the the 12 month
period that's described, um,
excuse me, on page of the
amendment is where
The zoning law allows an uh the
landowner as of right to make a
zoning change, so there's no
state action involved in this
scenario. It's where the park
owner is deciding to to make a
change of use that's gonna
require all of the residents of
the mobile home park to leave.
That's, that's the situation.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
so I, I have issue with that as
well cause I'm trying to protect
both parties and that becomes a
balancing act with this.
I'm saying, what if, if there
were something that were to
happen.
Um, let's just say.
Gas lines were bad going into
the, um, didn't have the
ability.
Or let's just say in their
house, there was some changes
that they need to make to bring
it up to code and they can't,
they would still get to go
through the slower eviction
process and then what happens if
they can't move down in the
eviction process. And let's say
they have broken pipes or
trailer. How does that play out
in this? Um, Madam Chair
Representative.
Most frequently in mobile home
parks, um, the duties and costs
of home ownership are split
between the resident who owns
the mobile home and the park
owner who owns the land.
So depending on where the um,
the infrastructure problems that
you're describing occur, that
would determine who's
responsible for paying for them,
and um,
Public health and safety law
will govern whether or not a
person can be physically present
while work is being done.
OK, so Madam Chair, I'm just
gonna tell you why I'm voting
No. um I do have a problem with
2 years. I get what you're
trying to do, but at the same
time, now we're putting people
who decide they want to move in
a violation. So as the bill.
Representative Romero, I'd like
to move a do pass the table.
I can
OK, we have a motion that um
supersedes the motion or do pass
we'll take a vote, we'll call
vote for motion to table.
Representative block, yes, the
table. Representative Lord.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson? No,
Madam Vice Chair, no.
Madam Chair, no. OK, we'll go
back to the um motion. Oh, on a
uh vote of 2 to table and 4
against uh the motion fails.
Um, so we will go back to the um
do pass.
Motion or
House bill.
18.
And we'll take role.
Representative Block.
No, ma'am.
Representative Lord, no.
Representative Romero
Representative Thompson, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Yes.
On, on a vote of 4 to 2, you
have a due pass on House Bill
418, and I just like to add that
I think this is something that
um because of the immobility of
a mobile home that this is so
important and um so thank you
for bringing this forward.
OK. Next we have um
House Bill 440 homeowners
Association liens, uh,
Representative Lujan and
Maestus who patiently been
waiting for most of the morning.
You, Madam Chair. Thank you
committee, um, today we're
presenting.
House
for 40.
House Bill 440 is intended to
protect members of home owner
association foreclosures, um, HB
would restrict homeowner
associations from foreclosing on
liens that are less than 12
months delinquent, less than
$5000 or consisting solely of
fines.
And that's, that's the bill, um,
it's, as you can see, a very
short bill, but to the point,
and I will defer to Senator
Maestas for further information.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable members, so this
doesn't preclude homeowners from
from foreclosing on a house if
if there's a debt owed, but this
just provides a reasonable
conditions for that to occur.
Uh, that
That uh a debt would be more
than 12 months delinquent, more
than $5000.
And cannot be simply fines. They
must owe dues, as you know, if
your trash cans out past 6
o'clock or.
You know, you have your Raiders
flag out for the big game of,
you get fined and so this would
prohibit a foreclosure simply on
fines many times there's
animosity between the homeowners
association in a particular
homeowner, and it shouldn't
result in uh foreclosure of a
home, particularly when the
mortgage is being paid timely.
Thank you, man.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to the
audience, you went on the list.
Um, and is there anyone in
opposition?
OK, is there anyone in
opposition?
OK. Um, and are there people in
support?
Hey, would you like to speak?
Madam chair, members of the
committee, Kent Cravens
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Association of Realtors
stand in full support uh for too
long HOAs have had.
Um, pretty strong arm influence
over homeowners, uh, almost
impeding on uh personal property
rights, uh, in many cases. So
this is gonna go a long ways to
helping that and appreciate the
sponsors for bringing this
forward.
Thank you. I think you're the
only person in the audience
left. Um, is there, is there
anyone on Zoom?
Was it something you said?
Anyone on Zoom who is in favor.
Please raise your hand.
Two people? OK.
Forest
Marty Watts
Jenny Forrest.
Hello?
Ahead, one minute, please.
Yeah, uh, we were a victim of
this, uh, type of stuff, and we
had to end up spending at least
500 to $7000 in legal fees, but
we finally worked it out, but it
was a really, this bill would
really help a lot of people like
us. We're senior citizens on a
fixed income, and it's tough
when, and, and we feel like we
were, uh, the homeowners
association legal firm really
came after us, but we end up
finally getting things done, but
it was, it was a hardship. So I,
I favor this.
It, it, cause there's a lot of
people like us out there.
Thank you. All right. Uh, seeing
no other hands for in support.
To speak, um.
Is there anything else you'd
like to add?
Uh, man, Madam Chair, we would
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative Block.
I'm sure, I moved the table.
OK. Representative Romero would
like to make comments. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. Uh, thank you,
Senator Representative.
uh, for bringing this, um, we've
been hosting these weekly
housing meetings HOAs.
Um, across the sort of, um,
spectrum, you know, the, the
spaces that they're um invested
in. And so part of this that I'm
Thank you Madam Chair Roxanne
Romero. We, uh, we contemplated
prohibiting foreclosure.
Uh, altogether as a means of.
Collecting the debt, you know,
you could put a lien and then
when the house is sold, you, you
get paid in full, including
interest rates and things of
that nature. But we looked at
statutes in, I believe, Texas.
In another state that had a more
reasonable middle ground and so
um.
So that's where the 5000 came
from. Uh, thank you. Yeah, I, I
think it's just a you guys sort
of having this first step.
On the delinquency, um, can we
talk a little bit about, um,
How these, how these liens are
placed, violations are we
looking at for some of
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, so you, you pay monthly,
uh, dues, and that's usually,
you know.
Maybe arranged in your mortgage
under escrow or whatnot, but you
also get fined. You also get
fined for breaking the rules.
And these fines can accumulate
uh.
You know, say you're on a fixed
income like the gentleman who
spoke on Zoom.
And the fines could be up to
$1000 1500 dollars, and then
boom, you're hit with a lawsuit
to foreclose your home.
Threatened with attorneys' fees,
uh, you know, if you can't
afford to pay the $1000 in
fines, how are you gonna afford
to pay the
$5000 in attorneys' fees and all
this good stuff. So it's a very
aggressive move many times by
the homeowners associations,
they, they're uh.
They have lawyers on retainer
who have the boilerplate motions
already ready to file. So it, it
can be very scary and very
aggressive.
When, when I have do is send an
invoice.
Send a simple invoice 90 days.
You put a lien, you just collect
a debt the way every other
person collects the debt without
aggressively forcing someone out
of their home.
That's what this is trying to
stop. And and this does not
prohibit the HOA from getting
paid, uh, they will ultimately
get.
Any other uh debt collector gets
paid.
Thank you
so I just said that there are no
restrictions to what types of
fines as assessed by HOAs.
Um
That they can use to um to use
for foreclosure towards Senator,
um, I agree that this is just a
really important first step on.
How these are handled.
threshold perhaps could be
revisited at some point, not
really understanding how these
are assessed or how fines are
often applied. Um, and again,
the sort of black.
Thank you. And I have a quick
question about um
If there are fines, uh,
And the
person who's being
Um
Aggressively, you know,
Um
Going, they're going for their
correct uh collections. Does
that, does this bill make it so
that they are not allowed to
also collect the um.
Uh, attorney fees, or is that
still in the bill, Madam Chair.
That is correct. So they are
still able to, um.
have attorney feature.
Is there a way to remove that.
Um, from the bill, cause I know
I represent a senator Maestas
that you um were suggesting that
they just serve an invoice.
Instead of having to go through
attorneys.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Ferrari, the, um, as mentioned,
the, the original thought was
just to not allow them to
foreclose at all.
And then uh then we realized,
well, that.
You know, other states had dealt
with this issue in a more
reasonable way. We build it, we,
we think that this is reasonable
to the homeowner association and
the and the.
And the, the, the homeowner on
on page 2 lines 9 and 10, Madam
Chair, uh, they cannot foreclose
solely for fines as many times
there will be uh uh a person
there on the block who
aggressively watches the house
and tags them with all kinds of
fines, uh, for even the most
ridiculous of, of uh violations
and those fines can accumulate
and then they go for
foreclosure. So this would
prohibit foreclosure if the debt
is.
Simply the fines, it would have
to be more do's and other.
Other larger um.
Delinquencies.
But, but in terms of the, the,
the attorneys' fees, we don't
want to really tip the balance
on that if, if, uh,
If you file a lawsuit.
Um
And, and the, and the law is
clearly, clearly on the
plaintiff side than many times
attorney's cases can be
assessed.
Um
So does the uh judge.
Um, have the discretion of not
charging.
Those to the um homeowner. Yeah,
yes, Madam Chair.
OK. Thank you.
All right, we have a motion to
table, um, we'll take a roll
call vote.
Representative Block, yes,
ma'am. Representative Lord, yes.
Representative Romero? No.
Representative Thompson? Madam
Vice Chair? No, Madam Chair. No.
OK, so we'll go back to the
motion.
Uh, oh, on a boat of 2 in favor
of the tabling and 4 against uh
the tabling motion fails.
And we'll go um on House Bill
440.
Um, we do have emotion.
No, we don't have a motion yet.
OK? It's been moved for a due
past on House Bill 440 and
seconded by Representative
Romero.
So we'll take roll call.
Representative Block. No, ma'am.
Representative Lord.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson Adam
Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair
Yes.
OK, on a vote of 4 in favor of a
due pass for House Bill 440
against 2, you have a due pass.
Madam Chair,
thank you committee.
Thank you for waiting.
He represented Matthews whenever
you're ready on House Bill 442
mobile home rent stabilization.
We have a theme going on this
morning.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Um
This is gonna be your, I think,
2nd bill this morning.
Uh, on the situation with
manufactured or mobile homes,
manufactured housing or mobile
homes.
Um
And I'm not going to repeat uh
uh all of the testimony you've
already heard.
Our focus today on HB 442
involves
The possibility of, well, let me
back up for a second.
Um, there's 3 major issues and
there's different bills going
through the system.
Uh, involving manufactured
housing.
One of those issues is rents,
and that's primarily what I'm
gonna talk about today.
A second is utilities,
particularly maintenance of
utilities and being sure that
people have working utilities,
that is also something I'm gonna
talk about today, and the 3rd 1,
uh, is the right of tenant
organizations to purchase the
park if um if the owners are uh
have received an offer to buy
the property and
I actually don't remember right
off the top of my head,
somebody, I think uh represented
Parhon is is doing that bill.
Um, and with me today is.
Um
Because we're focusing on the
rents.
is uh Rochelle Smith, who lives.
In one of the manufactured
housing parks in my district
called Albuquerque Meadows, um,
it's a park that has.
Um, more Reynolds Reynolds spots
from 400 or so, uh.
Mobile homes and there's more
than 600 people who live in it.
It is a 55 plus park.
And she's my expert because she
has.
Dealt daily for 3 years since
the property was purchased by
Legacy a out of state private
equity company. That's what I
was looking for, um, and
organized an effort at the park
to deal with frequent renting as
a result.
Um, she's become incredible um.
The practices of of this
particular company.
Uh, and also the impact uh.
On people in the community.
Often having 2 or 3 rent
increases a year.
So
What I'd like to do now, um.
And she's available to answer
questions as.
All right,
um, so my bill.
Let me back up just for a
second. Um.
As I said, HB 442 focuses on the
rent issues and and the um
failure to provide reliable
utilities and
Um, it does that by offering
something that is not seen too
much in New Mexico, which is the
concept of rent stabilization.
Um, this is used in other parts
of the country to deal with.
Trying to
Provide some stability to people
who are are renting properties.
It is particularly
Helpful and useful, I think in
the situation of mobile homes
because the individual that the
tenant owns the home and the
home is they often invested
their life savings in it.
Um
But it's the reason I try to
call it manufactured housing
instead of mobile homes, it's
because once moved.
And installed in a park, um,
with the utility hookups and
everything done, uh, it's
virtually no longer mobile. It
is attached to the pro to the
land.
And it
And if they, if the tenant is
forced to move because the rent
increases, um, because of other
kinds of because of being
evicted for something or
whatever, it is a huge economic
loss.
Uh, to the, to the owner of the
property because they've
invested.
Like most of us do, our life
savings in their home.
So it's not a situation like
renting an apartment or renting.
Uh, some other kind of property,
it is unique.
And
For that reason, model.
To deal with the situation.
Has been used in other states.
Not always in connection with
manufactured housing, but if you
go to page 4 of the bill
beginning on line 8.
It's called.
Rent stabilization.
Um, and what it does is it's a
method of trying to let
Tenants
have a longer period, a a
reasonable period of time when
they know what their rent's
going to be.
And so a lot of times rent
stabilization is set up so that
um
excuse me.
That you have, um, you set the
rent for two-year period.
May An in this particular case,
uh, that's what paragraph 8
does, it says from July 1, 2025
to June 30, 2026, the your rent
will not increase by more than
3%.
And then for the next year.
It will not increase by more
than 5%, so that the people who
are the residents know what
their financial obligation is
going to be now.
Part of the problem.
In this whole area.
And why there are so many issues
coming up in terms of
manufactured housing is because
State regulation.
Ends in terms of manufactured
housing with the installation in
the park. Thank you very much.
Um
And there is no state agency,
there is no state supervision,
there is nobody that tenant can
go to.
That deals with.
Uh, problems beyond installation
and so what we have happening in
the state.
Is all kinds of rent.
Manipulation we have.
Parts of the state where
The parks are not, we've had, I
think a mobile home in a park in
Alamogordo where they haven't
had heat because the natural
gas.
Lines aren't working right.
And there isn't anybody for
these tenants to go to and say.
We need some help.
Um,
and so the other piece of this
picture just to round it out,
it's not something we're hearing
today, but I have prepared a
memorial.
Um, and introduced it, um.
To provide that, uh, the various
agencies I've been working with
and talking to about what do we
do about these problems and the
fear of losing this critical
housing.
Uh, asking that New Mexico
mortgage Finance Authority PRC.
Governor's Office of housing,
the chair of Opportunity
Enterprise and Housing
Development Review Board of the
of the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
Uh, the Attorney General's
office.
And our regulation and license.
Spend the next year.
Examining the situation and
making recommendations so that
they can make recommendations to
us about how we so there's a
context to all of this. In the
meantime, um,
So HB 442 has two year.
period because the goal is we
will have a lot more information
and we can figure out what the
long term solution to this kind
of problem should be, it may be
rent stabilization. It may be
something else.
Um, and uh with that, um,
I, I will stand for questions,
my experts prepared to tell you
all about how the horrible rent
prices have been and so forth,
but I know you've been working
all morning and I'll let you
tell it. OK, thank you, um,
perhaps if there's a question
about that, um, I think you
explained a lot of what the
situation was in, in that um
particular park, um, let's go to
the audience, and is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
Cravens.
former senator, Madam Chair,
thank you. Um.
Kent Cravens registered
lobbyists for New Mexico
Association of Realtors, and I
appreciate the, uh, I appreciate
the thoughts behind the bill,
but I will tell you that one of
the quickest ways to reduce and
even ruin the supply of land
available for mobile homes to
exist on is to keep putting
pressure on uh park owners to um
not
Uh, I have to enjoy the same
benefits of inflation, that,
that other um people that like
tenants do, and it's not
enjoyable to have to pay more
for everything, but the the
costs continue to go up for
tenants as well as they do, um,
uh, owners of these parks, uh,
Bill Cleverly substitutes the
word stabilization for what I
would look at is control.
Uh, and it's a step towards rent
control, um, we feel that's just
very damaging to any community
of any size. Uh, there's
probably a lot of different ways
we could go about this, and we'd
love to work with the sponsor
on, on the memorial going
forward, uh, to, to work on
that. So, uh, New Mexico
Association of Reors is in
opposition. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, is there anyone
on Zoom who.
Please raise your hand if you're
in OK, there's no one in
opposition. We'll go to the.
Um, audience, and is there um
anyone in the wishes to speak,
OK? Seeing none, we'll go to
Zoom. Is there anyone, please
raise your hand if you're in
support of this bill and would
like.
OK, 3 people. If you will keep
it to one minute each. Thank
you.
Alfred Diaz.
Yes, good morning. My name is
Alfred Diaz.
And, uh, basically I am a, a
homeowner, uh, and, uh, I have
had my rent increased 4 times in
the last 2 years.
Usually, uh, the legacy gives us
60 days and then says, we're
going to raise your rent
anywhere between $30.50 dollars
a month more as a fixed income,
uh, senior retired, uh, that
definitely gives a lot of
stress, uh, and I have to make
decisions on what I can pay and
what I can't.
And thank you very much.
Kathleen Flynn.
Hello and thank you again, Madam
Chair and Representatives just a
brief statement that focuses on
underincome and fixed income
residents of New Mexico are
helped by actions to stabilize
rent in a climate of sharply
rising housing costs for the
last 7 or 8 years that I've
experienced in New Mexico. Your
earnest consideration and
passage of this bill will
accomplish making New Mexico
scarce affordable housing, more
able and more stable for those
who would otherwise need to
choose from, well, non-existing
alternatives, mobile home parks
are an attractive option at
first glance, looking deeper,
the buyer or renter is not
secure due to their property
ownership sitting on leased land
with no assurances or options
for longevity or recovery of
their investment in the park,
especially when there are units
are unmovable. Please consider.
act seriously and take action
rather than postpone for a
future session. Thank you.
Mary Kay. Brady.
Good afternoon.
Madam Chair and Representatives.
I come to you from a 55 and over
community in Las Cruces, New
Mexico. It's not only the
biggest investment I've ever
made, my home, but it is also my
recreation and my socialization,
because I have the opportunity
of welcoming neighbors with a
cup of coffee or a conversation.
Please don't take that away from
us. We must
At some point recognize that
rents have to quit at some
point. I'm on a fixed income of
$1270 a month.
And my lot ran right now is 809.
So I'm not one of those that
didn't save money all my life,
but my question now is, which,
which is going to run out first.
My life or my money? Is that the
question you want your family
asking.
Thank you for your
consideration.
Pamela Morgan.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
I live in a 55 plus manufactured
home park.
And uh it was bought by in-state
investors about 3 years ago.
The rents used to be on a tiered
approach.
And when the new investors, uh,
bought the park, they raised the
rent all to the same amount for
everyone, and the resulting
increase in rents.
Range from 20% to 55%.
Which is just outrageous. Um,
But that's, that's done, uh, as
far as I know, everyone's still
able to live here, but um,
What's nerve-wracking is not
knowing when is the rent gonna
go up again, and how much is it
gonna go up by?
Um, so it's very stressful to
not know when our find our
financial situations will be
impacted again.
Uh, so I just wanted to share
what, what's happening where I
live.
Thank you. I do hope that you
vote in favor of this bill.
Rhonda James.
Rhonda, can you please unmute?
I apologize. Um, I agree with
what the others are saying, and
I also would just like to say
that many of us worked very hard
all our lives and paid taxes,
and just because we didn't make
a ton of money, we now are
retired. I also live in
Albuquerque Meadows, 55 plus
community. We've got to have
somewhere to live, and this is
frightening. I just think wanted
to acknowledge what everyone is
saying. Thank you.
Flow
Where they um
Mobile home park did not have
gas utility for 6 months of last
year. Um, I stand in support of
House Bill 422 because I've seen
rent increases where I live, um,
since I moved there in 2016 and
more increased our promise both
for our park and uh another part
in the Gordo owned by the.
same person or group. Um, at
some point, maybe I or some of
my neighbors might become
homeless because we just can't
afford the rent, um, we have a
$10 charge
because we purchased our gas now
that it's available again. So
it, it's a worry only have
Limited amount of income, it's
not gonna get that much more and
rent keeps going up, so I
appreciate you considering this
and helping us with some kind of
rent stabilization. Thank you.
Thank you. OK.
Um
Representative, did you want
your expert to just say a few
words before we go to the
committee.
Uh, after she came to all this.
Madam Chair and Representatives.
Oops.
Um, thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you
today.
My name is Rochelle Smith.
I live in Albuquerque Meadows of
55 plus manufactured home
community in Albuquerque.
I am the chairperson for a group
of residents called the Meadows
Action Team.
Matt, for sure.
We represent the 600 plus
seniors and veterans.
That call Albuquerque Meadows
home.
When pressed, when we pressed,
um, our new owners that bought
the the park and February of
21
Um
They explained that the large
increases
Are being based on current
market rate.
This also is in writing for our
in our rent increased 60 day
notices.
When hearing that as an excuse.
To justify their actions.
A couple of us decided to
conduct a market analysis of our
own.
We visited 3 mobile home parks
within a five-mile radius.
They're by ensuring we were
similarly situated as far as
access to grocery stores,
pharmacies, restaurants, etc.
We also toured their properties
to compare amenities as well as
the appearance of individual
lots and common areas.
What we found was astonishing.
No, not only are we paying
hundreds of dollars more in lot
rent per month.
But the other parks
look like ours used to.
Everything was clean, tidy, and
in good repair, not a weed or
rusted out shed could be found.
Um
Please vote
Yes, on HB 442.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, um, we'll go to
the committee and we have.
Uh, Representative Lord.
Thank you, madam expert. I was
looking where Albuquerque
Meadows and it's by Cracker
Barrel. I'm just trying to find
out where it was. So Madam Chair
Ribson, I, I've been looking at
a lot of laws that pertain to
mobile homes and, and rentals
and ic so can I ask a question,
uh, Maam Chair Representative.
When you were in a contract,
like a one year contract, the
rent can't be raised.
It goes when that's either the
end of the lease or month to
month, so a lot of the people,
are you guys now, ma'amer is an
expert on month to month and
that's why they have the ability
or the dilation, you guys have a
lawsuit.
We are on a month to month
lease.
And they can raise it as often.
as long as they give us a
notice and then they can do
whatever it is that the above
and beyond, um.
Ma'am Chair Representative, um.
So we don't have rent control in
this state. As a matter of fact.
Uh, there was a
In 1991, there was a rent
control preemption act
prohibiting local governments
from so how will this bill
because you're now setting a
standard, which already says you
can't do, Madam Chairman
Representative, how do you, how
is this superseding this 1991
rent control preemption, uh,
Madam Chair.
Representative, um, I think
there was some limitations on
that, but this is, first of all,
rent stabilization and it is for
a two-year period.
Why we hopefully get the right
people at the table.
Under the memorial and figure
out a longer term solution to.
Um,
Ranson for these kinds of
communities.
Um, part of the problem is that
the law currently doesn't
require at least a one year
lease.
Uh, and there are some other
bills impending that are gonna.
They deal with that. But in the
meantime, we need to have some
stabilization so that we don't
For these people out of their
homes, and we don't lose.
This critical housing that we
need that is the best.
Uh, affordable housing that's
available on the market expert,
um.
In your
So you have an effective date
and saying that you want to, and
I would say civilization
control. It's all where is in
here where it says that you will
take into consideration if
somebody has a loan perhaps
where the interest rate goes up
on the land or property goes up.
Where that
The person who owns the land
suddenly has a huge increase on
cost because as we see things
going up all the time, how does
that play in for them to be able
to make sure that they can make
their payments and sustain the
property. Madam, thank you for
the question, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, first of
all,
Um
The owners of who have come in
and raised the rents so
frequently, uh, in the last few
years in the New Mexico market.
Uh, are not the kinds of uh
organizations that.
Uh, we're gonna be unable to
meet their financial needs.
These are often private equity
companies they're multi-million
dollar companies.
Um, and you know, one assumes
that they know how to do uh
predict their.
When they make their financing
arrangements, they make those uh
in a way that they, they have
the assets always to take care
of them.
Um
Again
We're allowing for rent
increases over the next 2 years.
While we try to figure out a
better long term solution to
this problem.
Because who will get hurt over
the next two years are not the
owners.
Of the property is gonna be the
people who are living there.
Who are faced with constant rent
increases, and we will lose this
critical housing.
So I'm chairs representative, so
if I understand this correctly,
so after July 1st, 2025 after 12
month period.
You're saying that
The landlord of
Land
Cannot increase more than
between now and then.
They cannot increase more than
3.
cent.
Am I understanding that
correctly? Um, and that's per
year, I'm sure, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, they can
from July 1, 2025 to June 30,
2026.
They can increase the rent 3%
more than whatever that tenant
is currently paying.
And then after June 30, 2026.
They could decrease it up to not
to exceed 5%.
These figures are in line with.
Cost of living increases.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I, I, I understand your concept.
My problem is I don't think
you're going to get past rent
control preemption Act because,
um, because you're now
controlling the rents in 1991,
and this 3% to 5%.
Uh, we've had some crazy
inflation, so we cannot really
dictate what or the property
taxes or the loan interest, and
I'm more concerned. I mean, if
you're a big corporation, you
should plan on the mom and pop
aspect.
I don't want, again, I'm trying
to go back to cops, don't find
themselves where they are
getting by on the month of Ford
to make that mortgage payment.
So I think for this, for me to
be more on board, they would
have to be some changes in this.
And other things taken into
consideration like a landlord
could say, oh no, you guys are
doing this, but I can't afford
that. I'm an aluminum, so.
As it is, I understand what
you're trying to do, you're for
uh.
For controlling the rent.
But I think what I would,
there's another aspect that a
mandate that.
When you have a property lease
of 1 year, 2 years, whatever, at
issues. So as it is right now,
it's a no for me, but.
I think there's a.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, expert, thank
you all for being here and
thanks for everyone's testimony,
by the way. I think all that
testimony is super important.
And I'm sorry, there's a little
bit of an echo and I, I just
want to make sure everyone can
He us
well, yeah, I didn't, I couldn't
understand what she said at the
very beginning. OK. I'll, I
think I pushed it back a little.
Hopefully that works. You never
know. OK, I'll just, oh, it
worked. OK, good. I, so I just
have a few questions. One
question, I, I know we had a
bunch of terms, rent
stabilization.
Could you tell me the difference
between rent stabilization and
rent control.
I, I just guess I don't really
understand the main differences,
Madam Chair.
My understanding, Madam Chair,
Representative, is that.
Rent stabilization is looking
for something that helps the.
Tenant and also the landlord.
Have a predictable amount that
they're going to be facing over
a period of time depends on what
the arrangement is.
Um, 2 years seems to be about
the shortest.
Um, some can be rent
stabilization program can be
longer.
In a lot of places, the rent
stabilization is set.
The rent rent stabilization
rates are set by a board that
represents both the uh the
tenants and the landlord.
Um, and, um.
Also gets people in who really
can project what.
Costs are gonna increase and so
forth and um then everybody
lives by that decision, a rank
control.
I would distinguish that by
saying that um that's where.
Uh, the government just simply
says this is what you can charge
or not charge, and there isn't
this process for having first of
all, first of all,
predictability over a period of
time, which I think is good for
both sides, quite frankly.
And also has an independent kind
of an organization that
Um, can, can have a way that
both parties can uh come and
talk and everybody can figure
out what if they're kind of
arrangement is.
Um
Given our lack of any state
agency that sort of does
anything in this area, um,
that's why the memorial to help
let's get a structure in place
so that we have a fair system
for both tenants and.
Landlords and in the meantime,
let's.
Kind of hang on here with the
basically a cost of living kind
of a figures and.
Um, hopefully we'll get this uh
hopefully in 3 years, we'll have
a a bill that really solves this
problem long term.
Thank you. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, and you
know, I do hear their concerns.
I really do. And in my district
especially, we have these
problems.
And we have aging infrastructure
when it comes to the gas lines
and a water has been an issue,
especially in some places, I
think in uh.
I forget which county, but I
know that one county had a
problem with the water lines
where there was just, it was
just not safe. And they just had
to turn off the spigot, which is
a problem that I've been trying
to work with New Mexico gas
Company and, and the owners and
from my understanding, it's kind
of a collaborative approach,
since they're they're owners of
their property, but also the
lines are owned by
Well, they're they're supposed
to be managed by the
Landlords. So, I know that those
are really big, long.
Term big huge investments, and I
know that we need to find a way
to find a solution for that.
But Madam Chair Representative,
I guess my, my one kind of
Apprehension when it comes to
the legislation is when we're
putting forward these caps.
I don't know what we're, we're
calling it stabilization, like a
cap on how much you can increase
the rent, and if this does
become a long term policy, I, I
just know cause there's, and I'm
dating myself cause I'm, I'm a,
I'm a kid, you know, I'm, I'm
younger, but there's a TikTok.
Um
Channel where there's a lot of
people in New York who've had
rent control. And so they live
in these beautiful historic
buildings, and they pay nothing
in rent, but these are very
wealthy people who can make
their, the place that they live
an amazing, beautiful place, but
it's all rent controls. They
only pay like 1000 bucks in rent
from whenever that rent control
started. So I just don't want
the adverse reaction to this
bill to be, OK, well, then this
is incentivize people to
To you can deed it over or
whatever that that rental
agreement. And so in the future,
you can just give that over to
the next person. They could be a
millionaire who only pays 11,000
bucks in rent. And so I guess
that's kind of my concern and,
and will that be something that
is addressed when it comes down
to brass tacks after the two
years and we're looking at that,
Madam Chair, and representative.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
that's one of the issues that.
Um, I mean, there's a whole lot
of issues to create a permanent
rent stabilization.
Uh, including, is it inheritable
and the kinds of things you're
talking about. And again,
All I'm trying to do is provide
the people who live in these
homes.
Uh, throughout the state is a is
is to have a rela to know what
their rent's going to be for the
next 2 years.
And allow us a chance to set up
a system by which this can be.
Uh, fill in all the details. If
this was not a crisis situation.
Then we could take the time now
and make it effective in 2 years
or something, but what we have
right now is a crisis situation
where people in parks like
Albuquerque Meadows and others
throughout the state are.
Not able to be.
Pay the rents that are being
charged.
So we just need a
Put a damper on it.
While some increase because of
course prices are going up. We
all understand that, but let's
let's get this solved so that we
don't lose this.
I, you know, I'm just trying to
solve a problem here. No, thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. I, I do like the
way that you approach
legislating. I really, I think
people can learn a lot from it
because I, I think it's based
upon what you hear, the actual
people have issues with and you
try to find a common ground or a
solution. So I, I appreciate
that. And so,
The, the other question I had on
this one, which I kind of was a
little concerned. It's cause
there's not an emergency clause
on the bill.
And since there is not an
emergency clause, it appears to
me in the section.
Two that we're creating on page
4.
So it
It would concern me if somebody
said, oh no, this is going to
come into effect after June
30th.
or this, yeah, June, or I'm
sorry, July 1st.
So the
Landlord could potentially hike
that rent beforehand.
And then it could have the
opposite effect and that's one
concern that I did have
regarding that. And I just
wonder if you have any comments
on that, Madam Chair,
Representative. Madam Chair,
Representative, um.
Thank you for pointing that out
and we'll see if maybe we need
to make some little change in
the at the before the next
committee and be sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that's pretty much all I had.
Thank you.
Thank you, timing is impeccable.
OK, um.
Is there, I just wanted to make
it really quick. Um, I think,
um, this is really important,
um, especially as more private
equity, um, investors come into
our state and um or other states
too.
Um, to buy up the mobile home
parks and then start trying to
charge and
Exponential amount, which isn't
fair to the people who are
already living there. So I think
this will help um
Uh
Probably not make that such a,
you know.
Sweet deal for people, um,
investors and make it better and
more um equitable for the people
who are already been, have been
there and then also not to see
them make and keep up the um
properties. I know this bill
doesn't do that directly, but
that could be part of it. Do I
have chair move a do pass.
