We.
Problem.
You may.
By.
Later checked with the chair.
Robinson.
Yes she does end up on.
Yeah.
In.
I don't know.
I get it.
What goes on because we have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation courtesy of
Representative tells.
Let's pray.
Father god we thank you for this
day.
We thank you for the opportunity
to make our state a better
place.
Lord protect every person here
their loved ones as they go
through the life that.
You find us.
As we consider the business of
the day.
Let us not forget all.
That all things are held
together by you as Paul tells us
in Colossians.
For the responsibility you have
afforded us.
Comes with the count a billion
accountability and we know that.
Lord we ask that you help us in
these decisions that what we do.
Is best for our constituents.
We ask for your patience as we
discuss.
And debate and consider.
Lord bless every member here.
Yes our great state and our
nation.
Can we ask all these things in
your son's Jesus Christ's name
amen.
Thank you.
Representative for the pledge of
lesion score to see
Representative family heard.
Our.
Imprisoning setting for the New
Mexico pledge courtesy of
Representative Lewis the
process.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico the assembled
perfect friendship among United
cultures.
Thank you.
Able
to leap from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I will go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business see no
objections so ordered.
Good morning everybody good
morning members.
just a quick run of show we're
gonna get through some of
committee reports today as well
as some introduction legislation
and we have a joint session and
to hear the state of the
judiciary on or about which.
Other other announcements.
The gentle lady from any
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker good
morning everyone.
as you know yesterday was Eddy
County day and at the state
legislature in today were
fortunate to have some Eddy
County ends here with us these
are individuals who work at the
waste isolation pilot plant.
That is a very important project
for the whole nation and it has
been in operation now for more
than twenty years safely
disposing of transuranic waste
thank you getting it isolated
from the environment on a
permanent basis so I'd like to
introduce our guest today on the
rostrum first of all we have the
Carlsbad field office head
honcho his name is mark
Bollinger if you'd stand please.
Welcome more.
Next we have Bobby Saint John
Bennett the project a long time
now thank you Bobby for being
here welcome.
Mr next to Mr St John is Jerry
strong welcome Jerry.
it Donovan didn't make it today
so we have Michael.
You know.
Help me out.
Yes James Mason is an expert on
transportation issues regarding
waste and we're welcome or
welcome here this morning as
well thanks James.
In the box to is here as well
what the lady working at the
Representative project.
Mr speaker thank you for well
but welcoming our guests
ingenuity and welcome guests to
the house of representatives
other announcements.
Can get a few more announcements
to make your members just to
make you aware and the staff is
here today and tomorrow from
eight to noon and from one
thirty to five for simple
vehicle title and registration
transactions.
We also have
today here at the roundhouse the
department of workforce
solutions apprenticeship day and
it's from eight until noon.
As a reminder to more morning is
in New Mexico Congress of
Catholic bishops prayer
breakfast at our lady of well of
the parish it is at seven in the
morning so super early but I
understand that there will be to
chat on is so totally worth
getting up really early.
Are there other announcements
employment.
Financial disclosures.
Pay attention to this one super
important financial disclosure
forms due on.
January thirty first to the
secretary of state's office
By law.
By law these forces me submitted
like these funds can be
submitted electronically through
Sanchez website if you prefer
but it this is super super point
and I'm special looking at the
from Kansas the freshman members
this is critical if you need any
help or support reach out to our
office reach out to the
leadership offices
the will be more than happy to
help you out in support you
again financial disclosure forms
due on January thirty first.
Any other nonsense.
I have just been informed buyers
seem to madam clerk next Tuesday
Wednesday and Thursday is
picture day that the
legislature.
Class photos so wear your Sunday
best comb your hair all the good
stuff trust me you don't want a
bad picture of yourself out
there and did that my first
couple years and the can't seem
to take it down so please
take note located in the house
lounge.
Any other announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of Business messages.
Click to read.
House executive message number
one.
Honorable speaker Martinez and
members of the house I have just
I have the state provide house
bill one with emergency clause
enacted by the fifty six
legislature first session twenty
twenty three respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
Mrs will be entered.
Gently from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business to no objection is so
ordered.
Other announcements.
Members of been made aware of a
couple of other social events on
the social calendar
he can be a patch in a nation
provided and it will be tonight
from six to eight thirty at the
end at Loretto.
Down the road the NM ADA NMRA AC
NM N. M. A. R. in an NBA friends
of the Legislature dinner will
take place tonight after the
fund from six to nine PM.
Today at noon in room three
eleven there is the second
chance bill lawmakers luncheon
hosted by the American civil
liberties have the parties you.
Any other nonsense.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker of our
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at
eight thirty AM we have five
bills on the agenda so we will
be rocking.
Rockaway gentlelady thank you
other announcements the lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker
health health and Human Services
will meet tomorrow at eight
thirty instead of eight but we
have a ton of bills so be there
thank you thank you Gillian
really rocking as well.
I think that is yes.
Further announcements.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker just ahead Dawn
reminder that
of the house consumer and public
affairs will be meeting today at
one thirty.
Members signal.
Any further analysis the
gentleman from million a thank
you Mr speaker your House
Appropriations Committee will be
meeting at today at one thirty
in room three oh seven we'll be
hearing an overview for Medicaid
and then Mr speaker will be
vacant in the subcommittees both
in room three oh seven in room
three oh nine beginning
approximately at two thirty
those are all on the go to run
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen members signaled.
Any further announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero
thank you Mr speaker your house
labor veterans and military
affairs committee will meet
today at one thirty in room
three seventeen thank you very
much thank you gentle lady
members take note.
Any further announcements.
The British in the house.
Don't be shy the gently to
prevent Leo can sing good Happy
Birthday so.
Right delayed release.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports seeing no objection it
is so ordered.
Click to read.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to whom it's
been referred house bill twenty
seven has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended.
And this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair Mr speaker move adoption.
We are adoption of the federal
Committee port for House Bill
twenty seven all those in favor
signify by saying aye
all those against nay the eyes
have it would report opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too who has
been referred house bill twenty
nine has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it to pass
and insert for to the
appropriation of finance
committee respectfully submitted
of the Thomson chair of adoption
we are on a favorable committee
report for house bill twenty
nine all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The ice have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred house bill thirty eight
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it to pass and it's
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption we are on a
favorable committee report for
house bill thirty eight all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed by have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to home is
been referred house bill forty
one has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
happens with Thompson chair move
adoption we are on adoption of
the federal Committee port for
House Bill forty one all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
All the supposed name.
I just have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to home is
been referred house bill forty
nine has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for the probation of
finance committee respectfully
submitted of the Thompson chair
move adoption we are an adoption
of a favorable committee report
for house bill forty nine all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Hello suppose maybe.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too has been
referred house bill seventy five
has had it under consideration
reports a with recommendation
that do pass and that's referred
to the consumer public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair
reduction we are on adoption of
a favorable committee report for
house bill seventy five all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All those supposed may.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to room is
been referred house bill ninety
two has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and insert for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair Mister
speaker I'm gonna put our name
our committees name in
nomination for the hardest
working committee will move
adoption.
We are adoption of pharaoh
Committee port for House Bill
ninety two and for health and
Human Services Committee being
the heart is worth committee so
far all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
All the supposedly known.
Yes I have a committee report up
to.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too much for referred
house bill seventy six has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that I
do pass as amended and the
answer for to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house bill seventy six all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
All those opposing.
The eyes have a committee report
opted.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business see
no objection it is so ordered.
Any other announcements.
Miscellaneous business.
Through some miscellaneous
business courtesy of the gentle
lady from Santa Fe percent of
set up the thank you Mr speaker
your house commerce economic
development committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty it will
be an organizational meeting and
we will have a presentation with
economic development Department
thank you Senator thank you
gentle lady.
Munoz this.
Going once going twice for the
second time.
Right.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move I go to that
order business introduction of
legislation.
See no objection it is so
ordered.
to read.
House bill one sixty two
introduced by representatives
block and Mason and act relating
to government prohibiting the
adoption of any law ordinance
rule or regulation that
prohibits or restricts the use
of personnel or resources to
assist in the enforcement of
federal immigration law for that
interferes with the enforcement
of federal immigration law house
bill one sixty to introduce by
representatives block and Mason
house bill one sixty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government and
election an Indian Affairs
Committee prevents the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one sixty three
introduced by representatives
block and mutable Maria.
Fund act relating to taxation
providing a twenty five percent
gross receipts tax deduction for
certain small businesses house
bill one sixty three introduced
by representatives block and
more of all Maria.
House bill one sixty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house commerce and
economic development committee
presents the house taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill one sixty four
introduced by representatives
block anymore William Duncan
Mason and lowered.
An act relating to firearms
providing for the permit less
carry of firearms by adults
repealing sections thirty dash
seven dash two point two through
thirty dash seven dash three N.
M. S. A. nineteen seventy eight
building laws nineteen ninety
four chapter twenty two sections
two and three laws two thousand
and three chapter two hundred
fifty three section one and laws
nineteen seventy five chapter
one forty nine section one as
amended.
House bill one sixty four
introduced by representatives
block anymore we a Duncan Mason
and lord.
House bill one sixty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee then set House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one sixty five
introduced by representative
Nibert an act relating to
unclaimed property enacting the
revised uniform unclaimed
property act appealing the
uniform unclaimed property act
making conforming amendments to
other sections of the N. M. S.
A. nineteen seventy eight house
bill one sixty five introduced
by Representative night part.
The
house bill one sixty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in the Affairs Committee then
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill one sixty six
introduced by Representative
Lujan and senator Tom and an act
relating to private sector
retirement aligning provisions
of the New Mexico work and save
act to enable the information of
an auto I are a partnership with
one or more other states
clarifying certain definitions
in the New Mexico work and save
act requiring certain employers
register as participating
employers to automatically
enroll their employees and the
New Mexico work and save I are a
program allowing employees to
opt out of automatic enrollment
making appropriation.
House bill one sixty six
entities by Representative Lujan
and senator Tom and.
House bill one sixty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee since
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one sixty seven
introduced by representative
Representative sniper ten itself
and act making appropriation to
the children youth and families
department for programs that
provide services to child crime
victims in southeast New Mexico
house bill one sixty seven
introduced by representative
Nibert and as L..
House bill one sixty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee events house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one sixty eight
introduced by representatives
Kate's Harper Chavez and how to
meal.
An act relating to health
eliminating receive knows from
smoking permitted areas allowed
in the D. Johnson clean indoor
air act house bill one sixty
eight introduced by
representatives Kate's Harper
Chavez and how to meal.
House bill one sixty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the head house health and
Human Services Committee this
house commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill one sixty nine
introduced by Representative
should pan ski Chandler and
Senator serve on days.
And act relating to the
legislature removing the
requirement that the
complainants not publicly
disclose any information
relating to the filing or
investigation of a complaint
made to the interim legislative
ethics committee alleging
misconduct of a legislator.
House bill one sixty nine
introduced by representatives to
Penske Chandler and senators of
this.
House bill one sixty nine.
Twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee sense
the house Judiciary Committee.
House bill one seventy
introduced by representatives
Romero and Representative Gail
Armstrong and act relating to
telecommunications amending the
cramming and slamming Act
clarifying the definition of
cramming.
House bill one seventy
introduced by representatives
Romero Representative Gail
Armstrong.
House bill one seventy having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee Vince the
house commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill one seventy one
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero.
An act relating to executive
reorganization creating the
office of peace building
providing powers and duties
creating the citizens peace
building Advisory Council making
appropriation house bill one
seventy one entities for
Representative Andrea Romero.
House bill one seventy one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee events the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one seventy two
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and act relating
to towards clarifying the
abatement shall not apply to
assault or assault and battery
cases of action house bill one
seventy two introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero.
House bill one seventy two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee man's house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one seventy three
introduced by representatives
how to meal Dixon Harper and
read an act relating to trial
procedure change the name of the
uniform child witness protective
measures act to the child and
educated incapacitated adult
witness protective measures act
allowing the victim the right to
deny a pretrial statement or pre
trial interview pursuant to the
child and educated and cap
incapacitated adult witness
protective measures at.
Providing for the admissibility
of a child's or adjudicated
incapacitated adults forensic
interview in certain
circumstances amending the
uniform child witness protective
measures act to include
adjudicated incapacitated adults
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the N. M. SA at
nineteen seventy eight.
House bill one seventy three
introduced by representatives
Hermio Dixon Harper and read.
House bill one seventy three.
The minute twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Human.
S. health and Human Services
Committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill one seventy four
introduced by representatives
Dixon's and small.
An act relating to groundwater
creating the underground
injection control fund making
appropriations house bill one
seventy four introduced by
Representative Dixon and small.
House bill one seventy fours or
printed and referred to the
house energy and natural
resources committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one seventy five
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
the crime reduction grand Act
limiting the grant
administration agency creating
the crime reduction grant Fund
making appropriation house bill
one seventy five introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero
Representative Hochman Vigil
house bill one seventy five the
mid range was by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Judiciary Committee
then set the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one seventy six
introduced by representatives
brown and Senator Kernan.
And act relating to
municipalities providing the
distribution of gross recess
receipts tax revenue to the city
of Carlsbad to compensate for
certain municipal gross receipts
tax revenue source to Eddy
County making appropriation
house bill one seventy six
introduced by Representative
brown and centre Kerman house
bill one seventy six having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee advance the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one seventy seven
introduced by representative
Thompson Trujillo and Lujan an
act relating to drugs amending
the drug product selection Act.
House bill one seventy seven
entities for representatives
ThomsonTrujillo and the hot.
House bill one seven seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house consumer public affairs
committee.
House bill one seventy eight.
Introduced by representatives
Chavez Hermio Roybal Caballero
Ferrari and de LA Cruz and act
making appropriation to the
public education department to
fund a paid internship program
for high school students at the
west side animal shelter in
Albuquerque and to study the
feasibility of creating a
statewide internship program for
high school students house bill
one seventy eight Representative
introduced by representatives
Chavez Hermio rebel Colyandro
Ferrary and Democrats.
The house bill one seventy eight
min returns by totals of printed
and referred to the house
Education Committee then so the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
For the bill.
Thank you.
House bill one seventy nine
introduced by representatives
Chavez Hana mu Roybal Caballero
lu Han and growlife.
An act relating to property for
the choir in notice of the
filing of leans against the
property owner house bill one
seventy nine entities by
representatives Chavez Hermio
rebel cardio Lujan and go to a.
House bill one seventy nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one eighty introduced
by representatives pants ski and
Perregaux an act relating to
public records providing for
storing official records
electronically.
House bill one eighty introduced
by representatives should pan
ski and Perregaux.
House bill one eighty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee then so House
government elections and ending
Affairs Committee.
House bill one eighty one
introduced by representative
Sarinana Ferrary Trujillo and
senator cels.
And act relating to school
personnel providing for purpose
units for license school
employees certified by the
national board for professional
teaching standards house bill
one eighty one introduced by
representative Sarinana Ferrari
Trujillo and senator schools
house bill one eighty one I'm in
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee fans
the house Education Committee.
House bill one eighty two
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to legal
notices adding the community on
the newspaper to the list of
official Spanish newspapers
house bill one eighty two
introduced by Representative
Lara.
House bill one eighty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
affairs committee the vans the
house government elections in
the Indian Affairs Committee.
I.
I.
But.
For
that.
With.
Right.
Our.
House joint memorial one
introduced by Representative
Chandler a Joint Memorial
requesting the legislative
executive and judicial branches
of the state to convene a Jack a
joint task force to study
employed classification and
compensation systems and budget
practices across all branches of
state government house joint
memorial one introduced by
Representative Chandler.
How's everyone one have been
read twice by title that are
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House joint memorial to
introduce by Representative
Trujillo a Joint Memorial
requesting the New Mexico
Legislative Council to install a
pocket in the state capital
presented by the New Mexico
state organization daughters of
the American revolution to
recognize the significance of
the one hundredth anniversary of
the passage of the nineteenth
amendment to the United States
constitution giving women the
right to vote House during the
memorial to introduce by
Representative Trujillo.
House memorial to having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House memorial one introduced by
Representative Ferrary a
memorial declaring January
twenty sixth two thousand twenty
three New Mexico Food and farms
day and the house of
representatives in celebration
of community food and farm
initiatives toward ending hunger
and strengthening the statewide
food system.
Sen.
House were one amendment twice
by title is ordered not printed
in place on the speakers table.
And why is there is Senator on
the floor.
You're well you're always
welcome back Sir.
House memorial two introduced by
representative Sarinana Senator
Woods Senators studio Lopez
Representative Castellano and or
tennis a memorial honoring the
response of New Mexico state
university's college of
agricultural consumer and
environmental sciences staff
during the hermit peak calf
canyon fire House memorial to
introduce by Representative
Sarinana Senator Woods Senator
Sedillo Lopez Representative
Castellano and or tests.
House memorial to having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in place on the
speakers table.
House memorial three introduced
by Representative Chavis a
memorial declaring January
twenty seventh two thousand
twenty three New Mexico nurses
day and the house of
representatives House memorial
three introduced by
Representative Chavis.
House memorial three having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in place on the
speakers table.
House memorial for introduced by
Representative Trujillo a
memorial requesting that the
governor designate the month of
September two thousand twenty
three as labor history month
House memorial for entities
Representative Trujillo.
House move forward have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans military
affairs committee.
House memorial I introduced by
representative Thompson Kate's
and how to meal.
The memorial requesting the
department of health to convene
a task force to study the
feasibility of requiring mental
health and developmental
disability providers to be
trained in the treatment of
people with the developmental
disabilities New Mexico current
co occurring mental health
issues House memorial I
introduce for representative
Thompson Kate's and how to meal.
House memorial five minute twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee.
That.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
This is because we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business see
no objection it is so ordered.
Other announcements.
Anyone have a good job.
The gentle lady from violence to
district seven.
Your predecessor would graces
with the joke every day.
Do you have anything to say.
Mr speaker I'm not as much of a
four percent as she was.
Although I've heard that some of
her jokes one all that funny but
I will.
Public alley did hear me that
say that
but it is my mission in order to
make sure that I have jokes for
you since I have to carry on the
tradition appreciate the talent
is just you know this is
webcasting recorded so the
former representative I'm sure
will view this tape later on I'm
sure I'll get a text later on
thank you Jim lady Mr speaker
elated familiar yes Mr speaker I
want to let the lady from the
Lansing now that part of the
charm of the a joke sometimes
were that they were not all that
funding.
That's what made it funny lady.
Anyone else miss.
The gentleman from.
San Juan McKinley thank you Mr
speaker here house labor
Veterans Affairs committee will
meet at one thirty this
afternoon at one thirty this
afternoon.
Thank you chairman members
signal to any other
announcements from the floor.
Thank
members just as a reminder in a
few minutes we are scheduled to
go into joint session with the
Senate to hear the state of the
judiciary.
so if you want to grab a quick
lunch next door next door I mean
in the next room that and the
next building that would be
great.
shortly will going to join
session for a state of the
judiciary from the Supreme
Court.
Any other announcements before
we go to a motion.
The Mr speaker.
Delayed from earlier.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the speaker point a
committee to invite the
lieutenant governor and the
honorable members of the Senate
committee joint session with the
house in this chamber for the
purpose of being addressed by
the Chief Justice of the New
Mexico Supreme Court the
honorable C. Shannon Bacon.
If there's no objections the
chair will appoint.
Representative Baca.
Representative little.
And representative for tests let
me repeat that the chair will
point Representative Baca.
Representative little.
Representative Ortez.
Mr speaker.
Chair recognizes Representative
Chasey as Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the house
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair and that the
rules be suspended to allow the
seating of guests in the chamber
during the joint session there's
objection the house will stand
in recess for a few minutes
subject to the call of the
chair.
Maybe Dawn LG.
It manages to look again.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you for.
Yes.
By the.
Process.
At the.
Thank you all right.
And I think.
The.
My personal.
If they if anybody
comes at the end of your.
So
I was in the.
Here.
If it's bad news.
Some.
To.
Morning.
Yes that is our at the start.
I don't.
That is.
M. D. C..
This is.
Thank you.
