Yeah from something city
they're going pretty well police
interesting
end of the day
and I like to sit next to the
scan casinos
it's it's
looking like so far a lot of.
And yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah
how you spend you know it's like
solid.
The ads is busy.
You'd fight in the.
Advice
is pretty cool
Yeah.
Yes there's a fine.
Yeah.
Yeah
definitely.
Yeah
Okay he's a pretty much an
agreement.
Interesting.
We toughed it.
Yeah.
Yeah i.
Yeah
with one person.
Yeah.
No
we had a informatio.
Yeah.
It was information.
And then there was.
You know they're working.
Interest similar to the.
That was really helpful.
The same presentation
we all know
you know
Yeah.
No
specific thing efforts around
yeah
I think that's.
Well we can.
You know and even if it's time.
You know
some of the.
So.
So I know that.
Ah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You know there's four different
jacks down there.
The.
The.
There's some what we hear that
are marked.
There's some over here mark
looks like
this excuse me guys
we have the set up.
Yeah this is
what we pull this one
or the other way.
Go ahead.
Here's this okay.
No
we have the office the other.
Thank you for patience guys
where are we see
thank you very much
they keep it
sorry
yes worse my car
thank you very
yeah all right.
The.
Yeah.
This.
Yeah yeah.
The.
Mr solution.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Is it working now
excuse me.
Hang up.
My goodness.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Those are yours.
Oh yeah
i'm gonna turn let's even get
roll on just this microphone
and see if that works
is it
director siages.
See if that's working well
good morning everyone this is
roll
that coming through
now that yeah the council and
everyone can hear you
okay
like to call this meeting of the
obvious school capital outlet
council to order good morning
everyone sorry for the delay of
and could we please call
charles.
Fourteen
actually
here.
Here
one of it yeah.
Sorry my thing remember present
for a billing.
Yeah.
We have a an agenda before us
are there any minimums to the
agenda mr chair member service
there's no amendments to the
agenda so I would entertain a
motion to approve the agenda as
presented.
The emotion
is the second.
This discussion
all in favor of the agenda
please indicate by saying I
allow the post.
Move on to correspondence there
any correspondence to come
before today mr chair members
there is not any correspondence
today thank you
then we'll move on to the
financial report and the the
financial plan
so
good morning mr chair members so
when I go over this financial
plan and kind of bits and pieces
kind of moving from different
areas but if you look at your
executive summary what's
included in this financial plan
is are the newer words that are
going to be proved or voting on
today as well as several out of
cycle award so those have been
added to the financial plan and
accounted for and there's some
significant changes that we've
made to the financial plan were
still kind of trying to
streamline the
financial plan as well as get
feedback from the council as to
what you want to see how you
want to see it and make those
adjustments so i'm going to go
to the third bullet of your
executive summary and hit black
point number two first of all
what we did as we had added an
additional twenty five to thirty
five percent to the estimated
out year
estimates so that it falls a
little more in line with what
the industry is looking like so
we did that calculation and now
that is attitude the financial
planet accounted for
and how that affects the
financial plan is going to be on
page ten
thirty three that uncommitted
ballots so when we do that
that's going to bring that i'm
committed balance down because
where a county for those extra
costs
third bully point is we updated
the advancement calculations
that
report was eventually taken out
of the financial plan and we
have right.
Back in and that will be
reflected on page ten as well
line items
six we are still were about
eighty percent complete in that
reconciliation so we've still
getting our final numbers from
advances on whether or not
they've been paid back or not so
you'll see that in red under the
fiscal year and a twenty four
estimate.
Um
lines thirty
you'll see in blue on page ten
again the council has a
voice concern about house senate
bill one thirty one is going to
impact us and the potential of
a words coming forward and if
we're going to be able to.
Afford.
So i'm going to
i've deferred him as could see
us on page
sixteen as to where we are
getting those figures are
getting that three hundred and
sixty million dollars keep in
mind the spreadsheet she is
going to go over with you is
for you to use
to see
who potentially will be coming
forward for an award they have
not been vetered they haven't
necessarily come and said they
are these are based on rankings
and the work that
miscosies does with her team so
with that i'm going to differ to
her to talk about those numbers
so mr chair and members if you
turn to page sixteen of your
books you'll see a potential for
a twenty four standard based
applications i'll give you a
moment to you to get to that
location.
So what this is is a a
price is that we used to figure
out how many bonds that we need
to be sold
so i'll start with the sheep in
roll
road is the districts and you'll
see that there's a color
coordination if it was orange it
was included in the fy twenty
three buying sale if it's it was
not included and if it's in gray
it was included in the fy twenty
three band sale so for example
we wanted to know how much to
expect how much money we might
need to expand when applications
came forward so he looked at the
first one row one bernilia a
good honest we wanted to see how
many mills they had caused we
were trying to see how many
people would apply for a waiver.
So we got their mail number
which was eleven point five we
got the available capacity which
is a rod and that sir binding
capacity and then ro column e
shows the bunning indebtedness
percentage then we have a state
and local march in row f n g.
And then wrote was estimated
project cost we got that amount
by using four hundred and fifty
dollars a square foot and
multiplied it by the potential
script footage for each project
then if you look at column I
you'll see that the local met
will have been nine point one
for this project
the statement would have been
five point six and they would
have had a binding
a binding capacity they'd only
have two point five left for
their match.
So every item you see
highlighted in yellow indicates
that these individuals would be
asking for a waiver.
The.
You'll note that.
I wrote to and running when is
central and when is max those
two are both and the agenda
today for a potential award.
So if the council were to
approve all of these projects
again this is high level
estimating to all it would have
been a total of.
Two hundred and eighty seven
million seven hundred and six
one hundred and nine so what we
wanted to do was show
what it would look like if
waivers were granted for these
projects the first time we
reviewed this column this
spreadsheet with the chairs we
used a hundred percent waivers
to be more conservative we used
fifty percent waivers so if
everybody on this this came
forward.
In half of them needed a waiver
the the total statement with
waivers would be.
Three hundred and fifty nine
million eight hundred and thirty
three
thousand and when you look back
to the page ten
ro thirty fy twenty four
estimate you see the three
hundred and sixty million
dollars there.
So this sheet was to show you
how we got to the three hundred
and sixty million and again
these are estimates and this is
if every single school and the
she was a replacement school and
it's a again an estimating tool
cause we don't know if all of
these prides will be pleased if
some will be partial innovation
if some will be systems only so
this was a tool so that we know
when we look at the semi sheet
on the financial plan sources in
usage pays ten.
What you're estimated on
communities uncommitted balance
period amount will be
so if there is no questions on
page sixteen with a rotential
for twenty four standards based
applications i'd like to go back
to page ten
over two miss romero to continue
I do have a couple questions
real quickly
so
these are potential applications
these are.
Projects we have not senior
applications mr chair members
you've seen central and max well
and they are on the agenda
today.
But this list of projects was
made in december of last year so
that we could work on the
estimated buying sales those are
the only two central and maximum
that will be on the agenda today
yes mister chair a few of the
other ones miss ramos are
programs manager is working with
them
the other question I have is in
terms of listed several of the
financial conditions of each of
the applications.
Have you taken into account any
cash balances that they have
that would be available towards
the project I missed your chair
members thank you for that
question up in above the metro
so what we do mister chair
members is when they finally
make an application like central
and mass will have and when they
come before the council that's
when we look at the statement of
financial position to see how
much money they may or may not
need and see what their cash
balances are so this is a worst
case scenario for planning but
as you given a ward or
considering award then we dick
down into th.
Any other question.
And.
Met him to your members I know
that central is not.
Well
fund fees one but will request a
rawer.
Other questions.
If not
thank you mister chair
let's now go to
just real quick page nine
or down to the bottom.
Where we're talking about fun
balance and the changes from
last meeting to now where now at
one point two billion fund
balance change from nine hundred
and two million and the change
is reflected on
two bonds and excuse me to drive
that we did me in june as well
as the correct in dra
that was done based on the bond
reconciliation and the cracking
drivers that needed to take
place also the one million
dollars transfer from the fund
into ped and their fund and then
also take it into account the
june van sale that is the
difference in that fun balance
also keep in mind the
highlighted you'll see a
significant unfavorable
and that is due to number one is
that three hundred and sixty
million estimate based on
miscosious his work as well as
the
increase the twenty five to
thirty five percent increase in
the out year estimates
and then also an increase and
the projections for esp nine and
so that is the difference in
that unfavorable area
and with that I stand for any
questions.
Okay thank you questions
questions from the council on
the financial yeah.
Thank you iris feel like I
underst.
Is much more improved uh better
than i've ever understood it I
think you've done a really
fantastic job um I take it
thinking to you and your staff I
think it was matter you
so we have this projection
that's actually really healthy
so thank you.
If.
But there are no additional
questions and appreciate the
report and we'll move on thank
you.
So would go on to the consent
agenda we have a quite a
extensive consent agenda
today
like to take him in three
sections
some of the routine matters
on the consent agenda items
eight through f.
Then what we're going to do
although we can take take care
these in one motion we'd like to
break them up a little bit so
that we can explain and
announce what the awards entail
with their two the dollar
mountain local match would
that'll be put up and then all
of the out of cycle.
Awards as well so.
In terms of the first items a
through f course of the phone
for the minutes of our previous
meeting the uh facilities master
plan applications received the f
white twenty five appropriations
requests
they certification of the
supplemental severance tax
bonds.
Fy twenty four standards based
award additional conditions
these are conditions that will
be placed on the
awards that will be
taken action on today.
Also the financial
FY twenty four systems based
awards additional conditions
so that takes care of that if
you would go ahead and know.
Get into the actual awards
and a listing or those yes the
sticker short break here to
transfer off mr bursiel go over
tour
conference now.
Okay.
I'd like to ask miss these
rumors ramos who manages the
programs to talk about the
potential rewards very briefly.
Mr chairman members first we
have a standard space a word for
maxwell combined this is for
phase one funding for a full
school replacement and
consolidation with a total
amount of three point one
million dollars with a state
match of two point five million
which is eighty one percent they
match in the district match of.
Five hundred ninety six thousand
at nineteen percent local match
these one is for planning and
design to replace and
consolidate the existing
facility for a hundred and
seventeen students grades
catherine twelve or forty five
thousand gross where feet and
this project also includes two
teacher housing.
Would you like me to go further
is that enough.
Mr chairman members the next
item is for central c but I
middle school older yes you have
a question okay.
For the
thank you mister german for the
teacher housing units how much.
And members those were uh five
hundred thousand per house i'm
sorry four hundred thousand.
Mr german i'm going to be
flagging that we're spending too
much on this housing units it's
about.
We're gonna get some that are
going to be in the five hundred
to five hundred and fifty
thousand dollar range.
And I think the council really
needs to look at working with
districts for modular housing
that would be
very nice housing units at.
Some of these prices that were
going to be seeing are about
double what we're finding where
what should be like.
Throughout many of these
housing.
Are we able to go back and make
that adjustment.
Generally mrperiod chairman
members I would like to remind
you that the cost per unit house
includes the cost for
infrastructure for repeating the
roads repeating the driveways
lighting all of the utilities
and all of that decrease
essentially teacher
neighborhoods at the schools and
so that is why the costs are
higher than the average housing
you.
And mr chair this is a design
funding.
We can crush in the architecture
be aware of this and see what
the final prices.
Mr german against them the
question is is the council going
to be in the business of
creating neighborhoods or just
like how d.
Uh so we will.
Additional questions.
Mr channel members the next
potential award is for central
sea but I middle school for a
standard space for replacement
of the small perfect line the
total amount will be four point
seven million dollars with a
state match of two point nine
million at sixty three percent
and the district match of one
point seven million at thirty
seven percent this is for
planning design for the full
school replacement for three
hundred and two students grade
seven through eight forty six
thousand seven hundred and
twenty nine gross for feet this
project includes twelve teacher
housing units.
The next project is for dumming
systems based projects for
columbus elementary school.
This is for a single phase to
replace the hac system or a
total project cost of three
point seven million dollars with
the state share of two point
five million seventy percent in
the district match of one point
one million three percent or
thirty percent.
The next project is damning
memorial elementary school for
assistance based project to
replace the roof in each back at
the sale or a total project cost
of two point four million state
share of one point six million
at seventy percent in a district
match of seven hundred and
twenty seven thousand at thirty
percent.
The next project is gadstin for
a systems based project for the
demolition of the al building as
well as several portables and
barricks.
Are the total project costs for
this is nine hundred and twenty
four thousand the state share is
one hundred percent of that in
the district match is zero
percent due to the twenty twenty
one senate bill forty three
which allows the council to
fully find demolition of
abandoned facilities.
Then the last project is for
central for the teacher housing
pilot program to award
two hundred i'm sorry two point
two million dollars with a state
match of one point three million
at sixty three percent a
district match of eight hundred
and fourteen thousand at thirty
seven percent for a single phase
of design and construction
funding to complete four teacher
housing units located at the
existing teacher housing
development in your district
and that completes the potential
awards.
We have the
committee recommendation we have
separate for the
the systems versus the other
cycle.
No mister chair we had one
recommendation
simply to approve the awards for
both the systems and the
standards okay then let's go
ahead and you could read off the
recycle awards as well
mister chair members i'd like to
take you to item g for the out
of cycle the first one we have
is james elementary school and
botalis when it's a design and
construction funding decrep
request lane two million three
hundred and twenty thousand with
a state match of one point four
sixty one percent and a local
match of nine hundred and four
thousand thirty nine percent
and this is for a design and
construction of a roof
replacement and straight sight
drainage improvements.
The next one is pertalia's high
school.
And this is to amend the current
system space of ward for two
thousand high school to include
design and construction funding
told the totally three hundred
and forty three thousand with a
statement of two hundred nine
thousand sixty one percent in a
local match of a hundred and
thirty three thousand thirty
nine percent and this is for the
funny of the portions high
school gymnasium roof
replacement
then we move on to heiser middle
school in
harbs and this is a design
funding request verizon middle
school to include replacement
facility up to a maximum
allowable of eight hundred of
eighty five thousand three
hundred and eight gross square
foot for six hundred and four
students grade six to eight with
a statement of two point four
million forty four percent and a
local match of three million
fifty six percent but it would
be designed face total of five
point four million
the district part of this award
is a district may return to the
council with updated enrollment
numbers to justify and increase
from six hundred and forty
students to seven hundred and
seventy five.
With a corresponding increase in
the total project class.
The next one is a new middle
school and halves which is a
design finding request for
construction of a new school.
And this one is also for eight
eighty five thousand three
hundred and eighty group square
foot for six hundred and forty
students grade six through eight
with a state march of two point
four million forty four percent
a local match of three million
which is fifty six percent and
again the district may return to
the council with updated
enrollment numbers to justify
the increase them six hundred
and forty students to seven
hundred and seventy five with a
corresponding inc.
The next one in the list is
other cookie prescription ms vvi
with a design finding request
is designed for need a word
would be five hundred and eighty
six thousand with a state match
of two hundred and ninety three
in a local match two hundred and
ninety three.
The last the final two or raspel
high school with an additional
funding request and to include
additional funding
for a total of six hundred and
forty one thousand with a state
match of four hundred and thirty
six thousand sixty eight percent
and a local match of two hundred
and five thousand thirty two
percent for the upgrade of the
fire alarm system to the maximum
allowable gloss group for.
Then the following one is
roswell miss a middle school an
additional funding request to
amend the current standards base
award to vasbell to include an
additional funding of one point
four million with a state match
of a hundred and four of one
million seventy one percent in a
local match of four hundred and
twenty two thousand twenty nine
percent.
With a demolition of the
existing crash and wing and
associated site work without mr
chair that is the completion of
the out of cycle.
Awards on the con.
Thank you questions from the
council on any of these.
I wanted to go back to a.
Twelve.
Central and the third district
is requesting twelve teacher
housing units to replace
existing we have to or the
existing units
mobile homes or are the
what.
Mr chair and members mr in them
central has an existing sea but
I middle school with existing
teacher housing adjacent to the
school the district plans to
relocate the middle school to a
different location your district
office many of the teacher
housing units that exist are no
longer suitable and and they
with the district would like to
demolish those and replace those
near the new middle school at
the new teacher housing
development that they've already
started.
So it's just to replace existing
teacher housing at a different
location and they will demolish
the existing helping.
They're not money
yes
they're nearing them.
So essentially the the district
is is building a large
development they have district
office they're going to build
the new middle school and then
eventually they will have twenty
nine teacher housing units i'll
in one development they already
have.
Or five units and they are going
to add for with this teacher
housing request and then twelve
with this teacher housing with
this middle school request.
Okay thank you mister silly
thank you mister chair so
I think these are priced out at
like five hundred five hundred
and fifty thousand per unit.
How much is attributable to.
The sort of the neighborhood
development to streets the
parts.
The.
I like what's the actual cost of
them the unit itself for.
The.
I mr chair and members I don't
have that exact figure I do know
that the the district has
developed a large portion of of
this already and they have the
design portion
nearly complete they are.
There are in a rural area where
it is difficult to get the
construction and
the the cost are high for that
reason as well they've also been
building several teacher housing
units in the last three years so
that there are familiar with how
to build these houses and how
much they cost so
ps and the districts both agreed
on the.
With us today they might be able
to answer that question specifi.
The.
Good morning.
Chair member sealey are your
question about the four houses
that we're asking for in the
payment project this subdivision
the district has built this out
with all the infrastructure in
place before houses that were
asking for everything as to the
market we just completed four
additional houses up at our
measure heights that division
and those are costs came in a
little over three hundred a
square foot for a three bedroom
and two bedroom units um.
I have photos of what those
homes.
Look like I can share with that
i'm sure that with you later but
this in these homes that were
asking for the infrastructure is
already in place but design has
already in place the district
has already paid for the plans
for these
homes that will go on the lights
that are already designated
so i'm curious mister chairman
then why are the costs so much
higher than the the figures
you've just sa.
Mister chair member due to the
escalating construction cost
that's the number there we were
estimating we hope that those
houses come in a lot lower we
would hate to put in
a low number and have to come
back to the council and ask for
more funding.
Our goal is to have these houses
built under the projected cost
in mr chairman.
How many vendors do you have
bidding on these
mr chair member we send it out
as an rsp so lately we've only
had one respondent but we're
getting a lot more inquiries
into our projects that we're
doing and our district
currently.
Enter their additional mister
chairman.
Regulatory hurdles to be
building at the site that you've
got because of tribal
considerations or
is that.
Mister chair member yes we have
partnered with inta who is the
utility provider for the naval
reservation we partnered with
them in the very beginning when
we built the first um houses on
our subdivisions so we've worked
hand in hand with them we have
finally got through all the red
tape and these houses are going
up very quickly because we
deadly are the ground work in
the very beginning when we
started this project not only at
our central office but also at
our means the heights that
division
where we currently have.
Fourteen homes.
At that.
At that location in them five
homes at central office.
A little more to
the houses at tba
that member asked earlier about
the houses that tba the houses
that tba are also experiencing
the structural failure failures
that the school itself is
experiencing we are having to
dumb all the homes because they
are not safe first staff to live
in um we have a lot of slab
heave a lot of structural issues
that are happening with the
homes so instead of keep pouring
money into these homes trying to
keep them livable it's in our
best interest to rebuild and
relocate to this new site that
we have selected for sabati and
then demo those homes so that we
don't encourage any more costs
on those properties
and ask a good question and how
old are those homes that are
going to be done.
Mr charit member
some of those homes were built
in the late sixties.
With the newest.
The newest homes where bells and
late nineties.
And was the foundation problems
mr chair member yes it is
foundation problems install on
the new projects you are going
to do
extensive swell testing to make
sure that that doesn't happen
again and rather we need to do
explanations
deeper I mean it sounds like the
homes were built substandard or
word would not pay an attention
to the smoke conditions
with it is unfortunate to have
to be turned on house were built
in the nineties that is.
Mrperiod sherren member to that
tier question the homes that
were built in the nineties were
not experiencing those structure
of failures it's the homes that
were belt in the late sixties
that were we're seeing the
structural failure in those
homes there would be a a total
love.
One
two.
At most six homes that would see
on that site and the rest of the
homes would be demount.
And we have done extensive soil
testing at the new site that we
have identified for the school
in the holmes that's where we
have five homes that are
currently in place so we do know
the soils we do know what
foundations will need to be in
place for the school and the
holmes moving forward
thank you for your comments
did you have any additional
comments mister silly mr
chairman just that you know it
seems like the the neighborhood
portion is already been
developed and you know.
You know estimated costs.
The very high silence.
That we get a better handle on
this.
Being able to break this types
of things out if people are
going to come with with project
request.
You know continuing to work.
I just talked to somebody this
morning that just purchased her
two by six construction which I
because i'm heard of with my jo.
And that questioning the need
for these real remote areas but.
In trouble from the cost
standpoint at being able to do
more and better going florida.
It's kind of money creating you
know such price demand in the
market and that's true with a
bunch of these school projects
as well.
Thank you.
Any additional questions.
I did.
Take action but number one I
wanted to think the staff for
getting all of these projects in
order and before us thank the
locals for for coming in as you
know we've gotten away from our
one time funding cycle a year
and these are all coming up when
they're ready so I think that'll
save us money in the longer one
as well.
Uh the additional work to that
was has to be was took place in
order to get it into this point
I also wanted to come in a
little bit on the housing
program it's you to us were
while we have funded and some of
these in the past.
Take a close look at this and
make sure that we're doing the
right thing and
maximizing the amount of m.
It is a very costly and although
we can make some impact on
individual school projects the
need is really
statewide and we need to make
sure we target.
Thank you for that.
Emotion to approve the entire
consent agenda.
I will move.
Thank you we have a emotion and
these are all subcommittee
recommendations but i'll take a
second anyway.
We have a motion in a second so
all those in favor of reproving
the entire consent agenda.
The.
Please end to keep my senate
all the supposed.
Congratulations to.
Applicants and I would have a
little bit of time if anybody
wants to.
Who approached the council with
any comments they may have for
many of the applicants.
The situation members of the
council jeans strickly
superintendent for hob schools
and one of the come today and
express our appreciation.
For the continued partnership.
With yes you see.
Express our appreciation the
staff aps fages as you mentioned
here
how schools continues to grow
just today our number is a
hundred and seventy kids larger
than what we were same day last
year.
And so we continued to see that
incremental growth and that we
saw precovered so we look
forward to getting into the
design phase of further
communications and reliability
on our eds back
and we'll see back here again
for looking at that seven
seventy five but we are grateful
for the subcommittee as well as
a for council and and look
forward to continue growth your
new mexico for all our kids
thank you thank you super dinner
for being here.
Morning chairman and members
jeremy sanches from rosball and
better school district I want to
extend our gratitude for your
support of mason middle school
roswell high school it allows us
to move forward with these
critical systems with regards to
mason to finish project and to
keep our students in safe school
environments and we also are so
thankful for the support that
we've received throughout the
years on the many capital outlay
projects and look forward to
many mor.
Thank you for being.
Morning with your chair members.
Amyroble maximum schools we
would also like to express our
gratitude for your support
maxwell really prides ourselves
on being good stewarts of the
public's money and mister silly
we hear your cash and sloud and
clear we assure you that as we
go through the design and the
planning phase we will continue
to do it as frugaly as we can
while maintaining the standards
that new mexico step rescourse
thank you.
Good morning and should be to
the superintendent of the new
mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired animals bbi is
very appreciated and grateful to
all of you for supporting and
both of our school sites and we
appreciate your support of our
expansion of our early childhood
program in albuquerque
were excited to have an increase
in students there and we
anticipate further increases so
thank you thank you that is a
very exciting school
thank.
The.
More checking in members of
council steve cornson from
central consultant i've met with
most of you before I do
appreciate very much personally
but also on express gratitude
from an entire district I know
that there's a lot of questions
about the northwest and what's
happened we're doing the best to
be f.
Thank you for both projects and
we will do our best thank you
for the comments about marginal
we will definitely look at you
know those possible as well but
again just want to thank you.
Good thank you.
Good morning
good morning chair cancel I am
just looking at then from
getting isdn the associates with
pretended of sport services
this is my first time here i'm
very new to the position I want
express the gratitude from gads
to isd till you are and to the
piece of paper or the work in
the long relationship that
you've had with gads and in all
the funding in we've been able
to build really good facilities
mentions my safe thank you.
Thank you for being here.
Okay.
So thank you council members for
your action on these items will
move on them to
a word cycle
and we have item e pre
applications received.
Mr chair and members this is an
informational item to inform you
of the pre applications we
received since the last pse of
the meeting we received quite a
number in the last month most
importantly and i'll run through
each one individually but the
biggest
item is alva here he has sent a
complication letter for a total
of fourteen schools
so as you know the application
cycles open all your long and
that's why we are seeing
applications every month.
For a standards based in the
last month we received a pre
application from simmeran for
eagle nest elementary school
slash middle school which is
currently ring to one sixty two
for alba kirky we received an
application for harris and
middle school currently ranked
ninety five in bend your in
middle school ring to one thirty
five.
For systems based we received
any pre application letter from
similar on for submiron
elementary slash middle school
currently ring to two fifty
three for the fire alarm we
receive two applications for
clovis one for martial junior
high school range two fifty six
for the fire detection plumbing
and each basis systems and
another one for sending a
elementary school currently
ranked two sixty six for the
exterior envelope plumbing in
each pc systems we received a
letter from west las vegas for
louise army ho elementary school
rent two sixty eight where the
exterior envelope he see
electrical buyer alarm site
range and demolition systems
another letter from texaco
combined which is currently
around three thirty for the roof
and exterior walls another
letter from clinton for for
clicking high school for the
demolition of the old junior
high school building.
And then for alba cookie we have
request for taff middle school
currently ranked twenty one for
roof and hbc systems sy jackson
middle school currently ranged
number twenty six for the roof
highland middle school range
forty four for the roof in hac
long fellow elementary slow
ranked forty seven for the roof
and hac my name is to elementary
school for forty rate number
fifty four for hac
sandia high school currently
rang seventy one for the roof in
hac valley high school currently
rang to seventy five for the
roof in hac I is in how are
middle school currently ranked
seventy eight or roof nhbc.
Of sooner elementary school
ranked three eighty four for the
roof a tristan elementary school
ranked four thirty four for the
roof and i'll northern high
school right ninety four for the
roof
we've also received a pre
kindergarten request for all
cookie or durance elementary
school to convert that into the
district center.
And we've also received three
requests for the teacher housing
pilot program from simiran house
and clea.
Um i'm page one ninety eight we
have the new.
Total list of all the pre
applications received those in
red indicate that those were the
letters that I just read to you
i'm indicating that they are new
those in the purple rows are the
words that you just made.
In the following pages we have
the letters from each individual
districts and with that I stand
for questions.
We're open for business yes.
Any questions or comments.
I noticed
applications there's a lot of
consistency with.
Almost everyone is referring to.
And I ate her bonus.
What maintenance.
Too much about that.
It's it's.
At some point we have to call
this to account so we don't
continue to spend good money
over that.
And I don't know about the rest
of the school districts but I do
know.
Additional comments.
If not what is the sort of the
time frame that you're looking
at it.
Mister chair and members that is
currently working on a timeline
for this large amount of
projects going forward we'll be
making a words that all of the
upcoming psy meetings do the
rest of the fiscal year on these
we're going to try to stagger
them in a logical way that helps
staff accomplish our goals and
next meeting will probably have
a lot of systems based and then
the next meeting more district
presentations followed by more
standard species awards
a large number of these are
obscure is the standards based
request or.
Waiting for their november bonds
to take place so those will
likely take place in the new
year so we'll be focusing on the
other requests primarily in this
calendar year
just done because they're in
others quite a few of our
current projects what is the
that match at this point local
match ratio mr chair and members
the
aps local match is sixty three
percent with that one third
reduction without the one third
reduction would be at ninety
four the highest possible.
In total the
total state request for aps is
approximately thirty six million
thirty seven.
It did not as there was a couple
of schools that were.
Not at that same net.
I don't know where they.
I was looking.
Where it had listed the matches
and several of the just a couple
different matches is that is
that possible that they can have
a different
mr chair and members for the
precape program which they
requested for durante elementary
the
all pre key projects are reduced
by one half per one thirty one.
Mister chairman and at least I
think there's just a technical
error so what I noticed is
on your chart on page one eighty
eight ro sixteen
local state match sixty three
thirty seven but when you look
at eighteen it's flipped that's
all.
This.
Oh yes i'm sorry who apologized
for that.
When is the last time aps was in
front of the council requesting
for
mrperiod chairman members it's
been.
Many many years I think a lot.
I'm director gorrell.
Which is about how long that mr
chair met mr ch.
About eight years
thank you so much for you.
Any additional questions if not
that w.
To the next item.
Two thousand and twenty three
capital only district
presentation from cuba.
Mr chair and members this is a
district presentation for cuba
he were has requested a pre
kindergarten project to add to
classrooms to their existing
elementary school as well as
teacher housing and with that I
will step aside and
let them let.
Welcome to senator morning
good morning mister care members
of the committee I have with me
this morning associate
superintendent mischavis who is
also associated superintendent
business and finance for our
district
happy to have her with us today
we're very honor to be in front
of the council today to ask for
the needs of our district so i'm
gonna turn it over to her and
i'll talk a little bit after
about what why we are asking for
these specific items thank you
mister.
Thank you doctor sanchez grego
mister chair council members we
have included a presentation in
your packet.
Um
on the basis of our request we
have submitted a few application
for a pre k classroom
as well as two teacher housing
units and which is actually a
duplex that were proposing to
build.
Um.
In our presentation we started
off with some information on
some recent successful pseoc
and that the district was
granted i'm so we list out
several bulleted items but we
are most recent one is the
twenty twenty impacted outside
of adequacy appropriation
and we also had one in we had
two of those in which we
completed some each back
upgrades and upgrades to our
security systems.
Um back in twenty nineteen
twenty twenty we applied for
several security awards on which
we were funded for
there were actually four of them
and we did numerous things at
our schools regarding building
access door access keycard
access video surveillance
systems
and then back in twenty sixteen
we were funded for a pre k
classroom addition that was our
first pre k classroom our
students had been in a portable
for many many years
so we were very grateful to have
received that and we are now.
We have a waiting list for our
pre key classroom and so we are
proposing to build a new
classroom.
Next I included a side on the
cuba independent school district
membership trends
and you can kind of see the
trend lines moving in and upward
direction but unlike most
schools in the state cuba is did
not experience covered nineteen
related enrollment declines um
instead we experienced increases
so we went from
you know the low five hundred to
the upper seven hundred numbers
so we are busting at the seams
in all over buildings but
especially in pre key and we did
during covered we added another
pre k so we have the precake um
classroom that the pse funded in
twenty sixteen and we added an
additional pre k classroom and
one of the chapter house areas
in or who and sina.
Um and right now both of our
classrooms have significant
waiting list so that's why we
applied for additional funding
for another prek classroom.
I included a
project description this is
based on our current clashroom
and the way we had the current
classroom built out was with the
hopes of expanding eventually so
this classroom would be adjacent
to our current pre k classroom.
And kind of make a pre k wing um
again it notes that we've seen a
large influx of students
especially in pre k.
This classroom would provide
some desperately needed
classroom space for a younger
students helping put them on a
path through success.
In addition to the pre k
application we have also
submitted an application for a
teacher housing duplics
and we come to you with this
request because cuba is in a
very rural community
we are we have a small and
restrictive labor market
and there's little opportunities
for employment the school
district is the largest employer
in the area
the village of cuba has maybe
seven hundred
residents altogether at the
school district on a daily basis
we have well over a thousand
including staff in students
and so we serve areas we have
children bust to cuba schools
from an hour and a half one way
so we serve a large part of the
eastern nabonation and several
surrounding villages and
communities
within the cuba independent
school district
because of this most of our
teachers drive in almost one and
after two hours.
One way from albuquerque santa
fe and barmington.
And this is one of our the main
reasons we have a very high turn
over rate each year
so this would provide
desperately needed housing for
our teachers
and would in turn the district
to recruit and retain.
And so I kind of at the next
slide as the requested project
description and and I kind of
touched based on both of those
the cuba elementary the building
itself was renovated in two
thousand six it's still in in
fairly good condition
we consistently have high marks
on our far rating
we have one pre k classroom as I
mentioned added in twenty
sixteen.
And then as far as our teacher
housing units we built five
units way back in nineteen sixty
five we're still using those we
still maintain those.
We have four units that were
built with the teacher housing
revenue bond in two thousand
six.
And we just recently built six
units in twenty twenty two
before units um
were actually
when they were developed and
they were planned out to be six
units or three duplexes but the
the district at the time
couldn't fund all of them so we
have a space for these duplics
units and we have facilities we
have all the ground work it's
ready to go we just are asking.
As far as our facility master
planning were current we have a
current facility master plan in
place
it identifies the need for
classroom space at the
elementary as well as the need
for teacher housing units to
include major renovations of our
nineteen sixty five units as
well as will replacement.
Um or addition of tuna units
the need for the pre k classroom
again I think I mention that
we've got one classroom
elementary one in oh who is anti
no chapter house they both have
an extensive waiting list.
The need for teacher housing
we've got two hundred and forty
seven staff members in twenty
two twenty twenty three
and the twenty twenty senses
identifies two hundred ninety
housing units in cuba
so that gives you an idea
forty five which are vacant and
mostly uninhabitable.
So that gives you an idea of
what kind of housing how hard it
is for teachers and our staff.
Financial summary
our local capacity are available
cash balance the recent outcome
of the aussie martinez last you
allows our district to keep 100
percent of the impact aid
revenue um.
Which has been phenomenal for
our district and has been set
aside him budgeted for the local
match for the pre k project.
And we have over one million
dollars research for
construction
local capacity as far as bond
sales we have just are our
school board just
signed off on a teacher housing
revenue band to assist with the
local match for the teacher
housing project so we have done
a lot of legwork that we hope
will go hand in hand with this
project request if wondered
so we are very grateful for you
allowing us to speak before the
council um I did also want to
mention our recent most recent
added summaries they've all been
clean and modified opinions and
that's been since at least the
last ten to twelve years well
i've been overseen finances at
the district
in the most recent years two out
of five years we had zero
findings on our audit.
And that was in twenty eighteen
and twenty twenty one
other previous findings in
twenty nineteen we had three
twenty twenty we had three as
well and twenty twenty two we
had for so we do our best to be
stewards of public money
and just wanna i'm gonna hand it
over to superintendency if she
wants to add anything additional
but thank you for your time
thank you as you can see we have
an amazing business partner
hopefully she will take off
district soon one day anyway I
just wanted to reiterate again
that the development of our of
our pre school was open a day
care center we have a big influx
really really younger children
coming into our district which
is very very exciting and so the
need for that has really grown I
want to think the secretary in
early childhood and her team for
helping us as we look at what
this what this looks like in our
district and the last thing i'll
talk about is the teacher just
you know I was a super turn on
the naval honation for several
years and learned about teacher
doesn't what that look like and
then come into the local public
school district was a little bit
different but as miss chavis
said there is really not livable
space in cuba the district
really has had to to provide the
living space for teachers and we
really try to really target it
to teachers there's others that
in our district who would like
to live in those spaces and we
say no they're designated for
teachers I wanted to point out
to the council that the other
thing that we've seen in some
regards is gouging a heat to see
it like that but that's what's
happened in the local district
as well charging teachers from
fifteen hundred to nineteen
hundred dollars to live in a
space teachers would call me up
and say reaga can you come over
and look at where i'm living I
would go over there and
literally substandard as tall as
mr lee as you couldn't even walk
in one of the houses right if
you go back generationally in
some of the older areas so it is
very very hard for them to live
and work in a space where there
is no housing a lot as well as
as.
Miss chavis has pointed out come
from the naval who nation we are
now getting an inflicts of nable
teachers and diverse white
teachers who are moving from the
reservation that are coming in
wanting to do housing in our
district and then go back to
there in the summertime or in
their areas lot of times latimer
starting to stay in cuba but I
just wanted to point it out we
know that this very specific
needs of a very small town and
rule with large populations
coming from larger areas into
our district with that mister
chair members of the council we
stand for any questions we want
to also think martica and her
team and everybody for the work
brian that they have done to
have to really support us have
we've been battering them
thank you thank you for your
presentation we have several
questions.
Yeah.
Can you share with us at that
point list.
So madam chair member per the
year
as as associate superintendent
sharis has talked about during
the pandemic we size a lot of
families return home so those
that were living on the
reservation return back to the
reservation those that lived in
local cuba returned back to take
care of family either older
generations or other we have
really done a lot of work to
ensure that we are we are moving
to the teacher pipeline and
encouraging the younger
generations that are moving back
to also get into education so
we've seen an increase with that
with that we've seen young
parents mums and dads who are or
moving back into the area and
then are now working for the
school district who whose
parents were taking care of
their children who now need
services like daycare so right
now we opened up the day care
with eight we've got probably
eight more that we could service
and that's just within our are
local unemployees we haven't
even opened it up to our own
students don't have very many
students that have babies and or
the outside the outside a
community has asked us to also
possibly house date care within
you there's not a date you're in
cuba and there's not one in the
three reservations counselor or
hell and tory on in any one of
those reservations so this is a
very large very important thing
also for the younger ones we've
just just seen a lot of
rampareness raising their their
grandkids and so there's also an
influx of of older generation
whose are dealing with different
issues where they're their
literally there's been death
there's been lots of different
things they're raising three to
four in some cases five
grandchildren that are then
coming back to their
grandparents and living in our
local district coming back to
our local schools
we have a waiting so we have
right now we have a a prison in
or who and we've been pushing
out and what I think doctor
warrantment payer and that team
that when we were doing this
early on the ped and the
governor and everybody allowed
us to do the work in the local
community so we paid for some
for that that precade of peopl.
Placed there but we just were
just seeing a lot more kids in
our community a lot coming back
we've been holding off on not
ensuring that we are not going
out we see like close to it
eight hundred kids with having a
very smart business manager we
go back and see let's keep it
right at seven hundred which is
still almost two hundred more
than we had in twenty nineteen
we don't we put in front we'd
only put in for that because we
want to make sure they can
continuously come back but in
the last three years we have
seen a continuous uptick in
terms of student enrollment in
the cuba public schools and we
also provide star link and other
things that I think their local
community are very excited about
we do pay the internship place
of things but I think for our
little ones and we just see an
influx of younger families
moving back really really trying
to engage and and bring up the
teacher pipeline leader pipeline
within the district and and kind
of roll the work beyond five
fifty and into the local
communities.
Thank you for doing.
Yeah.
Although what what's you.
I wanted to
say that i'm sure the early
child.
And your child care as well
that's really great.
They were doing pms pre k three
year old and they just have not
even started and so as we did
the day care we had to ask
permission could we take over
one of their buildings and
that's what we're doing the
letters borrow half of the
building if they if they can't
do it in their knock in a
doctors were keep hearing we're
not sure if they're going to
open we're gonna we're gonna go
and open up a three three year
old center and move to the
building that they actually
because it's their building on
cuba's lands it was like an mode
then years ago you are probably
their mischance when this
happened but on the weightless I
would see there's about thirty
two kids on the weight list
right now we're accommodating
all those kids by by moving them
to the inside and the principles
there have had to shuffle kids
around and you know really see
how we utilize that how do we
coteach in some of the
classrooms even though they're
on a weightless we are taking
them in
we just don't have the the
classroom ability that really is
model towards having to pre k
classroom so they're having to
share we haven't turned any kids
away though.
We still call him our weightless
kids those chairs you so much
and again thank you for
investment.
If the questions.
Is there it looks like these are
could be better.
And it looks like the other
three are identical on the same
site so there's no design costs
that are involved.
Infrastructure is complete.
It does seem like
a cost just
for one the door he has all that
ready it does
cost for that.
Mr chairman were yes everything
is complete everything is ready
the space of miscaves talked
about was a specifically been
identified that we didn't have
funds for but we there's not any
cost to the village in any of
any of that we've already paid
for the plans so it's good it's
already as I think they would
say.
But anyone else.
Just.
Thank you for your presentation
and thank you for all your hard
work that you because I incuba I
think.
Your leadership in your teams
leadership is probably one of
the drivers that you're a moment
increases to be honest with.
Um so three year kind of the the
pipeline of potential students
coming into your three and four
year old pre k are you just
basically drying from other
tribal or have start.
Programs or is there an actual
increase in the number of of.
Kids living.
The.
Mister chair member sleeve we
haven't really looked into that
too too much we're not trying to
draw from the local face
programs or any of the early
childhood programs that exist
and even the programs the
the grant schools are the base
schools we don't recruit we
don't and week we we tried it
really at you know honor the
cyvert nation and what they're
doing in their school districts
they're coming to us and so
again I think some of it is that
teachers that are young teachers
we got a whole bunch of young
teachers which is really
exciting coming in and they want
their children with them so
they're bringing them to the
schools if they might have lived
in a whole council or whatever
else they're bringing them to
school with them because they're
traveling into work educational
assistance teachers principles
etc and then a lot is growth
back to the back to the district
I did hear that some of the
program I don't want to get into
too much of the programs but I
heard some of the programs that
we were doing as well they
didn't have the staff in order
to function on the nab who
nation was some of these in
those areas but it isn't due to
anything that we've done we try
to make sure we collaboratively
work with them to insure that
the sovereignty of their
children in their nation
continues so we could probably
get some data on that and get it
back to you that if the council
need.
I think that's important just to
to work with their um.
Cabinet secretarian and her
staff to just get a better
understanding of is this a
public population growth or is
it shifting
cause that will help you
determine whether one classroom
is there an afford possibly if
you've got a waiting list that
bill yeah we've loved
you know
there might one classroom might
not be enough to serve your
jurisdiction and if it's a a
shift because of a printed
choices I mean that's rental
choice but there'll be helpful
to understand when you go out.
Assuming these are words or are
granted.
Would you try to get like the
same contractor to do both
projects and with that help on
some of the project costs or
would you be.
Mr chair member silly we've been
using the same contractor out of
espanola they're in the under
the ces guidelines
I think the first year we did
one of the bigger projects we
tried to get some was before
covered and we did not get bytes
and so they've been consistently
doing a lot of our projects and
kind of multaneously and so the
prices that they're charging if
that since you're using a price
list is that
the difference.
Mister chairman member state
it's in line with what we see
all over the state is high we go
back to him we've done a project
that was going to be per our
health clinic and initially when
we had put it in the five year
plan it was three hundred and
forty six thousand dollars and
then covered boom and then it
was six it was double the money
six hundred and something we
continue so it back as it how
could this happen and the
builder said it's just cost he
said i'm not trying to i'm not
trying to go do you are not
trying to up it it's just mere
costs we continuously go back as
we talk with him to see this
still kind of high
and.
You tries to work with us but I
mean I feel like that the
projects all over the state and
I feel like we're lucky to have
that company come in and
continuously help us which will
speak to that.
Um if funded through the ps we
were do put out an rfp and but
like a request for proposals but
like some of the districts that
have presented before us
because we are in a rural area
we typically get one person one
company bidding on our projects
but we would love to see some
competitiveness and have other
vendors bid so we would be
putting it out there in the form
of an rf but like you mentioned
it would drive cast down.
If.
Anyone else
if not will thank you for being
here though I think you've
explained your project very well
to us in the need for it so
again discontinue working with
staff and we hope to see you
here in the next few months to
get the same good thank you
thank you just when I think
again just read
really encouraging to work with
early childhood department as
well as they are a word.
All the very.
Thank you so much.
Yeah.
Next item is the
item cfy twenty four capital
outlay awards overview you might
have already done that
mr chairman members this is an
informational item to basically
summarize what you've already
awarded in consent agenda this
shows the
schools that were.
A worded curve program and the
total state match and local
match for each program
and page
two thirty three is a
spreadsheet showing the overview
of all of the awards made today
though the total states matched
refers one is twelve little over
twelve million.
Or today where the potential out
your match where the state of uh
forty nine point five million
but again that's out your and
one thing I just want to remind
you is one is planning a design
so this is not locking in these
construction costs at all when
these projects are complete with
their design fees that's when
they'll get their bed and come
forward for a construction
bunding instead of the out your
numbers will change they may go
down they may go up but this is
to determine phase wines to make
sure they have enough money to
accomplish that goal
very good questions.
Distribution of
your five.
The.
Mr chair members
we are on
page two thirty seven item five
d distribution of house bill
five or five and mister chair do
you want the subcommittee
charity read this motion or
would you like yes
thank you mister thank you right
mister chair or subcommittee
does recommend a uh but cancel
to approve and release funding
to our school districts
based on the fy twenty four cent
bill nine and total distribution
allocations the school districts
must accept and sign the war
letter and provide the psf with
information regarding.
How are the district intends to
utilize the funds and school
districts should have current
preventive maintenance plans in
place there are have been
approved by the ps of the the
funds should be expended within
three years with permission for
technical corrections if needed.
Thank you mister chair.
So
as the subcommittee chair
pointed out this will be
distributed and the same fashion
that senate built to twelve was
distributed last year that was
the seventy five dollars million
dollars
that the council distributed to
all eighty nine districts
and so there are two
appropriations section forty
five point one was for sixty
five million
and that was for cte pre k
or maintenance of public school
buildings.
Section forty five point two
appropriate thirty five million
for
security infrastructure in
public school buildings
and no district shall relieve
that shall receive less than one
hundred thousand for the first
appropriation in fifty thousand
for the second
and again we'll use at the same
methodology that we used for the
speed to twelve distribution
which is calculated on the sp
nine percentages
and on the.
Let's see
i'm page two thirty nine is just
a
it's the snap it from the actual
legislation showing the two
sections section one being sixty
five million
in the second page illustrating
the thirty five million for the
security.
And then on the following pages
starting on page two forty one
is the distribution based on the
sp nine percentages.
The.
The following pages after that
i'm starting on page two forty
three or just the sample letters
mister chair
that we intend on sending out
after we get the approval of
the council and with that i'll
stand for questions.
Thank you mister chairman things
I wouldn't aspect that we have
in our motion is that that the
districts have a current
rental maintenance plan or you
worried or concerned that there
are any districts that do not
have a current one.
Mister chaired director one of
it there there are a handful
that are
not in compliance it said it's a
sherred matter shall and so
we're going to highly encourage
in the in the email and the
letter that they have
a current pm plan in place
but we don't want to um it's not
it's it's not a shall.
The.
Yes mr chair thank you.
Rang could you quickly was
noting and the letter it states
that the distriction report to
the psf on actual expenditures
at the time funds are fully
expended do we require any other
reporting or other information
on how the funds were expending
to ensure compliance of.
Mr chair director each mislead
director
so the way the way we intend on
doing this as both through us as
well as peb so they'll have to
report through ped as well but
what our staff will do is
actually go back and ask the
each district how they've
utilised the funding
and we'll see how that works out
with the sp two twelve
distribution here in another two
years and but they do have to
report back to pep as well and
how the funding was was
allocated and used.
Yeah.
Mr chair right
is pierce of their giving any
guidance to the lease on how.
How the security funds should be
used I was trying to quickly
look at the statute is it is it
pretty opener and can you
explain what that looks like mr
chairman's video it is quite
open the language in the
legislation was fairly open I
will say that
like the sp two twelve funding.
If a district came back
requesting something that was
not
in line with the intent of the
legislation.
We we asked them to revisit
their scope and and based it on
things closer tied to in that
instance maintenance so for the
security funding if we if we
were to see.
Student transportation bus that
when we would save this is not
security related
but it is it is fairly open.
Thank you for that question
anyone else
there's no further discussion
then
all those in favor of the motion
please indicate by say nice
although the post.
The.
Mr chairman can hear me the next
item.
We're going to out of cycle
awards we have item eight.
Uh shapper
on the chance
construction funding request.
Thank you determine and thank
you to the staff we don't have a
subcommittee recommendation but
we did ask the staff to come
back to the full council with
some full of some more
information about this um just
in general essentially what
you're looking at is or is that
contollable construction funding
at four point two million.
Or pre key center that is for
classrooms so essentially that's
one million dollars for each
classroom which seemed fairly
high for an additional in
addition to a school that simply
creates a pre case center
given sort of the track record
of where we are with a rising
construction class subcommittee
was concerned about this total
amount for four classrooms so we
asked the staff to come forward
with some
information before we gave a
full recommendatio.
Thank you.
So mr charify me i'll read the
potential motion and then
provide some key points if
that's okay so it's.
Cancel approval to him in the
current prekay award to gets an
independent school district for
shepherd on track center
construction face funding
totalling four million two forty
five five eighty four with a
state match of two million nine
seventy one nine oh nine seventy
percent and a local match of one
million to seventy three six
seventy five thirty percent for
the construction of a four pre
kindergarten classroom addition
we do recommend approval of the
construction face funding
mister chair and i'll go through
the key points five schools
serve the chapro community for
of which serve grades came
through six.
I shape roll on track precase
center serves serving only the
precase students shaperell
desert trail sunrise yoga
heights and chapera and track
pre k
for twenty two twenty three the
precase center had four prepaid
classrooms within the facility.
I additionally they have for
portable classrooms at desert
trail which the district designs
to the shepherd along on track
center
the district counts those
students and and desert trail
portables in the pre can roman
as well
chapril area schools are well
utilized and currently do not
have any under utilized spaces
to accommodate the classrooms in
the entract.
If you'll see in the chart mr
chair the funding summary I want
to point out last time we did
not unfortunately have this
information broken out quite
rate for the subcommittee so we
made sure to bring this back
the total construction cost is
at five hundred and fifty four
dollars a square foot that's the
third line down that you see
involved that says total mac
that's the actual cost of three
million three hundred fifty
thousand two hundred.
We do have.
Eight hundred ninety five
thousand and softcasts which
does bring it up to that four
point two million dollars number
that.
Director warnament pointed out
so again I want to focus on that
the construction cost per square
foot of five fifties were foot
this is in line with what we're
seeing
it with the current conditions
also this is a fairly small
edition at only five thousand
square feet so the cost for
square foot goes up
significantly when you get to a
small job like that so that's
kind of skewing the number a
little bit if you well it has it
does feel like a million dollars
a class through mister chair
but it is it's a thousand square
fight classroom and then you put
in the tear space at thirty
percent that kits you to about a
five thousand square foot
edition there is some work being
done to the vested bill as well
to secure it.
And
when we make sure I don't have
anything else that exhibits.
I am page two fifty one listed
include the letter
the mimo of the shepherd
utilization is attached as well
as
member she expressed me will I
get to that.
Is the
utilization and then the last
exhibit is just a map of all of
the
schools within the district with
the precase pointed out.
And with that mister charles
stand for questions
if.
So could be chair would you like
to add anything based on the
information in this reload
that what you had required
address
address the concert.
Thank you mister chairman it
does
that we had across the
subcommittee was priced for
square foot so thank you very
much for that right and is what
was sort of the expense of the
feeder schools
or all of the schools that were
associated with the pre k
I guess I can start with a
question erm right why do you
think they're soft costs is so
significant to the t.
The.
Mr chair director wanted it I
believe a lot of it has to do
with the furniture fixtures and
equipment that go into the pre k
classrooms it's a lot more
intensive and there's a lot more
and then it this still has all
the all the normal testing
services that you need during
construction special inspections
roof observation it has all the
things that a major
that a major project has
just in a in a small little
edition.
Okay additional questions.
The.
Not we have a potential emotion
based on the information that
was provided by staff.
The.
Yes.
Can you remind me that mister
german what was the original.
Mr chair director silly I
believe the.
The original
is on page two fifty one
we're with me just a minute to.
The.
Mrperiod chair director sleep I
believe it was I don't have the
exact number in front of me but
it was almost half
okay so it's basically that the
the project cost of double.
The construction cost director
silly a sir
the safe cost did they did it
grow at the same rate as they
can.
Mister terry director sleenel
and and I was just reminded that
gross receipts taxes included in
the soft costs as well just as
a.
I wonder mister chairman for
some of these projects that
we're seeing.
Whether it's housing which I
still don't understand why
that's not like an enterprise
funded no opera.
Maybe with a little bit helped.
But with these prekate
classrooms coming in at a
million blacks.
Whether it's worth um some
discussion about.
Bidding out either regionally or
a statewide
you know because these
individual small project costs
are not good you only got one I
think that district.
Mrperiod charit directorsly I
believe that's correct on this
one the second yes so I guess
the distant throwing out there
is as a question is there's a
scalability and effect you're
going on with some of these
projects and is it worth.
The state's while if we're going
to be putting.
Entertain that discussion which
I know is.
Entertained in the past.
You know kind of contractor
that's willing to do teachers or
you know state why that will
have to do
and.
Start looking in that direction
or just through that up for.
It's certainly something
on alternative we need to look
at.
The problem is
how do we get to that point in
how long will it take and the
hopefully there'd be some
savings.
But I think.
Based on the information on this
particular project I think we
have enough inf.
If the staff is.
With it.
Not happy with it but
comfortable that the district
has
has looked at all options and
maybe we can talk to the
district a little bit is any any
chance that this contractor
would.
Explain maybe the process you've
used to get to this point that
they did include.
The money was insured council
members my name is nancy villa
and dead director of energy
management in construction for
the guest independence for
district and her where me is
mississippi governor
so sees the pre intended for
support services
our presence to get our
contractors on these one west
and rf a request for proposal
we send it out we pull this two
days we have a police this when
or two days we actually have
worked contractor for contractor
soul on our premender to remedy
the private meeting so
once we are start getting close
to the delaying there was not
movement on the contractors or
so we also as the record to give
they have a receive any
questions but for these one in
particular
there were some
not questions so we decide also
tricks then one were weak where
the dulling and at the end we
just end getting one proposal or
a one contractor and we're also
facing this and the other
projects it's getting hard to
get a contractors in a know that
contractors are getting
having a hard time to get also
some contractors so I think we
are.
Other projects as well
if hope if I may.
Miss valley is correct
we're kind of in a in a unique
position where we're in between
last cruises you mexico and i'll
pessible texas and we compete
constantly for contractors in
that area
you may not know this but
episode other large school
districts have no parcel or
they have a lot of fun funding
with arplandine
their bonds are in the sixty to
seventy million dollar range so
they have a lot of projects as
well as house cruises lcps are
we constantly compete for
contractors
and it seems to be getting worse
there's a limit amount of us a
local subcontractors specially
the major ones like electrical
and plumbing etc so it's it's
been a problem and just minor
projects we had on the
maintenance side of this summer
we had probably twelve projects
planned and six of them were
cancelled because the
contractors couldn't take on any
more work.
So that kind of explains how um
in this project he as she said
if miss bella mentioned we
extended the deadline for the
for the bids and only received.
What is the time frame now that
you have to work with with this.
Well um as far as the
construction of the four customs
we do we are using or are are
prefending american recovery
funding as our match so that
money has to be are expended by
june of twenty.
So it's it's going to be a quick
eight month longer these costs
good for.
I i'm not sure how long they'll
hold the cost at that what they
bear I am I imagine not very
long but just because of the
nature of the beast construction
is just is it ready to go
otherwise yes.
I think we're at at the point I
was I would entertain to most
into approve the proposed.
That the staff has developed on
th.
Okay.
About five point two billion
dollars with the
project funding in the pipeline
we're just.
You know there's enormous needs
out in the state but.
At the same time there's not
enough.
You know supply to be able to.
Finding ourselves increasingly
in a a position unfortunately
unless we come up with some
alternative.
Had have approaches to this that
we're going to be paying you
know sometimes double for the
same kinds of.
That's my biggest concern.
You know we want accomplished
more with all this bound to form
revenue that we have in.
The.
A show me is voting now on this
when mr chairman.
Do diligence
and the.
Voting noted so it re.
You know the other.
Site to this problem is th.
We prioritize public school
construction
there's highway construction
there's a hospital construction
that all of these contract.
Again maybe a lfc
could prioritize.
The other.
Thank you
provide a comment before the
voter not that specific to this
particular project which
but but back to director soles
comments we've talked about this
several times and four council
we've talked about it and
subcommittee I know the LFC
nearly a sea has taken a look at
this we really do have to look
at some strategies.
I think we all share that
concern and we should do it very
and swiftly because we have in
our long list of needs around
the state I believe cid was
gonna also look at the modular
housing piece which i'm hoping
they have that under way and so
just again that we need to work
together across
across agencies with their with
their industry partners and with
the yelling aids to figure this
out otherwise we will have a
great deal of need that will not
be able to be addressed and
that's absolutely not what w.
As you probably know the
oversight test force also looked
at it and brought in.
I hope that we can develop.
Alright unless there's further
discussion all those in favor of
approving the motion please in
the cape by saying I I although
suppose time
and was that
mr
yes mr chair I think we finally
got the audio technical issue
fixed
and was or you voted with which
we were you voting on that
in favor in favor okay the
record will reflect thank you
thank you very much.
The.
Okay next item is
you'll be
a school district
in its uh
restaurant of the psyo.
Yeah yes
thank you mister chairman thank
you for the staff very much for
your
continued work on this project
really appreciate your work
where the school district in our
questions with this
the word subcommittee does
recommend approval
for the council to reactivate
earlier on standing awards
standards based award from two
thousand and twelve and this has
to do with the renovation of a
lot of the elementary school
beginning with simply design
funding and
it's a total five hundred and
ninety two thousand nine hundred
dollars a state match of
three hundred and eighty
approximately sixty four percent
local match of two hundred and
thirteen or thirty six percent
but we have some particular
information language that's
associated with this approval of
this motion.
First is that a upon completion
of the design face work the
district.
May return to the pseus here the
council for out of cycle
construction fees funding but
they must also perform a school
utilization study as part of
this design.
We're particularly concerned
about a
leveraging the amount of space
given the population of the
school districts the second is
that the release of construction
funding
attached to this design funding
is contingent on the council
review of both that school
utilization
and cost information at the time
given this discussion that we
continue to keep having and
terms of doubling of costs and
everything else that we're
seeing
thank you mister chairman okay
thank you
like to at anything
thank you mister chaired thank
you director warrant
I think she summarized pretty
well just as a little backdrop
we we in the district grass to
go back and revisit the number
to see if we could bring a
reduced cost
unfortunately because of
everything we know at the time
I could not recommend that to
the district that we reduce the
cost of this however I
understand that concern and
therefore we've put these
contingencies in place to make
sure that we're doing what's
needed in order to shore the the
facility app
but but keep it with them keep
it within reason if you well.
Martinez is here for miscreal
and are there an agreement with.
Mr chair members all that
superintendent speak for herself
but in my discussions with
espinola staff there they're
understanding of what we're
asking.
Good morning
good morning thank you mister
chair members yes we're an
agreement with the contingencies
as you've stated
so we'll ring that back to the
council for your approval and
will continue to work with piece
of fa.
Yeah.
The.
It's static
what could you please dis.
So i'm new to this position arm
i've been the superintendent
starting your two I know when
they did start mister gented
come to me and he says you know
you have some outstanding of
words and i've tried to do some
research to find out what that
the rationale behind that I
believe at one point there was
discussion of trying a wanting
to maybe reached.
Close the school down and so
though a school district had
gone in that direction they were
not successful with that and so
they've decided to keep the
squad on fan
they have not also the school
district has not gone out for a
bond so we have passed the
resolution to i'm gonna for
about this year and so we are
looking at putting that in the
ballot in november and so of
course this is this project is
contingent on that also and
getting the find approved.
And so I think that was the
rationale the didn't have the
funding to be able to support
the project and so now they're
trying to move forward in that
and they do understand that
there is a need for that but we
did have a high turnover of
superintendents and personnel
and so
that's my best guess in the
research that i've done mister
might be able to offer some
mother ideas as to why but I
don't have another reason how.
Thank you I think she explained
it pretty well and it's sort of
in a nutshell it was a change in
priority at.
Also the
the reaction from the parents in
that didn't in that area.
Came to bad the
and even passed about issue with
the understanding.
Would come out of that bond
issue.
The condition of the school
certainly warrants improvement
though students in that area.
Good facilities a good learn.
The current board has recogni.
The.
Yeah.
I'm sorry but I would.
I do have diffic.
The district.
The.
Could have done this project and
the decided they were closer
school down and the rental
pressure.
Cause the
president to re evaluate that
they didn't get it done in time
I just feel like there needs to
be some.
Guidelines on how we can not
have this happen again I don't
know if we could say that the
new board things are different
but I mean there's a track
record that is unfortunate
and i'll leave it at that thank
you thank you
thank you mister chairman and
thank you for that member in
them I feel like there's there
is a lot to the story and I want
to recognize superintendent for.
Continuing to serve for two year
inner spanial and part of this
is the what she described in
terms of turnover and leadership
so
both in terms of the board is
turning but the superintendent
is turning and when there is
that amount of
turnover it impacts the entire
community
so there is mixed messages and I
hear what you're saying and I
also feel like it's on to some
extent the movement now to
actually reconcile this and move
forward as a as a positive sign
on the part of the district
particularly and they we need I
think they do need to focus on
this school and find some sort
of.
Movement lack of a better word
they have to address it because
there are host of schools and
especially school district that
need attention and this one is
above them in the line of the of
schools that need to be
addressed so the high school the
several elementary schools that
need attention so in order to
actually address the schools
that really do need it
addressing as well I think
moving forward and proactive
with space is a good thing and I
really recognize ryan and the
staff for continuing to work
with.
Thank you mister chairman how
many students are doing the
school so currently they are
fifty eight students.
And it's it's a design capacity
is for how many.
The.
Though that one was for a
believe a hundred and twenty
nine twenty five students and so
that's why the red design will
help us
go that down and be able to have
more of an adequate number to be
able to how far away is the
nearest other elementary school
seven miles.
Um
what is your
capacity for like three and four
year olds in the area.
School district envision
expanding to the like creak for
I don't know if there's.
Currently we have four precase
centers there is one that seven
months a seven miles way they
have some enrollment still ydi
also had a read I think well
right the same property as the
elementary so but they haven't
been able to find a teacher so
that's why disabled center was
servicing the.
Thank you mister chairman and
directorsly I think you actually
bring me up of an interesting
point we didn't think about in
terms of requesting for the
eurostation erms study to that
end or to that point in terms of
population
and the needs of the distracting
um that school with the school
for seven miles away but I
wonder i'm not sure if you can
include in their utilization
study some sort of
look at pre key as well in that
that might be helpful.
Just recognize the
this has been a challenging
project for a long time
basically.
Politically not being.
That's where we've got this.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you
the additional comments are
questions
if you chair me.
So maybe we could just be.
The.
That we.
Think he missed return in
article the distriction perform
district why do you realization
study including.
As part of the design fees so
just brought in that to includ.
To that point so.
We have a revised motion in some
other comment make one question
this is going to be unpopular
but is it still on the table to
close the school
now the board has decided that
they're not going to close the
school.
Even regardless of the
utilization study.
That's though I will take that
information back to them.
They didn't say no matter what
but I will take that information
back to them so i'll present the
utilization study to them before
I bring it back to the council
and that we will have their
feedback as well and mister
chair if I may just make one
comment that is not a decision
that this membership makes is
closing a school that's we leave
that to the district and to ped
we're here to we're here to fund
and build schools so i'll just
make that statement thank you I
appreciate that as you know they
keep director of the new mexico
school boards associates and
that is a local decision and.
I think that the utilization
study will help them in their
decision so
mrperiod terrify my just a
circle back on one same director
silly asked it's the original
was for a hundred and forty five
students there was a significant
building addition associated
with the original project.
We are we staff recommended to
the district that they work on
fixing the existing facility
there won't be any expansion
it's just a renovation project.
And just a circle back on.
The belonging meaner went off
sorry
if I if I can mr chair just one
last comment
when superintendent martinez
came and said we have a lot of
need at the district it was
staff's recommendation just as
was mentioned that we we work on
these projects that were already
in the queue and then we can
come back and and start working
on their list of priorities
and again these projects are
based on the facilities
condition index it is still
ranked very high and we need to
ta.
The lists get to that point in
i'll lose in favor of approving
the amended recommendation
please in the cake by seeing I
although suppose.
Again thank you.
Sometime in the future with the
nice utilization plan thank you
mister chairman members I do
appreciate it.
All right
just have one more on the agenda
but I didn't realize we had two
ages
okay and this one is very
important item
from a numeral seven office of
broadband access access and
expansion funding requests
mr chair members
would you care for the
subcommittee chair to read the
potential motion.
The.
Okay
mr chair and council
the potential munch motion is
for the council to approve the
if I twenty four funding request
from the office of broadband
access and expansion oh by for
schools
in in an amount to be determined
by the public school capitally
council the staff recommends.
Six million
the toral mount leave to article
to read its about six mile and
you can see it on page two sixty
four.
Uh did not request six million
they requested nine point nine
million but we're
i'm going to recommend that we
do approve the six million
however i'm also going to
recommend that we
have this reviewed by the
attorney general's office for a
couple of reasons at the first
is that.
What marty staff and the public
school cap facilities thirty
found was that some of the
requests out of the nine point
nine million were perhaps
inconflict with the anti
donation clies there are three
pieces of the anti donation
cause that are up for
consideration
which is a while that we need to
have this reviewed by the
turning general's office the
first is that the funding could
potentially serve students who
are indicated
or at risk
particularly in terms of
internet services to home the
second is that in terms of anti
donation clause
it could benefit the state
inevitably in terms of
educational outcomes of students
and communities including
economic development as well as
a community health.
The third is a subsection each
of the anti donation cars which
allows for the state to provide
essential services
or families and community
members most importantly however
I feel like we need to have the
attorney general's office to go
ahead and review this as well in
terms of the other funding
that's requested because
couple of things there's
attention or an identified
difference between legislative
intent in terms of senate bill
one forty four potentially we
don't I don't know i'm obviously
not a light lawyer but the
legislative intent behind that
drop out piece of legislation
and
the anti donation cause and and
so that's one piece of this and
the second most importantly open
to my mind is that the merciness
in yazi consolidated lawsuit and
the motion that was filed.
Um and then.
Supported in terms of providing
technology and services to the
students.
That I think
i'll turn it over to the staff
well if I could at this point.
It may be we'll wait till.
Makes their statements but we do
have mister bersiaga on the line
we've asked to look at that as
an attorney as well.
Let's let's hear from the staff
first and then we'll call on
mis.
Mrperiod chair members thank you
if you turn to page to sixty
four you'll see the executive
summary for this iran
director one amendment has
covered the majority of it I
just wanted to mention from the
key points that all by is
requesting nine point nine
million from the public school
capital out they fund and
pursuant to section twenty two
twenty four just four point five
ten million of the pseo.
Fund can be used for education
technology infrastructure the
efficiency corrections in
accordance with the guidelines
established by the ps.
However.
Of this request
the request is were fourteen
items and yesterday recommends
all for a total of six point
thirty six point six million
so other fourteen.
Three are not recommended for
approval and those these are the
following and one is to pay for
service for at risk students at
home the request without is ten
million and you'll see below
that
why we don't recommend it
this request is contrary to
section fourteen of article nine
of the numerous school
constitution commonly referred
to is the anti donation class
then the other request if we
turn.
Turn the page to sixty five this
is for connecting students for
infrastructure build and service
and that is for two million and
that is contrary to the anti
donation class
and the other one is for a
continuously.
Um which provides reimbursement
for her the memorandum of
understanding
but I also like to point out on
page to sixty five the list of
permissible items that is going
to be approved today or
considered and one is for cat
one fibre.
And cat two equipment state
share.
Network management services
several security services
state right education network
committed internet fees too.
State wait at a cursion network
last mile circuits phase two
you rate support for charters
and small districts.
State white erates a port and a
eighty eight contract labor for.
Project managers that work at oh
by
we have provided the request
from directors legal on page to
sixty seven with the request for
the nine point nine million if
you look at page two sixty eight
you'll see the details about
every request it is asked for
today and you'll note that where
we have the zeros.
And then we also have exhibit d
unpage to seventy which is a
memorandum from ps staff
attorney this month martinez
explaining a
responses to the questions at
this committee has asked with a
recommendation for this to have
further review they either the
state ethics committee but in
this instance the recommendation
is to h.
The remaining
the request related to internet
services a.
Mr chair and members.
The.
I think it's pretty clear
the recommendation is to approve
them the majority of these items
except for those that have there
is a question to know and.
Statement here maybe that's on
page two ten
seventy
they feel it might it is legal
but in terms of
the advice we're getting from
band council and our legal
council.
That is not that clear so i'd
like to go to
unless you want to add some.
Sorry mister chairman the one
piece of this that's not related
to
seeking guidance from legal
counts was contingency
and so I would entertain I would
I would say that might be
appropriate to actually support
continuing.
But again maybe that's part of
the discussion I just don't
think it's part of the.
Let's hear from room if you're
a.
Available.
And can hear us.
Mr chairman can you hear me
yesterday go ahead great thank
you
so.
First time I want to state that
I am
not speaking on behalf of the
legislative council and not
speaking on behalf of the entire
public school capital outlay
council i'm speaking on behalf
of myself as one of the council
members
I was asked to look at this
issue as to whether the um
the request for mobile for those
three issues are allowed I
focused on just the internet
service provided to students not
the contingency
it is my opinion that runs a
foul of the anti donation class
I know that both.
It's been a bill one forty four
and the recent
constitutional amendment to that
section our house
resolution one from a couple of
years ago or last year had
brought up the start first with
ten of bill one forty four I
think it's important to note
that that bill was an active
before the constitutional
amendment passed
so I don't know that we can look
at the intent of one forty four.
In terms of how it deals with or
it looked at under under the.
Anti donation clause again it
was passed in twenty twenty one
the bill really deals with
infrastructure and I think it's
important to keep that in mind
his infrastructure I think it
needs to be looked at in terms
of a system
the water wastewater systems
for energy say an
energy grid electrical grad
turnet I I would say is a bout
broadband capability that that
successful ball and the people
can obtain services prominent I
don't believe that was an ended
for providing service to
individual household so without
a move over two hours joint
resolution one
and that was from twenty twenty
two I think there's something
that is very important to note
is that when that bill was
introduced
in the text not bill excuse me
it was a joint resolution when
their dreamt resolution was
introduced boost
use the term providing but the
purpose of providing essential
household services that was
changed to
purpose of providing.
Services i'm merely for
residential purposes then the
term household was taken out a
couple of subsequent references
so that it talked about
essential services and at the
end of that particular provision
in house joint resolution.
One which is a subsection age
of.
That part of the constitution in
fines again infrastructure that
allows
for g water at wastewater other
services as provided mark.
And i'm gonna be further from
the subsection.
It has to
be implementing legislation.
Jell provide for accessibility
to essential services primarily
presidential purposes and
includes safeguards to protect
public money and other public
resources used for for the
purposes authorizing the
subsection so even though it is
talking about residential
purposes it's not time but
household services for say but
rather access and again I think
infrastructure becomes very
important
additionally senate bill one
forty four which was enacted the
year before has nothing in there
it doesn't include anything
about safeguards to protect the
money or the resources which is
part of the constitutional
requirement are for implementing
legislation or first ability to
essential services.
I think a mister chairman
members those group.
Primary concerns and looking at
this I actually had a little bit
more
extensive notes that I had taken
but unfortunately I left those
on my desk and I developed it
was cracked he throws why wasn't
able to attend the date
didn't want to get anybody else
i'll leave it at that mister
chairman thank you.
Thank you mister
we appreciate your taking a look
at this I know you've been out
of the office somewhere thank
you for taking the time so
far there any questions at this
point already comments.
The.
Mr chairman were there any
negotiations with the bright
band office about.
Dropping some of the use and
move of potential other project
needs.
Chair
mr silly.
All of this information was
shared with directors legal
for her review and discussion
and she we did not ask if th.
Request in the.
The.
Mister sligo I mean directors
are leave
she was she believed that the
request were permissible.
Then.
I guess I just question why
we're doing why we would.
We're not entertaining it right
now because of the this legal
question but just from why are
we doing this question.
Paying a subscription for.
The.
While does twelve hundred.
This video have any reaction to
being able to like negotiate
getting.
Fibre in the ground or access
versus paying starling
subscriptions
so mister chair I I don't have
any insight on that I don't know
by stephane here I think it
would be helpful that I think
that's missing from this
conversation is hearing what
they have to see
but to your point.
You know if they're other
aspects of the project that
could be swapped at not holding
up the project for some for
external reviewers or whatever
the case may be I think that
that definitely warrants a
conversation between psop and oh
by.
The.
But again if if if obay staff
are here.
The.
Mister chairman members of the
council good morning thank you
for this opportunity my name is
overdue of your economic the
broadband manager with the
public school facilities
authority broadband team with me
here today is a venessa willick
general council for the office
of broadband access and
expansion in quickly on
addressing your question about
why i'd like to give just a
brief background.
The psy broadband team has
worked on bradbean expansion for
the last nine years under this
council's guidance pretty much
all the schools have accept
access to skillboy
infrastructure which is a
tremendous feet it's very few
states actually can claim that
we are ninety nine point nine
percent in infrastructure
skillboard infrastructure
available to public schools and
most likely we're going to to be
one hundred percent in the
coming months
so
for the last two years our team
has been focusing on building on
this work taking the next step
in that is to leverage that
infrastructure to connect all
the schools together into the
internet that is the steel
education network and I am
pleased to announce that that
project is progressing and it's
we're likely to have the core
network
functional by the end of this
year and by the way that the
equipment that you heard about
in the past at was uh ordered
last december is scheduled to
arrive next next month making
that that possible.
So in order to get all the
broadband work done in
coordination with the officer
broadband through an mo our team
merged with the office of bright
band earlier this
this year in march continuing
the work that we were being
focused on connecting the
schools bettering that the
connectivity available for
schools but also looking at the
other requirement from senate
bill one forty four which is to
make sure that the service is
available to students are in
that can be accomplished in in
various way.
So currently the office of
brubby and access and expansion
is working with the public
education department the early
childhood and higher education
you'll eyes in gear funding to
develop five broadband projects
that aren't going to connect
students because that is a
priority there are still
approximately forty thousand
students who are not do not have
access to reliable connectivity
today right now and that is what
we have to to correct as quickly
as possible i'll give you an
example one of these projects is
mounting
antennas and electronic
equipment on a tower david skied
elementary school south of
gallop and that infrastructure
is similar to the two million
dollars line item that was in
the request the equipment
equipment infrastructure that is
going to be mounted on school
property.
At the school sight but is going
to connect students to the
internet students who do not
have access to the to the
internet at home so paying
unfortunately ebay does not pay
two
to establish that connection to
this equipment in this is what
the one million with pay for.
So pay for that connectivity at
equipment at the school site
that would provide students with
internet access when they are
off the school property likely
in their house is not for these
households it is for these
students
so
here i'm going to turn it over
in one thing that I would also
like to mention is that the
officer brought me in accessing
expansion actually as to how the
money in the bank that is a dfa
requirement before any contracts
for this type of work actually
take place so that is the reason
why the officer broadband is
asking for this funds to be
transferred to the office of
broadband so it is able to move
this this work forward so I
would conclude with saying that
the officer brought me with
entering tane other types of
projects yes this is not a
viable use for the funding we
are absolutely intended to to
stay within the the requirements
of the legal language but at the
same time we understand that
connecting these students is the
high priority and we'd like to
proceed with that work if it is
allowed by by current legal a
language in the most expeditious
fashion possible and I will take
turn it over to miss williak to
explain that the rationale
behind our belief where the
offset broadband's belief that
this isn't acceptable use for
this funding to connect these
students
so thank you chair and members
then as a lock as that.
You know the purpose behind the
ask I think.
Very well right when we're
talking about senate bill one
forty four.
It's our position that although
it was a your prior to the
constitutional amendment it is
still legislation that was in
place that satisfies the
triggering requirements of the.
Especially when we look at what
that.
I mean it was passed on an
emergency.
Behind the legislation was that
this is a necessity right we
need to get this
to be part of the to be part of
the infrastructure that we're
talking about
and and this needs to happen
quickly we have the aussie
martin
technology order as well great
we felt all of that please.
Houses you know both chambers of
the house voted on the.
Leave that establishes.
And so you know we believe with
all of those factors as we look
at that in the totality that
this satisfies a triggering.
I'm just trying to keep it very
simple very basic.
That is enough.
And we sample question what we
appreciate your
hearing near your presentation
and your basis I think that.
Want to make sure to move these
requests along quickly and
anything that there's not a
question that we act on that and
get that money in your council
you can start spending it I know
that the.
The.
So I guess the quote the
question is now
do you want us to pursue this
further with the
I think the recommendations
we've gotten from our staff and
from our council members is to
clarify this through the
attorney general's office if you
want to pursue it that way or do
you want to pursue substitution
that your request for something
that is not.
I think that that's the point
we're at unless then the
completely b.
So mister chair just
thank you for that for getting
clarification and and they're
what they would like to see I
just want to go back to it only
had mentioned
me it sounds like there may be a
misunderstanding about the
project itself if we are.
Installing with the million
dollars being requested and
stalling equipment on to a tower
located honest school and not in
individual homes.
I i'm i'm not clear how that
triggers an anti donation issue
so I think that that's worth
clarifying as well and and then
I really appreciate you asking
the office what you know what
they would like to do in terms
of looking at other potential
projects that we could swap out.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mister german just to
clarification that I was talking
about the two million dollars as
the cost to install
infrastructure in tennis in
equipment and that is the type
of of project that is likely to
happen now these projects are
going to be different there they
don't look like they depend on
the situation at every single
given sight.
What is that the type of
solution that is going to be the
most if cost effective to to
connect these students we cannot
predict in advance
these these projects are going
to be at this first throughout
throughout this state wherever
the forty thousand students are
going on by one so again in the
in the case what we can base our
our recommendations is the fact
is the projects that we have
developed to date in that those
projects they example those I
was given is installing antennas
in connecting those antennas to
to electronic equipment into the
internet to serve the students
that are in the david skied area
most likely we're going to have
similar projects in other
locations and that is what we're
basing our our request for is we
have to estimate how you know
how much is going to cost that
that service
it is again and estimation
we we can bring back to this
council
actuals whenever these projects
are fully developed um and
they're going to to be developed
one by one
using the template that was
developed through this year
you're funding but most likely
the infrastructure there is a
big portion of infrastructure
expense there that is likely to
be installed on school or
otherwise property are some of
the nodes related to the state
of education network or higher
education institutions are as an
example so those those would be
another locate potential
location where this
infrastructure equipment could
be installed based on that two
million dollar estimate to
connect the number of students
that are lo.
So it appears that there's gonna
be some additional
communication in.
Maybe negotiation required.
So I think if we can.
Or staff to work with.
Verification that can clear up.
And that I do think we should t.
Thank you mister terminate I
agree with you I do have a
question about the contingency
funding and.
So.
We wouldn't fund contingency
when we're funding all of it
based on a reimbursement basis
correct.
Yeah.
Keep contin.
Are the contingency is there a
definition of what it could
include continuities or is it a
wide op.
Is your terrible members
typically
for school construction we build
a ten percent con.
Actually.
Costs as weight.
So would those costs come in and
say these are here's a request
for reimbursement should come
from our contingency fund or
this purpose.
Mr.
What they'll do and and uh
mislead or this remember might
be able to help me with this but
when they do
we have sign a contract with
send or
or do the sand note.
What it was for.
Have a quote.
Is I mean get to the point is
that is it a is the question on
the content what's included in
contingency or
is it that it doesn't
you don't have a items listed in
there.
Oh i'm not sure why you put it
up.
Mr chair members we put it out
because it would be actually.
That's what how much is.
Seven hundred thirty eight
thousand nine forty.
Yeah.
Is there.
Yeah.
It was.
With the reason we get away with
it is because it was when they
get reimbursed it's only
actually
and all of these you're on their
west.
But whatever.
Mr chair and think him sorry I
didn't have my mind on earlier
I think i'm trying to can
understand that too because of
retricacious is correct when or
by comes in for reimbursement
which is how we provide all
capital funding it will be with
an actual invoice I think the
the kind of the confusion here
is these are estimates and that
makes sense and I think the
council can approve the funding
with the estimates provided I
think the question is when the
actuals come in do we really
need a separate contingency or
amount or if the council
approved two million now I think
yes the the invoices come in
above two million.
Um that would maybe require an
additional action from the
council to see you know what we
originally provided funding for
has changed so you think it's
almost like a process question
here
I mean with the contingence the
amount that makes sense I think
the question and there was there
would have to be some level of
psfa insuring that any amount
above the estimates here that
they want that I would you know
tap that contingency has to be
tied back to some amount.
That could be the only way.
Streaming I believe there is a
misunderstanding because the the
previous allocation there was
dedicated to the steer education
network and in such a meant that
the funding was being
transferred to the officer
broadband account so the officer
brought men can actually.
Issue contracts against that
funding as they do not have also
breathing does not have money
dedicated to this work currently
and therefore the idea is that
this funding would be
transferred to the officer
broadband access in expansion
and the items that are listed
here would become projects that
the officer bradbeam would
absolutely come back to the to
the council in present on what
the actual costs were in what
the users of the the funny ended
up being including the
contingency so so that that
certainly it is how the process
is intended to work over the
money has to be in the office of
broadband account in order for
the office to breath into issue.
Basically contracts associate
with in a words to scores in all
the typical work broadband work
that that our team has been
going historically and we'll
continue to do
and we understand that that's
how was to work with
the one the question is the
unless if you want to continue
with that contingency amount I
think but at least have a
general description of what
you're going to be spending out
of your contingency on what
overruns on previous.
On projects that were already
approved or on activities that
were already approved but we I
think.
In just awarding a two million
dollars contingency is we don't
know what it's going to be spent
on but if you're clear on it's
going to be for activities that
were have been approved by the
council and I think we're okay I
think this true I believe it is
implied but we can we we can
certainly not in here that the
contingency is for any projects
any cost over rents for the the
the items the fourteen items
listed above.
The cat wine in the car two
state shares and disabled
security services and the note
to upgrade in so on to all the
projects there are listed in the
uses listed here up above the
continency is ten percent of of
mr chairman me to train help
provide some clarification so
if this funding is is approved
you know what will happen is
that obay would submit that
evidence of approval to dfa ds
will allow or by two budget and
spend against that budget so
that funding will be available
to them and it will go you know
by we'll have that authority to
spend however then or by one
thought to get reimbursed at
that time from the you know from
the board of finance with the
actual funding until there is an
invoice in place that there
would submit and there would be
approved to create that
reimbursement so they will have
funding to move forward with the
projects.
Through the budget the you know
budget approval they just want
them cells be reimbursed from
you know and I know it's kind of
like a movement of money but
they won't be reimbursed for
that funding I don't budget in
till
they submit the drastic
so it won't it but it's not a
it's not a disbursement to
obviously they won't just have
the money and then be able they
can spend it but they will have
to be reimbursed by the board of
finance once this invoices are
available.
The.
I think we're think we'll get in
there
so.
So I I do believe that.
Uh we're in a position to
possibly approve the contingency
amount today as well.
With that underst.
But I guess the only things that
there are still in question
hardly the anti donati.
You continue to work on those.
If you can't come to a
conclusion that we can go to the
attorney general's office for my
old decision or if you want a
substitute those for.
Run through the process more
easily.
Mr church's one last thing I
want to to clarify as well as
per the mo it's my understanding
that those draw request prior to
them come into the port of
finance will also be reviewed by
pstaff so it provides an
additional level of review to
tie the invoice and the draw
request back to the original
funding request you know since I
sit on the council on behalf of
the secretary it's nice because
I have that information but
where if I were not here and it
was someone else from DFA we
definitely want to make sure we
have that second layer of review
prior to.
So unless there's any additional
questions for comments.
I have just one additional
so mr chair council members one
thing to just kind of throw out
there that'll just confuse
everything right is is if the
movement of money from the board
to obye right.
That itself does not implicate
the anti donation class.
Right it's it's right that that
initial movement of money
threshold.
Moving that money into the
account of over.
That's our position at this
point right whether there needs
to be clarification on the use
of that money
is is another question and I
agree with you I think we agree
with you that we need
clarification from the ages.
Mr chair thank you I think.
We can certainly consider that a
little bit more in that argument
as part of this my concern is.
Um.
The.
You know the board of finance
provides its funding to the psc
upon certification by the psc
that it's done its due diligence
in its awarding of funding and
that that awarding that those
awards meet state law and other
requirements and so I think I
would have a concern if the ps
approved funding without doing
that do diligence because then I
think it would then come up to
the border finance to have to
start questioning the
certifications that the pse
provides for awards which I
don't you know what necessarily
go into but we can certainly
look at that and have bond
council and board council review
that further if we need to.
Okay.
It's an amended motion
right you missed chairman i'll
make an amended motion that the
council approved a total of.
Six million seven hundred
seventy five thousand dollars
eight hundred eighteen dollars
in two cents which includes all
of the items on the page two
sixty eight
including the contingency with
the exception of two items the
one million for
services were at risk students
as well as the two point two
million for connecting students
with infrastructure
and as you suggested that
in addition to this motion
asking the staff to go back and
work with or buy around other
items that the funding could be
used for or going to the.
Can I ask clarification please
have mister chair so we are
saying for them to go back work
together clarify what is within
the current though I then so
that everyone is on the same
page if at that time they're
concerned still that then they
can have the opportunity to
swipe swap out any items that
works for obay and that is in
compliance with
with this council.
And then at that point does it
come back to us like where how
does that I just I feel like
we're missing a step before we
ask for.
III think that if they swap it
out.
Then certainly come towards for
accident or next year but if
they can't come to agreement in
terms of what is allowable
that's right I understand is
that if they can come to
agreement of something else or
either agreement on the uses of
the funding or the agreement on
other uses of the funding and
then coming back for approval of
that that that takes care of it
they should only go to the
attorney general's offers they
want to pursue and are not an
agreement of these things which
given our legal counselor band
and then given what director
busy ida said
if if they want to pursue this
it might be who g.
And I would you know since we're
talking about I would discrete
check that'll take some time if
you're interested in in your
free not that those funds to the
move forward.
Thank you for the clarification
all right.
Anything else all those in favor
of the amended motion please
indicate by saying I i.
Motion passes and thank you for
being here and clarifying the
feature.
Thank you.
Okay we're on to informational.
Items
Thursday.
The.
Or.
The.
Yeah.
Yes.
Mr chairman.
Share members of your go page.
Passport the more specifically
future place you have three
what is up coming at the next.
If you don't
send.
Okay.
The.
You'll know that PED is.
Well um.
Yeah.
The.
Questions.
Briefly patient.
Yeah.
Requires.
It also regulates the design
construction strength ability
and buyer resistance or.
Yeah.
The.
A stick field house however the
appreciation is much slower.
Okay.
Mr can I just comment so if I
may
I think I imagine this at this
of committee you know asked
about you know my daughter and
actually had the opportunity to
attend a conference dealing
specifically with modular and a
kind of seems to be the trend
across the country that you know
everybody is kind of you know
shifting to a modular cousin you
know the cost you know the cuts
time and half and you know you
could you know
you know you know get into a
single family well in for
anywhere from a hundred and
fifty two two hundred and thirty
thousand dollars it just depends
so you know what I like to offer
is i'd like to facilitate you
know where I bring in somebody's
interest free people and maybe
in or talk about this are with
you all they now mention this to
a deputy super ten ambilious
wall also
to maybe you know talk about in
this you know in some of the
transitor out there some things
at other states are doing to
kind of bring this cost down our
teacher charles you may be
willing to do that and also
bring in the international court
console on that as well also
where they're a big application
in this right now and really
pushing hard on it so i'd be
willing to do that if you guys
are open to that.
Yeah
we go.
If yes they talked about you'll
be facilities looking at
utilization so the discussion
was how we should work together
and starting them.
The.
Potential award.
To see your heritage
want to make some comments.
Thank you for being here.
You said the whole thing so
tells me to come up
there
yes we did productive meetings
talking about the need or ask to
be in more police collaboration
as they get requests
we have all the data on not only
what schools are asking for in
terms of.
Also now the three year old.
Yeah.
We have a few meetings and
they've exchanged some data with
us to share how they use both
cobor data
projections.
What we've been using.
Only at the state.
My school district.
There's anything that you see
that we can be doing on a policy
level or otherwise.
There are you all have been
talking about the need or just
straight funding.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Requ.
So one say it's great to see ps
of day and the department
working together as we work to
expand
our pre cap programs throughout
the state I just want to
add to the the sort of call for
collaboration between the two in
that the department is really
looking at the full early
childhood system and has both
public in private
request in mind so just to
reiterate like it's really
important that the department is
able to share information and we
as we build out our.
Thank you
all right thank again thank you
for being here and
will keep going
said a f
yes and then there's a
project close up to what we'd.
Yeah.
The.
Is important.
The.
Thank you.
The.
So.
Next meeting and we we got a
concurrence on the next meeting
date of october with everyone I
know there was a survey going
out so
we all were able to agree on a
day.
Okay
already well again thank you
council members for a long
productive meeting I think we
got some money out there working
for the box and kids happy and
so I would attain a emotion to
address
we have a motion
second dollar.
