Twenty twenty twenty two I been
deficiencies correction program
or six technical correction to
the wording was changed
item F. was it is a special
budget request for cars and I
need to quit meant FY need is FY
twenty two PS Fe annual report
which is a draft which will be
approved by the chairs by email
for the final draft item H. is a
joint powers agreement for the
office of I and and the PS CYFD.
Mr chair members of these
Roberts who's the manager that
program with the presentation.
Mr chairman members and like to
draw your attention to the
executive summary on page eighty
six.
this is an informational item
and just quickly to summarize we
are here today to have the two
districts make their formal
presentations to the PS the OC
as you may remember we've had
applications open all year long
this is our final round of
awards that will happen in
January so the district
presentations are prepare for
the January awards we completed
the site visits for all
standards based applications at
this time and we're proceeding
with the applications and
potential awards for estancia
which has applied for instance
in middle school currently
ranked number sixty three which
is us to consolidate their
elementary school into one
building New Mexico walking
which is applied for Pojoaque K.
X. ray cat in need and Oaxaca
middle school ranked number ten
and six currently they're
requesting a replacement screen
to consolidate everything into
one facility.
We've also done site visits at
Hobbes and Rousseau in tier C.
we've determined that those
three districts are not ready
for an award due to funding at
this current time eligibility
for a waiver and we need more
time to work with those
districts to prepare for
potential awards.
any questions on that before I
would like to introduce the
districts.
Okay
Mr chairman members first up we
have a stance in middle schools
again they're requesting the
consolidation of their
elementary school and all
introduce Mister descends the
superintendents and her team.
Thank you.
Thank you for this opportunity
to visit I have Mister Randall
Riley my board president been on
the board for twenty two years
and then my finance director New
Delhi to Chennai.
So you had a looks like this I
just want to go over a few
highlights for you.
Hey you see on page three the
information about the age of our
buildings in our district what
we're going to talk specifically
about today is consolidating
Vanstone elementary built in
nineteen twenty one the lower
elementary built in nineteen
sixty six and the upper
elementary finished in nineteen
ninety six and consolidate those
three different campuses into
one campus.
If you look on the next page you
can kind of see the square
footage of the different
building.
What I really want to look at is
the page that shows the aerial
map so you can see what I'm
trying to address here and you
can see it on the top left hand
corner Vanstone elementary which
is comprised of six classrooms
of various sizes and then in a
full full time purpose room one
of those sunken ones build with
the stage on the top our future
use for that building will
become a community center we
currently have art music and P.
E. in that room and so our
students are walking out two
hundred yards from the upper
elementary to go over to art
music and P. E. advanced on and
from lower elementary so I have
all my pre K. to sixth grade pre
K. participates in music and art
and they're walking over to
Vanstone so my goal is instead
of having three different
campuses for my eight two
hundred and fifty elementary
students is to get a mall and
one project we've had some very
successful projects with at PS
that they and PS you'll see in
the past you can see those on
the next page they've all been
completed satisfactorily and the
thing that I'm most proud of if
you look at our ratings page is
that we have continued to
maintain that up keep and
improve the rating of our
facility master plan our
facility maintenance assessment
I know years here and Larry was
one of the first people I met
from PS that they when I became
superintendent in two thousand
nineteen Mr Chilton list like Dr
Sims you're gonna have to work
on that F. more score and so we
have really committed to that
you see that we have a one
hundred percent at the
completion rate on our
preventive maintenance and R. F.
more scores now above the state
average there's no way we can
continue to improve that F.
marsh for the elementary school
particularly in the lower
elementary need to new boiler
needs a new roof it needs.
Some structural work the windows
NET two doors all of which have
exceeded the life that that
building so what I'm requesting
is that we would be moving
everybody up into that upper
elementary school I've already
talked a little bit about the
elementary school campuses I've
slowly been moving people out of
the and stone since I got there
and and we consolidated into
lower elementary and upper
elementary for classrooms.
Problem is I don't have enough
space to move everybody up into
the upper so if you look white
consolidation of campuses really
looking to reduce and right size
our use of our facilities we
have fewer students at that are
required for the square footage
that we have and so what I'm
really trying to do is address
that issue that was identified
on our current facility master
plan by right sizing and
reducing that footprint our goal
would be to move everybody and
then demolish the lower
elementary school and get rid of
all that square footage will be
to decommission and demolish
that building when worked at and
then I really want to bring
children under one roof to
promote safety and address
security having kids spread
across three campuses every time
I go into a shelter in place
every time we go down into a
lock down which we just had a
few weeks ago and I have one
administrator located in one
building trying to address the
needs of students and three
different buildings and then
because of our focus on
instruction I really want my
teachers to be able to plant
collaboratively we do that in
the library.
If we had each other all in the
same building and make it a lot
easier.
What you can see on the
foot print of the map that looks
like this you can see in green I
have to empty classrooms.
If you look in the right hand
side right now I have three
kindergarten classrooms and that
has been the scene of for the
last four years I have three
kindergarten classrooms that has
been the same for the last four
years I have three first
creating we bounce up and down
between two and three depending
on that and Raul but with that
classifies maxing out at twenty
one.
So I need those providing L. as
special ed room I need a speech
and language and we have a full
time speech language therapist
that serves pre K. and
kindergarten first second grade
need space for them I have a
full time occupational therapist
again pre K. kindergarten first
second grade the nurse's office
I don't have a peer center but
I'm using that for Vanstone once
I knew of art and music out and
so I have a need for eight to
thirteen classrooms I would hate
to I would hate to build to the
small number we have no
portables so I go above two
teachers per grade level I won't
have space for and that's the
range of eight to thirteen
depending on my funding
that does not get
my mic P. E. my music or my part
out of that far away building so
I'm also requesting a waiver
that would exceed what our
current split is to be able to
build an art music P. E.
facility adjacent to the
existing one and the need for a
playground we would data pre K.
playgrounds and we would need
to.
Redo the existing playground
depending on the footprint.
The next page talks about the
project design I think I've
already explained that for you
you can see the scope an
estimated cost of the project
the board has passed
successfully a bond election we
have also set aside some
unrestricted cash and have six
thousand six million one hundred
and twenty to throw the project
and then with the state match
and you can see our estimated
total.
For this project and the next
page talks about our finances
you can see that we have one
point six million in
unrestricted cash and that's a
lot to be carrying we've been
diligent in saving to satisfied
for this were small district our
bond capacity will not call for
our portion and so we've been
diligent in trying to save up
for this rainy day when we were
eligible for this project to
supplement the project as well.
our audit findings we had to one
qualified audit findings in
twenty twenty that were resolved
we just completed our twenty
twenty one we had one and
qualified on a finding which I
feel confident we'll be able to
resolve international.
That's the that's the project in
the down and dirty what
questions do you have for me
regarding our project.
The.
Not this have anything to add
except we're looking at
unfortunately all school
districts are in the dilemma of
safety in our top priority
because of.
The school incidents that
occurred at fortunate we never
want to occur that on our
districts with our districts in
three elementaries in three
different sites this will help
bring it to one side not that
he guarantee the prevention but
it fit it's more obtainable to
secure one side security I
believe then it is three
individuals that spread out so
for the safety of our students
in our district we really would
like this to.
Be able to do this to for the
students of our district.
I do not have anything to the
stand for questions that.
Yes.
In your presentation of the
material we were given you
didn't I don't think addressed
it directly about a possible
waiver.
In looking at it I understand
you don't have a whole lot of
bond capacity left at this point
about three million dollars you
have about a million and a half
in reserves.
If your questions six million
plus then you're about a million
and a half short if my math is
right
Are you looking for a waiver
possibly for that or would it be
for an additional amount and if
you could before you answer that
also address what your current
mill levy is and this stand to
school district.
Okay so I talked a little bit
about the way for I'm gonna let
her we've and.
Go ahead Mr chair and members
we've talked with the district
about the potential for the need
for a waiver and what we've
determined is the district has
sufficient funding to fund phase
one further planning and design
funding and a half which point
once that is done we plan to
reconvene figure out all these
potential legislative
initiatives take effect which
will drop their local share
significantly in which case the
district will probably be able
to fund their share it depends
on some design decisions that
need to be made on what we're
going to include with the
project or not with the project
so currently the mill levy for
the district is eight point zero
seven eight
they do meets eligibility for
the option to stature
requirements for a waiver there
ma'am is currently below eight
hundred five seven from sorry I
forty seven they have a nine
percent free or reduced lunch
there state share is now fifty
one percent and there mill levy
is above seven so they are
eligible for the school district
she had all those magic numbers
that I could hold in my hand and
I would just add to that so when
we talk about projects our
priority are that the
educational the classroom spaces
additional to the classroom
spaces are the GM the are in the
music room and that's where I
think a waiver might come in
because I don't know that the
project as it stands with the
twelve million what the fund
that as well.
Thank you.
One solid said.
It's just the elementary
questions.
The.
We'll still keep them separate
Mr Qian and so when you look at
this map we have these three
buildings.
Vanstone lower and upper
elementary that are all separate
elementary buildings and our
goal is to get him all under the
big group.
With a little bit more added on
at upper elementary.
They will maintain a separate
Maury to middle school you can
see that on your mac and then
high school will be into the
separate high school.
Mr chairman members of any.
The plan of the.
At the now.
The doctor this.
Yes it is to
Do some additions to the left
portion of the building the the
library is kind of a I was W.
shape over almost about six
thousand square feet that's
excessive that is way larger
than adequacy all four and so
superintendent Senators idea is
to renovate that libraries to
make a smaller library and then
build classrooms within that
space and then on these two
triangles that she's outlined in
red which have a roof and a slab
currently to build those spaces
out with in addition to that
square footage for those
additional classrooms.
So if we if we can maintain if
we can maintain our addition
under the existing roofline I
think we can save a lot and it's
already got the slap and no
foundation issues there the
question will come down to the
architect and the design and how
much they can capture out of
that and how many classrooms
it'll actually give us to get us
towards that list on the right
hand side when we only have two
spaces that we can draw from.
We have in the bottom right hand
corner of that state page it
says tax staging we have our our
servers and our and our tech
guys health and there we could
move them to a different
location and capture a third
classroom but those are really
the only the three spaces so
with the rest of those eight to
thirteen classrooms we're
thinking we can recapture out of
that library space the other
thing that I like to point out
one of the things we talked
about with DFA's would do the
walk through we have exceedingly
wide hallways that there's no
easy way to recapture that
hallway space and we have twenty
nine hundred square feet just on
that library side and then sixty
eight hundred square feet
because we really had they were
built wide enough to put locker
shelves in but it's in
elementary school and we don't
have lockers so we can't
recapture that without it
breaking into every classroom
in that's not logical either.
The.
I've been because I had a very
aggressive time frame was told I
needed to manage my
expectations.
You know I thought oh we can go
we can get an award we can go
out to architect they get that
designed and by then we're going
to break ground in may and have
this project next year and open
up a new school for twenty four
twenty five and I was reminded
that things do not move that
fast so you know it'll be slower
than that but hopefully still
ambitious.
Yes.
Mr Riley told them that you
don't know Dr Sims she's only
got one speed it's not slow.
So I have I'll manage my
expectations I don't want to run
anybody off of this you know
we're ready we have a plan we're
ready and we'll work with them.
Get it done.
Thank you for the opportunity to
come before you today and for
your consideration.
Yes Sir.
I'd be happy to at what can you
do offer a buildings if you want
to come down to sponsor away as
well lovely campus I think to
see you there.
Thank you thank you these.
And Mr chairman members we will
be providing more detail for the
PSA recommendation in January
when it's time to make the award
but but as of now PSA does
recommend the estancia project
for an award
in the concept of this project
is.
quite beneficial in the words of
the committee reviewed things
request.
Any other questions about
extensible remove on.
Awesome Mr chairman members all
present pool walking next
walking is requesting a
replacement screen for their
entire six grade and middle
school buildings which are on a
very large campus and many
different buildings that have
surpassed their functional
lifespan and is ready for
replacements I'll introduce the
superintendent Sandra Adams and
her team to make their
presentation.
Thank you
Mr chair members of the board I
would like to introduce Michelle
Ortiz she's our CFO Mr Gary
Johnson who's our head of
security Mr Ghani's had a
buildings and grounds we also
have
A doctor Morris who's our
associate superintendent and
miss Martinez who is our system
business manager I appreciate
you taking the time to to listen
to us today you have our
presentation before you
I want to talk about our
campuses and is this the screen
that looks like this import do
we have to campuses if you're
looking if you're looking at the
map of the campus to the west
are left is our high school
campus along with our elementary
and or intermediate we did have
a successful build with our
intermediate quite a few years
ago it has is our fourth and
fifth our elementary houses pre
K. through third grade and high
school courses night through
twelfth if you look at the small
rectangle on the right that is
our middle school campus and it
houses are sixth seventh and
eighth grade students and that's
the campus that we need to
address if you go to the next
page you'll see an aerial view
of this campus and you can see
it is considerably spread out if
you look at the building in the
top right hand corner that's the
main campus if you look at the
building in the top in the lower
left hand count corner that used
to be our sixth grade we have
move them closer into the other
students but just above that is
our jam and our cafeteria so our
students have to walk outside
all the way through it is not
landscape it is not pretty it is
gravel you see the big dark
square in the middle that used
to be an old adobe building
which we did get outside of
sufficiency impact aid to take
down as it was and saying.
but it is I quite spread out and
I'll talk about the individual
buildings a little bit if you
look to the right side of that
picture you'll see highway two
eighty five
and there's an overpass there
it's it's very concerning for
safety issues unfortunately we
do live in a world where we have
to worry about those things and
we're really kind of worried
that.
Somebody with ill will might
stop on the interstate and have
a direct shot right into our
campus so we really need to get
our students moved away from
that we do have a plan for that
we were actually doing what
through on Friday and heard a
tropical attire on the overpass
luckily it blew the top of the
front left tire and swerve
towards the middle of the road
instead of the five right tire
which could have sent it over
the embankment and into our
campus so it's a little bit
scary if you look at this we
have nine separate buildings on
this campus nine to maintain
line to keep state to
administrators so when we have a
lock down we have kids in
buildings with teachers but with
no administrative support in
those buildings so it's a little
bit little bit scary from a
security standpoint if you look
at the next screen the next
slide it shows you how these are
are laid out we have thirty six
classrooms in nine different
buildings plus
office space D. P. T. I'd center
if you look at the yellow
building on the lower left hand
side was our sixth grade academy
until this last year year and a
half we actually move those
students out if you look at that
building it has two single user
restrooms I'll be honest with
you if you were in there in
crutches are we using crutches
you probably couldn't get into
those restaurants and that house
a hundred and fifty students at
one time.
The students would have to go
out of the building into the
gymnasium to use the restroom.
If you look at the pink building
and with the kind of the all of
color to the right of it that is
our gymnasium and auditorium
we'll talk about those a little
bit better cafeterias right in
the middle so our kids have to
walk a long way from some of our
classrooms to get to the
cafeteria.
If you look at the angled
building its profits orange and
gray this building is one of our
oldest buildings it was
originally an elementary school
you'll notice it has six
classrooms one two three four
five six and I used to have a
part off the front of it the
part has been built in.
But it is falling off the front
of the building.
so it is it's it's a it's a
little bit and safe week we've
maintained at the best we can
but it is an old building
The next the next screen of
parking valley middle school
sixth grade academy is a
conglomeration of buildings on
one campus that date back to
nineteen fifty one
with several additions and
renovations between nineteen
fifty five in nineteen eighty
four it's located on at
seventeen ninety four state road
five oh two west so the east
side of the campus is on two
eighty five in the south side of
the campus is on five oh two
which is a website with roadway
to Los Alamos
the scope of the project that
we're looking at is to replace
all instructional buildings for
all grades six through eight but
we also like to construct the
teacher H. for employee housing.
currently of the middle school
is ranked at number six in the I
am a W. N. M. C. I. ranking and
the sixth grade academy is
ranked at number ten.
and then for the teachers we
have lost eleven teachers in the
last eighteen months due to
housing costs in the area and
I'll talk about that a little
bit in a minute.
On to the next slide the
estimated cost to replace the
two facilities of the sixth
grade academy in the middle
school is approximately thirty
three million dollars and that
will include construction soft
costs demolition reuse of
existing campus site and
renovation of the gymnasium the
tier two it would be a four
million dollar the cost and that
would include eight units six
three bedroom units and two two
bedroom units the teacher age I
would offer multi bedroom units
shared among single employees
and family housing and right now
we scramble to find help
employees find housing we have
to different situations for
employees are trying to make
ends meet and apartments in
Santa Fe and it's it's it's
really been a struggle will I'll
talk about that.
If you go to the next slide the
housing information currently we
have twenty nine percent of our
staff live in the parking area.
Twenty nine percent only so
seventy one percent live in
surrounding areas of our
teaching staff only eighteen
percent live there I lost eleven
teachers last year who
originally we're going to come
to work for us high quality
teachers that could not provide
housing or didn't feel like they
could afford housing in Santa Fe
and Dr of those eleven three of
them took jobs in Santa Fe after
they'd accepted with UPS so
we're losing teachers to the
Santa Fe area because if you're
gonna live there that's the only
place you can live then you
might as well work that we do
have some housing in Pojoaque
butterfly springs has an
apartment complex and a mobile
home units.
Calling them and Mr Johnson went
to see them today
to see what the waiting list was
like they won't even tell us the
waiting list is so far into the
future that they cannot give us
an estimated date of when a unit
will be available when I called
to try to get teacher housing in
the summer for new employees
there were over a hundred and
forty people on the waiting
list.
In Santa Fe there eighty two
currently open as of this
morning certified staff openings
if you're gonna live in Santa Fe
it's easier to work there are
cost you less to work there than
to drive to Pojoaque.
Espanola has seventeen certified
openings as of this morning and
lost almost I believe has to.
there are many more I As than
than teaching and admin
positions as well I didn't even
look at the number of I. A.'s
needed
our athletic director we offer
to for athletic directors in the
past twenty four months.
None of them could provide
affordable housing to move here
we lost out on all four of
those.
On to the next slide the
facilities master plan we knew
that we would have to do some
work on our facilities master
plan before we apply for this so
we took the extra time we needed
to make sure facilities master
plan was in place we've had a
new building for the middle
school on their for quite some
time but we wanted to make sure
we were we have all our ducks in
a row for this application
so that a facilities master plan
identified improvements with a
total replacement of these two
campuses for aging facility up
to seventy two years old in
different parts of it inability
to renovate and accommodate
instructional needs if you look
through the current campus you
will see surface mount
technology cabling you will see
surface mount electrical you'll
see surface mount intercom
system
it is a Cinemark building and
the only way to try to keep up
was to do service then we will
look at some pictures in a
moment.
safety and security which we've
already talked a little bit
about and technology are
NMCI scores RPV middle school is
at sixty one point six percent
and six great counties at fifty
one point twenty seven percent.
The next slide I want to talk
about the financial summary
we've been preparing for this.
For several years about three
years ago three and a half years
ago
walkie had a negative cash
balance and we have to address
that which we have worked very
diligently on we want again
wanted to make sure that we were
in a good place to be able to to
do to do this building at the
time of application the state
match was seventy six in the
district twenty four that since
changed but the district portion
would be eight point two million
we can bond for five point five
we currently have that we just
passed that last November a year
ago we also have a remaining
balance on our previous bond of
about one point one million and
we also can utilize some impact
aid which that's what impacted
was originally designed for was
capital offset so we have
capital out of cap impacted that
we could also put towards the
project we've been working on
teachers knowing that we we
haven't been able to get
teachers because of housing our
district match for that would be
about a million dollars and we
have secured about one point two
million dollars we believe on
that we have four hundred thirty
thousand currently and we've
asked for congressional funding
for seven hundred and fifty
federal congressional funding
for that.
If you look at the next page
ready access on that
this is the area of you again
the red aerials would be
demolished or completely re done
the the re done section is the
select between these two
buildings that's a cafeteria it
is not very wide it is very long
it is very hard to manage
student behavior is in there
because teachers are really long
way from there really isn't good
for that facility it was
originally kind of the entryway
into the gym or the auditorium
and it was re purposed but the
other red axes would be
completely demolished
the blue box facilities are
district facilities and they
would remain the yellow box
would be remodel along with the
little cafeteria in the middle
and the green box is a portable
right now we have a school based
health clinic in that portable
along with our nurse and it
would either be turned over to a
full school based health clinic
probably move to a better
location or where in
negotiations with west clinic is
still Norte who has our school
based health clinic to see if
they would offset the cost to
put it in inside the building so
we're we're looking at all
options on that.
If you go to the next slide this
is what we believe that we would
like to see our new building
look like
we have to live in this campus
if we when we build on this
campus because anywhere else we
can go so you can see the yellow
footprint there would
consolidate all nine buildings
into just to the main building
in the gymnasium
Our thoughts are that that with
this placement that it would
help us improve the top traffic
patterns and notice it gets just
a little bit further away from
two eighty five our students are
going in and out of buildings
between classes which gives a
safety
the students are not moving
between the buildings in the in
holding out it also means that
we don't have so many custodial
issues that when kids are going
in and out we have few of
buildings to maintain we have
room for our activities these
poor kids are still kids there
six something makers they have
no field to play on it's dirt
and gravel so we would be able
to put a field in and we would
have supervision between the two
buildings of the main building
in the gymnasium which makes it
a safer campus.
If you look at the next slide
you'll see the enrollment it has
gone down especially with COVID
but we always take a lot of
transfers in six of the ninth
grade a lot of students want to
come to parking at that age
level we are what we kind of
college drop off district a lot
of parents drop their kids off
on the way to Los Alamos and we
are seeing our our enrollment
kind of creep back up again if
you look at the next screen then
your next slide you'll see the
sixth grade seventh grade eighth
grade and their money is not
going to at all so what they are
maintaining
The next slide is our statement
of commitment we continue to
invest in the facilities if you
were to go walk through this
facility right now the first
thing you would see was if it's
all but the second thing that
CYFD is it's clean it's it's as
well maintained as we can do and
people are happy in that
building but it's really it's
really deteriorating
replacement of this bill
facility will ensure that
students at the pork belly have
a set safe up to date facility
in which to learn and grow
adding a teacher each allows the
district to utilize housing to
attract quality teachers we have
done what we can to maintain and
adapt the buildings but it's
time for something.
Our time.
I to like to be progressive and
I tried to dial this back I'm
hoping I'm in the ballpark we
would we would hope for an award
in January from you all we would
have architect selection in
February or March with the
building committee selection in
February planning start date
would begin in March planning
finish state we believe we can
have done by September thirty
first that gives us a good six
months to get that that
finalized start design start
date completion date and
construction dates to be
determined after that based on
I'm going up to fifty.
If you look at the next page it
starts our pictures the picture
in the top left is
Our.
Entryway at our middle school
it's not very inviting and it's
also not very set.
When you walk into that building
you probably have about fifty
feet that you could go into the
building another way and never
see the office but the FTP feed
to another direction before you
would see the office staff it's
just not a safe entry
you can see the bottom of the
eaves you can see the tops of
roofs I'm you can see that we
are not ADA compliant in any way
shape or form at this campus
almost everywhere you have to
step up or step down to get into
places at it's it's really
really concerning with eighty
eight.
the next to paid to slides are
additional pictures with our
classrooms it's our science lab
at our seventh grade.
They decided that the funding
was too hard to fix so they
point the mint on the pump down
tax so we have no science when
for our seven six seven some of
some of our seventh and eighth
but not R. six with some of our
state.
you can see that we utilize
every space that we can't for
whatever we need to.
I'm on the last screen you can
see some of our flooring and our
entryways and R. roofing
will just.
It was probably stated that when
it was built but that was
seventy two years.
Inclusion the students of
Pojoaque valley deserve to have
this facility where they can
feel safe can access
instructional resources and can
learn.
Staff of Pojoaque valley deserve
to have a facility that is
conducive to modern
instructional practices the
district has maintain and
utilize these facilities for
seventy two years and it's time
for a change it's time for
something new and exciting for
the students and committee and
community at the parking
dollars.
And I stand for questions.
One and.
Although I did that.
Chairman again members of as a
safety and security director for
the school district or also
retired Santa Fe police swat
commander so a retired of from
Santa Fe police with twenty
three years and I've been with
walking district for twelve
years and
During the past several years I
try to hold large scale lockdown
exercises I invite the New
Mexico state police Santa Fe
County sheriff of the I a
walking tribal police department
and other and other departments
that will come in and
participate with us we try to
make our drills as realistic as
possible and speaking with the
officers of who have commented
trained with our students.
The middle school is the most
challenging out of all of our
districts
and as as we go through the
lockdown procedures they have to
go and physically check and
clear every classroom and
believe me by the end of the
exercise these officers are
drenched right they they they
really they really work hard to
to do that just because we're so
spread out and the screen is
sold that
Every year that we do these
exercises they give me a laundry
list of safety things to work on
and and through the years we
continue to work on the safety
things but now it's getting to
the point to where on you know
it's it's really not conducive
to have a state modern safe
school environment and
So even you know any safety
upgrades that that we try to do
that are recommended to us you
know we have to really take a
look at because then you're now
improving school and which could
drop your rating down so so
those are very so from the law
enforcement standpoint the
safety standpoint you know those
are things that that that I want
to invite law enforcement back
every year in the fire
department back I've got to
mention we also work closely
with the Santa Fe County
emergency manager and and so
every year when I don't fix
these things up to up to their
part in I have a biological
explanation you know there you
know they they look at me with
raised eyebrows so
That's that's yet information of
I wanted to bring to.
Thank you.
State government.
We have a policy of housing for
our program but not for
standards based program this
presentation reminds me of the
need to have.
Such a policy
It also reminds me of the
challenges of doing housing.
With the P. SFA public school
capital outlay program there's
so many local variables like
zoning in water use in teacher
pay we start going down that
road is going to be a challenge
for you any that Mr chairman I
would hope that the
M. S. subcommittee will develop
a companion policy for standards
based point for housing as they
have for the grant program thank
you.
Yes and no.
Schools are seven years old
probably do need to be replaced
even if they've been maintained
and that the excellent manner
How many drop of students to see
how many you have twelve hundred
students overall
we we have the district thirteen
hundred sixteen hundred thirty
students as of yet at this
location on mill at this at this
location how many students do
have and how many or drop off of
of the Roman at this we have
just under four for just over
four hundred students at this
campus
I'd have to do some digging on
how many are drop off students
because some of the parents have
applied since kindergarten to
get into our our school and have
carried it through
but but I would I would just be
guessing if I if I guess the
number but I I would say
Probably around forty or fifty.
So about two classrooms worth of
correct but they're they're
spread throughout your different
grades not just all one great
correct are they
especially the southern side of
Santa Fe we have quite a few
from Los Alamos areas one I'm
not less almost a spaniel I'm
sorry Espanola area.
Do that what what arrangements
do have other other than the
student aid following the
students because again when
school district I'm just looking
at it.
From a perspective in one school
districts as we need to build
school buildings for the
students that are coming from
another school district.
But you don't get capital
dollars from that other school
district it's it's kind of I ask
the question why are you
admitting all the students I
know you're trying to be nice
but if you're funding is so
limited why are you if you bring
in these other students that you
don't need to when it looks like
you have about a three million
dollar shortfall in capital.
chairman and members of the
committee
we do not grow any classrooms
with transfers we just fill the
classrooms that we currently
have so with if I have a
classroom I'll just take
elementary because it's easier
to explain so if I have a a
third grade classroom that has
eighteen kids and and I could
have twenty two then we would
take like three transfers to
fill a classroom we we don't
ever create classrooms with
transfers we only feel current
classroom it's an excellent
response and I appreciate that
thank you.
They all high school and the
elementary school because the
angle building was in elementary
school at some point in time.
These
you want to build us a new one
you can come back and spend a
lot of.
Four
hundred.
Okay.
The.
And that's a good question we
will have to develop policy on
that
The number was calculated based
on space to begin with we
originally we're looking at
putting a teachers at the high
school campus it was going to be
pretty tight with this with this
consolidation of this we would
have more room
having lost eleven teachers this
last year calculating the number
of single individuals and have
and families this would have
cover what we would have lost at
plus one additional housing
units
the did the board would have to
come up with the policies to be
able to manage that we've
already looked at I don't see
Gallup and central consolidated
in their policies and how they
do that it would be free it
would they would have to pay
rent and the rent would cover
the cost of the the maintenance
person in the maintenance of
those facilities
we're just really struggling
competing with our neighbors
when when you live especially
young people.
They want to work close to where
they live and we did there are
there there is very little
housing available in parking
ever once in a great while we
might find a casita or somebody
who has a relative passed away
that they might be trying to
rent a home but it just isn't
enough to sustain our our
employees that we need to so the
district would have to come up
with the policies on on how you
handle that and there's a lot of
policies that we will have to
address including rent
extracurricular activities
honestly things like firearms
and alcohol because it is a
school campus and the the board
is ready and willing to step in
and do that we've already we're
working with the school board
association to replace our
policies and we will be working
with Mr Kennedy to develop those
policies as we.
Thank you you have any other
questions were built thank you.
Chairman of recommendations to
approve the Spanish based awards
Tomasello stripping your
elementary.
construction phase funding for
placement school for three
years of new kids grades pre K..
Of
space.
Grades pre K. to something or
other so what's that supposed to
be the six Mr Chairman strapping
through sixth grade K. through
six will make that change up to
the maximum allowable gross
where footage of fifty thousand
four eleven with an increase in
the state match of seven point
five million twenty percent of
course but the local which
makes.
Mr chair members of the Stewart
Mr parks if he has anything to
add and I'd also like to come
and that the district is here.
Mr Chairman have a comment if if
we could.
Correct yes we can do this
quickly.
Anyway three the reason this
isn't on the consent agenda this
is a good project it's a good
cost testament get double.
We went from three hundred
dollars in very well numbers to
six hundred dollars is what the
is that a better estimate right.
Cepeda's Mr chair Mr Abbey this
is an estimate from the general
contractor Mr parks gave us half
a dozen reasons why the cost
went up so much and I think the
what's of committee found a
convincing but I think the
thinking was the full counselor
here the reasons for the cost
escalation with that this
project.
The Mr chair members of I'll
keep my comments brief and if
you do have questions I'm happy
to answer anything but real
quick on the key points the
districts selected construction
manager at risk which is a
little different than a
traditional design bid build
project where the general
contractors brought on board
early in their part of the team
is committed design.
This project is currently in
design development going into
construction drawings and that
is the estimate that we have in
the boxes the design development
estimate from James corporation
and as Mr Abbey mentions when we
first when this project was
first brought to the council it
was the state match out here was
four and a half million and
that's that's raised up to about
seven and a half million it is
almost double the cost per
square foot there are several
factors
Influencing that number some of
which we've talked about another
projects some of which are
unique to Los Alamos and I can
go into that in more detail if
you like but I'll stop there for
questions.
So this is.
For this all.
So Mr chair that that there are
no bids yet with the
construction manager at risk you
you pick them based on
qualifications only this is only
an an an estimate at this point
however it's an estimate with a
lot of influence from a lot of
subcontractors of feeding
information and of course the
general contractor having their
finger on the pulse of current
conditions
some of the other items if you
well if you want to turn to page
one forty one in your book it is
the it's the narrative from
James corporation and it it
starts to list some of these
reasons for why the price has
increased the Los Alamos
premium.
Of the stop there with that and
there's a lot of the volatility
that we're still experiencing
throughout the construction
industry.
The demolition material is going
to have to be trucked into
Bernalillo county for instance
because none of the landfills
around the site will accept the.
The the demolition.
Staff
and then also there's there's a
lot of dirt work on this project
that
because of the way it's being
phased there's no way around
we're gonna have to deal with
some some dirt which is getting
a little pricey
It's to make things are you
comfortable at the district
level.
Sure Mr chair all speak for the
state
hi I believe that the design
team and the general contractor
at the construction manager at
risk are doing their due
diligence and they're designing
of a cost effective school
albeit pricier than we're used
to seeing answer.
Terry Gilliam and the council
members I'm Jose Delfin
superintendent of Los Alamos
public schools and with me today
on my left is our fiscal
director this is Theresa get one
and to my right is our
construction manager Mr Bob
Bowman and to his right is Mr
Tamika steel whose are all
facilities director and I can
tell you we've worked hard even
before my tenure in Los Alamos
to make sure we are a fiscally
conservative we have certainly
run through every.
I is dotted and crossed tease to
make sure that we are you know
spending tax dollars money
really efficiently so I feel
confident that the team here
including the PS has done
everything they can to.
Trust me lower those costs
because we're not happy with
them either.
Thank you.
Thanks for.
We have a recommendation.
Right.
Thank you very much.
So.
This is a remote a motion to
make an award of five hundred
two thousand two hundred sixty
three dollars for a emergency
systems based work to west Las
Vegas school district this is
the same amount of a project
that reverted
in June.
Mr Chairman strategy line.
Troy and reverted after three
years of not moving.
At the council for a.
Credit way to keep although
security projects will bring
unfortunately west Las Vegas Mr
orders Mr the deadline.
The point of committing
nevertheless felt that because
this is a security ward.
Which of a deliberate on to to
make that exception over the
happy circumstance of missing a
deadline to treat this project.
this is the sum of the second
project we've made a deadline
exception for I don't think
there any others we don't think
there are so for that reason the
council brings it back up the
motion is I've described it I
think what's missing from the
motion sort of make that it had
lived a pretty sure we talked
about this was contingent on by
monthly reporting from the
school district.
And that it would version would
be find this first you can see
that the district is reporting
they can spend the money by mid
July so this is consistent with
their expectation that they can
move expeditiously to spend the
money and then if I don't
remember there was something
about the contractor how are
they going to do something
quickly at the beginning of we
talk about are the worst weather
conditions.
Maybe that's it so nobody
remembers that.
Mr chair members there you did
just for them to put it in
writing their plans to move
forward and have a the
specialist which would expect a
that's the fact you have a
twenty four I'm I'm adjusting
this motion to provide.
so require second if it's okay
but I'm pretty sure we talked
about timeliness or would say it
on on covered monies would
revert by August first and they
would report by about so that's
the motion which.
I think someone it would be nice
if someone from the subcommittee
would second the addition.
Thanks.
You know after this.
Three men with members thank you
for.
For seeing us today
Yes we did have a few things
going on but in Las Vegas right
now currently we've been through
a lot and some of our northern
neighbors.
Fires to flooding to comment all
those different situations than
the shipping situations of
happen our national security
work with them to see Martinez
elementary.
I think we're still waiting for
servers for the cameras and that
those are six months behind to
eight months behind
but we have turned in our letter
During my S. does my facility
manager has turned that in and
we are ready to move forward
with this one and get it going
K. happen and come out the door.
Yes.
Okay.
Post.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd like
to try the next three and but a
one lotion.
And they all relate in
Farmington.
But a lot of time with the words
of the committee and it's been
productive.
These are good projects there
needed by the district the
challenges that districts
concern about the ability to
come up with a match down the
road I think in early
discussions the council the
subcommittee rather observe
that.
The district did receive awards
had fund balance of if I
remember right about ten percent
compared to a target of seven
and so the district ask for a
waiver and so committee did what
didn't approve that multiply the
council didn't approve or waiver
by the same token we wanted the
district to do these important
projects including especially
the pre K. so we kept the ball
in the air but.
Brainstorming with the district
what does it take to keep these
projects alive so so
These these motions find.
Well first of all the best
severity elementary school and
heights are paired they're
across the school for much of
the can't do one without the
other the subcommittee did fix
for that facing the system.
Difficult to do that and.
preschool we've talked a lot
about what our priority so to
summarize
Let's say they can sort of get
to the point of reading the
motions.
Amend the current standards
based award for heights.
In NMAA severity of the same way
toward to reduce the local match
from sixty three percent to
forty two percent so the fact
that point of committee is
anticipating action of the
legislature to do this if it
doesn't happen it is vital to
this project because we're only
talking about for the design and
programming phase so it's an
inducement to go for but it was
a way to kind of make it more
attractive for them to come in
and do this project
And then similarly for the of
Farmington preschool academy the
motion was a reduction of local
match from sixty three percent
to thirty one and a half percent
again anticipating.
Potential action by the
legislature for a fifty percent
reduction of pre K. in addition
there is a proposed advance of
the match for which of these
would help me up which of them
has the advantage.
Mr chair members is for the
heights middle school as well as
missing Verde.
A match for for for three years
so I've summarized the benefits
okay of I would yes to let the
record note that members can see
them all.
For just sign.
Programming only advance for
the.
Heights and.
The severity level school thank.
I'm Mr chair if I may Ted might
be on the phone still he had
called in earlier but early this
morning Ted sent an email to me
we have to the superintendent
and business manager they are
both out of the country right
now and Ted just wanted to in
the event that this was approved
express their appreciation so he
did right to me and I'm not sure
Mister chair if he's on the
phone are you at Mr account
indicates that Ted is on the
phone he wanted to to listen
and.
I think that was the subject of
a lot a lot of discussion with
the district and I I think it's
fair to say that the members but
quite a while looking at
district resources to cap say
what about this what about that
the district response was well
it's committed and Farmington
has a lot of schools.
An important to also is in a
situation where.
The other one gas situation
pretty volatile up there it's
the economy is not strong in
that area just in other places
so the district what a financial
adviser to every meeting and a
financial adviser was putting up
a caution flag on the district
committing for
You know their ability to raise
revenues at the local level so.
The thinking of the subcommittee
was to.
They're a little bit on trying
to induce them to come into the
planning and a socialized phase
in this way so I agree Mr
Chairman it's a little bit
different but again it does
anticipate action the
legislature make tax the P.
waves and their work and that.
Yes.
Mr chair members part of the
motion indicates that the
advance repayment will start in
June twenty twenty six after
their bond sales.
Right.
But Mr chairman again thank you
more about your last question
the district was about to walk
away from these awards and I
when you think about we're
sitting on seven hundred million
available.
The subcommittee.
Try to find ways to bend over
backwards to kind of go from
there so that was thank you Mr
chairman.
Questions.
Thank.
That.
The question.
Chairman I think we ought to go
back to six the.
Is that about.
So the warts of committee
recommends approval of December
twenty two certification to sell
supplemental estimation member
of three hundred and thirty.
With one of the financial plan.
That level and still sustained
significantly more work that
we've been to.
Mr Chairman however I want to
thank the subcommittee for
alright alright work on these
projects that delays including
the Representative the bond
reconciliation issue though this
involved multiple out of cycle
meetings or just a couple months
of the busy time of members and
staff yes others and misleads
was helpful as well before
Stephens so I want to thank you
for that and for all.
Chairman I think this is the
first awards for believe yes
awards committee recommends
approval for the adoption of a
revolution notification
certification reconciliation
with expended by proceeds as
follows and it's twenty yes has
to be twenty one in the amount
of four point seven.
Four million one thousand eight
eighty one and just to be twenty
one.
Babies in the seven million four
hundred eighty five thousand
four can you.
The delegate authority the chair
to approve any changes to the
resolutions were free
certifications of baby report on
review for.
Mr Chairman record this report.
You know this is very technical
and ordinarily it would be good
for again consent agenda but
given the challenges that we
had.
During the reconciliation.
And and the adjustment I just
feel.
It's important for the full
council to review these even
though that the details are a
little challenging to follow and
we really need to get those
procedures manual done so as
long as those issues were out
standing there were so committee
will continue to recommend
hearing these full council
rather than as a conservative.
The chair members I don't
believe you voted.
Thank.
Mr the MSA payment the review
this we're in agreement with the
but we took it off consent
agenda in case there are
concerns or issues that council
wanted to raise but the
subcommittee is recommending
approval of the two thousand
twenty three PS of PSA O. C.
work planned scenario one which
would basically move committee
meetings to Wednesday's still
maintaining them every six
weeks.
Throughout the calendar year
subject to changes the necessary
by the chair of the PSC said.
let the let the executive
director address that because
there were issues in terms of
trying to get things repaired.
And then getting up early for
the meetings on Friday and
Monday mornings it was it was a
an issue that that extra couple
days would benefit them but.
Our ticket can go ahead and
address that Mr chair members
miss Ross is is well versed in
this response I I defer to her
Mr chairman members of the PS
the faithful long and hard about
this and this past year it seem
like we hit nearly all of the
Monday holidays which required
us to reschedule subcommittees
are council meetings for
Tuesday's rather than Monday's
and so I thought was we could
avoid that by moving it to
Wednesdays instead which would
also benefit the staff in
preparing for the meetings by
having a few extra days.
Rather than a week before
Mr chair members if Wednesday
doesn't work for some of you
have set meetings we could
certainly be considered but.
This is our recommendation to
chair members I don't know if it
was clear but the capital
funding awards will also be made
throughout the calendar year
instead of quarterly I was also
part of scenario one.
As listed in the motion.
I.
The.
Somebody always sent.
Chair I if I could that's one
reason why we wanted to take it
off the consent agenda for
discussion here in case other
members I don't think members of
the subcommittee had a problem
because there's so many meetings
and things they didn't want to
have more we don't want to go
back to the monthly but
if there were concerns that the
this other option was to leave
it on Mondays and then on those
those few days if there were
holidays or other things they
would have to move it to a
Tuesday anyway but you know that
so those are the basic options
is the the the the that we're
looking at was either Wednesday
or or the Monday as you know I
won't be on.
January so I actually didn't
take a formal vote in
subcommittee so it's it's
doesn't affect me I'm pretty
open next year.
I just wonder.
If we could to for this to left
the legislative session.
I think a number of us here have
a hard time.
As.
Just my personal.
I January third Mr chair and
Daniel.
It amended the hard.
And that's again you right there
in January the table service
start thinking about the but I
don't think.
Mr chair members January third
of subcommittees and full
council staff January ninth.
And that we'd be back again in
April.
Mr chairman members this that
month indicates what I was
talking about the Monday is a
holiday so subcommittees on
Tuesday which leaves staff three
days four days to prepare for
council meeting so that's what
we've been doing all year with
these holidays on Mondays
percent committees.
We have those states.
Hey Mister chair members page
one seventy eight seventy seven.
I'm sorry.
Mr Mrs correct page one seventy
seven is the wind stays one
seventy eight is all schedule
with Monday's.
This.
The difference.
Mr chairman members scenario
wise and one seventy seven the
scenario two hundred seventy
eight.
The.
This
Thank you Mr chair members Mr
chair members may I bring up the
capital funding of plan right
now to discuss the potential for
next year.
we were thinking next year
instead of having it this year
with the application open all
year and then awards on a
quarterly basis next year we
were hoping to change that to
have keeping the application
open all year but having awards
on an ongoing basis potentially
monthly instead of these
quarters that way I think we
believe that we could address
these potential applications
quicker and not have to have
them wait to potentially six
months forward we can have them
faster which would also help
with if the legislative changes
happen we could award more
expeditiously.
Mr chair members as as you
review these materials this is
also in your book for the April
meeting.
We also have recommended keeping
the FMP assistance awards cycle
in all year like we did drive
this year with all the other
capital projects but the F. MPs
were still at a limited time
frame next year we're proposing
doing it all year long also.
Thank you.
Mr chair there is one other item
was the guidelines for teacher
and student for the statewide
education.
that's not professional it's
actually actually the guidelines
the look that bring to the
okay.
Recommendation of the
subcommittee without approve the
guidelines for students and
teachers teachers home
connectivity including hybrid
model yes this is so review the
guidelines periodically amend
them as time and circumstances
require.
the idea was to get something
down the guidelines are in your
in your materials I think Mr of
the video would be willing to
address those if you have
questions but we wanted to take
it off to the gentle again if
there were questions or concerns
that full council had.
Mr chair members.
We did have some questions about
costs and that should be in your
books on page eighty three.
Eighty three.
Three.
You see it.
Mr chair members if if you're
ready and I'm I'm sorry
interrupted Mr Abbey with his
question but I believe that
perhaps he was looking for this
with that said Mr chair members
the seventy questions have.
Hello Mr chairman members the
only thing that I would add is
that the technical portion of
this
will help our team and partner
agencies who are already working
on a pilot in the galaxy or yeah
that
is already funded by the
governor's
COVID relief fund projects are
being developed right now and
having the technical portion of
this would help us really.
Guide those projects and and
know how to develop these
projects and obviously we are
able to bring those projects
that are part of that pilot back
to you
there is funding available we
don't know how far that funding
is going to tool allow us to go
so we could present to to you
all real projects because a lot
of these estimates that to we
are putting together are based
on many assumptions because this
work is
is a first we have not done this
before connecting students and
teachers where they are at their
home so there is a lot of very
ability
and how to approach the so we're
learning as we speak.
So the are you asking about the
Estimates for the guidelines
themselves.
Mr Chairman.
And Mister chair members let me
let me help with that page
eighty three is a hand out
related to the information page
one seventy nine so one seventy
nine is actually the guidelines
and guidelines were developed
with specific groups around the
state school districts and
charters PED LFC and LESC LUFC
for all on a working groups that
work together to advise and help
create the guidelines and the
guidelines specifically talk
about what it is to be eligible
for page one eighty the devices
the C. the **** compliance and
cybersecurity the service and
the pricing is listed the those
are actually the guidelines that
we're talking about here today.
Mr Chairman.
I see you saw the version that
you
Approved previously but this one
is a little bit different is to
for the students and teachers.
For their connectivity the first
guidelines you approved for for
us to create the statewide
education network those are
those guidelines back in March I
believe.
Mr chair members it was February
thank you.
So if this guide line was
adopted as.
The state commit us to spend
fifty seven million more or less
and by the way video you did
exactly what I asked you to do.
I just said I know there are a
lot of variables give us a
ballpark of what it might look
like and current budget did not
so I comfortable.
I see.
At what cost fifteen thousand
dollars a student to serve
thirty eight hundred kids that.
That's a lot.
Desist committees to that or
not.
Mr chairman Mr Abbey no it
wouldn't because what we would
do is take into account the work
that the the pilot fourteen
dollars and develop these
projects and say are we aligned
with this fifty seven million
dollars were not what is the
best way to to connect the
students some of them may be
connected by starlink some of
them may be connected by.
Scott some of them may be
connected by the local internet
service provider that is going
to receive requests from the
from the current our first pilot
that the office of broadband is
developing some of them will be
connected using the future be
funding again fund federal
subsidies that are coming our
way it is basically allowing us
to start developing projects
and.
Bringing those projects back to
you and saying in this area we
have this many approximate this
many students who are non
connected in here are the the
ways in which we are approaching
the connectivity for these
locations but it doesn't mandate
that.
We adopt projects that serve
these thirty eight ten students
now that is our best guess
testament at this point about
how how much it would cost
infrastructure in in service
costs monthly cost nearly costs
and we don't know yet how we're
going to to approach that we
don't know how many of them are
eligible for federal subsidies
for the service portion again
this these
guidelines will allow us to
develop pilot projects that will
inform all of us how hard or
easy and how is going to be to
connect the students how costly
is going to be what is the most
cost effective way to approach
that.
Well and and as Mr video
mentioned pilot projects are
very important and with it the
passage last week of the
constitutional amendment
allowing the state to provide
direct.
User things a pilot project with
available funding would be able
to better inform the legislature
in future sessions as to what
the funding could be applied
from state resources beyond the
the PSSA the PSA state funding
for cap other capital school
projects.
That's what.
State.
Thank.
Both.
Robbins.
Bob this is.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I.
Said this and subcommittee
pending that we're not having
anyone really Fischer
I appreciate working with all
the members of the council
subcommittees with you Mr again
and with David Abbey I
appreciate the support I
received also and and also the
support and the work with the PS
that they staff thank you very
much.
Very quick comment Mr chair
piece of a staff all of us we
have appreciated Mr Robbins we
gave them a gift a subcommittee
meeting which was a hard hat
signed by all of us and thanking
him for his guidance and we gave
a card and we have appreciated
his support as well and I
apologize I guess I was supposed
to wear the hat hard hat I
apologize for not bringing.
Thank you thank you.
Second.
Representative what.
Why is.
About capital projects.
I could help now what.
