Provided initiatives in full
bonding capacity H. thirteen Mr
chair members.
And for
the potential security and CTE
for FY twenty four.
On line
Twenty two.
And
Mr chairman members is okay to
move to option two and three.
Mr chair members yes option.
One two and three options two
and three our our with the
legislative initiatives included
above.
With option three a different
fifty percent capacity of the
estimate from board of finance
for the potential for capacity
for sale.
So Mister chair members if I
could draw your attention to
line three on page fourteen to
see that the FY twenty three
estimated sale is three seventy
eight point four and the
difference between that option
two and option three we have on
row three FY twenty three the
estimated sales of the three
thirty nine point two so that's
the difference between option
two and three both containing
all the legislative initiatives
of a reduce the whole batch and
And the forgiveness of offsets.
Mr chair members at the under
option two and option three.
Research center.
For council.
issue bonds and typically we
certified everything we can get
our hands on but issue just
noted we have an extraordinary
amount of money spent balance of
seven hundred plus million and
it's been growing just as we've
also discussed recent meetings
the council's taken number of
steps to try to expedite
Business expedite the ability of
districts to common request
awards and get awards and it's
probably made some difference
and for example we've allowed
applications on a rolling basis
even monthly as opposed to
annually so district got to come
on but still it's made a modest
difference but not enough option
one.
Both of us are sold which would
show the council uncommitted
balance.
FY twenty five of over a billion
dollars after making for five
hundred million of awards which
is shown in part to.
Three oh three and.
By twelve thirty eight and
another hundred seventy almost a
half a billion of orders or zoom
in option one and they're still
a billion spent so hence option
two and there's been a lot of
conversation up with option to
of trying to find ways to get
districts
coming to the council with a
better prospect of getting
funding and and you've heard the
discussion about a proposal that
this Perea Warniment
Representative.
To the public school capital
outlay task force to school
boards association
superintendents association
suggesting lowering the match
rate by the for that so option
two.
Which Miss Iglesias just explain
of a Representative referred to
lightly would bring all up more
business to the council but it
would still have an ending
balance of four hundred and
seventy seven million even after
making.
A billion dollars of awards and
option to in other words five
hundred million more awards and
option two then option one
that's still a half million of
uncommitted belts is two years
from now and and I I I I know
the board of finance the store
please concerned about us but
while those as accumulating the
legislative finance committee is
concerned this body is expressed
concerns so that led to the
option three which was to lower
the certification of a and a
half percent of the six seventy
eight and option one and two.
Recommendation an option three
was to do half of that.
So what paid for at the.
The public at the option three
what page fifteen fifteen thank
you.
Option three
representative of billion
dollars of awards and still has
a surplus projected for the next
couple years so ordinarily we
wouldn't go through all these
options this is an information
item but this represents a lot
of the work that was done awards
and plans additional
Act section of the council will
face shortly in other action
items so
but I just that is by way of
explaining what Representative
for the financial plan options.
The answer to that is generally
specifically no money would
transfer to the severance tax
permanent fund on December
thirty first.
Another.
This.
Informational.
it's the next it's the item
I see six eight December
certification on sale this
coming up in a management.
Mr Mr chair members I I stand
for any questions.
Mr chairman members
that the contractors making
progress and will have.
Finish the reconciliation
process in
of coming here in December
twenty two and we will present
the the reconciliation
abnormalities that are that are
found at the PSUC meeting in
January.
So I have a question
appropriation brought this up on
the explaining the financial
plan so I was senator folks go
back to.
Of all the options have the same
item in row twenty five and.
The reconciliation has been very
challenging for the council and
the staff
we've had the staff doing a nice
job of reconciling to the share
accounts but we had if we had a
problem reconciling awards.
And authorizations to funding
available.
That's not committed and there
are some double counting going
on and some of you may have
heard there was a point where we
were concerned that the amount
available for awards was
significantly
higher I'm sorry lower because
of understating future
commitments but that's up school
is worth they are properly
accounted for especially in
rural
twenty six of this report you
can see for example that they
are committed awards of two
hundred seventy one million and.
FY twenty three almost a billion
in FY twenty four and so forth
so the good news for the
financial plan as the there's a
modest amount forty million
maybe not that modest of
adjustments estimated when this
reconciliation is complete.
but it's a lot smaller than the
number one concern about
previously identified but could
ask one question on that bread
remember asked online eight we
had we line eight you had at
thirty one and a half million
and when we adjusted it for some
reason the balance available
went down rather than up when we
lowered the amount did you
research that
Mr chair of members yes
so since it was in uses
Since we since we decreased by
eight to the appropriate amount
One twenty five how to make that
adjustment so they're all all
uses and in this from row eight
to row twenty six.
Yes you offline Representative
maybe read more ticket and
you're counting folks to
schedule a call with me on that
I don't mind madam conventional
some of this will sort out when
we get the reports in December
and I think we can expect the
reversion amounts will be higher
that we're showing we want to
all the proceeds issue by issue
we found two thousand five
proceeds with uncommitted
balance and so we can expect
some more versions and so all
that work need to be done before
we could figure out where we
were in terms of certification
but of course I want to explain
that as well thank you Mr
chairman.
The.
For additional work.
Well.
We.
This is the other question.
What are the COVID I asked the
staff to prepare a procedures
manual on financial reporting
and reconciliation so that we
can.
Get more consistency and
predictability in this process
so it's extremely important for
the thank you.
It's a good time for.
On the agenda.
There are.
Yes.
We are not yes.
Have.
Yeah.
I'm going.
