And I think knowing that those
options are out there and we we
range somewhere from having a
lot of money to not knowing
where we're at I think for a
project of this size I think we
could hopefully find some middle
ground with maybe you bring
someone up to the table to as
opposed to to waiver entirely of
the match so if you come in on
that and then.
thank I have a motion to make
thanks for the mention before
you come and I'd rather I go I
want to go ahead and add that
as far as New Mexico school
board association is concerned
we've been on board to do away
with the offsets and the of
reducing the match for quite
some time and we did get some
resolutions of of last month
that called for that as well so
I think what we're hearing from
all of the partner agencies here
members on the council is that
we're looking at some relief
from those so just just to keep
that in mind hopefully we could
you know the timing of for this
would would help in that regard.
I would like just to say you
know I mean our regional content
with the applications was I
think to act within this the
spirit of the Senate bill by
Senator souls so.
this is this is something we've
looked at
Since since that legislation was
proposed and then adopted and
endorsed by the school board
association so.
No.
There is that potential and I
mean we would leave it up to our
admin team to to come up with
what.
Middle ground might be available
but I I myself would like you
know just the the original ask
is.
Is is is what went into the
original decision to honor the
the language and the intent I
believe of the Senate bill that
Senator solicit sponsored to
fund this requests.
So in my perfect world I'd
really like for you to vote on
it today and I go home with the
money and.
If you feel that that is you
know what we need to do we can
do that but I would prefer a
hundred would you consider a
fifty percent match turning
twenty five thousand go home
with two and twenty five
thousand seventy thirty.
You know
You know I don't know.
This is at this.
You know could be discussing it
that way but we also need to
keep in mind that the.
Projects that we have funded in
the past for demolition have all
gone at a hundred percent.
So
You know
To try and change the rules of
the game at this point I know we
have probably a reason to do
that with the
Updated financial status but we
I think we also need to keep
that in mind so
Anyway all content lets you guys
continue to negotiate if you
want.
I'm like in his for he that.
We certainly just appreciate I
mean I would speak for myself I
mean we definitely appreciate
any anything at this point
because as superintendent
Salazar had mentioned earlier.
Our district has really been
living in in in the depths of
our financial position you know
we we joke locally that and and
this is been for over a decade
you know that we have trim the
fact that we have to cut into
the muscle we've.
Discard the bones were into the
marrow I mean that that's the
type of fiduciary responsibility
I think that our district has
exercised
throughout this entire period of
you know I would say for at
least the last decade
and so yes we find ourselves in
a situation where cash balance
seems to be higher than we've
we've seen you know historically
but I think that has been at the
expense of our staff and our.
I I think that we we we've
learned a few things in getting
into that bone marrow that.
has positioned us to as I said
in my of my little
Dialogue here is that because I
truly one hundred percent that
our assets do become
opportunities for our students
and so for us to maximize those
opportunities for our students
you know we we obviously would
ask you know for for higher
Portion of.
Just because you know we we have
lived within you know in our
community over some of these
conversations we've talked about
the school responsibility versus
fiduciary in and that's where we
come in we we believe we stand
on a lego Fisher responsibility
that is more than just a fiscal
issue it is our responsibility
to our students
To act on their behalf as well
so respectfully I I I would ask
you know that that that we take
into consideration.
Mr Chairman I just want
throughout my fifty percent
number wasn't just but it's
certainly economic number pulled
out of the air but if you are
ninety percent in the proposal
that misprint wonderment and I
will be talking about is a
thirty percent reduction in the
local match to sixty and if you
didn't have a offset you know
very around the fifty percent so
you know what what we do for you
for you has to be.
You know if we set a precedent
that that I guess I state of
regret right now and I think we
knew we were walking into that
by you know thinking we have so
much money we didn't need to
require match but I don't think
that today and that's how our
lives are isn't you get new
information circumstances change
so I just I don't think it's
appropriate to.
You know we don't want to call
done a project but we don't even
want to you know
the price of right either a
public hearing well and and
maybe take in consideration as
well that we've cut our us half
basically today and so and we
won't be coming back for the
Edgewood complex so are instead
of our pass a one point one
million dollars were asking for
the five fifty three
The.
Respectfully I would also like
to add that we
You know the precedence has been
set and we put
I would say a significant amount
of energy and and looking into
this and so you know
respectfully understand things
change that you know but we we
have put a significant amount of
energy into this process
and you know I just bring that
to the table as well.
Let me see let me of way in here
and say that I think that.
A lot more after your special
meeting enough to the Rick
reconciliation is.
This do so so at this point I
think that maybe as we get more
information I think something
that would be reasonable and I
don't know if anybody if you all
will fix at that but it would be
a seventy five state twenty five
local.
Proposals.
And
That.
With some considerable buy in
from the district as well as.
Moving from our hundred percent
to seventy five and maybe
more as we find out what are.
What are.
What are the actual situations.
Mr having.
How does that sound in the
district Senator a lot better to
me.
It would help me out with
transportation this building
that have my twenty.
So let the.
Reasonable.
proposal given where we're at
this point in time.
I don't support that Mr
Chairman.
You know I I.
A post fifty percent because you
know we don't want a nickel and
dime and direct these proposals
on but thank again when the full
council.
Reviews the magnitude of the
change due to the recovery
conciliation scope because they
were well we better slow down a
little bit more careful than
just waiting local matches in
sort of a arbitrary way thank
you Mr chairman.
Any any other proposals or
comments.
If not then
It is time to hear from.
The other group thank you very
much we appreciate your time
thank.
Mr chairman I want to compliment
the president for his knowledge
of school district finances it's
really nice to see somebody.
Thank you.
This is Edward yes and.
This is issue isn't on the table
in Morris that correct on this
correct the the faster time on
the agenda.
That will will be brief there's
a lot of information and
this certainly you can present
your leisure but we thought we
just not issue as to why we were
here.
So Mister chair members of the
committee
More Audrey how to me from the
town of a to it this is our
mayor pro tem commissioner Jerry
powers and he's just gonna get
very brief synopsis and I
understand the district has
asked for their application on
android homage to be withdrawn
and we look forward to
conversations and working in
intergovernmental cooperation
with them on this building.
So thank you for allowing us to
speak on this important issue
that affects that the residents
of Edgewood as well as the
entire district as which
population represents the
majority of the districts we
have a lot of the same
constituents a lot of interest
would really like to work
together with the district and
have extended many invitations
to do so on this on this issue
so there are there are an
attorney's opinion in here as
well as an analysis of why a
this building does not meet the
criteria for of funding for
demolition but I won't go into
those I just want to say that
the legislature of course is
always trying to accomplish
something useful and purpose and
it's it's up to us to try to
accomplish the intent not just
the the written
word of the statutes so we
understand why the district
wants to rid itself of the
building especially given the
financial information that we
just heard regarding the
insurance costs or now borne by
the district rather than the pre
K. that was in there because
they were asked to leave so
it'll be many years before new
elementary school is needed
especially with the role is
still declining and has been
declining for many years so they
want to be rid of it for the
insurance and maintenance costs
to be over there are somewhat
over bills and want to balance
that student ratio we understand
that and have a building site
for the future Edwards Edward
wants to preserve the building
for its use ongoing uses a
community center and restore the
pre K. capacity of an expansion
capability of the pre K. in
Edgewood so we've offered a win
win solution we made a purchase
offer to the district it saves
the town of Edgewood a minimum
of ten million dollars to
replicate that building new for
the community center in the and
the youth of programs as well as
pre K. that we've been using it
for our offer that will
facilitate expansion pre K.
capacity per the legislative
intent it will prevent way.
East of millions of dollars in
taxpayer money rebuilding a
brand new facility it will
preserve the building site for
the future school when needed
it's on forty acres and we've
only asked to for donation or
purchase of the actual south
campus buildings and the
recreational fields adjacent to
it that service so there would
still be enough room for new
school but even so there's in
the school section that we're in
section sixteen there's another
four hundred eighty acres
available even after allowing
for future high school
facilities to be built there so
it will also put money in the
district pocket we are offering
money in in exchange for the
property rather than just saving
the demolition funds but it will
save the taxpayer the demolition
funds for buildings that are
more appropriate and and
actually no practical or useful
life left.
The other that considerations of
our mental impact re uses the
best and biggest conservation
method when it comes to not
having to duplicate to materials
that would go into a new
community center and also the
energy that use in constructing
a brand new facility.
So we're asking
that the to work with the
district we've extended the
offer would not heard back our
purchase offer but we're
certainly open to discussions
and even negotiation
I appreciate your being willing
to listen to us today and speak
we didn't anticipate the
withdrawal of the application
but just wanted to get this on
the record and wanted to have
the information that we
Thank you very much thank you
thank you for being here any
questions or questions or.
Council members comments.
What.
General.
Question I guess this may be
actually for the school district
rather than the.
Hello as we.
Are you is is the school
district.
Open to the idea of selling that
facility verses demolishing.
Not.
Is there a reason.
So that I mean I just I mean I I
kind of see where with this kind
of Edward is coming from if if
we have facility it may not be
he occupancy standards for for
education.
But education standards are much
different from general purpose
for a community center things
like that that's not occupied by
students during the day I hate
to see if the facility can be
brought up to standard.
At a.
Thanks a minimal or an
acceptable level to the town I'm
not sure why the school district
state which is tearing down and
everything to me I I'm more of a
pragmatist for that you know I
don't like tearing things down
just because we can just because
we can get money to build
something new if it's your
useful for some other purpose
and it prevents I needed
expenditure of tax dollars than
I'm in favor of that so that's
my comment thank you thank you
Mr members of the commission
thank you so much for
acknowledging that is exactly
what the community is saying not
to lose a fourteen million
dollar building that the town is
willing to agree we've the
district of the responsibilities
of and just wanted to mention
that we do we are ready re
purposed for our town hall the
north building right next to the
south field so we'd like to you
know continue using that
building with re purposing it.
briefly.
The PS a face staff presented
the subcommittee the information
really flicking the.
Representative recommendation of
this facility like an FCI of
ninety percent we use a of tech
we need to come in we we use a
rule of thumb that if it's worth
it sixty percent tear it down
and I think the FCA okay ninety
percent but Mr chair chair Mr
Abbey eighty five point eight
seven five percent so
I mean it it's like to us how
much it's worth I just I think
there were some sympathy with
both groups and I think I'm glad
of the proposal was withdrawn
because I don't think there's a
lot more conversation but I
think both groups had a pretty
good merits in their approaches
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you any other comments.
Mr chair and I just have a
question
The material you provided
references the number of pre K.
students that were served you
said that the capacity in the
classrooms decreased from twenty
two to fourteen students how
many classes you have at this
site I believe it was a handful
for five classrooms and they've
gone into a facility that is not
very suitable for the pre K. and
they did have to drop their
enrollment significantly they
don't have suitable playground
you know things like that story.
The I mean there's a lot more to
that so I think it is that
misinformation when we take it
off the table so because I think
this is information about.
So Mister chair the reason for
my question is just you know our
pre K. students being served in
this community currently as
that's the information I.
There were fifty in this
building at the time that they
were asked to leave and there
are pre K. the in the in the
community but not an actual so
in Moriarty at the Mountain View
elementary school which was
built about the same time as
Edgewood elementary school
closed about the same time the
rather than being demolished it
was repurposed as a pre K. and
talent and administrative office
so we we do that we agree with
that three years and and re
purposing we just like to do
that the same thing at.
Thank you thank you.
Think of.
We'll close the discussion no
I'm I'm I'm hopeful that you you
will be able to work something
out of it's it's not
Something that we like to do
here to take the decision to
make a decision that
of competing interests of so
again I hope that
our discussion today helps move
the process along rather than
percent and I think before we we
We say anything else was just a
can hope that you're able to
work something out we'll be
talking about the product the
high school project next
meeting.
Yes I before we move on to a
different topic I have a quick
question for the superintendent
do you know how old your offset
is.
Okay.
We've got maybe you are CTE
program.
Thanks a couple.
Thank you very much thank you.
Like we're.
We didn't cover item be the bond
reconciliation update so we'll
be moving on to that.
Mr chairman members on page
fifty two you'll find the fund.
Update
One record will be completed in
mid December.
The results will be presented at
the January PSUC from the recon
work.
This is that it comes.
The next.
Okay.
We have a quite a long consent
agenda so I usually review it
that.
This is would you review what's
on the consent agenda today.
Mr chair members the items on
the consent agenda our first of
all the
PSUC equipment being approved
the other item is a system space
capital outlay award two
thousand can be for Indian
schools elementary school.
Mr chair members there is also
the approval of the additional
conditions for systems awards
which had minimal change other
than changing the years.
Mr chair members items D. and E.
and F. are related to to
broadband there's a cat one four
extension to Gallup first CHI
upgrade there was a need to
extend the amount of time.
There's a cat to network
equipment award for twenty
twenty two and twenty two twenty
three the right support for
charter schools where we're re
entry to contract with solex to
help support you refer to our
schools and then there was the
twenty twenty three preliminary
ranking which was approved to
move forward for release.
And there was of our adjustment
request the charter school
variants report which is
something you approve annually.
And there was a CDC agreement
consultant for the statewide
education network which is a
consultant that has been helping
us for the past couple of years
and again the final item was the
waited NMCI ranking methodology
which is something you adopt
annually.
And Mister chair members if
there's any questions about
anyone specifically I can stand
for any questions that you might
have.
Then generally the consent
agenda we don't have detail
discussion but if you do have
something for in general the two
like to just.
Three district not not to ask
which is to provide background
of the various reporters know
chair changes and charter
variances being requested at
this time there continuing from
what is been accepted and
approved in the past same thing
with the weight factors that is
not changing
Well that is whether on the
consent.
Can I should mention that all of
these have been approved by one
or the other of the
subcommittees and recommended
for approval.
And placed them on the.
Consent.
So any anything else.
Mr Chairman okay hi.
I would like us to talk about
okay.
The robust conversation about
the weights in point.
which.
We understood there would be
some changes but and I think
there should be some changes so
quickly I think I'm which side
K..
Ranking factors okay you want to
remove that from the Mexico side
that's my desire.
So any objections no objections
not to do that and let's let's
vote on all the others.
And I will come back to that so
all those in favor of approved
items a through J. on the
consent agenda please indicate
by saying aye
those opposed I.
Okay.
The that was in support correct.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right so those items pass
and let's let's go to K..
Of.
Ranking methodology on weight
factors.
So Mister chair members what you
have in front of you on page one
hundred and ten is the
methodology and weight factors
that have traditionally been
approved with no change the last
change was made about three or
four years ago with the weight
factor for age of system to zero
point six two five.
In the awards subcommittee
meeting we talked at length
about a method to bring the FCI
and waited in the I. closer
together and staff.
We recommended a multiplier to
bring those closer together the
result of the multiplier would
be to.
Because.
Schools in poor condition with
more with on you unutilized
space to rise to the top of the
ranking without going into the
details of the math but chair
Abby and Cherokee and Mr Abbey
was my understanding that that
item was to be tabled until we
brought forth more data.
So.
In Mr chair members NMAA table
the item yes we tabled that item
to change that because we wanted
more information on it and then
again if the idea was just to
get the two similar this
commission this council excuse
me this council has made
exceptions and and wave of both
matches and wave conditional FCI
numbers on a case by case basis
and we felt that at this time
without additional data it may
be better to just keep the two
numbers separate and if there
was a case to be made for a that
was causing the FCI to be low
simply because of under
utilization that should should
be presented in a request for an
awards and Mister chair Mister
Robbins you might recall also
recall that you mentioned the
fact that the council now looks
at any school within FCI of
seventy four Wirth is eligible
whether or not they're in the
top one hundred so you felt that
that had captured that need as
well.
Thank you.
Mr chair members we stand for
any questions.
Let me clarify your your
subcommittee recommended
tabling.
Well it.
There was a different motion as
far as changing the adding a
weight factor to under utilized
space.
We voted to keep the weights the
way they are right now.
Mr.
My concern is in particular the
triple weighting of space.
And I think that's a a legacy
of.
I
in two decades ago when we had
severe overcrowding at many
schools and in particularly in a
couple districts west side of
Albuquerque Rio Rancho maybe
less luminous Gaston that's a
national missile program that
screwed guest in a particular
you know we have high schools
with four thousand people in the
state.
The version so Mister Shinn put
a lot of money extra that the to
the council funds to build new
schools to address severe
overcrowding and I think this
triple weeding of space was a
kind of was adopted at that time
in that environment when there
was great concern that was the
biggest screen space problem in
the state maybe followed by the.
The impact aid districts the
Gallup and so forth well we
hardly have overcrowding in most
of our schools if anything it's
it's the other way we have a
problem of too much space we got
to figure out how to how to
right size the footprint but I
just you know when we we adopted
these weights at one we had a
change where the FC I went up
twenty percent it's still hard
to explain why that happened and
I think there were reasons to
have a New Mexico customised
index that look different than
F. F. C. I. is the industry
standard New Mexico condition
indexes not the industry
standard makes it hard to
compare our schools to other
areas and now that the emergency
of overcrowding is passed I'm
I'm just suggesting for
discussion that.
The triple waiting spaces it was
a good idea once and maybe so
it's usefulness of talked about
that before them and it came up
again when we had the initial
proposal to change it and.
Which is Phillis owner for
studies in order to we have to
we're trying to send a in fact
we just took action to send up
the rankings the other assumed
this section here Mr chair
members these what factors are
represented in the current
ranking.
Even though we did a scan we
basically say it's tentative and
keep studying this issue which
Mr Robbins also want to do.
The the the the the fact the
rankings are preliminary and
that's what what we're looking
at setting out in terms of the
capacity in the three while most
of the state I would I would
agree with your assessment we've
kind of gone beyond that but
Southern New Mexico I think is
still experiencing capacity
issues someone part of Los
crucis they're having huge
influx of of students in the
southern part of the state
Deming Lordsburg those areas so
I think reducing it doesn't
really.
Leaving it there doesn't really
affect most school districts but
it does help those school
districts that still have
space utilization problems and
others they're over capacity
right now I think keeping it
that does address that and
addresses some of the things
that Representative lawsuit is
trying to say the state needs to
step up to help build the
facilities adequate facilities
where students are are not put
into facilities are overcrowded.
So that that that's the my
thinking behind it I think the
the subcommittee was kind of
thinking we're not gonna have
that many schools that have that
overcapacity problem but for
those that do we felt that yes
they should get some more
consideration rather than
eliminating completely or
reducing that.
So.
Mr chair members on on that note
the speech related deficiencies
to help the small rural schools
that have a couple of new
students and that is is a huge
increase for them along
alongside other FCI.
I think that that if we're going
to send something out.
And we're looking at possible
changes additional studies that
we should.
Of provide maybe two sets of
numbers.
Once at the.
As currently.
addressed and another said that
would give an example of
reducing the.
The factor that that you're
talking about maybe down to to
rather than three.
And seen what that does to the
rating and that also show you
what impact it has across the
board to each of the districts
and the districts with all and
we would be able to I know
that's double work for you but
it would be hard to say well
we're looking at this other
factor but we can't tell you
right now but that how that
would affect you.
Projects.
is that is that doable is
unacceptable Mr Chairman
representative thanks for this
discussion Hey I think it'll
create a lot of confusion to
send out two sets and I just
think it's.
Appropriate if we have
subcommittee motion to support
the subcommittee motion I was
glad we had that discussion I
just think it's really important
to keep this conversation alive
from the point of your research
staff.
For for the next year we've had
this conversation of four years
or one.
I just feel we could do more
research in the interim but I'd
typed the purpose for the
subcommittee recommendation.
Thank you Mr.
Any further discussion.
Okay I'll just Mr chair will say
I think that Mr Robbins
explained our discussion really
well and that.
Correct me if I'm wrong but in
looking at the rankings they
would not shift a whole lot and
so by releasing them now gives
the districts separate unity to
look at the information that yes
if the staff has to make sure
it's all correct and to respond
and that that was the
significance of getting the list
out as it is thank you.
Okay.
Good discussion then no there's
not no further comment we do
have a motion subcommittee
motion so all those in favor
please indicate by saying aye
hi.
All those opposed.
You can't go twice.
Motion passes thank you.
The word cycle then.
When will I pay the applications
received.
Mr chairman members this is an
informational item to inform you
of the most patients that we
have since the last PC is the
meeting.
as you can see on the executive
summary we have a handful the
cycle for standards based we
received an application for
Maxwell combined however they
have withdrawn as of this
morning due to funding issues so
they planned on replying next.
We also have an applications
from hops for highland middle
school currently ranked number
one sixteen Houston middle
school currently ranked ninety
nine.
those two may be renovated and
they're also asking for a new
middle school to accommodate
enrollment increase.
And we also have Santa Rosa five
percent rose the elementary
school right to twenty five in
Santa Rosa high school ranked
sixty seven.
We also have a systems based
application for guest in
percentage recent middle school
right number eighteen Loma Linda
elementary school ranked number
sixty one and San Juan park
elementary school rigs to ninety
five and all three of those are
for fire alarm system and we
also have another pilots teacher
housing application from Cuba.
On.
And also to inform you we are
scheduling those site visits for
those standards based
applications right now I will be
emailing you the schedule for
the next few days.
on page one hundred seventeen we
have a spreadsheet showing all
of the.
Current applications that have
yet to be awarded.
Those been read text are the new
ones that I just listed in those
highlighted in green have
requested a waiver.
Item number of.
The school applications that.
We'll be needing a waiver to
fund these projects.
And then on the following pages
are the individual letters from
each district.
hoping to make these awards for
all of these at the upcoming
January meeting with district
presentations for the standards
and the teacher housing in
November at the next meeting.
And with that I stand for
questions.
Just for those in the audience
we have gone to a vote
application cycle so we do take
applications on an ongoing basis
rather than one or two times a
year so this was the record on
both we received since our last
meeting.
Question from anyone on the
applications received.
The action required information
Mr chair members now.
One then two items.
The US systems based capital
outlay award looks very to care
that we did Mr chair members but
we need to.
From motion visual action and I
I don't believe we were clear on
what the final decision was
fifty a census was to hear the
the.
Request for the demolition of
the high school at our next
meeting.
So.
But if I understand it back to
the point of committee to bring
something to the next council
meeting.
About.
Sixty forty.
All right of almost sixty forty.
I will.
I mean it I I am concerned I am
concerned forty percent local.
I'm sorry.
I think forty percent look I
understand that.
The chair of the council is
trying to find a compromise and
we'll want to not.
Beat the saints to death we want
things to move forward and I
can't we've got a problem with
president but you know president
Mr change in circumstances
change but I think forty funded.
Forty percent as a way to move
this forward and in a modest
amount of money forty percent
local mention sixty percent
match to.
A hundred percent match I make
that motion Mr chairman.
Also.
Yeah.
Okay.
Is there any further discussion.
All those in favor of Mr this
motion please indicate by saying
aye.
This unanimous and.
After I had a little the lady
sorry.
Can we understand thank you.
Thank you Mr be in council and
thank you all.
All right so let's move on to
item C. lease assistance award.
Mr chairman members
For you I have a motion with
three parks relief assistance.
I'm sorry this is one fifty
nine.
the motion is point number one
adjust the memory heard the
twenty twenty one consumer price
index for the United States all
items at seven percent this is
the not to exceed amount so this
amount is.
Yeah I was applies to that seven
hundred at the ending of this
assistance over time.
And so that is the not to exceed
amount.
Number two to adjust the PSUC
discretionary right madam to
calculate the distance of
course.
the committee to eight hundred
fifteen dollars and sixty cents
this is an increase of seventy
percent.
Seven three seven percent.
And number three approval of the
word recommendations to a
hundred and eighty charters and
just pull out the in the amount
of twenty million five hundred
seventy three thousand eight
hundred fifty two dollars for a
specified in the attached
spreadsheets and as we have
further language specifying that
upon acceptance of the award the
council authorizes piece of a
staff to distribute the award
amounts on a quarterly
reimbursement basis upon
receiving proof of actual lease
payments and a proof of all the
required documents.
Mr chair members if I may
Find a little bit more detail we
are deferring to ward
applications at this time due to
incomplete applications those
two schools are working on
finalizing their LPI's and their
leases to move in
on page one hundred and sixty
two we have an infographic and a
chart showing.
The the both the statutory not
to exceed amount that is the
blue line at the top of the
graph so that is the amount that
the CPI has increased it from
that initial seven hundred per
statute every year that is
required that incremental
increases required by statute
and then the orange down below
is the amount of of the memory
that the council approved on an
annual basis so today the
council can approve.
Any amount for that ma'am right
the wishes discretionary amount
up to that nine hundred twenty
eight dollars and forty eight
cents the awards the committee
approved today is seven percent
increase would which would
increase the minimum rates to
eight hundred fifteen dollars
and sixty cents.
And on the following pages are
the individual words.
With that I stand for questions.
And and that sort subcommittee
recommendation right.
Want to add anything.
Okay.
Recommendation from the wards
Committee.
Any discussion questions.
You probably understand I I
would have some questions since
I'm the.
Public Education Commission
member that feces the charter
state charter phone ones that
receive the lion's share of
these assistance and I
appreciate the the work of the
council over the years and
providing at least assistance
it's not required it is optional
I do ask again for
reconsideration at our last PC
meeting I had the one individual
who was asking what why do.
Several of the charter schools
have to pay out of their SCG.
For their leases.
And even if they have a
foundation majority of them all
Senator many of them do have
foundations they don't have
private landlords but even in
the case of private landlords
that periodically will go
through and we refinance their
properties
seven percent is great compared
to what we've had in the last
few years the so I appreciate
that and I I know schools will
really look forward to that it
is lower than what the consumer
price indexes or the producer
price index comes complete
producer price indexes actually
considerably higher than the
consumer price index right now
the other thing is interest
rates are up to anywhere from
fifty to a hundred percent of
what they were six months ago.
So what you were borrowing for a
house at about three and a half
to four percent you're now
paying about six to seven
percent depending upon your
financial things that does
affect schools that go through
refinancing or if they were on a
variable rate they're going to
see those costs to go up.
Like I said I do appreciate and
the seven percent will be
Very much appreciated by the
charter schools.
But it does I believe we'll
leave them following somewhat
short from what they would need
to cover their lease their full
leases and no charter schools
are required to in most cases
they they have undersized
schools if we use the weight
index we would see that many
charter schools are or and and
schools at somewhere between
sixty and eighty percent of what
a district school has in terms
of space per student so they
they are very efficient in the
use of their facilities even
though they have waivers
classrooms and things like that
tend to be smaller and
very highly your eyes
that's a comment on that asking
for an amendment to this the you
know just as as the council goes
forward the consideration
because if we keep keeping
increase below the rate of
inflation.
The charter schools and others
that receive these assistance
continue to have to use SCG
funds offset their lease
payments and that is a direct
negative impact on being able to
get funds into the collection.
Thank you thank you for those
comments.
The other comments.
Hello we struggled with this for
a while the seven seven percent
is so good number.
Based on.
Previous action by the council
so I think we're we're moving up
and
Hopefully we can do better.
In the future so how are there's
no further comment all those in
favor of the subcommittee motion
please indicate by saying aye
it was supposed to put I'm hello
as opposed.
As.
Just wanted to.
Out of sight words.
The Albuquerque sign left
language academy five six eight.
And we have to Representative
two.
Mr chair members do we want it
sent awards committee
recommendation.
The motion more Mr yes school
motion is to amend the current
stand face to work to sign
language can make to include a
hundred student increase in the
design world one for new total
three hundred students.
Rates K. through twelve with the
maximum allowable square footage
of sixty thousand GSF an
increase in the construction
match of six point seven million
totaling twenty eight.
Million seven thousand
previously worded Lokmat showman
and change to three million.
Okay thank you for that motion
Mr chair members the awards
subcommittee had some concerns
if you took to page one seventy
four the
loan has was indicated that it
was to the Albuquerque sign
language academy however we've
we've got that clarification and
new documentation that it is to
the Albuquerque sign language
academy foundation.
Questions were.
Did you want to add anything
else Mr chair members now.
I want to thank the awards
subcommittee very much on behalf
school if they're not going to
come up but this is something
that we've.
Here's on for many many years
they've Martinez is here if we
could just hear from him I would
appreciate that I thank you
again for this recommendation I
fully support it in these
students will greatly benefit
and these are select group of
special ed students that used to
go to APS for the more major
that now are going to be able in
the next few years hopefully be
in a facility that will truly
meet their needs and
facilitator education in the
special needs not only of those
students who have hearing
parents but other siblings and
their families thank you Mr
chair thank you Mr back Mister
Robbins thank you I just want to
thank the committee for for the
increased award I decided about
the future of us and I and I
invite you all in the future to
come see the screen come to the
ground breaking come to the when
it's done and possibly hold
meetings there we're I think
we're building something that is
true in and I don't mean to
sound
I want to sound like I'm
exaggerating but I do think it's
world class I think what we're
doing and with whom we're doing
it with the likes of Harvard
Penn state we we've just met
with the UCLA neurology around
the work we're doing to serve
a marginalized historically
marginalized groups students
right I think it's it's
something special and it's it's
it's that appropriate that New
Mexico as a leader in that field
so thank you for that for
everything you've done for us
and that I'm excited for the
future with you.
I I stand for questions if you
have a thank you for your hard
work on this I know you've been
working at it including this
ammendment getting the
additional hundred students
approval which will help
everyone quite a bit of any
additional comments.
I just want to say
Publicly I also support the
amendment and support the school
and I'm really pleased and and
thank you for the work that you
do with the students thank you
all that's good that's good
stuff I thank you thank you.
So all we have a motion all
those in favor of the motion
please indicate by saying aye
hi.
Those opposed.
Motion passes and we move on to.
Which is.
The high school twenty eight.
These design phase funding Mr
Abbey motion is to amend the
awards to zoning.
For part one to console at the
middle school to high school in
Twin Peaks high school to one
single campus and one award.
The state match of a million
sixty thousand seven hundred
fourteen for design phase
funding for eight teams teacher
housing units.
Design phase funding for
consolidated replacement
facility for the three combined
schools with the design and
enrollment of five eighty one.
Up to the maximum allowable
gross worst footage of ninety
seven thousand three forty.
With an increase in the state
match of eight million four
fifty eight thousand nine
hundred seventy for the design
phase review of proposed
solution to address or website
conditions current enrollment
hello will prosper she boarded
shall occur prior to the end.
Part of the out of cycle
construction phase funding
request.
Mr chairman the subcommittees
but a lot of time talking about
enrollment which is like many
parts of rural New Mexico on the
federal long term decline in
this they have a.
Being left.
Up in recent years and the fact
that some pages
Twenty five and one eighty six
so it's really important that
this this is extremely expensive
school from not mistaken ninety
million dollars.
Mr chair members we've never.
I've done a ninety million
dollar projects since the new
high schools in Albuquerque New
Mexico thank.
So this is this is one of the
most expensive ever it's not a
big screen.
So the enrollment is very
important and that was discussed
in the council and then Mr
Thiessen I've both experienced
the construction of the last
school which is one of our
newest schools that we replaced
in recent years.
In this century with this is a
brand new school that we're
replacing again.
And soil conditions were one
factor that we you know wanted
to.
That's the the purpose of the
language on dressing soil site
conditions of the committee had
a good conversation about it and
that's the recommendations to
treatment.
Thank you.
Anything else Mr chair members I
believe chair Mr Abbey captured
all of the comments.
Comments questions.
I recall the the last project as
well and I've been to that side
and now the.
The additional language to
address that does exactly what.
It says prior to.
coming back for a construction
award we visit the enrollment
projections look at these trends
which rural hard to provide a
consistent pattern and then in
particular make sure that
there's a solution for into
unstable soil conditions to give
us a better confidence at this
new facility will have a longer
life.
Yes so
come up could be retired by then
but
I I think that's a good thing
you know having you know going
out there to visit the site as
well so conditions are huge huge
some big issues out there so I'm
glad to see this language in
there to address some of this
and I'm hoping that they come in
actually present to you all hate
this we're going to do to
remediate these issues because
like I said the so issues are
huge out there the.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comments as
well Mr.
Just a quick.
Question this maybe for a PSS by
half.
Do we know approximately how
much of that I think for the
high school seventy seven
million dollars close to eighty
is really dedicated towards
foundation and stabilization of
the land name.
Mr chair members I don't know
the response that Mr parks we.
Mister chair Mister Robbins the
cost per square foot on this
project is quite high with the
anticipation of having a robust
foundation system included so
between the remote nature of the
district and and making sure
that we.
A substantial attention into the
into the foundation system it is
quite it's quite a high number.
to cover those to cover those
things.
I I know like in Los Angeles
years ago they built a high
school in downtown Los Angeles
the cost six hundred million
dollars because of the
earthquake conditions that they
had to put in place and it
wasn't a high school for six
thousand students it was for a
couple of hours and but and when
you get into foundation issues
you know he can really drive up
costs so thank you.
I hadn't the seeing that
Mr remind is in the audience to
the budget director finance
director to to want to add to
the discussion.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
I would like to first address
the big question in the.
The committee has not regarding
the foundation the soil
conditions in two thousand.
His two thousand thirteen a new
elementary school was designed
uncertainty it is a building was
built for seven hundred students
it's worth eighty six thousand
four hundred square feet and we
have those same concerns because
that building is about a quarter
mile west of where our current
high school is and say merry
what we want to build a new one.
When we and Mr Sonjay could do
from secretary seventeen is here
and he can correct me if I'm
wrong he was one of the the main
players the design of the school
we look at three different types
of foundations for that building
I believe they we had one
company come in and drill and a
drill three hundred feet before
the kid rock the soil conditions
are a lot of Klay we talked and
talked and talked and what we
finally settled on was a system
called rammed aggregate piers
some of you may be familiar with
those some of you may not
basically what happens is it is
a the whole and I believe they
were three feet in diameter and
ten feet deep.
We're thrilled multiple ones I
believe there were around three
hundred fifty of them then there
are filled with gravel and as
the gravel is putting those
holes it is compacted which
basically changes the
composition of the soil.
The US does school opened in two
thousand sixteen and in the five
and a half years that it is been
open we are not seeing any
movement in the in the floors we
did polished concrete floors so
you would see if there were any
major cracks there are no major
cracks there are no major issues
with settling we do not have
doors that stick I.
I will not say that that's the
system we would use for this
building but I will say that is
a system that has worked well
for the most recently
constructed building that
building is a two story building
so there is a lot of weight
placed upon that foundation and
it has it has worked well for us
and.
Because we have seen that it has
worked well it would be a very
viable option and hopefully that
will.
As we get further down the road
we will be able to.
To further investigation
hopefully alleviate any of the
concerns of the committee may
have thank you that's good I
will say one one more comment we
had the general manager of the
general contractor come in about
a year ago after the building
been open for years and he was
amazed at the condition of the
building he said it was in
better shape after ripping open
for four years five years than
some of the buildings that he'd
been in the don't been only open
for a year so.
What was designed for that
building work excellent and I
think it would probably work
well for a new building if yes
what we decide.
Thank you for that update that's
very good news.
any other questions.
Do you have anyone else that you
wanted to call in to speak Mr.
Superintendents here I don't
know a whole wide I can see here
that I'm sorry you got the older
slots back there behind of the
crowd.
Come on up.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair I'm
ready Cydney superintendent for
the school district and Martin
reminds his are director of
finance and it's certainly
taking us through the building
in another building that we feel
like it this is preparing us for
this new project.
Was good to finally meet you
we've talked to a lot on the
phone was called at the thank
you thank you for being here
thank you.
Are there any questions the
committee members have for us.
Questions no.
Regis let's keep moving forward.
Projects in thank you thank you
thank you right so I think we
need to vote on the.
To regal.
Okay.
So all those in favor of
approving the subcommittee
recommendation please indicate
by saying aye hi.
Was a post I.
All those opposed.
Motion passes.
On to other business we
certification of.
SS TV's.
We have a motion from the of
course the awards subcommittee
on this a council approval for
the adoption of the resolution
notification certification and
reconciliation unexpended bond
proceeds as follows.
Severance tax bonds twenty one
Series D. one in the amount of
twenty five million one forty
two thousand for PSC State
awarded projects.
delegate authority the chair to
make any additional changes part
of the board of finance section.
And then you can see in the
notes what the adjustments are
for.
Recent awards are being treated
up with the block funded awards
and prior resolutions.
Like getting yes Mr chair
members of.
Mr chair members the the third
bullet from the top Moriarty
Edgewood that had an adjustment
I believe.
A few minutes ago and we need to
adjust that number based on the
job so that that happened.
Do you want to repeat that
number Representative the
adjusted number just for this
the record on did you see one of
these numbers is changing could
you repeat it please.
We already you it was listed in
here for okay that one okay the
vendor number that so will apply
that just put factor in the
motion.
Thank.
Thanks for keeping track of
that.
Questions.
Not all those in favor of the
motion please indicate by saying
aye I was.
Hello as opposed.
Taxes move on to joint powers
agreement for office of
broadband PSC.
Mr chair members this is a
motion from the MS Committee.
We did discuss this and it is we
were given a draft and it's not
a final so the motion will take
that in consideration their
message made recommendations for
council approval to continue to
explore joint powers agreement
with the state of New Mexico's
office of broadband access and
expansion
administratively attached to the
department of information
technology for the oversight
management of the statewide
education network.
We looked at it and one of I
think we all kind of share this
with one of my.
Strongest concerns was to ensure
that the work that PSA for.
The set PS that face staff does
with regard to the right
supporting the schools
everything not be impaired
because the right right now in I
think it's a good thing from a
managerial standpoint to put the
staff under the management of
PSA that staff under the
management of the office of
broadband but that the work and
this is one thing I'd like to
see that the work of the office
is not impaired as it.
Supports the schools in terms of
it's the right work and it's.
Current mission we don't want
you know if there's excess staff
workers time available to
support other activities of the
office of broadband fully in
support I just don't want to
to drift because that sometimes
happens when staff move from one
area to another their their
focus can be shifted and right
now I think the way the draft is
written it's it's pretty good
that I've had a chance to read a
little bit more clearly it is I
think does do a good job I would
just like maybe some narrative
added and to ensure that the
work of the
SFA staff of support to the
schools not be impaired beyond
what it has traditionally been
by this
memorandum of understanding.
With a joint where powers of
the.
Thank you for those those
comments and also wanted to
along those lines at that you
know there has been some talk of
moving to our staff and we have
not had that discussion at the
council level so any any
thoughts about that should be
discussed fully and would have
to be approved by this body so
let's let's keep that in mind as
well.
But again this is not this is
still continuing to work on the
JPA so there's nothing final
about it at this point it's just
basically a motion saying let's
continue to work on it so I
don't know if that requires a
vote but we can go and vote on
to to give the SFA and other
parties the ability to continue
working on it resolve any of
areas of concern.
Mr chair if I can just add just
to be clear for everyone because
I wasn't clear on this during
subcommittee that the JPA was
drafted by PSS the staff and
that it's currently under review
by the office of broadband so
that you know that helped me
understand kind of where we're
at and then I just want to point
out that the director of the
office of the broadband Kelley
Slagle is here I know that she's
happy to answer any questions
today or any other day that the
council may have questions.
Thank you.
Welcome.
Sure.
Sure hello welcome aboard and
we're all working towards the
same and so I hope that are we
can have a strong relationship
and good working conditions
thank you.
Schools are very important we.
Thank you Mr chairman I have one
thing in this visit thing
there's a constitutional
amendment on the ballot in
November that would be able.
Public funds to be used for the
extension of broadband access
into the businesses and schools
and indeed I think perhaps even
individuals homes for the
purposes of education and I
think that may be a very good
thing it's it's not a wide open
the use of state funds but I
think in this area what we're
seeing over the last several
years in terms of the need and
the benefits of broadband access
in not only are urban but also
especially rural communities is
very important and I think that
that's something that can spur
the the the access the rural
areas so desperately need.
Thank you for those comments Mr
Abbey if you comments.
On the for.
It says
VA will use the PS that face
staff which is a little
different than.
Chair so I I I like that
language I.
hope it's workable and then on
page three I think we talked in
the subcommittee of a line to on
page three after under paragraph
eight that we would change may
to shall.
The which is a longstanding I've
concerned standing concern that
I've had the ticket yes but the
council retain authority to
allocate the funds in the public
school capital outlay fund and
not delegate them and I think I
just for some assurances that
the subcommittee meeting at that
that there was nothing impairing
that and this agreement and I
was advised that correct Mr
chairman Mr happy that is
correct.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you for reading this for.
Okay so unless there's further
discussion let's go ahead and
do approval to this draft
All those in favor please
indicate by saying aye hi.
Hello as opposed.
Motion passes for.
We have a I don't see that will
move on to.
And the that is guidelines for
teachers and students for the
statewide education network C.
and.
Mr chair members this this is
also a a staff recommendation
from AMS Senator know if Mister
Robbins wants to initiate the
discussion.
My mind was was elsewhere this
is an page to eighteen Mister
chair Mister Robbins.
Thank you Mr chairman he's
finding his location I'd like to
introduce the gentleman with me
his name is pope address keep in
his works with us with the
broadband PSA broadband staff
overview of your because on
annual leave today you know if
you.
To introduce yourself.
No Mr chairman members of the my
name is public at this K. the
I'm the.
New project manager for the yes
if a broadband.
And the I'm thrilled to be here
today and that very happy to be
helping this this awesome
project to go ahead okay thank
you welcome to the staff and
take yes yes.
With right with regard to the
specific recommendation
discussed we didn't.
yes.
Mr chair.
We didn't have a specific
recommendation there throughout
three options that were
discussed leaving things kind of
status quo the way they are
which probably is not a very
workable thing and I think the
office broadband probably be
liberal fight excellent
technical and
Support for a proper way the
other ones were a hybrid model
the middle of the road approach
for contracting and into to work
yes I would actually be able to
this would require obviously
changes legislation would be
able to actually own equipment I
think Office of broadband under
do it is capable of that where
is the office of broadband the
office SFA is not able to on the
technical equipment so some sort
of hybrid maybe maybe workable
verses a contracting into to
introduce but if it was a
contracting entity through the
office of broadband that might
be a good thing but then the PS
that they would still have some.
Support and some at
participation in that so that's
where maybe the hybrid.
Would be more of a.
The ideal situation that way PS
he'll see does retain oversight
both financially and ensuring
that schools
needs are being met so right now
there's not a specific
recommendation that's kind of in
general what we discussed and if
This I can see just want to add
anything.
I would be happy to hear that
I'm Mr chair members about Mr
produce key with me to answer
any technical questions that we
might have here today and
I think we best stand for any
questions that you may have.
But in terms of any action that
we're taking today this is it
this this informational.
Point Mr chair members it's
potential action to choose
either the status quo a
contracting entity for the
hybrid model for
guidelines for the teachers and
students of the San.
Mr presents key could go into
more detail about the whole.
should we have a recommendation.
Well Mr chair members.
Well the the subcommittee did
not have a specific
recommendation in part because
if you look at the the note near
the top of page two nineteen it
says cost estimates are and
impossible to develop at this
time so it's kind of like in the
car for the course of which way
you want to go cost is one of
the large factors to drive which
model you want to choose but
also federation into the number
of schools and students that
would be served and the timing
so there's three factors that
you want to look at how many
students can you serve how
quickly what is the cost going
to be and
so time never students and cost
and so each model has a up a
budget and a
a con a pro and a con to it so
that's why we wanted the council
here perhaps here some from
technical experts to give us a
little bit more of a direction.
I do think the hybrid model may
be the preferred thing but I
think would like to hear of
recommendations that our
technical folks could find Mr
chair members.
Mr Medinsky have a professional
recommendation yes
Like to Mr Robbins very well
said the hybrid model that
brings us
Kind of a little more
comfortable because if it gets.
To the point a little faster and
the what causes to the status
quo that to.
Brings us
Very slow evolution and the the
contracting X. entity will bring
hi there the administration the
required from a from from the
state so in in in my in my
professional opinion I would say
that hybrid all the would it
will be the recommendation.
So this would be a.
Approval to proceed in this
manner is the final approval of
tentative approval I mean of.
I'm not sure that I'm
understanding the full effect
I can recall right what you have
here but if everybody feels
comfortable moving that way I
I'm okay with it as well
so.
Transients
You know I read no work and then
I read the three options and
then I read exhibit a and I want
to see clearly what action is
being.
Proposed in I see a description
of a hybrid model which is
different than action proposed
and I just feel.
I would like to see the M. S. of
committee takes position and
bring forth a proposal with
recommendations to go with
hybrid.
I would prefer them to bring
back what that means so we can
say okay they want to go with
hybrid that means we're going to
do whatever.
And then some analysis
justifying that recommendation
rather than just doesn't seem.
Ready to I need to be clear what
would be voting on which I.
What I read here.
Mr chair and Mr Robbins remind
me if I'm my memories does not
serve correct but at the time
our subcommittee looked at it
there wasn't a staff
recommendation their staff
recommending it was and so.
You know obviously we were all
leaning towards hybrid but there
wasn't a clear staff
recommendation and so there was
a sense of like perhaps we don't
have all the information we need
which is why it was pushed to
four counts.
So.
Would you be prepared for this.
Hopefully the chairman would
agree that.
Just the subcommittee to flush
it out they've given us the
staff recommendation rather than
do it here we're we're not quite
clear what will be in just to do
Senator able agency but the well
director rob and.
Go ahead but I you know I prefer
to have separate commendations
when we're considering these
things that helps us for
discussion purposes as council
members and so that is very
helpful to have that.
Mr chair what I would recommend
we do is we can hold rather than
waiting until December our our
November perhaps we could with
now with with some more
technical support we could maybe
hold the prior to or we just
wait we add it to our next
agenda and our November meeting
add it to that and then bring it
back to the council for full
consideration in November so
Mister chair I don't recall and
staff will have to help us with
this if there's a timing issue
with you.
Guidelines.
Mr chair members is your timing
issues.
Perhaps.
The the faster the better the
because we have a all already
negotiation with the.
Riders so I think that.
Mr chair members I believe if we
for not being clear that this
wait till November whether or
not it's a timing issue.
And there are as as was
mentioned and and the outline
the hybrid model even with the
hybrid model under contracting
with the hybrid model there
would be legislation proposed to
accommodate some of that.
So I think that needs to be
flushed out also will need to do
that you know if it's if it
would help maybe the action we
could take today is just of
confirming our intent to proceed
with the hybrid model and
bringing more detail to the next
meeting for final approval.
Would that help.
Mr chair members that would help
us the.
On
the street that.
Someone would make the motion.
I will make that motion that we
move with the intention of
moving toward hybrid after
further discussion at M. S. and
input with a staff
recommendation coming.
Mr chair I'll just say if if
it's helpful to have a special
meaning I'm willing to do that
and I'll just throw that out.
In in again because I I I I
think it can take enough time
that with the other things that
I am just maybe doing November
maybe maybe we need to have a
special meeting for.
Allocate additional time for
this one topic
use their meetings last about
two hours and you know this one
may entail either a longer
meeting or maybe we need to have
a separate meeting but I'll
discuss that with the the
executive director of over the
next few days.
Thank you for the discussion.
Not all those in favor of the
motion please indicate by saying
aye.
I.
All those opposed opposed no.
When my vote.
Okay I just don't think we I'd
like to see more analysis on the
recommendation for this thank
you Mr thank you.
so.
Let's move on the agenda them
and the.
Thank you.
It is.
Most of the items are
informational.
And we have one of legislative
staff of.
Welcome.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of our
council under item eight tab
eight you'll find their an
executive summary provided by
the staff and then I will
quickly run through the slide
deck that that director Avid and
I and our staff is prepared this
would be the third time that
we're actually presenting this
we have presented this already
to the public school capital
outlay task forces wells to the
Mexico school boards association
but we felt like it was very
important to present to this
council I'm gonna move to some
of the sites rather quickly
because there's some depth of
expertise on this council in
particular
and then spend some time just
really in the latter half of the
slide deck explaining some of
the proposals that our staff has
for the legislature in terms of
outlay.
So
I'm gonna move quickly to slide
three you'll notice there that
there's just a record of a
capital outlay fund balance we
also heard from director Avid
and then misli each as well as
staff those numbers are actually
probably higher at this point
given where we are with the
increase in funding in the state
so what's important about the
slide though is a substantial
jump from FY nineteen to FY
twenty.
It's pretty indicative of where
the finances are the state and
you'll notice that the estimated
fund committed fund balance
still increases despite the fact
that we have some projected
projects in place.
That will affect us in fiscal
year twenty four however I think
that getting right with this and
the work of the staff in
December will really help us
hone those projected and a
committee announces in a
improved way I'm gonna skip over
slide for the that's simply we
all are aware of this
information this is really for
the extra community to
understand where awards are.
I'm gonna dive into slide I this
is the US statute that
authorizes us as a council to
authorize a just local share
requirements and waivers what
we've just noted as a staff is
that that up to in requests for
waivers is really just a symptom
that we need to address changes
to the formula you'll notice
that there's a request for
waivers or advances per fiscal
year and then the increase over
time and are they have been
increasing there's some
interesting space around fiscal
year seven
thirteen but we think that
addressing the local match
formula will be a more
systematic and direct solution
than creating waiver policies to
address individual district
needs particularly that's a
bureaucratic burden for the
staff.
On slide six you'll note there
that we have
the a chart that describes what
happens over time in terms of
the face to state match formula
new formula increase the local
share for most districts and
further increases local match
for many micro districts already
with the ninety percent match
rate for instance animus
And corona good examples and by
fiscal year twenty four the
match after the final phase in
his thirty seven thirty percent
seventy percent.
already and notice on there at
the high end of our.
Use the word owners earlier yes
yes.
slide seven.
You can see what we have done is
staff to just demonstrate the
impact on individual districts
so a couple of for you to notice
there the jump in Farmington
from twenty nine to seventy one
percent local match pretty
significant for the community
Albuquerque from forty three
percent to ninety four percent
and then even increases in those
small tiny descript districts
corona camallo which are already
above ninety percent so.
Slide eight I think it's
important for us to go over I'm
gonna go over each of these
individual pieces for for us as
a council to really reckon with.
in terms of the impact of policy
and why it's such an inner
iterative process.
So the face to formula makes
several assumptions that
actually may not reflect reality
and require further study by us
the first assumption is that
districts have the ability to
pay for facilities and it's soon
to be an average of four point
five mills per year over five
years however four point five
mill rate requires districts to
take full advantage of SB nine
the to melody.
And partial advantage of HB
thirty three up to ten miles
most districts only have a two
mill levy capacity some
districts have no capital no
disabilities so there's an
inherent assumption in that
second the cost of replacing
facilities is equal to the total
allowable gross were added to
the district times three hundred
seven dollars forty seven cents
per square foot.
Yet.
As we all know the average cost
of construction is likely
greater.
especially in the wake of the
pandemic.
Districts will spread out the
replacement of all their
facilities on a forty five year
basis that's an inherent
assumption however districts
with longstanding deficiencies
have a greater urgency for funds
requiring a larger investment
immediately not necessarily
spread over an ice I forty five
year spread.
the staff did some analysis on
slide nine that you can just
kind of briefly see a regression
analysis aware of what we found
was that the actual cost of
construction this year is
probably around four hundred
twenty five dollars per square
feet an increase of eighteen
dollars per square feet per
year.
Interesting to just note where
we might be.
So what I'm gonna do now is move
on to a couple of scenarios in a
first focus on the.
Local state match formula issue
that we have as a state and then
I'll talk about offsets and the
third of some other ideas that
we have together
give me just really want to
think director Avid and study
Lujan working with myself and
tend to do our two teams and
sort of thinking through these
things.
so the problem statement here
around state match formulas that
face to formula increase local
share for the project funding
pretty significantly so what
should we do about this given
our fund balance.
we can three options here to
think about and put in front of
our legislature the first is
maybe reduce the local match by
a flat.
Thirty percent across the board.
we could consider fifty percent
for Michael districts.
Estimated change in the average
local match you'll see there's
about from seventy to forty six
percent
to really simple clean fix
across the board.
Option two would be to actually
decreased the facility life from
forty five to thirty years for
districts reduce similarly rate
from four point five mills to
three males we could also do
that so those two are sort of in
the same range reduce estimated
changes in average local match
from seventy to fifty percent.
facilities are often placed
before forty five years.
I think that might be a good
rationale and really
particularly to district needs.
Option three increase the cost
per square feet
There's an assumption of three
hundred seven dollars we could
jump to four hundred twenty five
work with the staff to really
come up with the of home number
there fifty percent local match
for microchip maker districts
you'll notice that the estimated
change there's a slightly higher
seventy to fifty three percent
but we do know cost of
construction has increased so
those are three scenarios would
need to go to
have task force support and
potential
of legislation do want to say
that what we are suggesting here
is that would sunset after two
years we do feel like it's still
in their intention is to study
the state and local match
formula of the we need to have a
long term solution to this but
this but these are some good
solid I think short term
remedies first the to to buy
some time to actually do that
work.
The next few slides can take a
quick look at your leisure but
you the staff has sort of the
scenarios each of these through
three scenarios an impact on the
range of different districts.
Minutes John to slide sixteen.
So this is work that we did to
sort of think through offsets
there's description of offsets
often there's confusion on what
an offset really is
we heard from superintendent
Salazar earlier that she had a
eighty some million our cities
have some thousand dollar offset
it's about six to seven years
with the which I think was
important.
and you'll notice so that that
we have sort of an imperfect but
telling graph that has.
Districts and there ought
legislative offsets right now
compared to their actual balance
their actual program cost for
this fiscal year fiscal year
twenty three and the reason we
did that was we wanted to
demonstrate sort of the impact
of those offsets it's in perfect
but you really kind of get an
idea if you look at lake Arthur
they've got the
Offset that's proportionally
pretty significant compared to
their
program cost.
So on slide seventeen
There's a couple ways that we're
thinking about this.
So we could look at offsets by
age and
So just taking a quick look at
this graph you'll notice that
offsets that are older than five
years are just under thirty
million dollars.
What's important about this
slide eighteen is that one of
our scenarios actually has to
the age of offsets so we could
sense that offsets to forgive
anything older than five years
the actual impact of that would
be seventy four to forty six
million dollars that encourages
participation in districts with
older offsets we could credit
slide offs sits on a sliding
scale so not necessarily just a
blanket forgiveness but looking
at a sliding scale with older
offsets.
Being given for given to a
larger degree sort of still
still somewhat in the similar
range in terms of the cost and
it maintains a proportion of
portion of all offsets will
aging out the oldest one and
then option three establish
criteria to allow the council
itself to make offset
forgiveness awards on a case by
case basis think of that one.
Again it's sort of like the
waiver solution a little bit
bureaucratic in nature and
however some something that you
know we could consider.
I'm gonna skip to slide twenty
because of the nineteen is again
free to take a look at in terms
of the impact on districts in
offsets.
But on slide twenty we also as a
staffer recommending that we
look at three distinct programs
in terms of what we can do is
some of the Fund balance the
first is working to support for
committed prekindergarten across
the state we know that that's a
huge investment for us all and
so the first option is just
simply reducing the local match
required for prekindergarten
awards by fifty percent period
second.
Exempt all local prekindergarten
awards from a local match.
And the option third the third
option is to exempt the wrecked
provided appropriations from
prekindergarten facilities from
offsets so no offsets in terms
of the pretending
prekindergarten award.
We also think that for school
security we're hearing
resoundingly from
superintendents and school
boards that says school security
is a major priority so sunset
existing but what we actually
has already right our school
security program.
Madam as of July but we could
look to appropriate a certain
amount of money ten million we
have heard at the press ups code
if from some superintendents
that perhaps more would be.
Representative was it but we
could appropriate certain amount
more and
That would be distributed
similar to the SB nine match
without methodology we also
think that it's very important
to be supporting career
technical education facilities
so recommendation to allow the
council itself to issue some
awards process these as well as
really reflect the revise
adequacy standards that are now
being
looked at and second
recommendation there is a to
appropriate funding via our
public school reform Fund
to PED for CTE started crossing
specialized treatments is sort
of a below the line nonrecurring
allocation.
Director Avid anything.
Thank you for that presentation
was it was any consideration
because this one thing we
discussed and subcommittee a
couple months back.
On the offsets.
We at us PED at indicated be
difficult but.
There are many of the awards
that are included in offsets
because any of the appropriation
comes at many of Las also that
maybe for items that would be
funded by the SFA if we could
just see what those are and I
know that would take time PED
said but maybe with some
assistance they could flesh
those out because you know we
might be able reduce the offset
by just saying well if you use
the use of money to put in a new
turf actually terrifying new
field well that's hundreds of
thousands of dollars for for one
football field
doing things like at by band
uniforms buying band equipment.
Though those are consider
offsets but those are not items
that would be eligible for PS
that they funding the same thing
for computer equipment things
like that right now schools by
that they provide you know
probox or other types of
electronic devices to students
that's not eligible for PS that
they funding but if the
Legislature gets that it uses
part of their capital money for
that well that becomes offset
for the school district if they
accept it so.
What I would be.
Recommend is that an analysis be
done on what portion of losses
because some of these things
you're talking about reducing
offset by twenty or thirty
million out of the seventy plus
million.
Perhaps that would do of of an
equal job without having to
fudge around with a formula I do
appreciate what you said that
the changes are reducing by
fifty percent but if you have a
school district that has a ten
percent match taking it to a
twenty percent management still
put him in a position where they
can't do anything.
One question you mentioned that
some school districts didn't
have the capacity to have a to
increase their rates for you
talk about capacity or they
don't have significant
valuation.
Because right now small school
districts Michael districts have
to have a mill levy combined
total mill levy of at least
seven.
Larger districts over over a
hundred have to have a mill levy
of at least ten eligible for
funding would reducing that
perhaps to six and nine percent
in Abel's more districts to
apply because some districts if
they're at if there you know a
small district and they're
currently at you know.
Six point five.
They say well I'm not gonna
apply because we can't apply for
not at least seven well they
might be able to apply same
thing with some of the larger
districts apply for waivers.
to apply for waivers but also
even funding I think there's a
there there is a requirement
that we can propose this council
can impose a a because we have
some districts where they say we
do we we've tried we've tried
we've tried every time I go to a
bond it gets voted out.
But that's because you don't
have to have a lot of voters but
not a lot of students in the
schools and so they don't want
to increase their their taxes
but it seems that and looking at
the charts that we have before
us today they have sufficient.
valuations they just don't want
to have their taxes raised but
they put that often other parts
of the state that do have sister
you know raised their taxes
they're they're charging you ten
and I've been there some
districts that are fifteen or
twenty percent local mill levy
so it was there and there been
any consideration about looking
at the mill levy and really
putting a strict minimum that a
local school district has to
have to even apply for funding
because I understand we can
waive things but it seems unfair
to me when you have school
districts even some small school
districts they're a well above
ten percent.
And we have some small school
districts that are you aren't
even approaching seven percent
and we're saying well let's make
it easier for them to borrow
when or not borrow but be given
money from the state when some
of the other districts are taxed
themselves at very high rates
and we're not going to help them
out because of their only at a
five percent match going to a
ten percent match really doesn't
get much.
Just hours thirty percent
reduction.
If they had a ninety percent
local matches would go to
seventy three percent right to
right.
Okay twenty seven percent
reduction to.
Okay.
Mr chairman Mr intact I think I
think it's certainly worthy of
study in terms of the actual
impact of middle of the in the
capacity I think a it's
extremely complex I was just
actually writing down trying to
list particular districts that
to my mind sort of demonstrate
the complexity of that so for
instance you have Pecos which
probably has pretty hot and land
valuation but the tax the new
funding capacity there's going
to be really interesting space
right and then you've got
Farmington which I think
certainly yeah some of what you
said may or may not be the case
and not community and then you
have a community like Aston so I
up to my mind I'm thinking of
the spread of the school
districts across the state and
why what we are facing with the
middle of the situation
particularly does recall should
require some study.
Thank.
If you first of all thank you
for you LFC for putting these
together I think this this
really gives us some.
Some good options to consider
and
Thinking of some of the you know
you have come up with three
options on on the match.
But some you know some of those
I don't know if they would work
well together for you to take
one or two of the options and
have a greater impact I know for
instance on the.
On the offsets if you were to to
forgive those old older of
offices so older than five years
and then also anything that that
was
not something that is of
PSUC funded or was in those
categories that we talked about
of CTE safety and you know you
could have a bigger impact of on
anything that was newer so.
so forgive the old ones anything
that was new a look at the the
the purpose of that funding if
it was not something that we
funded or in one of these
critical areas that we're
looking at school safety C. T.
K.
I would have a double effect and
I guess we're we're also saying
that unless on the offsets those
would only come to be if someone
was coming to PS you'll see for
funding.
Otherwise they would see no
benefit from the offset.
Right from getting rid of the
offset in any in any questions
so again the
We want to encourage people to
come to PS you'll see and make
it easier
but reasonable and I think the
match does does more.
Well it's it's a combination but
looking at that the couple of
these options together rather
than one or the other I have.
Thank you Mr chairman I
definitely I think for as we are
Presenting this to all different
stakeholders and will take all
of that back to staff and sort
of work on this one thing I
think that I would ask
Mr teas to sort of share and or
help us think through is the
notion that the staff either yes
if the staff or the public
education department staff could
go back and look at offsets and
historical offsets and what may
or may not have been
What may or may not fall under
something that the PSUC could
have awards that we could have
issued because I think that's a
pretty large burden and I'm not
even sure if it's doable.
Mr chair are are that that would
I'm not against that idea at all
but that would be open over
burdensome task for.
PED staff will have to people
Caporali office go back to two
thousand and three you're
talking thousands of more if I
would have to go through.
To gather that data.
The.
Just on how that process would
be just looking at the The
appropriation line of what it's
for rather than looking at the
far part of our.
Mr chair we we we have the
appropriate and we know what to
proprioceptive the cap on the
bill but what they actually use
it for the whole different
story.
For example like the what
Council services when they write
the language these days it
encompasses everything which we
don't know what they're gonna do
until we actually some of their
plan to us the state to plan
design construct renovate
purchase books for
disappointment for to use
computers whatever whatever
whatever and to the summit that
we don't know what it is and it
could be on you know it could be
all it just came in one invoice
like for feels cool but it
doesn't coming up because
Senator.
Perhaps we just set a time for
talking about relieving offsets
five years and older that's one
number and then look at the
appropriations that are five
years or younger your that would
greatly reduce the the task and
serve only looking at you know
nineteen or twenty years worth
of our cars you only have to
look at five years that could
reduce it but I think you know
that maybe it's something that
has to be included legislative
language no this is not going to
be considered an offset or
something but it seems to me
again and I'm from a large you
know.
The City of Albuquerque that has
a lot of legislators and
everything like that and the
City of Albuquerque about half
for a little over half of the
total assets right now or
Albuquerque public schools.
So they stand to benefit from
any reduction but by the same
token many of their offsets may
not have been to this enough for
actual building improvements and
allowable type things so
you know maybe maybe we set a
time limit we only go back you
know if we're going to forgive
them before certain date then we
from that day forward we look at
what wouldn't have been eligible
for PS of a funding and exclude
those from the offset and then
as as a process going forward
when those are a farce come in
we specifically exclude.
From and that would probably it
would look require legislation
but that when it when it funding
when when funds are I reimbursed
if they were reimbursed for non
eligible for USFA items would be
considered offset in doing that
at the time the funds are
requests for reimbursement.
Lessens the burden of having to
go back.
Just a suggestion.
Chair just on that point that
that would definitely need a
legislative change remember the
offsets are calculated district
have to June first to accept or
reject appropriation so then
that's when we calculate the
offset so than they would have
to be a timing of when those
plans come in and want to start
somebody in our farmers and when
we calculate that often.
That has to be some so you would
think that this some snapshot in
time to exist right now.
Help you with that.
Mr chair
When you get a one minute and I
don't know I have a question.
Why couldn't the school
districts who are looking for
forgiveness for an offset why
couldn't they find that historic
information do they not have it
that we know the specific have
to search for it I don't know a
lot about school districts
districts financing why would it
be if PED bird market state and
the school district wanted
relief of the off if they can
find that history.
Mr Surtees Mr chair yes that
that could be a possibility but
it depends on how you gonna like
looking at it statewide to go in
and.
I.
Mister chair Mister teeth if
it's yes the districts that are
applying for the question from
chair here and I think maybe
that.
Good discussion.
Mr check and ask questions sorry
director.
Quick question.
The way I understood this is
that you're saying we would do
both the okay match.
And the asset not pick one or
the other we do one of the
options about okay that's what I
understood just make sure that
you guys like that thank you for
that let me just say on that
last slide.
Of those critical activities.
Some of you're proposing for
protection and then two other
issue.
Posing for removing the offset.
So you could do them all that's
what I was thinking that you
could do both.
At the same time on some of.
It's a menu and you just pick up
all of.
And and Mr chair just to note
that this the proposal of these
would be a two year.
So that that needs to also
figure in the workload programs
you know that's going to be
necessary.
The so thank you.
So we have a yes so all those
reports that use the list we've
decided we're going to ask for
anything that was priority other
priority information.
Something to come up with
something.
Mr chair members the only item
that I.
I could come forward with the
fact that the PS public school
capital outlay oversight task
force meeting on October thirty
first
and and the topics are the
update from the cares.
We're going to discuss the
adequacy standards.
Going to discuss
How far bureau has come along
with our state local match study
the office of broadband is
invited to presented that
meeting.
And we're going to talk about
special capital the CTE and the
security and in those two topics
is going to be districts
presenting.
Mr chair and that's all I had to
to add thank you.
Anyone have anything else.
They like to.
This.
If not again thank you for all
of you for being here those of
you this the staff of the whole
meeting we appreciate you being
here.
In a some of the things that we.
We deal with and also thank you
council members for their
service.
Education.
So I will entertain a motion to
adjourn hello.
Have a motion and a second.
All those in favor of the
turning please indicate by
saying aye.
All those opposed thank.
The gentleman we go to.
Thank you thank you just hope
