Mr chair members your serious
changes to the agenda if you
look at items six c los alamos
public schools facility mazda
plan assistance they've had to
be removed from the agenda
they're no longer requesting to
resend their reward.
The.
Thank you then I would have
entertained a motion to approve
the agenda as a m.
Motion in the second
who prove the agenda is amended
all those in favor please
indicate by saying I
was post
and
forgot to do ro.
With circle back to rocket
star.
Can you phone when you're not.
Yeah.
Does the recording.
We got a super majority.
Okay
yes.
The.
You're joking your.
The.
So while we've approved the
agenda is early correspondence
to come before us today mr chair
there is night
looking solid sir
move on to public comment and
i'd like to ask if anyone in the
audience has
public comment that like to
share.
With public.
We'll move on then to the
financial report item on the
normal three
good morning members check you
so if you look at your executive
summary will attack this time
i'm going to take the financial
plan a little differently we're
going to talk about two
particular items that have been
over some concern but that's
good through key points one
they're financial plan includes
a new standard space and system
space a words totally
approximately seven point six
million in phase one funding
which sixty point three million
are out your construction
it also includes the out of
cycle the words totally in a
hundred and eleven point four
million in new construction
funding and twenty eight
thousand in additional
construction funding so if you
look specifically on the two
items under bullet three we're
gonna continue to have the
conversations regarding our work
as it pertains to you the
potential impact of senate bill
one thirty one which what we did
is we titled it estimated cost
of pre applications because we
fell we've heard what york
require requests where that this
is going to be an ongoing so
we're going to continue to do
this work and call it estimated
cost per for pre applications
we're also going to talk about
the cost per square foot
variants analysis that we did
which allows us to hone in on
the financial plan and all the
outcycle awards that are on the
detail and will go through that
in what that means exactly.
So let's start off on page eight
and we're gonna talk about we're
gonna go down to section two
this is the itemization of all
of the out year construction
funding some of it also includes
a design feeds funding but this
is a result this chart is a
result of the items on page ten
through.
Thirteen.
What we did if you recall last
pseuse meeting we increased
those out your fundings by
thirty five percent
we collaborated with within the
department and chose thirty five
percent with that there was a
good number to increase it by
based on the climate of what's
going on with the construction
industry was we were figuring it
out as these projects were
coming forward to get a worded
it wasn't enough so we finally
decided to sit down and go
through that the financial plan
the detail region by region and
determine the best
estimate again these are still
estimates of what the cost per
square floor would be in that
region now so if you would go to
page fifteen
of your financial plan and take
a look at the chart.
All of these projects are on the
financial plan in the detail i'm
the time table
if you look at
how them
that is what was estimated at
the time that the district came
for their initial award and
column g showing the cost per
square foot is everybody and
that's spreadsheet.
Yes column g is the class per
square flight.
All right.
Colon g is the cost per square
foot that was estimated at the
time that they came for their
initial award so we're talking
the let's take row five four
slowness that was an award that
came in two thousand nineteen so
that estimated cost was as of
then.
So then we'd sat down and did
the work and did if you look at
column I that is the new
estimated cost per square foot
for those projects so column h
is now what you would see on the
financial plan
so we feel that it's more in
line with what we're
experiencing now in this claim
so that significantly changed
the financial plan on that
section section two
but again or more in line now
with what i'm transpiring
before I go onto the second
ballet I want to stop here and
ask if any of the members have
questions regarding this work.
This.
Mister.
The.
The.
Check members
that the reason for the the the
large increases this project is
changing from a from a system
space to a standard.
If we have another question.
Your graphic.
So mister chair is per the year
if you look at the first one for
an idea ron out where it was one
seventy five and it's gone up to
three hundred that one is low I
mean it's low in today's world
because it's just a remodel that
was specifically so that's why
it's not at the five hundred or
or the six fifty it's it's at
three hundred cause it to
remodel and the other one you
were pointing out it was.
Miss padia keep in mind this
spreadsheet has a combination of
new score construction
renovation and system space so
the ones that you see for thirty
two going up to a hundred and
fifty scraper at those or system
space projects so it's a
combination of all three of them
so
it's going to look like a huge
variance we would need to know
exactly what the project.
In front of us.
No is.
Whatever.
It might be to might be helpful
to
just
with them out
mr chair separately.
Mister
stab I think this is really
great work right again like a
commented earlier at the
subcommittee I I very much
appreciate this I think it's a
great attempt to get in a better
place in terms of the financial
plan I do really like my dinner
and instant chairs
recommendation in terms of
splitting them out and the
reason is it actually would help
us to my dannest point look at
percent increases in systems
versus standards place and that
would actually be really
interesting so thank you.
Well definitely do that for the
next meeting.
I'm mr chairman's per the year
any additional we clarify the
ones that you were asking about
specifically or any additional
questions
just clarification so the
estimated cost for square foot
is that coming as an update from
the actual alliance
or is that just another sort of
estimate on the part of
yesterday so mr chairman's per
the case in column I
are what we have done internally
based on what we've seen and
based on the region and the
location we were very closely
with the field department to get
what's happening in what we've
seen so that's why those variety
you'll notice the nine hundred
dollars or sooner gallop and an
out of as you said location and
the others are different but we
looked at each and everyone one
by one to get these estimated
forecasting costs.
Yeah.
Thank you i'd like to just not
that m.
The other questions
this particular.
Mr chair members I want to now
go back to page eight.
And I want to direct your
attention to
row thirty
if you were again can recall
last meeting be
it and work as to
the potential impact of senate
bill one thirty one and who has
made mention possibly coming
forward so that you have a
better idea of
what it looks like coming in the
future and how senate bill it
will be potentially impact us
again we've determined that this
is going to be an ongoing work
so we retitled the financial
plan the other thing as we also
knew last meeting we had put the
entire amount under one fiscal
year which was fiscal year
twenty four which we knew at
that way it was a hundred
percent accurate we also do want
to say again
these are high level estimates
because none of these projects
have been very they could be
from a one conversation about
the district as called us and
indicated that they plan on
coming forward so again these
are high level so what we did as
we worked internally with mister
schmell two further analysis to
determine what at what point
will they be coming or in a ward
on the design level as well as
the construction level so if
that being said i'm going to
hand it over to mister schamon
as well as while you can then go
to page fourteen of the
financial
mister care members i'd like to
briefly walk you through the
estimated costs for pre
applications for existing and
expected standard place projects
so i'll just go through each
column and have explained what's
going on with the page number or
each fourteen page fourteen
thank you
so mister chair members starting
with column a.
And b we have the district and
then the score that were into
speeding to come for a standard
space award so the items that
are in the normal funds are
existing applications the ones
that are I tale size and red are
expected so we've had the
conversation with the district
but there's been no formal as
the middle at this point are
going on to column sea
we then look at if the district
has indicated or is currently
requesting a local matroduction
for the project which then goes
into columns de and f which
looks at the statutory
eligibility requirements for
each
wave or a local mattred action
option based on the current data
that we have
moving on to column g we have
the enrollment to five year
projection for each school and
in using that data we plug that
in to our maximum allowable gsf
calculator which that amount
then correlates or goes into
column I where we multiply the
gsf by five hundred dollars a
square foot to come up with an
estimated total project costs
moving on to column j we then
look at the sp one thirty one
state match as it exists right
now to estimate whether if they
came for an award currently what
the amounts would be moving into
a column's mnp which i'll speak
on in a minute
columns k and l then break out
the project that as the total
estimate of project cost for
state and local match so face
one as designed so we're
estimating that to be about ten
percent of the total project
cost where his face to as the
remaining ninety percent for
construction
then finally moving into columns
m n o n p this is our
approximating the potential
fiscal years that these projects
would come for either design or
construction award so the
amounts in purple are designed
the amounts and green.
A construction finally moving
down to the bottom of the page
the three highlighted amounts
and row twenty one these are are
the amounts that we anticipate
for the next three fiscal years
which then correlates to the
amounts
of the summary.
Your members the numbers that
are mister schmell just
mentioned a reflected on page
eight and ro thirty
feedback into the financial
plan.
I think that information is very
helpful in it helps us tied back
to th.
Are there any questions on this
particular
page.
Just a chair members I want to
kind of back track to what my
conversation with you was
regarding the outcycle awards
what we heard in ams when I made
the disclaimer that those
numbers do not take into account
any waivers that potentially can
be coming forward we heard from
ams that they want us to do the
again very high level analysis
of who we think may be coming
for a waiver or possibly just
giving some scenarios in a fat
later time they determine that
they need the waiver so that w.
Let me just go back on that
on the sheet then
the wavers are on d e n f the
various elements of the waiver
and I don't see any that make it
through w.
That correct mr chair members I
am referring to the spreadsheet
on h sixteen page fifteen
that is the item that they
wanted to know if any of them
are going to come for.
Mr chair to answer your question
on page fourteen
to be eligible for a waver you
only need to be meet option one
to or three so some of these
meat the first option.
Okay so as long as one of those
is met one of those squares is
is not read then we're okay then
they're they're eligible to be
considered or waiver.
Moving on to the last point.
Just
a statement that I wanna make
regarding the top portion of the
sources on page eight of the
financial plan where you see the
items in red these are
reflecting the bond capacity and
we will be working very closely
with misleads and bought a
finance to determine what is the
best way and route to go as to
when we should be selling and
how much of these funds we
should be selling between the
december and the june sale so
we're going to be strategic with
that in order for our us to
ensure that line thirty three of
the financial plan
stays.
Questions on the financial plan
thank you questions
the financial report.
The.
Okay
thank you so much for the report
and I will move on them to the
consent agenda
we have several items on the
consent agenda
today
minutes of our previous meeting
the
facility master plan assistance
awards and understand their
three rewards to be made
the preliminary ranking
the condition index
teacher housing project.
I looked the project in cuba.
Four or total cost of nine
hundred and twenty eight
thousand
item
next item e
capital outlay award to texaco
four.
Seven hundred and eighty one
thousand.
Award for dexter the amount of
five point four million.
Liftstation approval to
renegotiate the advance payment.
School.
Approval to
renegotiate the payment.
Based on an upcoming bond issue.
Item I guessed in facilities
demolition award language change
to their adding
to the scope of work for a
hundred twenty seven thousand
and then the recertification of
supplemental servants tax box so
those are all under consent
agenda is recommended by the
very subcommittees.
First of all ask if there are
any questions brief questions on
these and if not I would
entertain a motion to approve
these items.
We have motion in a second to
approve the items on the consent
agenda all those in favor please
indicate by saying I
was supposed
motion passes we'll move on then
to item roman numerous five the
award cycle by them a pre
applications receive.
Mr chairman members
mr chairman members
item a is the pre applications
received.
As you know this is an
informational item to inform you
of the applications received
since the last pse meeting since
then we've received two
standards based applications one
for carls bands and set
elementary school ring to sixty
eight and may so this stir for
me savings to middle school
slash high school ranked number
forty nine we received two
systems based applications one
for greedy combined ring to four
ninety three for the roof which
has categories two in three in
our facilities assessment
database and lost alamos for
lost almost high school
currently ranked two eighty five
and the following page on page
one twelve is the current
spreadsheet it of pre
applications received
yet to be awarded those new
applications that I just
mentioned are in red
those rose in a purple
or up for discussion today for
potential award.
In the following pages include
the
pre application letters from
those four districts and with
that I stand for questions.
Questions on the.
Applications received.
What what is the time f.
Mrperiod chair and members
as the list is significantly
grown in the last few months
the current strategy intended to
plan is to make as many of these
systems based applications at
the next december ps the usa
meeting as possible and then we
will focus on the standards
based applications in the new
year with district presentations
and awards.
Is the band.
Support their.
Madame chair I mean mister chair
and members period I believe
that is the plan yes great thank
you.
They could miss german for the
sense that elementary.
Are you using the five hundred
dollars of square foot is there
estimated.
Mr chair and and members mister
silly the numbers on this
spreadsheet come directly from
the districts this is the
districts estimate these numbers
have not been bettered or
analyzed by psp
okay and do you know what must
her square for their estimating
at
mr chair and members
in their letter
they say five hundred dollars
per square foot
and is that include dim over
the existing building or.
That part of the scope of the
project are just a building.
Mr chairman members all I know
is what is in the letter we
haven't had any discussions with
them beyond thank you for your
letter will start working on
this process.
Other questions.
National items
are nor the questions
we'll move on to the next item.
Two thousand twenty three
capital out the awards overview
mr chairman members this is an
informational item to review the
potential awards that you will
be making today.
Um in total
we have several two standards
based projects one is for dexter
elementary in middle school rank
one thirty four in eighty one
that was just in the consent
agenda and approved we also have
springer first spring or
combined to consolidate and
replace currently right to
fourteen and nineteen
they are requesting a local
match reduction for a fees one.
The total statements for both of
these projects for fees one is
seven million we also have
potential systems based award
for texaco per text for combined
currently ranked three thirty
one which was just approved in
the consent agenda the state
match for this is over just over
a half a million we also have a
potential award for cuba
elementary school for a pre k
funding the potential state
match for this space want a word
is a hundred and twenty four
thousand we also have in a word
just approved in the consent
agenda for a teacher housing or
cuba state match of five hundred
and one thousand three hundred
and nine.
On the following page on page
one twenty one is an overview of
all of these potential awards
made today as well as the awards
made in october I mean excuse me
made in august.
Which would bring our
funding or both of those months
to just over twenty point two
million.
With the potential outer of a
hundred and one million
i'm sorry a hundred and ten
point nine.
And on the following pages are
the individual program
spreadsheets with more detail
for each award that I can go
over if you would like to.
Then all stand for questions.
Would anyone like more detail on
these.
Got the questions then.
Information correct.
Okay well then move on to it i'm
see
pre k capital out the award cuba
independent school district we
have a subcommittee motion on
this one.
The.
So
subcommittee has emotions that
wasn't exactly
and line with the request from
the school district so we
thought we should bring it to
the full council and give you
our reasoning in terms of what
we are proposing so the
subcommittee does recommend that
the council approves funding or
prek for curious.
Ninety one point two or the
state match hundred and ninety
four point two.
Of sixty six point.
Thirty five percent per
SB one thirty one which is a
half reduction for the precade
facilities
and the phase one planning and
design face funding will be for
one to two classroom additions
and to renovate the exist.
The elementary school
the base bid design will include
one classroom
but then the design option will
have options for a second
classroom and this was because
we were.
So rather than simply fully
funding or the design
of both classrooms wanted to
look at and have a space to do
the side with the second phase
two funding whether or not the
second classroom was actually
appropriate so there was
questions in there in terms of
their funding and or the amount
of students
that would serve the precaution
so each allocation is intended
to fully complete the project
space or specify purpose and
upon completion of this awarded
phase of work including
performance with all
contingencies out of psycho
funding for future basis of work
maybe considered at any upcoming
regularly scheduled.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Thank you mister chairman and
this period yeah I don't think
it has been done.
Yeah would definitely encourage
that because on the back of page
when twenty eight you'll see
there where we have some
questions in terms of school
district has fifty four when did
precase that.
But
twenty eight slats are unfilled.
There is some question.
The district has
currently enrolled.
They have two classrooms one at
the element.
Definitely new.
The questions any additional
questions on this.
If not there now
all those in favor of approving
the subcommittee recommendation
on this please indicate by
saying I
was a post
or some passes.
Next item.
That is.
Item d captainly award for
springer minis.
Er so the sub committee here
also has a particular
recommendation it's not
totally different from what the
school district is requesting a
little bit
difference so we are
recommending the consolidation
we thought that was very smart
and think the staff are working
with the school district so well
phase one total amount three
point three million state match
of two point six million
and a district match of.
This includes local match
reduction of about ten percent
there's one w.
Existing elementary and the
middle high school facilities
total of a hundred and nine
students grades c.
We're seeing this is trends now
for these smarter school
districts subcommittee also
would recommend the project to
include five teacher housing
unit with consideration or
manufactured housing.
We were seeing.
There's additions of teacher
housing units as part of the
systems or.
Wanted this school district to
go ahead and consider that since
they haven't started down the
road of teacher housing yet.
Cast less cost prohibitive I
suppose to the projects
enrollment projection gross
where footage will be verified
and updated by the suffer if
necessary and each allocation is
intended to or they complete the
project is a specified purpose.
A pine.
With our continuancy is a
recycle funding for future face
of work may be considered.
Commercial
thank you for that subcommittee
recommended.
Mr churn and members just that
this is an important project for
the district to consolidate the
two schools that are currently
on two separate sites are the
consolidation of this project
would rate size the school and
end of eliminate many safety
concerns as well as the
lifecycle of the schools has
surpassed in their having
significant maintenance issues
on regular basis so this project
would definitely help the
district
mr chairman members if you like
a visual of that it's on page
one fifty and one fifty one
thirty one here from springer
that would like to comment as
well.
The.
Mrperiod chair members of the
committee superintendent also
spring municipal schools thank
you for hearing our presentation
back in july giving us the
opportunity to gather the
information requested to be able
to come today
in hopes of receiving the award
we want to
acknowledge.
Miss pray awareness suggestion
from subcommittee about the
consideration for the
manufacturer housing as an
auction for the teacher housing
peace and say that we are in
complete agreement with that
and I stand for any questions
great thank you any questions
for super ten and else.
Any other questions on the
project itself
if not all those in favor of
approving the subcommittee
recommendation please indicate
by saying I
will post congratulations
thank you.
Yeah.
Next item is when the numeral
six auto cycle requests.
And this is the first one is the
more in combined school.
Yeah.
For your subcommittee
recommendation.
Thank you mister chairman.
Recommends that the council
would approve.
The standards based award to
demons public schools and
including a waiver of their
local match
they score district his done a
good job and
as much as they can in terms of
funding.
This construction.
But the total waiver the waiver
of the local matches about forty
three point nine million revised
date match of fifty one millio.
Revised local match of zero
dollars for the construct.
For a ninety six students I
think the district is maybe a
little bit more larger but about
a hundred students great precade
through twelve forty five
thousand.
Still worried about this mister
chairman uhm this is
quite large in terms of the
price.
A smaller district this is I
think one of the biggest of not
the.
Council has made in terms of
price per square foot certainly
they do want to recognize the
school district and everything
that they have done to try to
reduce casts as well as the
staff to partner with them
but I
I think that in terms of
following the process as a
council
we're doing everything we can
and I I do think that this is
this doesn't feel good as a
subc.
Something without with with less
with only one bid.
My hope is that we look at
something that the legislative
session during the legislative.
This is becomes to untanable or
were were leveraging dollars
where we could but you building
up to build.
We do recommend.
Thank you and I appreciate the
the work in the considerations
that the subcommittee
took in.
You're deliberations then your
final d.
The school district for all of
your work trying to save all of
us
but again.
School children that.
Facilities can.
Members I just want to point out
some things here the current
state local match for demons is
fourteen percent and a eighty
percent local eighty six
percent.
The enrollment pre key the
twelfth grade is a hundred and
twenty students we've seen a
twenty three student count
increase in a twenty twenty one
twenty two school year
the maximum loud construction
cost is forty two point five
million at nine hundred and
forty three dollars of square
fight.
I'm the total project cost is
fifty one million
the district is bonded to the
four functional compapacity and
has a mill levy of ten point
five miles.
The district and psfa staff in
the
the general contractor worked to
eliminate one point seven
million dollars of value
engineering.
In just a couple of other key
points to mind is thirty eight
miles from raton where they
would have to go for food and
lodging two hundred and sixty
four miles from about kirky.
We did advertise advertising
that both the albuquerque
journal in the santa fe new
mexican and is miss warning for
said they were too contractors
attended the mandatory preposal
and only one submitted a
proposal.
With that also.
Representatives from school
district here would you like to
add anything at this point
in this year's super ten.
The.
The.
Mister chair and members of the
committee and we appreciate very
much the recommendation that
doctor prayer warrantment gave
from the subcommittee and this
has been a very long process for
the morning to get to this point
and we know the heartburn that
you're filling with the price
per square foot
and we fill it as well and but
at this point we don't feel like
there's an alternative and so we
pres.
Like that anything
chairman members committee just
to.
Appreciate their sport over the
last six years that we've been
working on this project in
through the process of
determined that we very much
appreciate the
advice and support of the ps.
Good physi.
Questions.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you for giving it ps a beer
staff to come back up as well
just to fit with you.
Do we as a council
have the details of the bed by
you know materials costs for
different types of materials way
labor card.
Mr chaired director silly we do
not have those breakdowns this
is a lump some bed so at the
time of at the time of proposal
review we see a lump sum form we
don't see the detailed breakdown
we will see what's called a
schedule of values as the if
this project is awarded and we
make the award to the general
contractor we will get more
levels of detail as the contract
is drafted
as mr chairman with them this
cost coming in so high
i'm curious why we wouldn't get
more detail from there the
contractor before you enter a
contract to know what you're
really buying
at mr chairman directors to
leave we have had several
conversations with the general
contractor
as mister fickland said we've
come to the table with the
general contractor and the stay
in the district and talked about
what items can be taken off of
the project without
reducing the educational
delivery of the facility i'm so
we do have
we do have information just not
in great detail until we get to
the contract phase.
I guess that's probably mister
chairman a normal process mr
chair that's correct
and I guess
that would make sense of your it
cost were within normal ranges
but in this case we're not and
i'm just curious like
how we move forward with almost
like a
flying blind without knowing
what the additional cost drivers
are.
Mister chair I don't I don't
think the cost drivers have
changed from the last several
projects to be brought forward
unfortunately this one is even
further away from any minister
which has interned driven the
cost up exponentially so I would
say that this has the same
issues that the other projects
we brought from the salamos
grants and galipad which are
any number of things from soils
conditions it could be the type
of mechanical system that was.
Specified on the project there's
there's a multitude of things
that are making it more
expensive but at the end of the
day the location is what's
ultimately.
When I understand that there's
going to be a premium for that
this is still kind of an
outlayer for a rural.
Is that just tied up in you know
we we've seen prices kind of
level out for certain types of
materials were not seeing the
same kind of price blakes if i'm
not mistaken for some of those
things.
Really going to go to labor or
is it going to go
you know they if they come in to
say we're going to have to house
labor out in rats own for you
know eight minutes and that's
going to cost why you receive
i'd be more comfortable with
having some of this for me
personally a better
understanding of some of those
details because I didn't even
feel that on plus alamos
projects that we had
that level of detail it and are
where we where we sit
here.
And the
the soft cost estimates
while we really don't have we've
just got a total bid so you
don't really know what what's
built into the soft cost that
this particular point I know
we've got soft costs that are
estimates when we're starting
out on a project based on the
projects prosperous square foot
but what are the shouldn't we
have more specifics at this
point for some of those you know
three million is going to be for
sure seeds taxes you know what
what's the rest
mr terror
director solely there are still
about twenty percent I believe
in soft car son on this portion
of it that is controlled by the
district and the the state so we
did not put in the full thirty
percent that's typical okay
we we can outline what's what's
in those softcasts it's gross
receipts tax it's special
inspections
roof and inspections performance
assurance contractors
so there are a multitude of
things that come in we do not
have those
solidly estimated as have yet
those typically don't get
started until after the contract
is signed with the general
contractor
when do you where does the
district expect if this is
approved to start contract
negotiations to get that
detailed breakdown
mister charlotte it would go
immediately in tandem with the
signature of the mo
and then would you review those
detailed cost estimates and
identify
where there is outliars and
being a position to negotiate
over whether that should be
included or not and he could
have come down if you wish back
hard enough
mr chair director silly I I
don't think there will be much
more negotiating on the price
unfortunately.
We will see more detail on how
much they are lumping into the
various
areas of of their
of their documents but no I
don't think there'll be any more
negotiation to reduce cost and I
will say that yes
if not most materials and
equipment have platead but we
plateauted a higher level they
haven't come back down and we do
still see quite a bit of
volatility and the materials
market unfortunately with the
situation and maui and a couple
of the recent storms we're going
to see lumber prices show shoot
way back up concrete pricing
goes up and down depending on
the day in the location the
plant for this is very far away
which is adding to the the cost
of the concrete for one th.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you I I do think that along the
the lines that mister soles.
The.
I think that as you get that
information I think it would be
helpful to study it very hard to
also compare with some of the
other
upliars in terms of bids that
we've gotten and say see exactly
where that's coming from if
there's anything that we can
gain from that and maybe the in
a better position down the line
on other p.
And of course of any.
But I do think it's it would be
very h.
Limited to all of us.
Det.
Mr chair thank you we definitely
will study this as well as the
most scared of
line items when we get the full
document and we do want to
compare those against the
previous funded projects in the
last six months we are also
anticipating bringing some
projects south of I forty which
is going to shed a lot of light
on
where we stand with a real cost
for square foot state wide I
think we've seen some of the
larger cost for square foot in
the north I do anticipate seeing
something different south of my
forty in the next couple of
months but we absolutely plan on
taking all of those in comparing
them yes mister chair.
Previously we had talked about.
We had talked about labor being
a bigger issue than the actual
equipment and material costs so
I think to direct your party
awareness point I think we are
all eager as the allianz are I
think we all share concern about
the the costs are continuing to
increase and I think the better
we understand what's happening
the more effective will be at
identi.
Some potential solutions or
options for bringing costs sound
were in this together and we
need to figure it out together
and so I think the added.
Thank you mr chair thank you
miss video
any other issue
in my question.
The.
Mr chairman during them this was
a typical rfp based process so
it wasn't low bid although we
only had one proposer turn in
and but they they did turn in
qualifications along with their
their bed
we
mister chair we typically don't
like to support low bed
situations if we can avoid.
All those in favor of approving
the subcommittee recommendation
please indicate by saying I
will suppose
motion passes in graduations on
your p.
See the buildings go up.
Yeah.
Next item is
the mosquiro combined school.
Construction funding request
this morning
thank you mister chairman
so that the subcommittee also
recommends to the full council
the approval for a mosquito
two things about must get all
the
why we wanted to bring this to
the council for discussion
rather than just a consent
agenda the first is similar to
demon the cost per square for it
is pretty exorbitant
so we're seeing that again it's
a similar situation in terms of
the small very rural school
district they've done everything
that they can to move they have
been in the works they ordered
their transformers ahead of the
ahead of time if you are recall
we approved that so this the
recommendation is to approve
the total amount including a
waiver of their local match so
it's a revised state match of
forty five point nine million
dollars
with the local match of zero
dollars a construction of the
replacement facility
for their one hundred and ten
students altogether.
Through twelfth or to me
approximately same size group
square footage of forty four
point nine thousand
one thing in addition to this is
we did not approve it is a
council request from the
district to you but in some
teacher housing they had also in
addition to this submitted
a request for ten teacher houses
and I think if I remember
correctly at the top of my head
it was about fourteen million
dollars from ten hours is which
was
also pretty.
House so we didn't approve that
and we asked the district to
reconsider umm teacher housing
giving where we are going in
terms of manufactured housing
and all of that but we do
recommend that the council
proves.
Including the.
Thank you
thank you for that
recommendation.
Chergy and members I just want
to go there fruit brief key
points here
the current state match for
moscow is six percent state
ninety four percent local the
current school you're in rome is
eighty eight students.
The maximum allowable
construction cost is thirty
eight point two million which is
eight hundred and fifty two
dollars a squire flat the total
project cost is forty five point
nine million.
The district current currently
has a mill levy a thirteen
mills.
The poc as a previously granted
a waiver for their local match
for design and for the early
work package the transformer
the district psfa staff in the
contractor worked to eliminate
about two million dollars worth
of value engineering in the
project.
And again most girls about
seventy four miles.
From raton in about two hundred
and fourteen miles from
albuquerque
and on this when we had four
general contractors attend the
mandatory pre proposal and only
one contractor submitted a
proposal with that i'll stand
for questions
thank you
and we have
superintendent.
So not from.
Let's go to here to add a few
comments as well then I see
good morning chairman members of
the committee
specifically I just want to
first thank you all for
consideration in the and the
recommendation of the sub
committee for approval for this
project this is something that
we've been working on at this
point for over five years
so it's we've we've jumped
through all the hoops we have we
have followed the process and
and we appreciate the
participation from psp and the
support we've gotten from
knowledgeable individuals as we
as we continue to pursue this
and government
at this point I guess if you
have any specific questions
regarding the the project I
would be happy I have some other
comments regarding
specific cars and things that
we've come up against in
mosquiro that I would be happy
to share with you all to to
bring context to some of the.
Before we open it up again like
the other project.
District in the staff.
You reminded me all we spoke
last that this w.
For over five years six years.
Yeah.
I think you can thank you mister
chairman
why are we designing the school
for hundred and ten students I
don't think you've got that many
in person and they've got it
pretty robust online we do have
a reversed online portion of our
school but at some point in time
when you're designing a school
and general first of all the the
adequacy standards
probably don't accurately flat
what is required
constitutionally to provide our
students a fair and equitable
education and so in doing so
there's a minimal square footage
that it takes to educate any
number of students regardless of
that what that might be but
their online component has
allowed us to address the needs
of other individual students who
are not uhm
met by the needs of typical
brick and mortar and yet also
allow the school in an effort to
be proactive and independent and
opportunity to
match that
desire to provide the best
education for all of our kids as
possible
and mr chair director selling if
I could add
as you are aware we we have a
growth square foot calculator
that we use
that calculator when you get
below two hundred students does
not adequately refresh reflect
what you need in a school you
can't make a classroom smaller
they all have they have to be of
a certain size and so honestly
this school whether it's eighty
eight or hundred and ten is
probably close to the right size
so that's the basically the
floor for.
And is that taking their account
how do how do you operate with
like combo classes.
So
you know instructionally the
best thing is to always have if
you can a teacher for each
individual clashroom however we
are conservative in that and and
so we have one clash room
typically in the elementary who
has serves three grades in one
classroom so we really are
trying to address them the
minimal amount of of space that
we possibly could consume given
the number of students that we
have in the classroom and so you
know the question always comes
down to what can we do to best
serve our students versus the
space that it takes to provide
for them that education and so
we address that as we can both
buy the number of students that
we are engaging a long with the
the teachers that we can recruit
and whatever the the situation
is as it shapes up for our
district in any given year so we
have the ability to
be flexible whether so so it
requires spaces that are
flexible so we may have one year
where we have enough students
that we have to have a teacher
for that but this great over
here now we can combine two
grades this grade over here so
so at some point again it lends
itself to that need to have
enough space to be able to be
flexible in what we can do to
best server students and mr
chairman
how many classrooms will be in
this new facility and how many
class.
Using a full time basis
knowing that with some
fluctuation in your student
population in the future you ma.
There's not a single space and
what we are proposing that will
be unused on any given day every
day every space will be used.
And this is the same situation
where you had a
multiple bidders attender
bitters conference and then one
came in and said take it or
leave it we're not giving you
there's no detail behind it or
anything that.
The situation is the morning
mr chair director saled that is
correct we had four general
contractors attend the pre
proposal one general contractor
turned in we did have several
conversations with those that
did not turn in and it's the
same story we've heard there's
just not enough labor
availability at their own
houses honestly even at the
general contractors to put a
project manager on the job
and so rather than play an
inexperienced person on the job
they decided not to go after the
project which is smart in this
location
should we have an expectation
that springer comes in at this
cost
mr chair director silly I can't
speak to the future that's at
least two years away we could
see a recession and then we'll
be the only game in town so I
can't speak to where prices will
be in two years but I don't
expect them to continue on this
bananas course that we're on
right now.
And the softcost you're standard
thirty percent did you were you
able to strike that as.
Jaggian mr slid we actually only
did twenty percent soft cost for
this one
thank you mister german
thank you mister silly
superintendent can I ask for you
to briefly describe what your
online options are absolutely we
offer um
students we I came up through
the ranks and all you know
participating in a lot of rodeo
my kids participated in rodeo so
there's a group of kids out
there not just rodio kids but
that brick and mortar systems
they they work they practice
the setting and typical brick
and mortar does not always suit
them best may be for other
purposes as well and so we
identified that fortunately
right before covered and and we
we began an online school that
provides students the full the
full round to be able to take
courses from wherever they are
with teachers who are on our
site so so are teachers all
provide input and contribute to
our online students
the online students have times
when they can call in for
tutoring specifically during
during hours each of the
teachers have prepared where
they can reach out or the
students can reach to them so we
make it as engaging and
interactive as the online
students will will participate
or as their schedule allows and
even outside of school hours
there's significant
communication with the students
it has a it served as well
during coven and it continues to
serve well and serve the needs
of those students well.
Who
sometimes might be a drop out
student or you know we encourage
a lot of at risk students and
and bring them along on given
the small scale of our school
and individual needs based us
for with those students need and
address their
needs
so mister charding has two
questions so what percentage of
your students are choosing that
path and is it primarily high
school students it is primarily
high school students we do have
a but five students right now in
the elementary school we
encourage
instructionally and for the
purposes of strong foundation
that those kids and particularly
an elementary school b face to
face with teachers we feel that
it's best at any point in time
but inconsidering the at risk
nature of some other students we
figure that
the path that we are taking for
them is better than some of the
alternatives that they have as
our teachers are very engaged
with those students and we are
at about half an hour but those
are students who are outside of
our district so we're
accommodating to the needs of of
students from all over the st.
Any other questions.
And
curious so we just approved a
design
award for a springer which is
going to be about the same size
school
why couldn't they just use one
of these.
Should we be developing like a
product
so we don't have to pay the five
plus million to get everything
crapped and they could maybe
move up their schedule mr chair
director silly you're breaking
my architect
I would say that each school I
appreciate the product type
discussion
but I would caution us in doing
that in that school is
specifically designed for that
community and that teaching
methodology of that district
we are also a state that is
has a variety of culture and we
need to be able to address those
and the design as well we also
have a lot of read different
regions and climate in this
state and prototypes just do not
lend themselves to
conducively to different school
districts and they don't
transplant well from district to
district unfortunately
but when we're dropping fifty
million dollars for the small
elementary schools
why wouldn't we entertain that
particular if it's in the same
region.
Mister chair director silly
you're not going to save as much
money as you think you are by
going to a prototype it's just
not it's not gonna it's not
where the savings comes from
would be from the design phase
I would like to further address
that if I may mister chair
mr chair director silly one of
the things that I think is
valuable in our communities as
the custom and culture of those
communities and the things that
they raise their kids up to do
and when we consider the career
and technical education of these
students and what the priorities
are within the community to try
to force them all to be placed
in the same box would be
unjust
I mean you do that with them
housing design you can customise
certain aspects of it to beside.
Different types of build outs
for different types of spaces
but
you know I think we're moving
into an error where we're
spending this much money that
to allow that much for local
flexibility at this much cast
is.
Of at least saving the design m.
Again mrperiod chair director
sleep I would I would caution us
to go down this road there's a
lot to be said about sight
specificity of a design
there's topography to deal with
theirs the climate you could be
in a hot area to climb it down
south or a cold snowy climate in
the northern
part of the state
and
quite honestly schools are a
sense of place for a community
and a sense of identity and if
we start prototyping that we're
going to lose those local
cultural identities.
They give us thank you for those
questions
and the other question.
Then all those in favor of
improving the subcommittee
recommendation please indicate
by say no
those are post.
Graduations good luck
thank you for all your heart
working.
See.
So then we go to other business
teacher housing guidelines
update and I see that there's a
subcommittee motion on this as
well.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mr chair members we do have a
few key points on page one
ninety three where we did a
little bit of research at the
request of misleach we looked
into the across group what
cost for teacher housing we
checked if the sites would meet
the existing teacher housing
guidelines of five hundred and
fifty square feet eleven hundred
square feet and fourteen hundred
square feet and we have the cost
for square foot for each list of
on page one ninety three it was
very important there are pay two
by six construction energy star
permanent foundation hard
requirements and the currently
adopted building code
another thing that happens
the reason that it's gonna be
competitive real property is so
that it doesn't decrease in
value and if you're on a
permanent foundation you are
considered a real property and
a regulation and licensing
department has a process for
that to occur
with I do want to point out that
these grapeful costs are just
the design the manufacturing in
the installation does not
include streets it doesn't
include sidewalks it doesn't
include the utilities and such
so it's an added exact
comparison to a.
Although it is this demonstrate
that it's much cheaper
and page for ninety five mr
chairman members shows that we
will
take straight the manufactured
housing
been prohibited on the
guidelines and without said
mister chair members we stand
for questions that you might
have.
The.
Thank you mister chairman i'd
like to think the ms
subcommittee for considering
this I think it's very important
it won't we now
something that's related to.
We're asking our educators or
teachers to consider pre
manufactured homes which is act.
And I think that also behoves us
to think smartly about our
schools as well in terms of
design and tamplets because it
does not feel good
to approve funding as much as we
want to and we do not want to
make decisions on the backs of
students or districts but it
still does not feel good.
To approve funding
that seems pretty exorbitant to
be honest so I think any and all
considerations should be
on the table in terms of what's
asking the council my staff to
look into a thing so I think
that teacher housing is a good.
Mister.
I actually the subcommittee is
already.
I need to leave
any other questions on this
just real quick mister chairman
do we have a policy about how
much in writing go towards the
cost of teacher housing or we
operating into the assumption
that it's free housing or if
there's some nominal rent that
that's just for maintenance or
maybe we haven't gotten there
and that's what
mr chair are director so we ps
of raise participation is only
to build the housing the
relationship whatever the
district is going to charge a
teachers or not is not part of
our perview
I guess that's something that
consider if we get to you know
non manufactured housing where
you're looking at how family and
whether that should be part of
the the cash.
All those in favor of approving
th.
Although the post.
The.
All information.
Yeah.
Mister chairman members if you
want to go to page two or two
talk about just very briefly
where we are on the project
close outs
into account wallet point one
underneath the hundred and fifty
seven project audit list were
moving along very well we now
are at sixty six percent of
those hundred and fifty seven
they are now closed again what
we are working on are those
older projects back to two
thousand six two thousand eight
two thousand eleven and because
of record retention different
systems where they're not the
district and provide their
documentation that's good that's
the piece that's taking longer
what we did here in one of the
sub committees is what will be
helpful is a list of reversions
that that is in conjunction with
this work so we will now be kind
of changing directions a little
bit focused on those reversions
so that you have those.
Thank you I think a calls are to
very important so again.
Thank you thank you.
So mister chair members if you
turn to page two hundred and
three
three this is awards inflation
and the pscoff and this is an
informational item so based on
everything that we've been
listening to from members and
the community
we wanted to just talk about
what we can control
for the for the fund so
if we go to pitch two hundred
three and starting in april of
twenty twenty three the pseuc
funded projects aren't
experienced start as sharp
increase in construction costs
and we had anticipated that cost
and did some percentages on her
when we were selling the bonds
percentage of some cost for
square foot however we did not
reach where we are today so one
of the things that we do already
is we are.
Do our request for proposals we
try to stage that so it's not
released when there's other
projects being released at the.
And then below that here are
some items for you all to think
about for f white twenty five
and the application cycle we
could you could substantially
reduce and limit the phone in
pool and the eligibility
requirements.
If another side is if a district
has more than three active
funded standard space projects
no new awards will be gra.
And below as an example of
districts that have three active
standard based projects more
than three a galip has nine
central has for as crucials has
three and one of one of the
things that we heard from the
awards.
The number of three on the size
of the district for example
could only would only have one
if you have a district with many
schools like alba cookie then it
be easier to say three only so
just if you decide to do this
approach we'd look at the number
of schools in the district and
use that type of scale
another that was to limit one
standard space and three systems
based per year
another thought was to resend
existing awards that have not
expanded any funds within one
year
and right now we have nine of
those projects
and we just want to point out
that the mo already allows you
to do that it says projects not
making progress may result in
the cancellation of the award
after which the facility will be
reranked and a district will be
required to reply at a future
cycle and the question was asked
have we done has this council
done that before and that was
done with a espanola with the
largely
um and now they've reactivated
their word.
And then the other suggestion we
had was to limit legislative
appropriations from the public
school capital out there.
Probably a no go.
Criteria would be established
early in twenty twenty four when
you typically set the.
They finding applications.
Is that
and mr perks and I stand for any
questions.
To this come to contribute to
this conversation
any questions on.
The.
You know
threshold requirements not
having many projects open
ongoing
you can also.
Consider placing threshold
depending on the year of that.
It's five years or more has to
be a hundred percent complete
two years or more it has to be
fifty percent c.
To move those projects.
Previous experienc.
Also.
Having that
close out part of that.
Anyway that's just some other
good for thought issue.
Which I just wanted to add those
the nine districts that haven't
expanded any funding are the
committee asked us to visit with
the districts by another reasons
and bring that back because
there could be.
Reasons that they haven't been
forward in a year that might be
acceptable.
Then on the state local match
wavers.
So mister chair members again
this is a also an information.
Some of the key points are there
the fees two calculation of the
local merge formula
intentionally increased the
local match and decreased the
state match
many districts cannot afford
their match due to their bonning
availability with or without
there reduction in their local.
Senate bill one thirty one
reduced the matches by one third
one half however district still
can't afford a local match and
must rely on the potential match
reduction so what this means in
essence is even if a district is
bonded to capacity and they
perhaps can only earn van to two
million dollars but their
project is five million they
would still be coming to ask for
a waiver anyway even with the
reduction
so here we've talked about some
potential solutions.
The local match lower and the
state match higher
we could decrease the
emeratisation period which is
currently forty five years we
could increase the cost for
square foot will.
We could indicate a maximum
local share based on student
enrollments and you'll see they
are listed there.
Or we could do a whole.
Calculation by setting the local
match percentage based on the
amount of district can bond two
which may result in less ne.
I recommendation is to allow us
to study this over the over the
year
ring for some case studies so
that we can see the consequences
of any of these what they might
would they might i'm do
in so that leads us to page two
hundred and five with um the
local match reduction.
So the first solution is to
revisit the state local match
and the second recommendation is
to revisit the criteria for the
local match reduction
i'm again the
the problem is the same the key
point that districts can afford.
Require distinct bond above
their means and then we have a
solutions potential solutions.
Reduce the mill every
requirement for small districts
reduced or remove the percentage
for a free and reduced lunch
reduced to remove the
requirement for receipt that
match to be th.
Additionally we can
establish a written psc policy
for consideration of a local
match.
There is our potential approach
to both
in order to eliminate and
foreseeing consequences allow
time to steady how the potential
solutions they local match and
loca.
That's that we'd l.
Connect session when it's.
Two hundred six just has and
worked that bible has d.
Some of their solutions is.
Yeah.
Thank you chairman i'm just
curious if you're going to if
you're looking at.
Allowing time to study
are you looking at doing that
internally or maybe using beeper
again or doing.
Mr chair members currently were
looking we're thinking about
doing it in.
Have a question in terms of
timing I know this was discussed
at the public school.
What is their time frame on this
are they looking at adopting
something.
Consideration this session
mr chair members I didn't i'm
not aware of what they're
considering adopting this
session I can get with the chair
souls and ask him what he might
be thinking about I haven't had
that conversation.
Have you had any conversation.
Thank you will take a coast look
at this any questions on.
It looks like a simple there
should be a simple fix up.
Okay so as we want to the next
item.
Budget projections and personal
issues so mr chair members is
this information on some page
two hundred nine or just
reporting that we are authorized
to have fifty six ft
and right now we have fifty four
fifty two positions filled and
were recruiting for four fte
we are looking for a research
analyst which.
Young lady leave us.
Reviews for that last friday
we're looking for a programs.
We need a facilities assessor
the gentleman who was there.
We do the recruiting for the
opposite for the broadband
people who.
Working over at.
Below that you'll just see our
current our turnover ra.
The.
So
we're down to next pseuc meeting
so I see we don't have a medium
and november
mister chairman members know we
have the subcommunity meetings
on november twenty ninth.
Right.
Any other business come before
us one of the members in the
audience and sta.
Of course think the council for
all the work did you do and for
your time and
and dedication to this this
afternoon
i'll entertain emotion to a jury
motion in a second all those in
favor please in the cape by
saying I
was a post meeting as a journey.
Yeah.
