I mean sentiment us thank you
vote for many of our.
For many of our new legislators.
Senator Moores I yield to you.
voice vote is a the the the keen
hearing Montana governor last
four yeas or nays all those in
favor vote EA you yell you Hey
correct it's been awhile since
we've done this but that is
correct senator US president.
All those in favor signify by
saying yes yeah.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
part of that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
it is so ordered Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
third reading of legislation and
ideal to Senate term on yours
placing House Bill one with
emerging Clause on final passage
and is now subject to date
debate amendment or substitution
no objections centerman us to
stuff that was we do that in
house bill two that is capital
repairs and maintenance that
needs to be done there's four
million dollars two million
the other one is from the two
million dollars in the
maintenance capital capital
maintenance fund.
And so that's where the money's
coming from it's not general
maintenance in the capital
request there is some vehicles
that need to be replaced within
the capital to create some
efficiencies there is a high
lieutenant governor no but
they're going to the hive Act
system needs to be rebuilt and
and that done and then in the
annex where L. E. S. C. was
four million is going to be
spent I can be spent within the
year we don't have a problem I
think my expert witness here has
assured me that that within the
anyone wishing debate.
I see no debate centerman us to
close on the bill thank you Mr
president I thought somebody was
going to mend a proofreader for
the executive so
merged Clause do now pass and
pass this consenus and it.
I move that the Natomas consenus
Senate.
The consent of the Senate the
Slide show hands at the center
we do one voice vote and we want
to do everything we vote their
Senator is your seats please
more voting if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
Yes.
thank you Mr president thank
members about.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president is that we go that our
visit NASA's miscellaneous from
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
thirty to six o'clock range just
stay tuned we're waiting to get
the house bill two across and
once that's here will come back
on and referred that up to
me Senator Ortiz Y. Pino have to
announcements etcetera these if
you know the Mr president the
members of the Senate the.
The issue of the letter to the
closing some of the clinics for
veterans that are held at
satellite locations around the
state and there.
There were there was such a
We've been asked to consider the
possibility of sending a letter
from the state Senate to the
congressional delegation all
five members of our
And and instead of that to find
the money to keep them going.
So we've we've prepared a letter
and and Mr president I wonder if
it would be alright if if if the
indication that we would also be
able to sign that letter
including lieutenant governor if
you wanted to.
Think centre to subpoenas for us
as consent to have the reader
Mexico rational delegation all
state senators and all state
representative.
The New Mexico state senator has
received numerous enquiries from
services of the veterans
administration this extremely
serious issue is what the VA has
announced its intention to
utilisation closing these
clinics will have a significant
negative health impact on those
to whom we owe so much.
clinics for the entire nation
this heritage should not be
eliminated the public outcry
over this announcement has been
prolonged and impassioned many
These clinics to make access to
make accessible the medical care
they depend on as a result of
this widespread reaction the VA
We strongly urge you to work
closely with the veterans
administration to secure
whatever budgetary increase
would be needed to ensure the
continued availability of
constituents is deeply
appreciated and has proven very
successful in the past please
let us know how we at the New
Mexico state Senate can lend
So unless there's some questions
or or issues they want to be
discussed and not sure of the
during announcements is but but
unless somebody is opposed to
having their name included we
would simply include the names
of all the senators and
lieutenant governor on this
letter and Lenore has a method
her she has on on her computer
sign but unless you're opposed
to signing let me know otherwise
we will cite your name to this
to this letter thank you.
Thank you to our chief clerk
Senator sweeties.
Care.
I see veterans and active duty
servicemen and women everyday my
practice
per se they are signing veterans
to go to see other specialists
or whoever it may be and so I I
but I don't think you know I
want to caution people have a
knee jerk opposition of saying
closure of a facility
automatically means decreased
if you're going to close a
certain clinic
why are you closing it is it
funding is it because you can't
hire people you can't staff
medical assistance you can't
staff of a physician or nurse
the types of questions the study
needs to
you know needs to ask where if
they're going out of the yes
system now how how often are
physical therapist or whatever
may be that's probably being
paid for and accomplished
outside of the VA system already
there's a lot of
A lot of things to consider but
but certainly certainly
supportive of the letter as is
thank you thanks committee we do
have further announcements
Senator Hickey.
do want to further note these
clinics are basically.
Our primary care who make
referrals to specialist and so
Social services in connection to
services and
that veterans need and get at
the VA Medical Center but these
are supplied.
we need to serve them in all
capacities not just health care
but the social services and the
other pieces many of them have
behavioral health services and
there are financial realities
but on the other hand there are
also their lives their their
mental well being as well as our
Thanks for other nonsense and
seminars.
Thank you Mr president when
house bill two comes over will
need about twenty minutes to
make sure the FIR is get printed
Any further announcements
Senators.
Senator Wirth I'm sorry Senator
Gonzales.
mind about the the big game of
last night.
And so as my wife and I were
watching the game and we kept
going back and forth the so what
know I asked don Nicolas have
been that she's from North
Carolina the what is the tar
heels.
And she says well what it is is
a certain section.
crusty and whatever.
And and she says and that's how
they got the name tar heels so
anyway that's the answer
Senator Vogel.
Thank you Mr president I just
want to speak on the letter
I've got a lot of calls as well
about the closure some these
clinics would even limit even
more access to health care they
do have their furrows I get
referrals but unfortunately if
they don't go to these clinics
then I can really get those
care more access more clinics
you know at another hospital
especially in southern New
Mexico so just wanted to express
that thank you Mr president
thank you Sir Peublo Baca
from the Senate to the nine
killed in that horrific crash
well we've been off of the Gulf
team of U. N. M. and the others
that were fatalities in that
wreck in Texas and so if we
of hardships from veterans in
northern New Mexico specifically
in Espanola who are elderly and
said it would be hard on them to
try to commute outside of the
valley if they had a good
health care thank you Mr
president think centre how to
mail any further announcements
Senators.
Senator Hickey for a second time
who had the vision to put the
funding aside for New Mexico for
these rural clinics the very
first ones in the country and
to give a appropriate shout out
to him thank you thank you and
his wife who was sure that
behavioral health services were
also provided and all those
again dinner should be arriving
shortly for both members and
staff I'm not sure which call it
will be in but it's a keep an
eye out for that and we'll be
back as soon as we get House
culture I see no objections the
Senate the Senate recess to the
subject to the call chair.
