Those in addition.
Okay
Thank you madam chair of the
committee this is our third time
in addition to this
Of Senate bill in the last time
there was a meeting of that was
happening at the same time or
that afternoon with the help of
the council governor's
discretion was for their support
for that so it's going to do is
of hard copy of the letter that
came stated for for twenty seven
from the chair chairman of the
all pueblo council of governors
of supporting Senate bill.
And so nothing has changed
with regards to the substitute
Bill this is present so if
there's any of additional
specific questions as the
governor of of Senate Public
School percent of is here
and then the general counsel
Stephanie in the course of this.
So.
Changed okay.
So.
First question to committee
members.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you
madam chair I noticed the ship
of state police hiding in the
corner.
Your.
If it if if we could invite him
to come up real quick.
Are you.
Right okay now with this.
Madam chair Senator Ivy Soto yes
we spoke up.
and links.
The fifty introduce yourself of
course our Tim Johnson the state
police
Senator Ivey Soto we spoke at
length with with the sponsor and
and some of the folks over at
the bill of particulars Sandia.
And
realize that some of the things
that are concerned with could a
dress
in able to use that we have with
the various tribes and pueblos
four four slightly adjusted
history once I got there but
after having conversations with
them.
With that.
Okay.
and because I will I mean I
would I mean I'm I'm I'm happy
to let out of this committee and
and and effort to move on to
just I'll just say that there
are the the the three things
that I.
That I'd suggested after last
meeting that I I need to be
included.
right was the ability of the
state police officer during the
thirty days to be able to review
the personal file.
And to decline the
The commission if there was
something and the personnel file
and I would write that because
because you use the use the
hypothetical matter Mr G. last
time of somebody that you
modifier button it could be
somebody that somebody else
farger.
Right that that for the that
didn't work for you.
The who that gets picked up by
tribal police force.
And up ten so the ability for
you to be able to review the
personnel file in general I
think is is an important one and
the ability that I based on that
review of but but otherwise
within thirty days to tuition
the the commission of the the
second thing was
That I just think.
While I realize that you.
May have the the the discretion
to required in the will use I do
think based on my understanding
of the Oaxaca K. that the
That that basically if if the
tribal police officer does
something on a on a commission
while forcing state law that
That I would end up suing the
commissioning state agency.
And and that and that so I I
thought was important that there
be something though the state
saying that among other things
the the agreement for the you
what would include
indemnification of the of the of
the State.
forty lawsuits the the third
thing but I do think needs to be
added and that I think all three
of these can be revisited and
judiciary.
Of the thirty eight be added is
that when
But enforcing state law probably
just officer shot comply with
all requirements of of of peace
officers
pursuant to Mexico statutes.
and so so so just just be aware
that those are the three things
that I do think it need to be
worked out still and financed in
this process.
Of and and so
but drug but none the less I I
appreciate that there's been
consultation that that there's
kind of an opportunity the that
the all across the governor's it
look at this there's been
opportunity for the
for the for the nations and
tribes to build a way in that
they would like to as well.
and so we're just with those
with those three points and be
aware of those three points in
terms of your axe Committee
the madam chair thank you
thank you thank you.
Please.
The Madam chair representative
Representative quick I guess
there's concern on the on page
story about the.
Which is the.
Sure.
According to.
This letter from from fact
player a way that they feel
licensed or should be stricken
and in the state to state level
for the interest of.
Madam chair and the Senator
Griggs.
Right now so each tribe RT has
liability for their officers
what this program in the section
on page three the state that we
show submit proof as part of
that so it's not like we're
being asked to pay anything more
what this means is that they
social proof of adequate public
liability property damage
insurance because operative the
peace officers and police
professional life insurance from
a company licenses so the state
of New Mexico so as part of
that.
In the process they just have to
show proof would be asked to
submit anything more and madam
chair center a as you move
forward.
A lot of patients from.
Is if they are to be held you'll
have to pay for any insurers are
they want they want the state to
be yeah I I read the letter I do
get it because if the if they
currently have their state
police opted to have a tribal
officers I'm sure they're
already sure.
I would think so because of
liability issues so but I I do
understand and I've I don't know
why the refund issues that are
is for the commission sure.
For sure.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you.
The committee.
So I just have a couple of
Because we know about the.
Tribal consultation protocol
that each department has
significantly between
Within each department.
Send that within those protocols
those agreements were reached
with the.
Tribal nations in that sense to
have certain issues and address
and I those that are in those
protocols are brought to the
table and consulted accordingly
then we shouldn't have any
issues as far as moving forward
any of the especially to this
committee we talk about tribal
affairs in our rural
communities.
And that was something is
getting with this particular
bill was at that was what was
the question with the
consultation so we have the
letter that Senator Shendo has
brought forward but that each
tribe nation and pueblo have
their ability to opt in with the
state of New Mexico their own
agreement are Emily you with DPS
in this case because that is
part that we're working with
here but I don't think it's
solely within DPS I think that
the when we talk about this
whole judicial.
Process that.
We can share without reading
into at.
The prosecution that poll
spectrum of the somebody does
get arrested to the the type of
who's going to be responsible I
hope that could be addressed for
the you is in that sense that
we're not just peace mailing
something in and just plugging
something and that really is a
process that has to be that it
through our judicial branch
thank you senator chair will
entertain the action on the
bill.
Who did not pass on Senate bill
thirty three and to pass.
Senate rules of Senate Indian
Senator has to be a substitute
for several third.
Thank you the other seconded by
Senator.
The of the world Senator Griggs
yes.
Senator Ivey Soto Sir Senator
Sanchez yes Sir Senator Shendo
yes Senator mail yes Santo
Domingo yes.
So Senator milieu.
The staff that will those two
passwords to build now we're
back on I thought we were in
production with the full action
okay so this is a
okay all right thank you bye.
The issue.
I just can't what what we're
giving those guys.
Slightly related questions.
So I notice in the matter but I
will because of governors.
That they say on behalf of the
all pueblo council governor's
collectively represent the
nineteen published in Mexico and
our sister publica for Texas.
I wasn't aware of the Pueblo of
Texas yes.
So that madam chair that is the
this little girl Sir very pueblo
in Texas but there are pueblo so
they're part of the open
accounts of governors.
Yeah.
And they're located in el Paso.
South of us all.
Yes but you have a family.
Levels because.
Okay.
Okay yes nineties came in this.
Ascension.
Thank you conversations outside.
Maybe give.
Thank you madam chair there was
a committees.
Senate bill three ninety two to
date this is a bill that will.
When you buy a fishing license
or a hunting license that you
will be able to.
Some of the fees if you want if
you choose to donate so if you
rounded up it's it's forty two
dollars and ten cents anyone
around at the forty three
dollars that this when you
rounded up at this increments
make it even dollar amount will.
The young shape of young child
of programs whether the fishing
or gun safety or whatever the
officials providing right now
and these they already have
these programs by it's just a
donation that you would be
giving when I make a purchase of
your fishing license or your
license.
a little backstory on this we
had a visitor coming bring this
idea to assist name is right in
fact and tossed is ten years old
is visiting the capital stop by
and have this idea he is a
hunter and a Fisher of fishermen
and so stop by Senator Pirtle
office of mine we spoke with a
very intelligent young man and
so we're running this bill
With his idea.
And all that Senator Pirtle.
Speaker will but.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and I think it's
important to note that that this
is in a raise in fees this is
one hundred percent volunteer
you want to add to the existing
programs you can donate a little
bit of extra money to the game
officially can then take that
money and either add people to
programs that already exist or
do new all new classes or extend
what what they already do so
this is just designed to.
Supplement not supplant what
they already do we we want to
add on to what they're doing
they're doing a great job with
youth programs but there's
there's always more for thank
you madam chair.
And those in the audience
man was as of those support.
You many in the.
We have any in opposition.
Well if you would like to make
public comment please go to the
Mike or.
Public comment.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Ivey Soto.
With respect to.
Or.
Madam chair Senator he had some
excuse cool or something the
other.
In his chair and senator he does
reside in do a ana county so it
would be quite the track for the
eleven year old
to make all the way to Santa Fe
so we're hoping to to get in
here.
Maybe schedule something on a
weekend if if we get out of this
committee into the house and
have an experience that but he
is watching his his Care it's
keep them updated the last
committee we had I think we
spoke on to on the phone before
and yes he's definitely involved
watching closely yeah.
Go ahead and eat them and madam
chair I I just I appreciate the
candor of these two senators.
That they you know.
The.
The best idea that had this year
comes from ten year old office.
Anything further.
Of.
So thank you yeah sure so
So one is if you buy something
or purchase of apartment game
and fish.
And if there is a
A change different or just any
kind of donation or is that what
it is not madam chair center yes
so if you buy your fishing
license go down get your fishing
license and it cost you twelve
dollars and eight cents they
will now ask you do you want to
round that up to thirteen
dollars so that okay the
difference is will go to the
youth programs you know here
that's only good about that.
So it was a change you are going
to.
So no I and I think that's great
and madam chair center it's
totally volunteer like secretary
Powell said it's it's just a
question that will be on there
and they can choose to do so.
What drugs it Mr backing yes
statewide and they are and madam
chair center they already exist
so so these are existing
programs not adding any new ones
madam chair sent all the madam
chair Senator the the the vision
is now they have funding state
for twelve kids to go on a
special you thought that if we
have some funds meeting take
fourteen or fifteen and then if
if it grows the even get bigger
than that but it's just a really
extend our dissipation what
already exists.
Appreciate that I think will be
good I think most of the folks
that.
Or purchasing so four hundred
and fissures and outdoors in the
the.
Support yeah the only the only
thing that I can think of is
just simply adding a page to let
all of them.
Up right where it says also just
actually I guess my land line
all such donations.
And in the house bill two junior
money of the Sanchez.
But otherwise.
Senator said.
Of the user thank you Senator
o'neill yes thank you madam
chair inspired the Sanchez she's
tired.
I will support this.
I miss.
Okay thank.
Any other questions from
committee
stage to try.
Averaged is actually an old
bills is Medicare I do before
the commercial yes I I do I do
want to say that I I appreciate
that Mr McIntosh
you know what was up here and
and with when he engage our
conversation with you know I I
completely that's because level
that the conversation with but
he had an idea can idea and it
was like you know what would
this be nice and very helpful
and and it's it's also I think
it's I think it's also
compatible that the that the
folks who is talking to.
Didn't just simply say all yeah
sure no problem they actually
took answers.
And and and proceeded with us
but you know it's
so I I think I think that's
really process and I and I
commend you guys but also Mr
McIntosh for for
for being out here being engaged
and and also having having an
idea that that may very well end
up it'll so thank you senator
and I have a question is there
shortfall as far as these
programs.
And madam chair through COVID I
think
like many programs they might
have fallen to the wayside and
they are they are bringing as
many of the back as possible
and and they are doing all they
provide.
If you can't say four hundred
cation there's there's money for
that they're special you funding
of that they do off road
vehicle training safety training
there's quite a few programs
that they offer currently as
we're coming out of COVID those
are starting to make their way
back and and they do fund as
much as they can in this is just
strictly to help
supplement those already
existing programs.
And US Senate is what about the
other agencies this is just
going right strictly to game and
fish but all the other agencies
to offer you the programs so
that game and fish madam chair
is a very unique department with
how.
Funding I'm sure you're already
aware it's hard to sit through
the licenses that they sell and
so this would only go to them
because this is they're the only
ones selling these licenses and
they're the only ones that
receive funding in this way
there's other departments that
have similar volunteer donation
when you go to the DMV or I
think even now many counties
have it where you pay your taxes
you can do all kinds of wild
things and and donate your money
but this is specific to gaming
aficionado youth programs that
they offer because of the way
their budget.
And what they actually get some
of your mouth it's hard to be
tax deductible some of these
become so generous with the
binder license
there thank trophy license that
they want to round it off a
couple hours.
You say god bless.
The tax implications I ours.
We get tax deductible and madam
chair I'm not a tax expert nor
do I play one on TV.
I mean I think most of those
were you donate
it would be considered but I
don't know that to be a hundred
percent fact.
Mr McIntosh difference tax I
believe he's a dependent.
The facts about your aspect I do
want to just comment one thing
which is the reason why I ask
the question about or verify
that this is the programs.
Federal is the operated within
the department of fish is that.
Where we would do this with
drivers with us without our
income taxes and.
for for the political parties we
do this for a variety of other
organizations but with the
specialist license plates.
We end up collecting money.
To deliver to a third party.
and which I think actually
violates the intonations.
And that would be problematic in
this case this additional money
is going into these programs are
being operated by the department
and so I don't see that problem
and that's why this works for me
whereas some of these other
schemes that we that we have the
government I think our problem.
