Thank and and you know because I
have started I'll just kind of
restart.
Good morning and welcome to the
rules committee
we're going to be getting
started with our organizational
meeting this morning after which
we're going to be hearing
confirmations for three regions
for the New Mexico School have
that.
start with numbers introducing
themselves I have Ortiz Pena
thank you madam chairman and
good morning everyone a state
senator Jerry Ortiz Y. Pino
Representative Senate district
twelve that's downtown
Albuquerque and the older
historic neighborhoods that
surround downtown and but I
really enjoyed being on the
rules committee we get to to
meet a lot of marvelous
appointees from the from the
administration so looking
forward to a busy year madam
chairman thank you.
Good morning madam chair I am
Liz Stefanics state senator for
district thirty nine which is
parts of six counties Bernalillo
Lincoln San Miguel Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia and I have
moved from one committee to this
committee so it's my first time
participating on Senate rules
and it's a pleasure to be here
thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
fellow members and my name is
Brenda McKenna and I'm state
senator for district nine as you
see from my side I have
Bernalillo and Sandoval in my
districts and the Senate vote
this includes a little bit of
Albuquerque Rio Rancho Public of
Sandia proceed this corral is a
good honest and the tonic
Bernalillo I'm originally from
non pay pueblo and like my
colleague Senator Stefanics this
is my first time in rules and
really looking forward to it
thank you.
Good morning everyone I'm state
Senator Mimi Stewart.
I live in Albuquerque my
district encompasses the
international district in two
years we'll compass every bit of
that now it's just about two
thirds of the New East gateway
area of.
So happy to be here good morning
everyone.
Before we switch over to our
minds are only minority members
here this morning that well we
can finish up on the on the
server Senator limits.
Thank you very much Madam chair
good morning everyone Linda
Lopez Senator district eleven
which is the southwest budget
friendly County thank you.
Thank you members of the
fortitude to work with you on
this the spark Committee it's
been an interesting eleven years
no question about it with a lot
of fun with a lot of debates and
I think we work really well
together on this committee so
welcome aboard madam chair and
their to do members of state
senator mark more Senator County
thank you.
What does the yes thank you to
move good morning I'm state
senator Leo how to me I'm from
the Espanola valley and I
represent state Senate district
five which includes Rio Arriba
Sandoval Los Alamos and Santa Fe
counties and I'm excited to be
the chair for the second year in
a row and I'm looking forward to
working along side our entire
committee and our chair I am I'm
the vice chair thank you.
I'm Senator Katie do hit by
Representative Senate district
ten which is in Albuquerque
right now it's part of the north
valley and a whole lot of the
west side of the southern Rio
Rancho in two years it will be
basically from balloon fiesta
park down through to the beach
and Taylor ranch
but thank you all for for being
here this morning especially
welcome to our members
I also like to introduce the
wonderful staff that we're gonna
have here with us for rules of
Passover right who is our
committee secretary.
we have a number of analysts
back here we have robin hill who
is the committee analyst and
Martin claims the major analyst
and over here Sam would do who
is the minority analyst.
All we have are wonderful
started arms
her Martinez.
And Lucy hello.
And Ted.
About us thank you I knew I was
gonna going to mispronounce
that.
All of the lawn and Damdama.
And we have four very young our
attendance and ours in my sister
David mia yeah.
Hello.
Open I'm sorry Sir I missed you
news is.
Six years.
This year.
Thank you so much Mr Sanchez.
So
We're going to.
I want to explain a little bit
about the rules for the and
before I get into that our
intrepid minority leader I'll
help him to introduce himself.
Baca Senator district twenty
nine.
Thank you thank you senator.
What talk a little bit about the
rules that this.
And I will play and they go
through some procedures that
we've developed for the rules
committee
so in because the rules does
confirmations and then also does
legislation we did not have a
division of labor for senator
Hermio will be chairing for
confirmation hearings and I will
be chair during the legislature.
Here is a legislation.
So all of the the member should
have in front of them and and
folks and the public can access
this online if you go to the
Senate rules web page there's a
link at the top that says
something along the lines of a
click here for procedures for
the Senate rules committee
just so I'm just going to
briefly go through them because
it's a little different than the
approach that this committee has
taken before especially
as regards public.
So with the exception of today
were.
Their Buck testing of figuring
things out in general we will
start promptly at nine o'clock I
know that in the land of
legislative time where nothing
usually starts when it says it
says that well that that's kind
of a crazy thing to say but we
have.
Precious precious little time
here during session and so we
want to make sure that we're not
wasting any time so at nine
o'clock on Mondays Wednesdays
and Fridays we will get going as
a subcommittee with whoever's
here we don't have a quorum and
then we will wait to take
official action voting the
centrally until we do have a
quorum.
What and as far as amendments
if you there are like the
amendments or someone is
offering a committee substitute
those need to be submitted to
the committee twenty four hours
ahead of the hearing so that
both members and analysts have
sufficient time to to look those
over it's not going to be a
strict rule as far as amendments
in general if there are sure
amendments that we can deal with
obviously and committee or for
all members that come up as we
go that's just fine.
double dropped bills at the
state identical bills are
dropped in both the house and
the Senate we will hear
whichever one of the proponents
want to hear but we will not
hear about we don't have
duplicate hearings on bills so
we would ask that Sanchez of
double drop bills let us know
what bill they would like her to
and we will we will defer to
them on that if there are there
are bills that are.
Identical to something that we
have already heard in part of it
is just like part of the bill
that we have already heard those
are likely to also be treated as
double job bills.
The real change here is how
we're gonna do public comment
those of you who are familiar
with the Senate Judiciary
Committee this will sound very
familiar to you up but we are
going to
have remote as soon and in
person public comment but we ask
a couple of things so overall
presentation of conferees and of
legislation the sponsor will
have ten minutes to do their
their presentation of their bill
whether without experts then
there will be ten minutes for
Oregon to comment and support
the sponsors will are expected
to organize their folks and let
us know who they want to have
speak and and to help keep their
supporters within that ten
minute time frames but will be
up here helping out with that as
well with time.
If there's opposition we would
encourage again organized
opposition if there's organized
opposition
than they were so whoever those
folks have decided once is going
to speak and it can be multiple
people they choose what but if
it's organized will have fifteen
minutes for opposition with
or without all taxpayers if
there's one organized opposition
then there will be ten minutes
and the speaker will be able to
speak for one minute each.
If there's yeah so that's going
to be a healthy approach
presentation of of legislation
conferees and public comment if
there is if that time permits
and then on organized COVID will
be permitted but we would
encourage that everyone and
you'll see how to do this on the
procedures that are posted but
to sign up for the unorganized
common time if you sign up we
can we will give you priority.
Also if there are organizations
or lobbyists with clients who
just want to be noted as
supporting or opposing certain
legislation you can submit that
up to an hour before the meeting
to our committee secretary and
we work that out when we are
hearing that that.
so you can get these procedures
on the federal webpage I'll tell
you I already see where I had a
whole bunch of typos so we're
gonna have updated ones later on
today but in general as we are
but testing these procedures we
might change them throughout the
session because of something not
working we will adjust to that
so I would encourage those
coming before the Senate rules
committee to detect those
procedures often if you are
going to be before this
committee.
Otherwise I think that's
probably about it as far as our
organizational meeting
and that went that way but do
folks have questions members of
the committee having questions
about features or anything else.
Senator more specific departure
thank you vice chair we can talk
maybe offline a little bit but
we would have concerns about the
subcommittee of both rural are
requires a Senator we take
official action we do have a
majority of the members there
also we'll talk to how you
envision that to the quite
frankly there's only four of us
in the seven of you we can never
prevent a quarrel especially
with seven guys of the the
majority party and different
have some it's one thing when
you know we had a three minutes
with the previous years with
Morial's non controversial stuff
especially towards the end of
the session for the sake of
moving things along with that
work really closely with the
major part of those in the past
so I hope to be able to continue
to do that so.
Just three members here here and
very critical built on what
we're just a minority that we
work we work closely with the
chair and vice chair on those
issues before we talk a little
more offline so sure that we're
all set to.
Madam thank you.
Thank you and and yes we can
that we can actually more about
that offline in general I want
to make sure that we are not
not running into floor as a
committee
and I have also want to
encourage our members especially
for that critical legislation to
be here and so I'm hoping that
what one of the reasons that
we're going to we are wanting to
proceed as a subcommittee is is
to help get members here in
their seats so that we do have
everyone's voices as were
reviewing all this legislation
but that but we certainly don't
want to we want this to be fair
for everyone and will make every
effort to make that happen and
what we should have more.
Anyone else.
That being the case we could get
Senator Rodriguez yes.
And.
I will pass the gavel to.
Share our media will take over
for the confirmations thank you
madam chair we're gonna be
waiting for the Senate sponsor
Senator Rodriguez to come in
before we get started with our
conferees.
And I'm gonna tell you the order
in which will be introducing our
conferees and hearing from the
sponsor I'm gonna start off with
miss more barrel followed by
miss Mona and then rounding out
the agree with Mister Robinson
so Mister Vera if you want to
come up to the front table and
wait for Senator Rodriguez we'll
get started as soon as she comes
in.
And and I don't know if folks
are watching on the webcast can
tell but we can see here we have
so language interpreters here
with us and so just a reminder
that we are he.
Asking questions to speak slowly
not speak over each other to
make their jobs as as easy as
possible.
So.
Good morning Senator Rodriguez
welcome to the committee.
Are you.
For.
Yeah thank you very much for
having us here today hi.
To see.
Thank you
Thanks again and Mr madam
chairman and members of the
committee
I'm here to present to you this
line item Barbero who I'm so
thrilled.
To bring before you and then
goes far back many years her
whole life I think has been
dedicated for the most part to
the children who are deaf and
hard of hearing and multiple
other impairments links to be
the principal the lan and high
speed up to she taught at the
school for the deaf for many
years at every grade level has a
degree in deaf education and
from there have moved on to be
principal and continued legacy
is she still does today so she
has been miss madam chairman
members of the committee and she
has been appointed to serve at
the school for the deaf board of
regents for several years but
never was brought out the
paperwork was never brought down
to the committee so she
continued to serve and and is
here now thank you for getting
her paperwork see this return of
expired December of twenty
twenty four issue to serve the
other five years almost so well
for years so thank you very much
and I'm gonna let her speak
because I understand you have
new rules and we will be short
if that's okay with you can she
say a few words are a state.
Yes thank you.
Well thank you
Mr chair madam chair I'm you
have to chairs operating and
confirmations
Again I'm Linden Barbero and
Senator Rodriguez definitely
kind of wrap it up for you I
have been involved with the New
Mexico school for the deaf since
nineteen seventy six
that's when I arrived in New
Mexico from Illinois as the new
young teacher and
this the school for the deaf has
been part of my heart for all of
these years so I did I served at
the school as an employee across
the full spectrum from being a
teacher to a supervisor to the
principal to the director of
curriculum and instruction
for twenty five years.
And I retired in two thousand
one.
and but have stayed involved
obviously I was appointed to the
board of regents
I believe my first appointment
was in two thousand five so I
have served on the board now for
quite a long time it's an honor
it's a privilege
I.
Take the job seriously
I believe in the school in New
Mexico has a fabulous fabulous
resource in the New Mexico
school for the deaf I'm very
proud of the work that goes on
there everyday and proud of the
legacy that the school provides
for the state
you are a model The New Mexico
school for the deaf is a model
program for other states and I
will just mention
I'm working with the Arkansas
school for the deaf I was asked
to come and help them.
Create programs that look like
what goes on in New Mexico we
are known around the country for
the services that we provide so
again I'm very proud of of the
work that we've done and it's an
honor to continue to be able to
serve as a member board if you
choose to come for me today
thank you so much thank you Mr
now I'm gonna go to the room is
there anybody here in support of
the conferee.
Saying that is there anybody in
the committee room in opposition
of the conferee.
State not I'm gonna ask our zoom
operator if you can ask by a
show of hands on zoom those of
you in support of the conferee.
To ensure that confirm that are
on the side of the interpreter
is being able to see on June R.
yes thank you.
And that is.
No attendance in this room so
therefore no opposition on.
Very good any comments or
questions from those on the
committee.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr vice chair of the
morning thank you for your
service we often don't get
people who'd been doing should.
With us failing to confirm so
glad you're here today thank you
you know I think.
The death for for many years and
I know I just I perhaps you
you just briefly tell the
committee members this this was
amazing to me how much for the
school for the deaf this program
the state.
What thank you for people and
well not the schools and thank
you briefly describe that
Insulet we.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee The New Mexico
school for the deaf provides
services to children and
families all around the state of
New Mexico
I believe the last numbers that
I saw were serving in both our
early intervention program which
is zero to five around the state
and then our outreach program
that works with kindergarten
through twelfth grade students
around the state in their home
school districts those numbers
are close to six hundred
children and families around the
state in addition to this the
students who attend the New
Mexico school for the deaf on
our campus in Santa Fe as well
as our campus our preschool
program in Albuquerque Los
crucis and Farmington so we
operate in collaboration with
local school districts to
provide those services to the
little guys in those areas and
then as I said the K. through
twelve outreach program when
districts request that they have
a deaf or hard of hearing child
in their programs and they would
like some extra support we have
a staff of folks to go and do
that work with in those
communities so it's it's a huge
program
and it's
again back to Arkansas it's one
of the programs that Arkansas
would like to figure out how to
do because they are not yet
serving kids and families in
that way so.
Mr vice chair and.
Miss Parker thank you for that
answer so.
In addition you have some little
preschools.
Tell us where you have this pre
schools around the state yes Mr
chair members of the committee
those preschool programs are in
Albuquerque Los crucis and
Farmington.
We established many years ago
when I was still there kind of
the the guideline if if we can
identify three deaf or hard of
hearing preschoolers in the
community and the community is
desirous of having us work with
them to establish a preschool
program in that community we
work really hard to do that so
once we have the numbers we work
with those local school
districts to establish those
programs in in cooperation and
collaboration with them.
Thank you so much for answers
your service all this time thank
you thank you yes I thank you
senator we now go on to Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr vice chairman and
and then this program thank you
for being willing to serve
you've been on for quite a while
I'm sure this gives you a
perspective the work there
before could you share these
this committee for many of us
who aren't on finance this is
our one chance of finding out
about some of the programs in
our state and and I wondered if
you could share with us
something about what you see is
happening in terms of long term
trends within educating the.
Deaf and hard of hearing
children are we seeing an
increase in the numbers are we
seeing of a reluctance of
families to have their kids go
to the boarding school and would
prefer to keep them healthy what
are what are some of the trends
that are happening in regard to
deaf education in the state.
Mr chair members of the
committee that's a great
question
the trends I would say in terms
of numbers of of deaf and hard
of hearing children being born
in the state of New Mexico those
numbers are pretty consistent it
is a low incidence disability so
there are not a large numbers of
of deaf and hard of hearing
children in the state of New
Mexico
so the numbers are pretty
consistent in terms of overall
population.
I would say in terms of families
desires.
That really is a very individual
of choice families make but
because or not but and because
of the services that the New
Mexico school for the deaf
provides around the state
families are given all of the
information that they need to
make the choice that's right for
them
our numbers in terms of students
coming to the New Mexico school
for the deaf are actually up
from the time I was there when I
started the numbers were about a
hundred and sixty students
attending the New Mexico school
for the deaf.
And at that time there were not
very many options for children
out in their local school
districts.
the numbers at the New Mexico
school for the deaf right now
are about a hundred and forty
five on campus K. through twelve
when I say so the numbers are up
a little bit from the one sixty
when I first started one sixty
five we actually dropped way
below a hundred during my time
there's lots of reasons for that
ID eighty was actually came into
being when I was still at the
New Mexico school for the deaf
individuals with disabilities
Education Act which actually
been required public schools to
provide programs and services in
in their children's home
districts
that had a pretty immediate
impact
And many districts and families
were able to fairly quickly
figure out that is really hard
for districts to provide high
quality services for deaf and
hard of hearing children if
again when you mentioned Jalal
and many of our very small
districts may have one deaf
child really challenging for a
district to provide appropriate
services so the numbers came
back up and as I said we've been
very steady anywhere between a
hundred and forty hundred fifty
students on our campus pre K.
through twelve for many years
now.
Did that answer your question it
did things at Mr vice chairman
and and that was part of the.
There is in in Albuquerque the
the Presbyterian ear institute
yes and the cochlear implant
issue is that is that keep
coming Senator for families of
what's the relationship between
them and the school for the
deaf.
Mr chair members of the
committee
yes many children many families
choose to have their child
implanted The New Mexico school
for the deaf Services many of
those children in our programs
so there's not of and exclusion
if your call clear implanted it
does not mean that you are not
able to attend the New Mexico
school for the deaf many of
those children still do need to
rely on visual communication
even though they've been
implanted
implants
again they they work well for
many children some children they
do not so it is it's not a
It's kind of hard but it's not a
cure for being deaf they're
still deaf even though they've
been implanted
it's a it's a technology it's a
piece of equipment that allows
children to hear sounds
differently than they would
without it but again we have
many children at the New Mexico
school for the deaf who are
implanted and we serve them.
Very good thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much yes thank
you senator will next head to
Senator McKenna followed by
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you vice chair how to meal
Mr barrow I want to commend you
for wanting to still serve the
special community I have a
cousin who was born def and he
he's done so well he graduated
from value that University in
Washington DC and when he last
visited New Mexico he visited
your colleagues in the campus
and he just had a great time
and I just really want applaud
you for containing twenty to
serve and I'm really so proud of
that school thank you very much
thank you vice chair.
Thank you any other questions.
Senator Moores thank you Mr
chairman of the committee
nice to see you again thank you
are Senator Rodriguez and your
passion for to education which
you know hi share share are
probably not same level as you
do but but by background those
who aren't aware I would not be
here literally without the New
Mexico school for the deaf my
aunt was a student there many
many years ago who by the way I
heard my uncle founded us would
not mess with this and done in
big springs Texas about
communities
my mother went to got our
master's degree she's hearing
echo that we're to my father who
is getting his first master's
degree about it so it's and I
ended up growing up on the
campus of Gallaudet for many
many years so I also have a
passion because I would be here
without the background a
different situation in
particular New Mexico school for
the deaf
but I do have concerns about you
know at the residential schools
really wasn't model for nineteen
hundreds now we're into two
centuries later and you touched
on a lot of the issues that I
believe New Mexico school for
that is leading the way
providing education statewide
because residential schools
really was the old model for
back in the old days when they
didn't do it of students and
with the recent investments and
the other standing there are
products say my parents had
something to do with in the
small part are really really
important in fact load on a
personal note we just started a
scholarship back on it in my
dad's honor to promote
Hispanic
education majors from the state
of New Mexico and I'm currently
in the process of funding that
tunes so that hopefully will be
up and running here and and next
here to once we get the the fund
established there so anyways
when.
You are are you guys are a land
grant institution correct
correct correct how much do gaps
funding statewide.
Yes the
The lead Mr chair members of the
committee the of Land Grant
provides about seventy five
percent of our funding for the
school.
Overall dollars
Without my numbers right in
front of me that's but it's
about seventy five percent of
the total operating costs for
the school that was received
from the land when a permanent
fund.
And my point in and I know you
said what you have a hundred
forty five current students
that's news to me I knew it was
down to under a hundred there
for a while
I know nationally of residential
schools state be American school
for their for the Maryland there
are more conservative and
park for Maryland the American
school for the deaf and hard for
the Maryland public schools of
school for the deaf which are
more familiar with
usually around fifteen percent
of the population of state is
that about roughly go to the
residential schools of course
the Mexico's a much bigger
population landmass and some of
those states so I'm shocked that
you're actually up to about
twenty five percent if it was
so about six hundred of students
statewide mature about a fourth
of all state our students
correct yes this is the probably
closer to seven hundred fifty
statewide
again we serve six hundred.
In our early zero to five up
through pre coming through
twelve in public schools
settings about six hundred kids
are receiving services from the
New Mexico school for the deaf
out in the communities and about
a hundred forty five on our
campus that's the lowest
estimate so it's just it's so I
think if we were redoing the
constitution nowadays we want
just be spending all that money
in the Land Grant Justin
approach to more school we want
to services statewide which
sounds like you guys are
reviewed job would do and I
applaud you for that on in to
continue that and they're
outreach of those students what
percentage would you say to
Stephens is obviously changed
dramatically deprivations change
dramatically the last number of
decades how many of those
students are primarily death us
there posted multiple
disabilities.
You're talking statewide for the
witcher what your overall
feeling of my I'm I'm probably
more familiar with the numbers
who are at the New Mexico school
for the deaf I'm I would say
Eighty percent of the students
who attend the New Mexico school
for the deaf are primarily deaf
and about twenty percent of our
students have additional
disabilities.
And that's Robert.
Madam.
Representative your
no and Representative where I'm
going with the final question is
I'm really concerned what
happened not concern actually
think it's a great thank would
happen in the spring point was
about we can half ago two weeks
ago with the case and mission.
Are you not familiar with this
I'm I'm not
they have come out the ruling
yet but the the justices really
beat the crowd out of the state
of Michigan for.
In a a deaf student
in school
Roughly they lied to the parents
over a number of years about how
much progress student was making
ended up giving him a
certificate of completion after
telling the parents said he's on
track for graduation did not
make appropriate accommodations
for the students so I think it's
going to have a significant
impact on not only deaf
education but special needs once
spring corporations are rolling
so I would encourage you to find
out about that case what are is
The New Mexico school for the
deaf doing.
Let me back up what how many of
the students graduate.
graduating it's it's supposed to
get a certificate of completion.
every student who graduated in
the last.
I'm gonna say I but has received
a diploma grow.
Okay that's that's fantastic
news that so that's where I'm
gonna really encouraging you as
the and I'm gonna ask the other
board members if they for this
case to give us our their
thoughts on what we're doing in
New Mexico in particular the New
Mexico school for the deaf that
is going to redress what the
Supreme Court
the quit line of questioning and
currently was a bloodbath
both sides all the Supreme Court
justices really gave Michigan a
hard time about that so I'd like
I'd like to the feedback from
the O. two members of the board
of regents on that too and.
Chairman made a lab right a
little bit on that I know we're
going to the next one will be
short of your time but thank you
senator Morris for that the case
involved a situation where I
myself first hand has
experienced this in the past
with our daughter who's staff
and I'm happy to see that the
the Supreme Court ruled that.
A bit how can I put it up
adequate to say it mildly
communication and services have
to be provided for deaf children
and deaf students in this case
there was this child who had
been in the school and have not
received in a it was more of a
public school setting have not
received any form of
interpreting services language
and Hanson to speech therapy and
none of the services that for
example the school for the deaf
provides so the child had fallen
quite behind and the parents
kept asking the school to please
provide services which the child
wasn't at speaking in in its own
language sign language.
And did not have a Capulet R.
rate planted and is in his or
her memory to be or her
knowledge to be able to X. to
express himself in any form of
language years went by in in
that show again for time
purposes years went by and the
parents believe that their child
would someday graduate with a
diploma from the school at that
time the school kept telling the
child that yes the child would
have a deployment give them more
time more time but nothing seems
to be changing and at the time
when the child reach the age of
graduation he got a certificate
of completion.
Not a diploma meaning that the
child would not meet the
qualifications and all the
eligibility criteria to be able
to get a diploma.
Let some students so the court
ruled this is the Supreme Court
ruled that the the schools must
provide at the services and that
The school thought that they had
done this or that are provided
this or that but it was clear to
me I went to that when my
daughter was born we lived in a
rural community and in in that
show I have to tell you that
back then there were hardly any
services for deaf kids I was
myself had no clue what a deaf
child would be like she was my
first child all I knew is that I
was a child myself to say the
least I have no clue why my
daughter was so frustrated
little newborn baby always and
one year old she was still just
looking at our finger and moving
it around I have no clue what
that meant then then finally I
decided I would quietly go.
To Colorado to what we call that
a community colleges center to
have or tested because I kind of
felt I would stop on the floor
and she would turn and so I I
know she's not deaf I was trying
to convince myself that she
wasn't and so I tested every
ways that I could argue with
whoever told me she's my
daughter was staff that she
wasn't that you know that that's
not that's not the problem there
may be other reasons but not
that well it turned out when I
took her and she was profoundly
disagree on the staff and she
was probably maybe one and a
half years old at the time and I
started they told me I had to
bring her to the school for the
deaf that's how I'm here at the
school in Santa Fe I landed here
then because I had to bring
glory to the school I had a
choice whether to come here go
to Colorado because there's only
one school for state usually
made school however springs had
one set up they have the other
and so I decided come to Santa
Fe and then bring their daughter
before I brought it to school
well it was a difficult time for
me because I put her in a public
school there and in the northern
part of the state including her
there no one knew what deafness
even meant there was no
communication no.
Absolutely no form of fast
program to help Lori and I
didn't know much either about it
so I start I ordered a book
called joy of signing you
remember that.
I ordered it on the mail and it
came in after looking through
signs to see if I could tell my
daughter how she could ask for
water for to ask for to tell me
she was hurting somewhere in her
body for.
She needed what she wanted we
would constantly just do this to
each other she would point and
she would do this I had no clue
she had no clue she couldn't
communicate and so and it's
terrible in so the school
provided absolutely nothing
nothing for her but frustration
they had arrived so late in the
little corner and slapped her in
the head when she couldn't
understand what they were saying
and on and I'm finally I just
thought I've got to move to
Santa Fe I gotta get out of here
so I could take or the school so
here we are in Santa Fe and we
put her at the school for the
deaf we moved here this too hard
to go to be away from Lori so we
we just moved here back then
this was in the seventies.
And that's what happened so I do
understand the limitations and
the concerns that can exist and
I I really I applaud this family
it was a poor family not didn't
have a whole lot of resources
apparently I've read about this
quite a bit and I applaud the
family for percent because you
know we don't have that
situation today as we did when
Lori was small but but it's good
messages sent that we need to
find every form of total
communication for children who
are deaf and can't speak thank
you senator senator Morris chair
Senators.
You need to us my heart I
remember what my mother's
dissertation dealt with language
adaptation of a which was at the
university equipment or Gaynor
PhD or the language adaptation I
just vision you with your
daughter and I was with my mom
much of those that research that
she did for dissertation and I a
and what concerns me about the
future is a without.
You know I think about my act
which at a Mason Mintz the thing
about what amazing woman she
just grew up speaking Spanish in
Espanol never heard an English
word in her life became deficit
as a toddler
Go to school for the deaf goes
executive search Griego that
goes gets a master's degree in
English from North Texas never
have never is heard a word of
English spoken in her life and
she's one of the most beautiful
writers ever she bears me with
her and her co writing skills
and like I said issue her mouth
or founded us would on springs
back in the eighties so
and I think what have what have
what happens you just talk about
that family without that pin and
figure that you had to force a
case like made it all the way to
the Supreme Court which is in
America this gonna have a a
lasting impact on the for
education just wanna make sure
New Mexico's prepared for that
and parents alike Senator
Rodriguez some senators of the
parents from Michigan my
grandparents who obviously
fought for their daughter have
that ability and that the kids
aren't left behind so the other
regions I would appreciate your
thoughts and put on that issue
to make sure that we're doing
that for all Mexicans thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
sent over thank you thank you so
much any other questions but
what must perform assume sorry I
did this with all of our other
regions remember the
constitution you are the head of
the New Mexico school for the
deaf not us after confirmed not
the governor no one you guys are
constitutional officers the only
want to go into the U. S.
Supreme Court so your job is to
protect those students only
those students against political
pressure and everything else so.
Good work and make sure that you
don't fall for the political
pressure that might come your
way thank you Mr thank you
senator Senator Stewart.
I can't I move that we said this
nominee and move her to the four
the Senate for confirmation
thank you for that before we
move we have one last Senator
with questions which is Senator
Duhigg and then we'll come back
to that order.
Thank you Mr vice chair that.
The questions that kind of
sprung up in my mind with
Senator Moores line of
questioning.
So that you get seventy five
percent of your funding from the
land grants can you providing
these services to to students in
their communities as well is
that.
It does that funding come from
that land grant funding have how
does that get paid for.
The we have both the the Landen
permanent fund money and then we
also receive legislative
appropriations every year the
money's actually are in
different fund pots but yes all
together
the the entire amount of money
that the New Mexico school for
the deaf receives provides the
services both at the school and
out in the state.
Thank you so so if there's a
small community the though those
public school districts they're
not paying paying you for the
service no correct I will I will
clarified again that are
collaborative preschool programs
this is gets a little
Los crucis and Farmington we
have joint powers agreements
with those local school
districts because those are like
the New Mexico school for the
deaf campus those are in brick
and mortar schools so we have a
a joint powers agreement with
those school districts around
the sharing of costs to operate
those programs essentially it's
it's the child count money that
the school districts are
receiving through IDA they
agreed to provide that to the
New Mexico school for the deaf
who then hires the teacher hires
the aids we don't get
we don't get a hundred percent
of the money funding to operate
those schools from the school
districts in New Mexico school
for the deaf is still providing
a significant amount of funding
to operate those programs is
just and that the school
district agrees to but you know
transportation and food service
those kinds of things that are
available to all the other
children in those schools it's
just set up through a formal
agreement between those
districts and the New Mexico
school for the deaf.
Thank you I appreciate that
answer.
Your reserves how do you ensure
your Senate Rodriguez are you
ensuring that those teachers are
certified sign language for the
program K. what the mission
issue are certified sign
language in these
the schools are actually
properly trained to two separate
scripts F. as in such diminished
sometimes small communities this
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Morris yes
actually again The New Mexico
school for the deaf is the
hiring agent for those folks in
those preschools they are degree
deaf educators they are fluent
in sign language so we we take
on the personnel issues with
those positions because exactly
that we want to make sure that
who's ever in those programs is
in fact qualified to be
providing the services.
Senator Baca did you have
something on that point.
No separate from that point
okay.
And call and again on on
something that the senator
Morris had asked I you said that
about twenty percent of the the
students at the school have our
dual diagnosis.
I would I'm glad to hear I I
have heard elsewhere that school
for the deaf was not accepting
dual diagnosis students what I'm
some wonder why have I would
have gotten that conflicting
information I don't know if you.
Certainly can address certainly
Mr chair and members of the
committee of the New Mexico
school for the deaf has always
accepted children who have other
disabilities
our enrollment admissions we do
Asker required that's kind of
that the the Dow for the that
being deaf is in fact the
primary reason why the child
needs to receive services from
the New Mexico school for the
deaf they can have any number of
other conditions we have
children who are deaf with
Developmental delays we have
children who are deaf and have
physical disabilities we have
children who are deaf and have
very low vision to some children
who are almost would be
considered deaf blind we we
serve all of those children.
How have you.
How do you decide if if being
deaf is the primary reason that
that serve so I if I have a
child who has down's.
How do you decide whether to
this is the primary reason the
districts services Mr chair
members of the committee it's
that really does go through that
whole assessment process and it
comes down to can the child
benefit from being in an
environment where visual
communication is is going to
provide significant benefit to
their again language development
mental development social
development behavioral
development all of that once
it's determined and and
sometimes that that's a long
process I mean we have children
come and they may be with us for
a year or two years or three
years and again those ID peak
teams are getting together
regularly monitoring progress
and it may be decided you know
what this might not be the best
environment for this child
that's rare but that can happen
so determining whether or not
children benefit from all of the
services that are provided an
are available can sometimes take
a little longer but we we work
through all of that with with
families.
Very carefully.
Hi I understand and I might be
waiting in to condition area
here that I don't know about so
I'm doing so cautiously that the
school for the deaf do any oral
language learning.
Mr chair members of the
committee absolutely we have
We have a full range of speech
language of folks on on staff
we have spoken English classes
for those students who have
significant usable hearing those
students are provided the use
again spoken English classes
their speech therapy classes
there's auditory learning
classes so absolutely
our our goal is to make sure
that every child receives the
services that are most
appropriate to his or her needs
and
that they are fully functional
when they leave the New Mexico
school for the deaf.
Be that verbal language if
that's their their need or full
ASL it that's their need.
Thank you so much yes as AT Act
what one of the other senators
mentioned that continue to serve
in this position and I'm always
very patient.
Thank you senator Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair and policies
for getting in your late but I
present a couple questions for
you first I wanted to thank you
Mr chair Senator for sharing
that with us that that
experience of years and very
touching and I I myself did not
know that and now I fully
understand your advocacy for the
school of the deaf deaf and I I
just I didn't know that before
so thank thank you for sharing
that and and miss Parker thank
you for your service all these
years I know that these these
boards are are very demanding at
times and and many times
thankless I want to thank you
for that I want a question out
of curiosity in the last three
years we obviously went to the
COVID pandemic and and much of
the much of
much of the school many of the
school for the onslaught of that
through their operations and how
to conduct learning I'm just
curious how school of the deaf
adapted during that period in
which you all did to cope with
the pandemic.
Mr chair members of the
committee you can summarize well
you know we
We we did the whole distance
learning that every other school
in in the state of New Mexico
did we equipped all of our
families with technology with
laptops with hot spots with the
any and everything necessary to
ensure that children had access
to the instruction the
instruction continued no
question it was incredibly
challenging
to do
Distance education for deaf and
hard of hearing children
but we did we carried on we
sent food our food service
continue to work we delivered
food to families we delivered
packets of information and
supports and resources to
families all over the state
we are.
I think we did a pretty
phenomenal job given all of the
challenges but yes we we were
thrilled when face to face
learning could could take place
again but we we absolutely
followed all of the directives
from the department of health
and the department of ed in
providing the services and.
everybody worked really hard to
ensure that definitely hearing
kids continue to get.
Educational services well thank
you I I Mister chair I have a
school age child as well and I
know how difficult it was and
standard public school and so I
can't imagine the hardship that
you all face to during that time
and so I applaud you for getting
through that my next to my next
to increase would be on the
budget I and you tell me if I'm
wrong here but I just rate a
briefly read through your annual
report does a twenty million
dollar your budget sound about
right for school with the death
yes okay and and and so so I I
looked in there and and that
includes appropriations I think
right I surrender you got one
not long ago for a dining hall
and some other things so I just
for the benefit of the committee
wanted to wanted to to get that
number out there so we can know
what kind of operating budget of
which in my opinion is actually
quite a value I I think it's
amazing you get done what you
done with with that sort of
budget all on another note I
would ask a question that showed
about five percent of that going
to professional services of that
budget which I assume is
professional of attorneys and
and maybe consultants or things
like that and and in your in
your resume yourself you you
list yourself as a consultant do
do do any direct consulting with
school of the deaf.
Mr chair members of the
committee I do not I do I don't
consult with the New Mexico
school for the deaf
But I do I do I work for free
with that for the New Mexico
school for the deaf.
no I do not I do not do any
consulting with the New Mexico
school for the deaf and and you
are correct in the professional
services I don't the our
attorney costs are probably in
in that in that pod but it's
mostly for again some of our
ancillary and support services
such as auditory services speech
language occupational therapy
physical therapy some of those
folks are in fact contracted to
to work for us as as consultants
they're not full time staff or
employees thank you Mr chair
thank you so much for that Sir
thank you for the transparency I
want to also thank you again for
your service and I look forward
to standing behind your
confirmation thank you
appreciate thank you senator
before I had a basket and circle
back to that motion I just want
to comment that my nephew moved
from Leadville Colorado in the
nineteen nineties and your his
principal Matthew Romero moved
to Santa Fe it sure that he
would board up the deaf school
and his mother and his father at
didn't move immediately but his
grandparents did and they moved
right here to Santa Fe to ensure
he would board and have a
lifeline for the family right
here in Santa Fe that could come
over to my partner signs and so
slides every chance he gets to
help people within the community
so I want to thank you for all
that you've done and I remember
he has fond memories of you and
of the school thank you for that
so there was a motion from
Senator Stewart appointing the
confirmation moving her forward
seconded by Senator Moores we're
now going to start with the roll
call vote if I can have a roll
please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca.
Senator Ingle is excused Senator
Lopez yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Yes.
Fifty yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator T. Pino yes Senator
Pirtle is excuse Senator Stefano
yes.
Fund XPS Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart yes Senator huh
yes Senator had a meal yes and
senator do the.
Yes.
Yes and to excuse thank god with
the vote of nine yes to excuse
you will be moving on to the
Senate floor congratulations
thank you thank you.
Thank you thank you but if I
could have missed what I come up
and join to Senator Rodriguez.
And as I was coming up it just
for that conferees information
if we're able to get our
committee report to the floor
before eleven you will be heard
on for today I'm not.
We're gonna have time to do
that.
Managers were doing to
transition assist the
interpreter of the COVID press
conferences fame.
Is it okay.
The.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and we
will try to move quicker to
ensure that John Roberts and can
hopefully get your
recommendation also I have
Kristen Water here Kristin was
appointed approximately a year
ago in April is she her term
will expire in December of
twenty twenty seven and she
fulfills a very important role
on the board of regents she is
the parent of a deaf child and
the current statute requires
that a deaf a parent of a deaf
child serve on the board and
this is something that I
remember working at from a long
time ago and I'm happy to see
that we continue to have parents
on the board Kristen's very
committed she does web design
and much many other areas of I.
T. technology and I am going to
pass it on to her the second
time thank you and good morning
everyone
I am I'm here to fill a parent
representative position on the
board of regents for the school
for the deaf in my relationship
with the school for the deaf
it's a very personal one and it
began for me just a few months
after my second this is born I'm
a mother of three children two
of which are hearing and I have
a five year old son who is hard
of hearing he was identified
with a bilateral moderate to
severe sensorineural hearing
loss so he has hearing aids in
both ears and the start of our
journey I really had to be a
medical advocate for my son in
order to get him the diagnostic
EPR that he needed to get his
diagnosis I I came up with
certain medical institutions
having scheduling issues trying
to push our appointment out for
diagnostics up to six months and
I knew how imperative and
critical it was to get him that
access during that first year of
life so that he could have
natural language acquisition and
have access to sound and all
those things that he needed to
develop and not skip a beat so I
really had to do my research I
ended up finding a private
practice I was able to give us
our diagnostic APR and avoid
waiting for that scheduling to
take place I'm and we had him
equipped with hearing aids by
the time he was four months old
during that time I felt like it
was really challenging because
the medical community doesn't
really give you advice about
what to do after the devices
you're kind of just left on your
own I mean they tell you kind of
a few options but I did receive
several messages you know
voicemails from the early
intervention program here in New
Mexico and my service
coordinator she kept on calling
me and I was so overwhelmed that
I didn't really like I don't
know what early intervention is
I didn't really want to add one
more thing to my plate but I'm
so glad that I did reach out and
call her back and those
programmer presented as are so
diligent and passionate about
what they do so I really
appreciate that you know as a
mother
but I got in contact with the
early into.
Mention program and this is one
of the programs that is closely
affiliated with NMSC and work to
families throughout the state
system to provide home visiting
services the legislative deaf
mentor speech therapy ASL
classes and just general support
for for parents in this
situation you don't really know
like I had a hearing child I
didn't know what to do with my
deaf child or how to support him
and I felt a little ill equipped
because I didn't know ASL yet so
I I you know hit the ground
running with this program and
started learning ASL started my
son and services that we
attended our first event
community event at NMSC when he
was six months old we went to
family to family weekend and I
think you know NMSC is so
special because it's kind of
this meeting place it's this
gathering place for people not
only throughout our state but I
think I've met people who have
come from other states to take
advantage of these community
events and immersion Services an
ASL classes the NMSC does
provide I really do think the
institution is setting an
example for a lot of states
because I've talked to a lot of
parents who don't have these
programs and services available
in their state and our early
intervention program is doing
some really amazing work we're
number one in the country for
referrals to this program for
children zero to three I'm
serving on a board
that is involved with the early
intervention program as well
because I do believe these
programs are critical and they
need to continue to be funded
and also we need to get the word
out to new families and service
providers medical professionals
that everyone is working
together to make sure that
children are being served and.
Have access to everything that
they need
so I digress I think that NMSC
is is this great meeting place
and so in that first year of
life we attended many of these
community events and NMSC and
shortly there after my son was
enrolled in eighteen twenty four
month preschool program and NMSC
and he loves the school there
he's five years old now and he's
still involved in preschool
services we had a couple of
setbacks with the pandemic we
did our best with the remote
learning you know what they
thought of next year preschool
would serve him well so he's
going to start kindergarten next
year but my son is so confident
and he has a language and he
communicates I mean I really
just can't get him to quiet down
to be honest with you and he
does this cute thing when he
doesn't want to he just looks
away is like I'm not listening
to not one minute you know.
But he's he does the braces has
language and he loves going to
school and he doesn't feel a
sense of other you know and that
was really important to me as a
mothers to have my son just not
skip a beat and be empowered to
go be whoever he wants to be in
this world and succeed and so I
think the school supports him
and has supported our family I
have extended family who are
taking advantage of the as all
classes that are free at the
school for the deaf
and like I said we participate
in all the community events I'm
trying to be involved with all
the and early intervention
programs as well and
and so that's that's why I'm
here I feel like as a parent
it's really great to bring that
parent perspective to the table
and I'm just honored to have a
seat at the table or these
important decisions are being
made that really support our
families and our children in New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr do we have any
questions or comments from
members of the committee senator
Morris Dees thank you thank you
Mr chair if you could address
some of the issues our product
in the previous confirmation
first off are you SO are you
fluent in ASL I'm I'm not quite
fluent but I am at a level for
now I've been learning for the
last five years and the Business
School provided a soul classes
for parents parents and hearing
civilians yes they're they're
available for any family member
even X. you know external family
uncles grandparents can take
advantage of ESL classes for
free and we do.
Actually six percent or parole
here this question is chairs for
probably trusted governor's
office all three of these
companies are part conferees are
from Santa Fe probably because
of the sponsors or significant
influence were the other two
border regions from to we have
to your graphical representation
and are there any staff members
of that are on the border right
regents sites I think the third
confirmation today is that
correct yes okay what about the
other two thank you very much I
can answer that Mr Chairman the
other coverage will be coming
before us to is from requests
and the person and when that
person comes up all speak more
for her but she is a this is
small business owners
veterinarian effective been
quite involved in helping the
school she brings animals
therapy animals and different
animals here to help with the
kids and she is not daft she
hears but there is a person who
is down on the board of regents
and that is also a requirement
and it his name is Nathan gone
and he has served on the board
for a while now thank you so
that's where it's at yeah and
these three people that are here
today John Rockwell he'll be
Mexico explain about him up that
later on this will be next but
Ellen and I don't know where
Lynn and lives right now I I
don't even know if they lived in
Santa Fe or not these are the
governor's appointees and I've
worked
They are but anyway so that's
all leave it at that.
Just give the three we'll see
today are from Santa Fe and so
you said Norma's also from Santa
Fe from I was.
I'm sorry for not making this in
Albuquerque.
Okay.
Thank you.
And it ended before go there is
a school citizenship the parent
Representative Mr chair is the
school still flying the kids
home on weekends.
Line the kids they don't do that
anymore I'm not sure that they
don't fly.
Yes madam chairman Mr Chairman
can learn and answer that about
point yes.
Yes we we no longer fly because
we don't have the same small
airline ever use but we do every
child does go home every weekend
so we transport every child home
Friday afternoons and pick up
every child on Sundays thank you
thank you Mr thank you to
transferred to rest but it
really is we have no plans
before I.
Before I go to any more
questions or comments from the
committee I failed to ask if
there's anyone in the room who's
in support of this country.
Thing that I'll also ask if
anyone in the room is in
opposition of this country.
Seeing none at the zoom operator
did we have anybody join us
something else okay still in
those in attendance so that will
then continue with questions or
comments.
A new jobs as our dresses issues
with drugs earlier about the
issue your perspective would be
incredibly valuable since you
are also an advocate for your
child I was not aware of this
case it's really troubling to
hear about but also I'm very
proud for those parents for
taking it as far as they did and
and and creating change and I
think that change does start you
know on the community level I
think it starts with family
involvement and parental
involvement and you have to be
involved in your child's
education I can't speak for
those parents going to public
school and having trouble with
services there because my son
does attend the school for the
deaf and I know there we have
you know constant evaluations
I'm involved in his I. F. S. P.
as families educational plans I
am in close contact with his
speech therapist and has
educators on a daily basis so I
couldn't see him not receiving
services and me not finding out
about it in that environment
but I would definitely advocate
and support any parent who's
having troubles like that
because I do know we have those
per Friel services that are
available and our children need
to be receiving the services
that they are eligible for.
thank you senator Morris Senator
Duhigg.
Thank you
I just have a question he
started off saying that the
early on getting that says
diagnostic appointments as a
challenge.
And then my understanding was
that when a child is born if
they feel fail their initial
hearing test with that kind of
starts a cascade of immediately
getting getting reach out for
services is that I guess why did
that happen in your case and and
well well it did and and I think
that the newborn hearing
screening which is required for
New Mexico is an amazing tool
and it is something that catches
the children and house amendment
referred a lot sooner I've
talked to a lot of parents who
didn't have access to a newborn
hearing screening and they
didn't find out their child was
different to eighteen or twenty
four months when they're not
getting that response you know
from the child and it's a
behavioral sort of discovery but
no my child to take the newborn
hearing screening and he did
fail it with flying colors but
the doctors were like don't
worry about it it's probably on
the on excluded you don't you
don't worry we're going to refer
you to a specialist and from
there we went to an anti and we
took some more hearing
screenings and those are also
failed and then from there we
were referred to you NM
audiology and that's where we
and counter the scheduling
issues and I had to seek out a
private practice at the UNM
wasn't great there services were
amazing they just couldn't get
it to us fast enough.
Know about those other costs of
yes it's not just important to
have the government faction or
dizzy fee for those other
multiple reasons to become the
crosses over.
Mr white Senator it's just a
place we passed a bill that was
prior to your time Senator
Duhigg I was a sponsor of the
bill many years ago that
required the into the hearing
screenings for newborns back
then because I realize Lori was
already my goodness price for I
by the time I learned enough
language to be able to
communicate whether so this was
a very important and it passed
unanimously that I can thank and
I do believe that it started
that cascading effect early
intervention we were then
referred to earlier intervention
and then they tried getting in
touch with us to get us services
and help us with those
resources.
Hedge fund that to make sure
that you're getting that was
working as a message yes.
Senator Stewart thank you thank
you so much for coming forward
you and Senator Rodriguez so I'm
just curious.
What what is the response from
your other to chill are they
trying to learn sign are they
taking classes what's the
interaction line between your
your five year old and the other
so this is a really great aspect
of these services the early
intervention.
Program and NMSC I think they
really focus on the whole child
perspective so it's it's about
and raging rivers life not only
in his language capacity but
just making sure his successful
all around and that includes
having good relationships with
family so we've been supported
through the early intervention
program to all learning SLO we
have a deaf mentor who comes to
our home and we play games in
ASL together so I have a twelve
year old son who's the all this
and then I have a three year old
who's younger than revert and my
twelve year old he takes the
classes we he goes with his
uncles to the night classes at
the school for the deaf so they
all communicate in sign language
really and my three year old she
comes up to me every how do you
say this inside mom so that she
can go and have a conversation
with her brother so she's
actively learning in fact she
signed she does a lot of sim com
so I had to let our teachers
know at school I know she's
moving her hands a lot but
that's just because she also
speaks AFL so they've really
embraced it and and and they're
really close.
Thank you so much for that.
Thank you any other questions.
Thanks there's been a motion for
a tech has followed by a second
by Senator Stefanics if I can
have a roll call vote.
Yes Senator Baca is excused
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Lopez yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator McKenna yes senator
Munoz senator Morris yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle is
excuse senators to funding yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator how to me yes Senator
had a meal yes and senator do
yes Senator Duhigg yes again you
have nine yes to excuse to pass
with flying yes and to excuse
you have a do pass we'll see you
on the Senate floor graduations
thank.
Since making his way up since
our ranking member.
This this we introduced earlier
the organizational meeting.
To introduce yourself.
let's see.
Watch me you're my cough sure.
Bill
incorrect.
I also realize I've failed to
introduce Jesse Greenspan when I
was introduced earlier she was
the chief of staff for the
rules.
Senator.
chair just remind folks about
this thank you yes members are
these background checks that
are.
The.
Of the hearing and so.
Thank you so much will now move
on to Mr Robertson and we'll
hear from his Senate sponsor
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman I am very very happy
and proud to introduce to you Mr
John Robertson he is a long time
servant of the New Mexico school
for the deaf and the association
for the deaf in New Mexico also
he has he actually was the
founder of the commission for
the deaf in New Mexico and
continues to serve
of through support through
support service providers
programs throughout the state
for deaf children and adults who
have graduated from the school
for the deaf and need special
services he is also I recall
from a long time ago he served
in so many capacities at the
school for the deaf
Looting a driver for the buses
at the school transportation
director I recall that to Mr
Robertson.
We'll do whatever needs to be
done to help deaf people and
deaf children he is he went to
Gallup that university and he is
he has he has a a bachelor's in
sociology but he also has and
masters in vocational
rehabilitation deaf education
and he the went to school and
school for the deaf and
continues to serve in this
capacity is for sake of time I'm
going to stop there and pass it
to him
I'm proud to continue.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez for
your introduction.
Good morning.
Madam chair.
Mr how to meal.
Members of the committee.
I will be brief.
In my comments this morning.
I was born here in Santa Fe.
I was adopted.
My parents lived in Albuquerque.
They didn't know what to do with
me.
Because they didn't have a
communication they would have
needed.
To communicate with me there
were no services at that time
for any children under five
years old.
And as Mr chair mentioned.
We have so many incredible
services now but we did not have
that much time there we really
wasn't nothing until you were
five years interpreters we've
never even heard of inner.
My father was shot you know
he's a doctor.
And he had no idea what to do.
How can.
They try to make noises feel the
vibrations of the soft but I'm
very confused where the sound
come from eccentric.
My father was not even as a
doctor he didn't know what to
do.
And as I say he was a doctor but
he didn't know how to solve that
specific issue with his own son.
And so what happened is that he
just so happened.
doctor Connor at the time the
superintendent his brother if
I'm correct Mr Ellis with the
superintendent excuse me at the
school but after that time.
And so my father reached out to
Dr Connor.
And he said.
My son what he's done.
And doctor conger said you know
my brother is actually in the
superintendent of the school for
the deaf why not contact him.
Where where would that be the
civil consent face so they went
to Santa Fe.
My parents thing that Mr Connor.
And they were asking what do we
do with this deaf child.
And they really didn't know what
to do because.
Mr Connor was it really didn't
fully understand what little
young children need.
So wondering well it's there so
you know we know if their
primary disabilities definition
happening else his knowledge was
more in depth education in
general and again back then they
didn't have early intervention
services they didn't have pre
schools for the deaf.
So that we just decided well why
not just put Johnny in to the
school for the deaf and I was
four years old I went to the
school for that at all.
And it was a shock I had no idea
what was going on.
Signing every which way.
It was incredible.
Sen lost.
I was fascinated by the removing
their hands so much.
I wasn't in the meeting but I
picked up the is cell very
quickly it was my first language
I think that very quickly.
I was placed in a classroom to
try to help me learn to speak.
You know you're blowing on
feathers to make the right No
Way is actually a funny story
about that.
they brought us kids at that
time I was maybe nine years old
safer it is traveling throughout
the states to show with the
school for the deaf could offer
and so I a was on that trip and
we would tell us to eastern New
Mexico university we went at
that time.
There's a huge audience of
people to come for this
demonstration and the speech
teachers that appropriate for in
front of me and she said okay
hello on this and that that time
I wasn't feeling very well
legislative and other and then I
started to call on state.
I will never forget that moment.
Well now you know.
Anyhow.
So at that time I had to go to
speech classes regularly.
I remember in my time we were
they didn't allow us to sign
during speech class.
To you know start we start
signing by accident they would
you know what our our hand rule
or they don't do that anymore
they really encourage students
to sign when they need to if
there's their comfort zone and
they're welcome to provide even
during speech class.
No but anyhow I I want my whole
school until I was thirteen I
went to school for that and then
I won't explain why but I did
eventually go to a public school
when I was thirteen but and that
was a big shock.
I I was thinking what is going
on here there was no further at
that time at that time it was
nineteen fifty nine I had no
interpreter hi I never thought
of what interpreter would do for
me I guess acting class and try
to keep up as best as I could I
was absolutely lost terribly
frustrated.
I was you know I'm just being
last in class.
And I had to just put that in
there with the a private school
sit and just watch the lectures
no idea what was going on in
front of me no access.
Totally over my head.
I went to middle school and high
school which is essentially no
services at all.
I would highlands high school
three three time you know three
times a students at that school
it was completely lost at every
moment they eventually put me in
the worst losses.
Because I have to keep up I
didn't have access you know they
didn't know what to do with me
so they just put me in this kind
of lower classes my parents
didn't know what to do as well
and they thought well let's see.
Let's see if we can if we can
college level work.
So they do and they were shocked
at my score.
The reason for that was because
I read books like I was being
fed check I read the
encyclopedia every day because
that was the access that.
Was was through literacy I went
to college I failed there as
well because I didn't have an
interpreter that I finally got
together University graduated no
problem moved here starting work
sort of work at the school for
that and I also have to master's
degree from the university of
Arizona and almost a third one.
And almost accepted into a PhD
program as well that are on our
state in order for you.
Thank you so much Mr Robertson
and the
anyone in the room in support of
the country.
Cigna last the same anyone in
the room in opposition of the
country.
Thing not has anybody join B. as
the.
No one is joining us via ism so
next all good at comments and
questions of the committee and
I'll start off with Senator
Stefanics thank you Mr chairman
chair
and I'm very pleased because Mr
Robertson is my constituent and
hi my question is as a deaf
person what uniqueness do you
bring to the entire board and
the running of the school.
All Mr chair first of all myself
as a deaf person.
I feel very empowered and proud
of myself.
to be part of a full the board
excuse me.
Being a deaf person able to
support deaf children something
is proud of I have a unique
perspective.
As a former student of the New
Mexico School.
I have experience the school for
the deaf as well as public
school education.
And so I really do have a full
Sri she shin.
For what The New Mexico school
for the deaf has to offer.
Especially in the way of their
many many service and it's just
amazing what the school is doing
nowadays.
So for example.
Miss more US funds receiving
services as just a tiny be
Incredibles and her son really
will be light years ahead in
terms of his start for his
future just to have that access
and that's amazing again in my
time we didn't have access.
All and.
This is that that's another
story.
Thank you.
And I was.
Mr chair madam chair I want to
thank him for his continued
service as well as the other
board members so thank you for
stepping up.
Thank you senator Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr vice chair this is
so amazing for us today to hear
from all three of you all at
once it's kind of like a good
date to to start at good Monday
morning to us I do have a
question though I might my
background and my expertise is
in teaching reading especially
to children with dyslexia.
I just want to know a little bit
about how you learn to read
without having really been
tossed it saves so could you
just talk a little bit about how
that happened in your early
years.
Thank I'm happy that you brought
that up.
Senator Stewart My father.
Was very very involved in my
life I.
Again I did attend the school
for the deaf at a very young age
and so you know my father and
mother tried to speak with me
before then at that time they
didn't encourage parents to sign
with their children at that time
that you can folder idea with
the nineteen fifties a different
world and now.
But they pushed for me to be
able to relate very well I did
have hearing aids they were the
the funky kind that came down to
the box for your cat.
Here look like over the.
What the hearing is coming up.
It's it really did look at
those.
So much more and speak to me
very clearly make eye contact
face to face and he would read
he taught me to read.
But they also supported my
reading abilities of the school
for the deaf.
Since I was there since for from
so I had I have a good mind.
And I'm able to discern and
expand on what I see when I'm
reading I just have that ability
if I see in here that I can
really understand what they're
you know what they're getting at
and so I'm very grateful to my
father as well as the teachers
of the school staff that really
instilled that I do love for
tea and they really you know
they would write on the
blackboard make sure that we
were.
engaging with just written
language and I have no glasses
of the time so I had to you know
run up and the blackboard.
Again they do have those
services on my glasses.
That was a big.
So again.
Very grateful to my father and
the school for the deaf for my
to read so well when they did a
great job
You know we had a lot of folks
at home and I still do.
Mr vice chair thank you so much
for that that story
I had an older sister who.
He certainly was hearing but she
also read the encyclopedias
everyday up it was pretty
amazing to just sit and watch
here she went through the whole
book and knowledge and then she
started some other that we had
so she's she's brilliant but she
has no common sense so.
A loss that.
So just thank you so much for
your service and what you do I
just think it's great the school
for the deaf has these
requirements on their board up
parent but that person you know
so you guys are really doing it
right I I just Madam everyone
you up to killers thank you.
You Senator Stewart thank you
Senator senator Morris thank you
Mr thank you senator thank you
John is looking through your
your time line here and it's
just the connectors are probably
pretty strong my family looks
like you're at the school when
my aunt was up probably freshman
or sophomore it's I think you
know over and then your echo
that right out to my parents
were there for on their master's
degrees do you know pop pop my
straighter zona.
Now more than right after you
know Bob to characters in it.
Anyways if you could address
some of the questions I had
earlier about what we're doing
for to make sure that the the
kids are taken care of I don't
experience what you experience
as a child or my aunts
experiences childhood my
grandparents also at that time
were discouraged from learning
sign and you think about that
senator from our neck of the
woods up there is English was
their second language and so
they never really ever had an in
depth personal feeling
conversation with more and grow
because not only do they never
learn ASL to they're told not to
learn out there selling their
primary language is Spanish and
so that that's to me very sad
but she still such a remarkable
woman to talk so those
challenges that you had
been pre access had Hari
preventing that for making sure
that the next generation the
next hundred years of the school
for the deaf don't have.
Well for starters ms Barbero as
she mentioned we just have a
wide array of programming so we
will continue that that will be
a big part of making sure that
that we're hiring people who are
real experts really know a lot
about early childhood
development.
And what is involved in
providing appropriate support
services.
Particularly when working with
families.
making sure families are
included we're including aunts
uncles brothers sisters in that
education and never ever ever
preventing.
School for the deaf from birth
stopping those programs that.
Making sure that we're always
continuing to support the
school's efforts.
We need to educate the community
state live we need to make sure
public schools know about the
school is yes services that are
available.
Making sure that the state
support.
They're definitely hard of
hearing children that choose to
stay in their districts the
state is still the right
services.
If you don't do that.
Where will the children be in
their features.
Well the successful people.
Or will they become successful
and your I. A. of feels will to
become engineers will they
become medical professionals so
they become business people.
Right now there's there's
lawyers now there's a top lawyer
and I. H. supervised.
Other lawyers a deaf person.
Researchers rules for NH
Services can you imagine that
that guy is yeah.
The gentleman whose mother.
Was actually my classmates here
at the New Mexico school for the
deaf.
She can if she had not attended
the school for the deaf where
would her son the.
We were deaths on the.
We have
a deaf to bring tenant at the
school for the deaf Dr Jennifer
herbal.
She is an amazing person sure
she really and I will tell you
she is from a deaf amlee.
Her family came from schools for
the deaf.
So imagine if her family had
never gone to school for the
deaf.
Where would drive.
Where would you be.
She wouldn't be here.
She wouldn't have to be a leader
in this community in our vero.
Like miss more of.
Thank you thank you.
We do are you going but I really
appreciate all your service and
for frankly answering some
concerns I have about the future
of deaf education the state to
set a table no your.
And as a trade secret yes those
he was my boss really where the
the college in Texas again all
done big springs.
Yes that's right.
Small world.
Thank you for that I just want
to quickly I was speaking a big
springs and I should ask you a
confirmation is how he said all
the graduates are all the
students once five years
actually graduate degrees how
many are going on to the Big
Spring scholar that for other
post secondary educational
progress do we have anyone going
to Rochester or
thing service.
Yes yes yes several students now
all of our on going to the
southwest college for the deaf
and there are several guests as
well as registered registered to
for the technology.
Some are also going to public
universities with interpreters I
think there's two what you want
now one graduated from
Thailand's recently so you have
three or four years ago awesome
and are those of those on the
committee noted the doormat done
and experiences named after my
aunt her his former boss and
administration building is named
after my uncle on this so we go
way back into into the Gallaudet
bison a little piece of trivia
so as my father must be deaf
education thing because my
father used to make me read the
encyclopedia brown.
I know all sorts of useless.
And just so you guys know the
Bisons and since I have a
connection with football they're
the ones who invented the hot in
football so that's a little
piece of wood golf trivia.
That's right thank you there
with that I've moved to pass and
before we move forward to do
pass I just have one comment I
sent a text message to let my
family know that we were talking
to all of you and I think the
country is for the New Mexico
school for the deaf and I was
sent a message to remind
everybody that my nephew Matthew
did bring home the gold to the
New Mexico school of the deaf in
the Aspin at deaf Olympics so
that's a thank you so drugs and
for the have I want to thank you
again from the to do I'm very
impressed by you and all that
you've done I have not read the
encyclopedia but I am very good
at us theory when I need to do.
Thanks.
So we do have a due pass from
Senator Moores with the second
from Senator Stefanics if I can
have a roll call vote.
Senator Baca yes Senator bye yes
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ingle
yes it looks like Senator Lopez
is excuse Senator McKenna yes
Senator mechanic yes.
As senator Morris yes senator
Morris yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excused
Senator funding yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
how to me yes Senator had a meal
yes and senator do.
Yes we have nine
Yes and to excuse me have a due
pass line yes to excuse me have
a due pass congratulations to
all of you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee and if
we can get these done before
we're off of the floor today
will we'll try our hardest to
get you up in the Senate chamber
for these countries and as one
other reminder every packet that
was left behind to committee
members make sure you leave it
behind there's personal
information so that we can be
shred and dispose of properly
without having to hand it back
over to our chairman thank you.
I
don't know if you're in the
financial stuff.
All right.
We don't need.
Right thank thank you either
