and then we will call it a day
so with that I yield any other
members for announcements and
miscellaneous in that order
business announces
miscellaneous.
The chief clerk to in center my
Estes to go through the oath of
ethical conduct centre messenger
please rise.
In the chief clerk regards to
that oath.
the Senate from district number
from district number twenty six
do hereby recognize the inner
review table do hereby recognize
swear that.
I shall faithfully support
myself I shall faithfully
support the United States
constitution the United States
ethically and with integrity
additional charge and with
integrity discharge at higher
responsibilities the high
responsibilities placed upon me
by the constitution placed upon
spirit I shall abide by the
spirit as well as the letter of
the Senate rules as well as the
letter of the Senate rules
pertain to ethical conduct
scrupulously avoid any active
in propriety void any act of
impropriety are any act that
gives the appearance of
impropriety for any deprivations
gives the appearance of
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to the river of
business committee reports an
it I could do that the state no
objection is seven if you want
to either way you can move it
explain it or if you want
explain it first and then move
it anyway so I move adoption the
committee report we have a
committees every two years we
did that this morning in the
committee and we also approved
the Senate budget we've
increased the but Senate budget
we had a full committee we had a
unanimous vote.
Thank you Senator.
So.
Senate recommends that the
following list of the committees
of senators to the standing
committees of the Senate
effective January seventeenth
chair after that said the
ranking member David guy egos
members Joseph serve on this
Carrie Hamblen Stephen avail
room three eleven will be
chaired by senator souls vice
chair Senator pope.
Thank you members etcetera
renewable members Senator Brandt
through Friday one thirty PM in
room three twenty two.
Meet chaired by senator Mooney
also ice chaired Senator
Rodriguez ranking member will be
and Senator Steinborn and
Senator Woods.
Health and public affairs
meeting Monday Wednesday and
Friday one thirty PM in room
three eleven be chaired by
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
Senator my S. Senator McKenna
and senator said Neil Lopez.
vice chairs etcetera Neil
ranking member Senator Griggs.
Members Senator Ivey Soto
survive this vice chair Senator
Duhigg.
Thank you members Senator Pirtle
members Senator Baca center Ivey
Soto Senator Moores etcetera
Duhigg vice chair center how to
meal ranking members is Senator
Ingle.
Our members Senator Baca Senator
Tax business and transportation
meet meeting Tuesday and
Thursday one thirty PM in room
three twenty one chaired by
Senator Sanchez Senator Tallman
and senator Wirth.
The procedural committees
committees committee of the call
of the chair will be chaired by
Senator Duhigg Senator Hemphill
Senator moon Jooss Senator by
the a Senator Pirtle and Senator
Shendo respectfully submitted
Senator Mimi Stewart chair.
it the committee report has been
adopted.
Senator Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go about our business
introduction of legislation
we're on that order business
relating to water and acting the
regional water system resiliency
Act authorizing the creation of
regional a utility authorities
providing the powers and duties
liabilities and water rights
Senate bill one.
Senate bill one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate conservation committee
providing that justices of the
state Supreme Court receive an
annual salary equal to the
annual salary received by New
Mexico federal magistrate judges
Senate Judiciary Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two.
Senate bill three introduced by
Senator Stewart and act relating
appropriation Senate bill three
Senate bill three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three.
act ensuring free healthy school
meals for all students making an
appropriations Senate bill four
Senate Bill for having been read
twice by title is ordered
senators the phonics and
Representative Liz Thompson and
others and act relating to
public health creating the
statewide public health and
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee.
That Senate finance committee
that Senate bill five.
administration to find zero
interest loans to political
subdivisions of the state for
projects to replace or repair
infrastructure damaged by fire
contracts making appropriation
declaring an emergency Senate
bill six.
Senate bill six having been read
twice by title is ordered
Senate bill twenty introduced by
Senator Kernan endorsed by the
investments and pensions
oversight committee and act
relating to educational
retirement providing an
eligible employees of southeast
New Mexico college to
participate in the alternative
retirement plan conforming the
required minimum distribution
age to the federal Internal
That's Senate finance committee
Senate bill twenty.
Senate bill twenty one
introduced by Senator Griggs and
act relating to prescribed
one having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
conservation committee Vance
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate bill twenty one.
Senate bill twenty two
tax credit creating the electric
vehicle charging unit income tax
credit requiring an additional
registration fee for electric
project fund Senate bill twenty
two Senate bill twenty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax
transportation.
to spy Senator Campos act
relating to health care
adjusting the distribution
formula for the emergency
medical services fund making an
finance committee Senate bill
twenty three.
Senate bill twenty four
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act relating to public
emergency relief fund
prescribing duties for the
public education department
Senate bill twenty four Senate
bill twenty four having been
bill twenty five introduced by
senator Munoz and act relating
to public finance creating the
federal infrastructure matching
funds to assist tribal
governments in meeting match
Senate bill twenty five having
been read.
Twice by title is referred to
the Senate engine.
and act relating to finance
providing for the distribution
of certain excess oil and gas
tax revenues and federal mineral
Transportation this isn't tax
committee senator events Senate
finance committee.
Senate bill twenty six.
response act creating the rural
infrastructure crisis response
fund establishing eligibility
requirements for financial
assistance creating the bureau
response fund amending the
tribal infrastructure act to
make the tribal infrastructure
board the fiscal agent for
assistance from the small rural
seven Senate bill twenty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered.
Printed and referred to the
Senate Indian.
Rural and cultural affairs
provided an income tax deduction
for school supplies purchased by
a public school teacher Senate
bill twenty eight Senate bill
twenty eight having been read
Senate bill twenty nine
introduced by Senator o'neal.
For the courts corrections and
justice committee and act
relating to criminal justice
eight Senate bill twenty nine
Senate bill twenty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health of public
affairs committee and Senate
transportation services division
of the General Services
Department to purchase electric
vehicles in a manner in which
those vehicles would constitute
thirty Senate bill thirty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate transportation
business and tax committee
thence Senate finance committee
guardianships providing
rulemaking authority to the
children youth and families
department amending the changing
the name of the family services
acting secretary sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
Senate bill thirty one Senate
bill thirty one having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by senator smitteez
and act relating to elections
prohibiting the sharing of early
and absentee voter information
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill thirty two.
Senate bill thirty three
affairs law enforcement officers
to enforce New Mexico law
without commission agreements
limiting state or local live
bility Senate bill thirty three
bill thirty three Senate bill
thirty four introduced by
Senator pope.
And act relating to lobbying
prohibiting former legislators
former legislators as lobbyist
for a period of two years after
service imposing a penalty
Senate bill thirty four Senate
bill thirty four having been
Senate bill thirty five
introduced by Senator Hickey and
Representative Dixon and act
relating to anesthesiologists
all of just may supervise
requiring in person supervision
removing limitations on counties
where and and just the the CZ
five Senate bill thirty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health of public
affairs committee Vance Senate
the federal American rescue plan
act of twenty twenty one in a
gross receipts tax exemption for
certain health care providers
declaring an emergency Senate
Senate finance committee that
Senate bill thirty six.
Senate bill thirty seven
introduced by senator how to
meal and act relating to
district rather than transferred
from the county to the district
Senate bill thirty seven Senate
bill thirty seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
Senate bill thirty eight
introduced by Senator share and
act relating to taxation many
the tax brackets pursuant to the
leased vehicles gross receipts
tax and gaming taxed manufacture
licensees on the transfer of
gaming devices and increasing
the rate of the.
Railroad car company tax act
motor vehicle excise tax act
alternative fuel tax act county
and municipal gasoline tax act
credit act investment credit act
laboratory partnership with
small business tax credit act
technology Dobbs and research
and development tax credit act
housing tax credit act
alternative energy product
manufactures tax credit act in
certain credits deductions and
exemptions pursuant to the
Credits deductions and
exemptions pursuant to the
income tax act corporate income
and franchise tax act in gross
donations to nonprofit
organizations imposing
additional registration fees for
all electric and plug in hybrid
to dedicate an increment of the
state gross receipts tax.
Reconciling conflict in
amendments to the same section
Senator before I sent it to
committees would you like to
respond so Mr president
according to our rules of every
the rules I think that
especially since I've never had
a bill make it this far before.
actually like to correct my good
friend from San Juan County it's
actually not according to the
rules it is actually according
to the constitution of the state
of New Mexico that all bills are
everyone else but he knows when
I'm going to be doing that R.
will know when I'm doing that
we'll skip it for now but that
is a constitutional requirement
so any member can make that as
full house would be nice if
maybe we could I introduce this
new gold invoice that we're
hearing over the speaker a lot
of our members are here right
now maybe to more you can tell
us who This Is Your handsome
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee vents
Senate finance committee.
Vance not really Senator only to
Thank you Mr president so
We have done our business today
it's been a super good day in
the Senate
week first of all members I just
want you to hear of we are not
going not to appoint a
parliamentarian at this point
we're gonna leave that position
certificates we are going to
this is this for everyone caring
memorials and certificates we're
gonna try and limits to two a
day memorials and certificates
of rein it raining in where we
were pre COVID we didn't do any
memorials or certificates during
the COVID and so we're going to
so if you have a memorial or or
we're gonna coordinate all of
that I want to give everyone a
heads up on that we will not be
in on Friday I want everyone to
session tomorrow will give
everyone notice in the morning
on that and then the goal would
be will probably come in at ten
thirty on Thursday so that we
is all this legislation needs to
be processed by the staff put in
place for committees for the
next for the next week and we'll
jump right and so that's what I
have for announcements and
issue New Mexico we have three
million dollars.
Seeing capital outlay that
hasn't moved in and and Senate
finance we're gonna start
hearing some capital issues
fix the problem with capital not
moving The appropriation apple
out give some examples in Laguna
they have a fire station it's
they have four million dollars
in capital outlay they need
cancer center I as a twenty four
million dollar price tag on in
cap outlay the need additional
nine or ten I can't believe and
so we need to fix that and get
that cancer center bill New
And they can't fix the fence for
ten thousand dollars and so they
requested that we start hearing
and how we combine that and and
fix that issue it's a tough
issue and and members need to be
interchange where we bonded that
interchange and DOT has not
built or started it and the feds
are gonna start penalizes next
legislator well we're still
talking to the executive a ten
governor wish we could give you
a share but you can have get
yours out the executive may be
more than willing to let you be
the executive for the day when
every legislator here loves to
take capital home but is it the
best use and is it used getting
used that's a question and how
of two cities village Pueblo.
And it's hard to divide that
amount of money and try to do
some good in New Mexico and do
good with that correct dollars
background want information we
wanna know we'll let you know as
we move forward where your
capital is an and and what the
issues are with it so that's
going to start and Senate
the floor till tomorrow so we
may add that additional fee bill
at the nine o'clock meeting so
income the for the fee Bill B.
airforce.
tomorrow afternoon so thank you
Mr president.
Thanks everyone else any further
announcements.
Say no further nonsense
may be a training after we're
done on the floor and as and
when you all said I think we
also could come read in house
bill one Senate finance my go up
work that it takes to to get the
train to the station and we've
now got the train out of the
station and we had a good day in
the state Senate and is thanks
to all of you in the work that
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
See no objections the Senate to
