For a couple of minutes. We have
a kind of a sensitive internal
committee issue that I'd like
to, to discuss with you all. Um,
we won't be taking any, any
official action or anything. Um,
but otherwise I'll hand it over
to the vice chair and we'll go
ahead and get started.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. We have just
one agenda item today, which is
we'll be hearing SJR1
legislative salaries commission,
and so we will be hearing from
uh both senators Doig and
Figueroa, and as a reminder once
we start, there's 20 minutes in
total for the presentation, in
addition to that, you'll include
the organized support that I
signed up, just so everybody
knows in the room, there is
nobody who signed up in
organized opposition, but I'll
still have you raise your head.
And if you're in opposition, and
for those watching on Zoom, we
do ask as a committee that you
sign up at least an hour in
advance before committee to go
ahead and speak in either
support or opposition. And with
that, good morning, senators,
we're ready to hear from you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, committee. I am happy
to be here. Uh we are bringing
you.
Mr. Chair and committee a
resolution that some of you have
seen before in other iterations,
it has been called for multiple
times through the last few
years, the text of the
resolution is fairly short, so
our presentation of it will also
be fairly short, but we are
looking forward to rigorous and
thorough debate. The concept is
large. This is the concept of a
resolution to put before the
people an independent.
Commission
To establish and limit salaries
for the legislative body, and
that would be new in the state
of New Mexico. I'm sure you're
all aware we've all heard it
many times. We are the only
state in the country that has no
established salary for service
in the legislature.
That's what we're here to talk
about this morning.
My constituents in New Mexicans
deserve more than that, and we
need to look to the future
beyond us, Mr. Chair, look to
establishing a structure that
will last and serve New Mexico
for the next 100 years and, Mr.
Chair, I'll go ahead and move uh
the sub for the purposes of
discussion.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
There's been a motion to move
the substitute for discussion.
Is there any opposition with
that?
Signal opposition. Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so
just very briefly, this would
create an independent citizen
commission that would be
responsible for establishing and
limiting, uh, the salaries for
legislators. So there would be
no self dealing, we would not be
involved in in making those
decisions about salaries. Um,
and so that's what section one
does.
Section 2 is really just, just
clean up language, uh, about the
per diem we would the per diem
and mileage would continue, um,
which is, is normal in most
states where they do where they
are, are giving salaries, they,
they also do pydium and mileage.
Um, and, and then also in
section 2, we are by
constitution.
Providing for that, uh,
opportunity for a salary, uh, by
that independent commission. And
then Section 3 of the sub says
that this would go on the ballot
in 2028. Our state constitution
says that constitutional
amendments, uh, go on the ballot
at the next, at the next general
election after the adjournment
of the legislature.
The Legislature is the
fifty-seventh legislature. We
are now in the first session of
it. It adjourned in January of
2027, when we will go into the
fifty-eighth legislature. And so
the first general election after
the adjournment of the
legislature would be in 2028.
Uh, that also gives us the
opportunity, it gives us at
least 3 sessions during which we
can work out the enabling
legislation.
Uh, that, that would go with us.
This is a, this is a
constitutional amendment. All
the details about how everything
will work or not and should not
be in in our Constitution. Those
will come in the enabling
legislation that comes
afterwards, we would have 3
years to work that out, uh, with
a, a section and they're saying
this will only go into effect if
the voters.
Pass this amendment.
In the 2028 general.
So with that, Mister Chair, I
believe you have a list of our
organized support. I know there
are also a couple of other
people who had signed up to
speak and support if there's
time left after our organized
support, we'd like them to be
able to go ahead and speak as
well. Thank you, senators. I'm
gonna call those of you up who
signed up to support the bill
and speak. If you can form a
line and although I call you
out, if you'll also state your
name again for the record. I
have John Martinez of
Conservation Voters of New
Mexico, Mason Graham, Comma, New
Mexico.
Hang Nanjian from Asian Family
Center, Catherine McGill, New
Mexico Black Leadership Council,
Abraham Sanchez Center of Civic
uh Policy and Tehranvia of New
Mexico voter, a native vote.
Each of you have 2 minutes, and
once again, state your name for
the record.
Thank you so much, Mr. Vice
Chair. This is Mason Graham from
Common Cause New Mexico.
In 2022, we pulled the sample of
likely voters on this issue and
the results were very clear, 64%
supported establishing salaries
for legislators and 62%
supported an independent salary
commission. The support spanned
across demographics, political
parties, and regions, so voters
recognize that this change is
long overdue. So passing this
amendment would mean making an
investment into our legislative
infrastructure, ensuring the
work that you all do here and
during the interim is fairly
compensated, but also help our
emerging leaders run, serve, and
lead in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair. My name is Catherine
McGill, the Mexico Black
Leadership Council. My father
was a Baptist minister and he
used to say, it's easy to preach
to the choir.
The hard work begins when you
step beyond the walls of the
church and speak to the people,
because that's when you get the
real reception for your message.
And beyond these walls, the
people of New Mexico are clear.
They want a legislature that
looks like them.
Live like them and understands
who they work for. Government of
the people by the people and for
the people, isn't just a slogan.
It's a promise.
But that promise falls short
when only those who can afford
to serve are able to sit in
these seats.
Representation matters, passion
matters, preparation matters,
and yes, accountability matters.
Believe me, we'll be the kind of
employer to expect great
outcomes, phone calls returned,
good bills introduced.
And subsequently passed.
Representatives showing up in
our neighborhoods when we pay
for a job well done. We expect
exactly that. And when we do,
this body will truly reflect the
people it's pledged to serve.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is John
Martinez. I am here representing
Conservation Voterss New Mexico.
Uh, you may be wondering why are
the environmentalists here in
this room for this democracy
bill. It is because we have come
to understand that without a
healthy democracy, we cannot
achieve any of our objectives
whatsoever. So we have put a
democracy legislation on equal
importance with all of our
environmental and conservation
legislation in this session, and
uh we, in the name of um
Democracy, diversity, a simple
fairness. We urge you to do
pass.
Thank you.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Tarren Villa and I am a
registered lobbyist with the
Mexico Native Vote. We are here
in strong support of Senate
Joint Resolution 1. We support
Senate Joint Resolution 1 to
establish a commission to set
fair salaries for New Mexico's
legislature, a government that
truly reflects its people must,
must ensure equitable access to
public service. Currently,
financial barriers prevent many
working class and
underrepresented communities,
including Native Americans. The
most underserved
yet integral contributors to our
state's diverse population and
culture and economy.
From fully participating in the
legislative process.
By dressing, legislative
composition, we can create a
more inclusive and
representative government that
ensures all voices are heard,
not just those who can afford,
afford to serve.
A law lawmakers to support
Senate.
Thank you is Hang or and I know
I have Abraham Sanchez, who's
joining us via Zoom if we can go
to him next, he was on the list
of organized support.
Good morning, Vice Chair and
committee members. My name is
Abraham Sanchez. I'm the
inclusive democracy project
director with the Center for
Civic Policy. I'm fortunate to
work with organizations all over
our state to remove barriers to
participation and to create a
more representative democracy.
Today, I'm joining you from a
beautiful sunny day in Las
Cruces. For southern New Mexico
and rural communities all over
our state, modernizing our
legislature is vital to increase
participation and improve our
state government. One of the
best ways to accomplish this is
to support SJR1 to let voters
decide if legislators should be.
receive a salary. Our unpaid
legislature creates a barrier
for everyday New Mexicans to run
for office and results in a
legislature that is often
disconnected from the needs of
working families. It's sad to
see how many community members
react.
When they're informed that
legislators don't receive a
salary. They quickly realized
the only way they could ever be
legislators themselves without
making significant personal
sacrifices is to be rich or
retired. This needs to change.
In New Mexico, we can work
together to tackle the
educational work needed for
voters to decide if their
legislators should be paid.
Please vote in support of SGR1
and empower voters to build a
more inclusive legislature.
Thank you.
Thank you. And senators, we had
an additional list if there was
time, and we do have time. And
as a reminder, we're only
hearing comment from those who
signed up. I have Meredith of
the League of Women voters who's
with us today?
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I, Meredith Main,
and I'm representing the League
of Women Voters of New Mexico
and the American Association of
University Women, uh, both
organizations have been uh um
working on modernization for
many years, and we strongly
support this legislation and uh
I don't want to repeat what's
already been said, but the
voters get to decide this and um
for all those who say, oh, these
Legislators are just trying to
vote themselves some salaries,
that's not true. A lot of the
legislators here are going to be
retired by 2028, and I think
it's very important that we
think in terms of, of um how
many incumbents we have already
who are serving for a long,
long, long time, who might want
to turn over their seats to
somebody else, if um, you know,
they don't have to wait until
their pension would kick in.
So, uh, I think it's actually
going to, I, you know, it's
gonna increase the diversity of
um members who can serve
community members who can serve
in our legislature, making it
very healthy. I think it's very,
very important that um that we
passed this legislation and not
remain the last um state that
doesn't have a paid legislature,
people work very, very, very
hard and we um owe them that
respect. Thank you.
Thank you, Camilla, I have you
on the list, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Camila Feibelman,
director of the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter, and we
concur with all of the reasons
that other groups are supporting
this legislation, but I want to
bring to bear the point of
highly complex technical
legislation. Many of our
environmental bills require
knowledge of the science, or at
least time to get up to speed on
a knowledge of the science to
make sure that the policies
we put into place a line with
the technologies available or um
the complex rulemakings that
would result in them, and
without a paid legislature that
really has time to dig deep. We
rely on legislators who do that
because they're champions of
these issues, and that is
wonderful and wanted, um, but we
also need the time and the space
to really explore bills from
their technical angle. Thank you
so much. Thank you. I have 2
others who are online and a
third who should be.
in the room,
uh Reger of Lutheran advocacy
ministry, if you're here, you
can come up to the table. But
before then, we're gonna go to
Claudia Reisner, Veterans
Claudia Reisner.
Joan Dickerson joining via Zoom,
also from the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus.
Good morning, Mister Chair,
members of the committee, John
Dickerson with the veteran
Military Families Caucus, uh,
Claudia Reisner is in another
committee at this time.
Uh, we wish to stand in strong
support of this legislation. We
feel that it will bring
diversity to our legislator
legislature, and also it's a
matter of fairness. Uh, not only
do you all work the 1 or 2
months in the winter, but you
all work.
Uh, in the interim, uh, meeting
with constituents of
Crafting legislation, interim
committee meetings. It's a
full-time job and it deserves to
be paid as a full-time job. We
support this legislation. Thank
you very much.
Thank you so much. And Kurt
Regner of the Lutheran Advocacy
Ministry is also joining via
Zoom.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Kurt Reger. I'm the director
of Lutheran Advocacy Ministry of
New Mexico, and we're also here
to express the position of the
New Mexico Conference of
Churches, speaking in favor of
FSGR1. My 5 years in this role,
I've been pleased to witness the
changing demographics of our
legislature, away from a body
that represented the background
and experiences of just a few
groups in New Mexico, to one
that is definitely more
representative of the diverse
people of our state. Yet at the
same time, I've witnessed the
loss.
Excellent legislators on both
sides, in many cases due to the
economics of serving, and it
became just too much of a
financial burden to bear.
Ultimately a paid legislature
would help ensure that our
legislative body represents the
cultural diversity of Mexico,
but just as important, the
diverse stories of all New
Mexicans, Lutheran advocacy
ministry in the conference of
Churches urge your support for
SGR one and thank you for the
opportunity to share our
position this morning. Thank you
for your comments, and we have
Hong of the Asian Family Center,
who's also joining via.
Hello, my name is uh Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Heng Yuan. I'm with New
Mexico Asian Family Center, as
the largest and most
comprehensive provider for the
Asian Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian community in New
Mexico. We believe that SJ R1
will help create a legislative
body that looks more like
A A P A NH and other diverse
community it represents. We just
celebrated our 2nd uh APNH day
yesterday.
And it was so beautiful to be
visible and look and be part of
the beautiful state.
We support this bill because it
is time for New Mexico to move
to the legislature reflect that
reflects and representative,
represent our state geographic,
racial and economic diversity.
Serving as an elected official
is hard work that carries so
much responsibility and
dedication to address
complicated challenges facing
our state.
We support this effort.
And we hope you are going to
vote yes for this. Thank you so
much for all your hard work.
Thank you. Thank you. And
senators, there were 17
organizational members, the
coalition working in support of
Senate Joint Resolution one that
I'd like to read out who sent an
email yesterday, common cause,
New Mexico, American Association
of University Women Center for
Civic Policy, Conservation
Voterss New Mexico. Equality New
Mexico. Family and youth
innovations League of Women
Voters, Lutheran advocacy
services, New Mexico.
Asian Family Center, New Mexico
Black Leadership Council, New
Mexico Native vote, New Mexico
Open elections, New Mexico
voters first.
New Mexico working families's
party
or they organizers in the land
of enchantment, progress now New
Mexico and Sierra Club of the
Rio Grande chapter, and so no
organized opposition, but I'm
going to go to the committee and
ask by a show of hands, is it?
Madam Chair
Mr. Chair, before you go to the
committee, we have a couple
minutes left some wrap up.
So, Mr. Chair, I just wanted to
note, um.
So we have 3 co-equal branches
of government, uh, in New
Mexico, executive judiciary,
legislative.
Because
We only, uh, have
professionalized two of those
branches. They are not truly
co-equal. Our three-legged
stool, one of our, the legs of
our three legged stool is cut
off, um, this would
professionalize our legislature,
make us be a truly co-equal, uh,
branch. And allow the
legislature to
Uh, perform the the really
important oversight function
that we are supposed to be
performing, that we, we
literally can't do now. Uh,
every time I hear we are last in
something, um, I think, boy,
that's probably because only 2
of our 3 branches are
functioning the way they they
are supposed to be. So while
Well, providing salaries for
legislators is by no means a
panacea. Um, it will not fix
anything or everything, uh, it
will not mean that everyone
will, will quit their day jobs,
uh, nor necessarily should it. I
think there is a benefit to
having people work in the real
world while serving, um,
It will be a significant step
towards that professionalization
that will be to the benefit of
all New Mexicans. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, senators. And
before I go to the committee by
a show of hands, is there
anybody in the audience in
support of the bill or the
resolution?
15, and by a show of hands,
anybody in opposition.
not, I'm going to go to the
committee if you can raise your
hand if you have questions or
comments.
Tender Townsend.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
senators, um,
You're right, we've heard this
before.
And
Always uh interesting.
Discussion to go through it. I
have a few questions.
In your bill. There's no mention
of term limits.
Is that something that you also
believe would
cause
Turn over more representation,
do you support term limits? If
so, why? And if not, why?
Mr. Chair and senator, I'm gonna
stick to the content of this
resolution, it is not part of
this resolution, specifically.
Um, Mr. Chair, and uh
Senators, I, I appreciate that
and I could almost choreograph
the answer, I would suspect.
But I think when
Many of the people stood up here
today.
And of voice their thoughts.
One of the things that was left
out.
is that people all across New
Mexico.
have voiced.
The need for term limits, not
only in our legislature, but in,
in Congress.
And so
Halfway addressing the thoughts.
Uh, and concerns of New
Mexicans.
Seems to be a little bit
misguided. I mean, we want, we
want our jobs and we, and we
want our salaries, but we, we
don't want to listen to the part
of the people that say that term
limits should be included. So,
My
You might get me on board with
this if we came up with term
limits, because I think it is
significant. Let me go on. I, as
you might expect, I got more
questions.
Are there terms defined for
those commissioners?
So Mr. Senator, all of that gets
worked out in the enabling
legislation.
This is simply a constitutional
amendment that would create the
existence of an independent
citizen commission and allow for
so salaries to have a
constitutionally because right
now there's language that says
no other compensation or
Percocet. OK, so all of those
details get enabling
legislation, which is is step 2.
Mr. Chair and Senator, that was,
you, you
You're reading my mail.
Um, I would ask that you for the
people in the room and for
people in New Mexico, explained
the need for enabling
legislation and exactly what
does that do?
Mr. Chair, Senator Sh. So,
If you think back to when we
passed, uh, let's say the ethics
commission.
That a constitutional amendment
went on the ballot to the
voters, saying,
We creating the existence of the
commission.
But really giving almost no
detail about all the details. I
think they had the number of the
commissioners, um, and that was
about it from what I recall a
couple
other small details in there.
That we came back in session.
I actually wasn't
Elected them, but y'all came
back in session and worked out
what's called the enabling
legislation. That is the statute
that works out all the details
about who appoints those
commissioners. What the making
sure that there is a balance
between the voter registration
of the commissioners, um, the
rules and, and the basic, uh,
guidelines under which the
commission operates, uh, whether
there's a director, all, all the
details about how
All of that works.
Always gets worked out
afterwards, because
We don't want
Our Constitution to be 700 pages
long.
We want it to lay out the bare
minimum and and and be some uh
something that any citizen can
pick up and look at and be able
to, to read and understand, um,
we put every detail into our
Constitution. One, it makes it
really hard for the legislature
to respond as appropriate to
adjust things if needed, uh,
because every time you make a
change, it would go to the
voters, um, but 2, it would, it
would create a document that I
think
Probably would not be
understandable to our to all of
our citizenry, which is
something we never want to have
in our Constitution.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I
appreciate that, sir.
I appreciate that. um.
One of the biggest issues that I
think
I hear from
New Mexicans all the time is the
fact that there's an old
There's an old saying about
camel getting his nose under the
tent, and it's hard to keep him
out once his nose is under the
tent, and I think that's exactly
what we're doing here.
We're letting the camel get his
nose under the under the tent.
And the people of New Mexico,
we're gonna, we're gonna vote
something through that we have
not defined.
And I think we ought to.
Be more
Clear
To the people of New Mexico
exactly what what we're doing.
As I go on, there is a
requirement.
Of a simple majority.
The vote.
Um, to approve this going
forward.
Um, but in many places on
important votes in our statures
2/3 vote is required. Why didn't
a 2/3 vote
Um, prevail.
So, Mister Chair, Senator, that
would be unconstitutional here.
So when our Constitution says
that when there's a
constitutional amendment that
limits people's rights.
Then it requires a higher
threshold of a 2/3 vote of, of
the citizenry. Uh, if you are
not limiting someone's rights
in, in the amending the
Constitution, and it is a simple
majority. There was a 2017, uh,
Supreme Court case, uh, the
dealt exactly with that issue.
Oh
I'm, I'm not aware of this.
Specific Supreme Court case, but
I am
Aware of many of the people's
comments in New Mexico.
And
And I think
The design of this calls for
Uh, a 5 member bo in the
affirmative to pass it of a
nine-member committee.
But I mean, perhaps I
misunderstood.
What, what 2/3 are you talking
about? You're talking about the
voters at the ballot box, or
you're talking about something
passing this committee. Yes,
ma'am. I'm talking about on page
2 line 14.
It talks uh an affirmative vote
of at least 5 members of the
Citizens Commission on
Legislative salaries is required
for adoption of the report.
I think it ought to have a
higher threshold.
Let me tell you why, because if
you go up in on page 2 line 1.
It calls for, and I'll read the,
the bottom of uh page one.
Uh, item B, it says the Citizens
Commission on Legislative
salaries is composed of 9 public
members, OK? I, I don't have a
problem with that. Not more than
4.
Of whom shall belong to the same
political party at the time of
appointment.
At the time of appointment.
Now, that's pretty important
three words right there at the
time.
Why is that necessary?
So Mr. Chair, Senator, so I
think this was the same
language. So again, looking back
at what we did with the the
ethics commission, um,
I think that same language was,
was in that one. And then in our
enabling legislation, we put in
the additional qualifiers, which
is now standing in the Senate,
we put in this language every
time we're talking about a
border commission, uh, that says
you can't have changed your
voter registration, but it's
usually 2 years, uh, preceding
the appointment to make sure
people aren't gaming things. Um,
I think additional appropriate
language that would go in there,
which we saw with the gaming
commission when it came before
us was, unless you,
Unless it has been changed for
the purposes of voting in a
primary, and then you vote,
change it right back, because
right now, if you are declined
to state, um, or my party, or
you can change, you can go do
same day registration, change
your, your affiliation so that
you can participate in that
primary. Uh, we'll be hearing a
semi-open primaries bill on
here, uh, sometime soon where we
can discuss that more. But we
don't, we, we want to make sure
is that in making sure
Folks aren't engaging in game
gamesmanship around their
affiliation, uh, if we don't
want to cut out people who have
made those that temporary change
in order to
Participate in a primary, uh, if
they choose to, but that is
language that would be in the
enabling legislation.
I would not have a ton of
heartburn about putting that in
here. I don't think it.
It's necessary for it to go in
the actual constitutional
amendment. I don't think there
would be harm in just adding
that part, if that is something
that.
That would that members, uh,
think is necessary from the
start, but we know from how we
have handled this previously.
That is what we end up doing in
the enabling legislation is, is
making it not just at the time
that they're appointed. Uh, and
if, and if you change your
affiliation after you've been
appointed, then you, that would
be you, that would be
disqualifying.
Well, uh, Mr. Chair, and
Madam Chair.
I think it allows it to be
gamed.
And I think
That needs to be addressed. Yet
this says.
That you can
Point based on political
affiliation.
But any of those members and
then flip.
And leverage their committee. If
one of those persons, one
person, changes the political
party.
To the majority of those members
appointed, then you
automatically have 5 members.
Which is what is required to
pass something.
That is, that are all members of
the same political party, and
that's a game in the system, in
my opinion.
Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. You are
highlighting a crucial point
with which I strongly agree, and
that is that illuminates the
importance of the enabling
legislation.
And the time we will have over
the next 3 years to nail down
those essential parameters.
About in what time frame could
someone have changed regist
party registration or
affiliation.
The automatic um retirement from
the commission if someone
changes well on all of these
things need to be built into
that enabling legislation, and
they will be crucially
important, which is why we have
this span of time to work on it.
Those are not the only issues
that are gonna come up in our
discussion today, um, and
they're very important.
And you can look at.
A 10-page prior version of this
resolution that highlights some
ideas.
But we are going to have to
battle that out, Mr. Chair and
senator,
uh.
Over the next 3 years. And that,
Mr. Chair, and, and Madam, that
is exactly my point.
This legislation that we would
pass today or or reject.
Cannot be changed by the
enabling.
Commission. They have to operate
within the statute that we
passed out of committee, and
that, that's why I say it's not
fair.
And, and it needs to be
addressed right now because we
need to set the framework for
how
The enabling
Um
Legislation is passed.
I, um
I
I know there are other members
that have ideas about it, so
I'm, I'm more than willing to,
to let other members go forward,
but
For these reasons, I can't
support this legislation, not
because I don't support the
initiative. I don't support the
process that we're choosing.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Senator Black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, Senator Figueroa, I
appreciate you bringing this
forward. It is a critical issue,
and I share very much, um, the
concerns that um uh my colleague
uh in French Senator Townsend
said,
One thing that that just kind of
reminds me of, and I know we'll
we'll deal with the legislation
after the voters do, you know,
do their boogie-woogie stuff on
this thing, right? So,
What what we've done
I've seen at counties like
absentee board, for instance,
the county chairs will appoint
Republicans and Democrats to an
absentee board because this, the
old adage trust but verify.
Those particular people that
have been appointed or
nominated, they're vetted by the
state party or county party to
go do an absentee board, and,
and I would hope we could maybe
do something similar for this
where I, I think there's still 3
major parties, Republican,
Democrat, libertarian in New
Mexico, and I assume that 9th
person would be a libertarian as
maybe, who knows? But the state
state parties would go out and
they would pick the people to
nominate to these, uh,
different, um,
This board, I, I think that
would give everyone a better
feeling because I do think as
Senator Townsend said,
You can game the system.
I mean, even 2 years, I mean,
come on, I mean still game the
system. Um,
It it's a great constitution.
I'm glad it's not 700 pages.
It's 212 pages for all you young
people in here. It's a page
turner.
So I hope you read this thing,
uh, at night or, you know, at
school and uh
Learn it, live it, know it.
That being said, I, I kind of
have a, an elephant and a donkey
on my shoulder on this one. I'm
going both ways here. The term
limit thing is critical. We have
to have term limits in the state
of New Mexico as well as in
Congress.
President's term limited, the
governor's term limited, county
commissioners are term limited.
We should be term limited so we
can keep cycling in new ideas
from young people around the
state, like you're in the
audience today. One of the
things where I side with you on
legislative salary, one thing I
don't, one thing I do is
performance. We haven't really
performed very well. Is it
because we're not a professional
legislation. I, I don't know.
Maybe, maybe not, um.
But I was a county commissioner
for 8 years.
And, and Madam Chair, do you
know how much I made as a county
commission on a part-time job.
20 meetings a year.
Not during the day, 6 o'clock at
night.
You know how much they paid us?
35,000.
So I did a little public math in
my head.
And that comes out to $1,666 a
meeting that was Sandoval
County.
Here we are in the 60 day
session.
We don't get paid, you get per
diem, but for those of you that
live far away.
Down south here,
That per diem is eaten up so
easy, and you're out of pocket.
I, I get that. We just can't
drive to Espanola or Rio Rancho
every day. I mean, we can, I'm
sorry, we can if we need to, or
Albuquerque makes it easier on
some of us. It's more of a
burden on many of us around this
state, I would argue.
I would also argue that the
district person that the
legislature just gave us to help
our districts.
It's huge for constituent
services because here we were
before.
Many of us have full time jobs,
and I would argue, Mister Chair,
Madam Chair, Senator Figueroa.
People of New Mexico, if you
want to sit here in the
legislature.
You have to make a minimum of
$200,000 a year.
$200,000 a year, which is
roughly the top 5%.
Of New Mexicans.
To serve your state.
I think it leaves out a lot of
people where we could open up
the aperture.
To various different talents
around the state.
Of ranchers.
Farmers, blue collar workers.
Contractors.
Small business owners, many of
them who can't afford to be
here. Teachers can because they
get paid while they're being
here from what I understand, it
could be wrong, but I was told
that.
I think
This is a, I believe in letting
the people decide if the people
think that the legislators
deserve to be paid.
The job that they're doing well
or not doing well.
That should be up to them,
because quite frankly, let's be
honest, we're not doing very
well in the state with
education, crime, and so many
different issues. You wonder,
performance-based, merit based,
should we really be paid?
Well, I think they're all good
people here in the legislature
that are doing their best.
As best as they can to serve
their constituents.
One of the things I had a, a, a
question on, uh, for you, Madam
Chair, because you're an
attorney. I'm not sure if
Senator Figueroa is or not. No?
OK, well, you look like one. OK.
So, let's
Mr. Chair, I don't have to
compliment or not.
You don't have to answer that.
Um,
Can you, is it, is it your?
It hasn't been written yet, the
rules, but is it your intent or
your vision or the spirit of
this.
To have these committee members
appointed by the governor. Mr.
Chair, Senator, I think that as
a body we would work that out in
the enabling legislation. I, I
am not going in with a
predetermined intent. Um, but
one of the benefits of having
this time to work that out is
that before, by the time the,
the voters are going to the
ballot box to vote on this.
We will have worked that out.
They will know how it's going to
work. They will, they will see
how it's going to work and they
will be able to, to make a truly
informed vote. Thank, thank you.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, uh,
Madam Chair, so if it wouldn't
be the governor, what other
avenues would there be to
appoint this 9 member Citizens
commission.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, I mean,
so we can look at what we've
done for other commissions.
Oftentimes we'll say the pro tem
gets an appointment, the
minority, uh, and the minority
leader of the Senate gets an
appointment, the Speaker gets an
appointment, the minority leader
in the House gets an
appointment. Um, and some
appointments potentially from
the, the governor's office. We.
That is often how we do it. Um,
and so I would, I would not be
surprised if we took a similar
approach this time, but that is
We don't know that is, that is
something for us to decide as a
body when the
OK. Thank, thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
has this been, um,
What, why, why now, why are we
doing this now? Have we not done
this before? Has this been on
the ballot before for the
citizens, and it was rejected or
why now?
This has been before the
citizens of New Mexico and are.
Over 100 year history, at least
5 times, but the most recent
time was 1992, and that's 30
years ago.
And since that time, Mr. Chair
and Senator our constituencies
have nearly doubled our state
budget has more than doubled the
complexity of what we do as
drastically changed.
And for our legislature to meet
those needs.
For our constituents.
The clamor which you have heard
in public testimony today has
become louder.
That is right now.
Thank you, uh, Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I, I
want to make sure I understand
that this has been before the
voters in our great state.
5 times before and the voters
said.
Go pound sand.
Mr. Chair, over 100 years for
100 years since 1912, since we
became and the voters have said
for 5 times, go pound sand. And
Mr. Terrence Senator, you are
correct, but the last time was
1992 was 1992.
And it was a very close vote.
So every time.
The voters grow closer to the
realization, I think we passed
the tipping point because Mr.
Chair and Senator,
It is my constituents coming to
me who are saying we have to fix
this, our legislature is not a
functioning third branch of
government to balance our
executive and judiciary, and we
need more from them.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Sherry. I would, I would argue
there's a lot of things that
don't function well, um, in
government.
And I would agree with you on
that.
I
I didn't know that about this
was rejected 5 times, and I
understand the last one was
1992.
Things definitely have changed,
uh, since then with the
invention of the light bulb and
everything else since then.
Um
I
Uh, I have some major concerns
with this.
That Senator Townsend eloquently
pointed out.
Um, but I'm willing to support
it because I believe.
That the people know better than
us.
On so many things is how I kind
of look at, you know, my
political philosophy as a
limited government guy by
letting the people decide if
they think.
People in Santa Fe deserve to be
paid and offer the performance
that
They are or are not
Meeting
In the people's eyes, so.
I thank you for who who wrote
this?
Yes, yes, drafters, Mister
Chair, but this has come
multiple times out of
Various iterations, a cohort of
legislators, I started this work
in 2021 with a year-long working
group of 8 other legislators,
but I know it was carried even
before then. Thank you for that.
Uh, last question, Mr. Chair.
That brings up a good point. So
this was rejected by the voters
5 times, but was it brought
before other committees in the
House and Senate where it failed
to pass?
Mr. Chair, I, I, as far as I
know, this is brought almost
every year. This is frequently
brought. Um, so yes, it is, it
has failed in in plenty of of
committees, uh, frankly, I think
there's.
For a lot of our members, the
way things are now works well
for them.
They can't afford to be here.
They, they are retired. They are
quite wealthy, um, and so the
current pro process probably
works pretty well for a lot of
them, and, and they would prefer
to keep it that way. Uh, I don't
think that necessarily is a
reflection of the will of the
people of New Mexico.
Thank you, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Well, I'm, I'm not
retired. I'm still in my
twenties.
So I appreciate that, um, I'm
not extremely wealthy, but I'm
wealthy enough to have, uh, 3
cats and 2 dogs to support.
Um
The two things that are really
making me want to favor this are
opening it up.
The aperture to those citizens
that quite frankly, again, just
my opinion, if you're not making
$200,000 a year.
You can't do it.
You just can't do it.
Um
The term limits piece.
We, we need that so bad here in
New Mexico, we have so many
great people out there that want
to run, and it's just so skewed
toward incumbency. Um,
But the other piece is
I really believe that people
need to choose.
I really believe that. I, I
think we don't know what's best
for the people, the people know
what's best for government.
And I hope we can um
Follow that mantra and that
philosophy.
This session and further
sessions down the road, so I
want to thank you both for
bringing this forward. You, you
have my.
Over 51% support, so I'm gonna
say yes.
But there's a lot of things we
got to work out on this.
And I am more than willing to
work with the other side, as you
know, I've worked with the other
side on.
Public health very much enjoy
it. Great ideas that come from
Republicans, Democrats, and
Independents.
So, um, I want to thank you for
your time and pushing this
again, even though it's been
rejected.
Numerous times we'll see what
happens this time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
really appreciate the last
comments of Senator Block. He's,
he's actually turning out to be
OK, isn't he?
I, I think.
And, and I want to start with
this too. There's a lot of
praise for our new paid
legislative staff. I don't
disagree. I was going through
this on here. My, my new
legislative staff just this week
has responded to dozens of press
inquiries locally who want to
better understand legislation
I've proposed to resident
concerns that the veterans home
that I have and one guy is
really upset cause the local
shelter lost his cat. I could
not be addressing those concerns
for constituents if I didn't
have district staff back.
there to make sure that the
needs of our constituents are
being met. We're all praising
that, but that really was
falling on a partisan line of
getting that done. There was a
lot of opposition to that. There
was a lot of opposition to
change.
And it's turned out well, at
least it's turned out well for
my constituents. I'm able to do
a lot of work.
The reality is, is, is that our
per diem, our per diem rate does
not cover the cost of what it of
service to be a legislator.
You're right. Look, have to rent
a condo here that travel back
and forth to see my girls. It's
costly to serve in the
legislature.
How do we open that up to make a
legislator more inclusive, and
this is a good conversation to
be had. I think that there was a
comment made during public
comment though, saying, well, on
the retirement aspect, cause we
know that the way it's set up
now is this is a long game. In
10 years you can collect
retirement of service. I think
that was encouraged or was
created to encourage legislators
to leave, at least I go around
and encourage them to leave once
they've hit about that mark.
But it doesn't, it hasn't
worked. And so instead of
encouraging legislators to
leave, it seems that which is
what we're trying to do here,
right? We're trying to say, OK,
fill, fill your term.
Is that I don't want paid
legislators.
I don't want paying our
legislators to encourage them to
never leave and never present an
opportunity for for younger or
different ideas.
To come up here is, is that you
get.
complacent legislators and now
if we, if we can't pay him to
leave.
Goodness, now we're gonna pay
them to to stay.
Um, I
I think that I want to support
this because it goes out.
To the, to the general public,
but I think that when we, we
visited about term limits, I
would really like to visit with
you after this committee about
serious consideration of of
including that. This should not
be a partisan issue. I
appreciate the remarks of
Senator Bloch.
But if we can collectively come
up with what is just good for
New Mexicans moving forward by
addressing, sure, we'll pay our
legislators.
We're also going to
turn them out after 1620 years,
we are going to create or or
maybe require them to sit out,
because as you know it.
Favors incumbents
Sit out before they can return
some sort of agreement and the
benefit of doing that is if we
could leave collectively as a
legislator, it's gonna be
important that we go champion
this back in our community, so
it gets passed.
And if we could get some more
bipartisan support to go out
there and get this done.
At that end, I would like to
visit with you guys here to see
if you would give, you know, we
don't want to just throw out
bombs of amendments.
against this, but, but to really
give serious consideration to
including term limits in this
and moving forward a proposal.
Two voters that is really
meaningful and is meeting the
concerns of, of, of our voters,
you know, as a whole, and then
maybe we have an army of
legislators who go out there and
explain why this is a more
inclusive option, so I'd like to
visit with you guys. This is not
the time to have that
conversation about this bill,
but I would like to visit with
you after this committee should
it pass. Thank you guys.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator,
uh, I appreciate the dialogue.
I, uh, want to start with, and I
like my colleagues saying that
they support this. I hate
of capital H, passing
legislation that's gonna be
repaired later. Uh, I'm gonna go
back to something Senator
Townsend brought up on the 2/3.
And my question to you, Mr.
Stern, Madam Chairs, uh, in the
next election cycle,
Just thinking through the
possibilities.
Of the governor's shift to
Republican.
Do you still consider your bill
uh being enacted in the way you
want it.
If it's under
Republican control.
Mr. Chair, Senator, of the
legislature is who would be
shaping that, uh, that enacting
the the enabling legislation,
uh, while governors always have
the ability to exercise a veto.
Uh, we also have the ability to
exercise a veto override. So if
the legislature is a body came
up with enabling legislation
that we were satisfied with, and
we thought was appropriate for
this. And for political reasons,
a governor chose to veto it,
then I would think.
that we would, um, assert
ourselves as a coequal branch
and override that veto.
Mr. Man, Senator,
I've been here for a veto
override, but why would you not
look at the 2/3, so Townsend
proposed to resolve that, uh,
uh, to me, it's one of those
things just sending out a bill
that has unintended consequences
that we see now.
And, and expecting it to be
better after it goes through the
process, uh, in, in, in Sack.
We always say let's send a
judiciary to fix it.
I would stop doing that. Let's
fix it before it gets judiciary
we're busy in, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, you, you and I finally
agree with something because it
is bad policy.
For us to kick down the road.
Because public expects us to do
better.
And I'll shift gears has turned.
Senator, uh, my next question
cause I don't know that I'll win
that argument. I think that's
valid argument, correcting it
while it's here and kicking it
down the road. But my next
question is one of the lady from
um
League of Women's Voters talked
about us not being here. Uh, it
goes to the next point of term
limits, and I hope you guys will
listen to the turning our, our
obligation or a conversation
we've had, um, she thought.
We're gonna be gone.
But I know legislators, even on
the Republican side, but we're
here for too many years and so I
think that we need to look at
that again.
Um
Sending unattended consequences
down the road.
I agree with, finally, the lady
from Lain voters that that may
be an issue.
And, and I look at Merman turn,
Senator, you look at the
legislature now, predominantly
female.
The dominant minority.
Or actually a reverse
discrimination state.
But the only ones we don't want
here.
Or
White males.
And, and I'm Hispanics, so I'm
protected.
And, and it's one of those
things that it, it bothers me
that if we don't have a term
limit classification in here or
at least a discussion over a
valid discussion over it.
And we're limiting people from
coming on after sending
Thompson's goners.
Some blocks gone. Who's going to
replace them and how long are
they gonna be here?
But it does come into play on,
on the finances, but I would ask
you please to consider thinking
through both of those 2/3 and
term limits because I think
they're valuable.
You won't get my vote today.
But I think if you want my vote,
and I don't know that you want
it, but if you did, you'd
consider what you've heard
today.
And Miss Terrence Senator, I'll,
I'll close with this. I'm just
gonna tell you, we've been
talking about money.
In 2012, as the first Hispanic
ever.
be voted into office from Lee
County.
Right, right, right on it.
I work by the hour.
The family
So I work overtime all year
long, knowing that I'm coming to
the legislature.
So that I can feed my family
while I'm here.
But that was the decision me and
my family made.
Because it's an honor to be
here.
I'm not asking you to pay me.
I'm saying thank you for the
opportunity.
To have a voice for my
community.
Now we're trying to say, and,
and I heard earlier that this
will be an atom. I can keep my
job.
And get a brace for being here.
That's not what I asked the
community to do for me.
I asked them to give me a chance
to represent them in Santa Fe.
To be their voice.
For our concerns
I think this is making it a
business decision.
That I get a raise on top of
Per dam
And what I currently raise
When I'm at home.
I think it's a bad message and,
and I know.
Uh, Senator Rose said her
constituents are pushing this.
Mine have not.
I have been grateful.
But I'm willing to sacrifice my
time.
My family time.
And my wife's resources.
So we look at it yearly. She's
at work right now.
So I can stay and play.
In this
And I look at it as my giving
back.
The community for everything
they've done for me.
I think
Putting money in.
To make it more attractive.
Yeah, you can get more lawyers.
I'm not a lawyer. I'm sorry. Uh,
I mean, I work by the hour, we
do construction.
But the reality is my option to
serve this state.
Voluntarily
Was my object. So those are in
the legislature right now.
Oh
Volunteered.
To serve their people.
And I know this isn't going to
be enacted, ladies from uh
women's League of voters thinks
I'll be gone by that time.
Could be, maybe not.
But there again, if we had term
limits in there, the next cycle
of senators would be coming in
with the race.
If I'm here.
Or just, I, I, I do like the
idea of the district staff.
But I, I just surely
It breaks my heart. I've told
people forever in this car, I'll
stop with this story. We have,
and, and we talked about budgets
increase.
Well, we have a certain amount
of money in this state.
For me to take away from public
safety and education to me is a
disgrace. We've not fixed public
safety.
And we've not fixed education.
So for me to take funding from
those two, if you have one pot
of money only.
And we should be directing our
resources to something that has
value to our constituents and to
our state and with that on.
Thanks, mister.
Thank you, Senator, before I go
to Senator Townsend for a second
time, I'm gonna head to send to
Panics, followed by Senator
Bergman.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, uh, sponsors for
bringing this forward today. Um,
I appreciate it and I plan to
support it. The um
When I first came to the
legislature back in the 90s, um.
And then I left and then I came
back.
But at the beginning, I, um,
Half toyed with the idea of term
limits.
Of supporting term limits.
And I quickly realized that.
With term limits, you lose.
The history
You lose the buildup of
knowledge, you lose a variety of
things.
And if, in fact,
I didn't think it was
appropriate for county
commissioners to be a
term-limited or county
employees. We've given the
county um electives the
opportunity to raise their
salaries now, etc. but
When you think about all the
electeds.
Uh, I think we should be talking
about a free exchange, whether
it's city councilors, town
council members, county
commissioners, state
legislators, etc.
I think it should be wide open.
And I think people should
self-select or have their family
members tell them when to
self-select to leave.
Um, and in the meantime, I think
we should be considering the
buildup of knowledge that could
assist the next generation.
I also believe this uh is
important because we want to
encourage the next generation.
We don't want somebody sitting
at home saying, I have to go to
my job. I can't do this.
I talked to a few years ago, I
talked to um.
A young woman, not so young, and
she was a single mom. She was an
attorney just
Brilliant, and she thought she
would like to have my job.
And I said, great. And I said,
now as a single mom,
I want you to think about the um
need for a salary.
I want you to think about, do
you have daycare planned? Are
your children old enough to go
to daycare? Do you have any
family members around who can
support you.
And it was decided just in that
conversation that she needed to
wait a few more years.
And I think that this piece of
legislation if it were to go
through based upon the voters,
and it, it's gonna be left to
the voters.
They will determine if it's
gonna happen.
I also have said to many people,
many of our
Joint resolutions and amendments
to our Constitution don't pass.
When we have
elected scandals.
And when we have elected
scandals, it just sets the
entire public back again.
And it doesn't send them back
just on a boat. It sets him back
on how they perceive all of us.
And for those of us who want to
serve and are here.
We don't want to be marred by
that.
And we, we want to, you know,
continue the path, but we want
to also open the doors, and so I
see this is opening the doors to
the next generation, and I thank
you for bringing it forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Bergman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, thank
you, sponsors for bringing this
legislative legislate.
for it. I'm excited to support
it as well. And I was just
wondering if Senator Figueroa,
do you mind sharing what you do
for a living and how you balance
your legislative duties on top
of that.
Mr. Chair and senator sure I do
what we all do in juggling these
things, but my profession is a
high school Spanish teacher.
So, um,
It's, it's difficult to be here.
And be away from my students,
but I live in a two income
family I have, we have no
children, so we are a two income
family with no children, we can
afford the extra cost it takes
to live up here and serve up
here, and it was a difficult
decision.
Mr. Chair to run the first time
that economics plays a big part
in the decision, and it affects
the family budget and the family
opportunity in a huge way.
And I am blessed to have a
working husband that I can um
rely on to back me up to do this
work. When we come up here to
serve, Mister Chair, we all know
it's not just us. Our families
are serving New Mexico right
along with us.
And this legislation, Mr. Chair.
Doesn't really change that.
I suggest that it changes our
ability to serve and be
available to our constituents.
In a um more accessible manner.
Um, when we have to work extra,
as Mr. Chair, the senator
described.
To afford to be here, that's
extra time, we are not
accessible.
To our constituents to serve
them.
Um
It's, but it's what we all do to
make this work.
Mr. Chair
Thank you, Senator. And how many
people do, do, does a senator
roughly represent?
Mr. Chair, Senator, around
50,000.
Thank you. And do you think that
the current makeup of the
legislature in the current way
our system works allows you to
adequately represent an answer
of 50,000 people's needs on a
daily basis since we are elected
in the Senate for four-year
terms. Uh, Mr. Tarrant, Senator.
No, but that is part of the
three-legged stool, not just of
our three branches of
government, but modernizing and
professionalizing our
legislature is a three-part
endeavor and staff.
We've made inroads on and it's
already, Mr. Chair, as this
senator noted, making a huge
difference to our constituents,
Staff is step one, compensation
is the second piece, and then we
can talk about time.
But those 3 things will allow us
to build a structure, not for
us, because if you think about
the next 100 years, we will be
gone, Mr. Chair, but we need to
think ahead and build the
structure that will serve New
Mexico for that period of time.
And all three of those elements
play a part.
Thank you. And just one final
question, um, does passing this
legislation prevent another
legislature legislator from
bringing a bill that limits term
but would set term limits.
Mr. Chair, Senator, no.
That if someone wanted to bring
forward a constitutional
amendment to impose term limits,
they.
All they have to do is ask LCS
to get it drafted and introduce
it.
Thank you. That's all the
questions I have. Thank you for
a second time, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair for
indulging a second time.
The comment was made about the
governor vetoing.
Have the power to be towing us
override this building.
Would the governor have a chance
to veto this, Mister Chair,
Senator, no constitutional
amendments are not, are not
signed by the governor. So there
would be no veto power. I just
wanted to make sure that people
understood that that the
governor.
In the future, whether it's
Republican or Democrat doesn't
get a chance to look at SJR.
I want to ask you one question
just before I vote.
Do you believe
And I
Yeah.
Appreciate, Senator Bregman's
comment, but would you add term
limits to this bill so that the
people would know what they were
voting on.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't
think the people would not know
what they're voting on.
Without term limits in here. I
think term limits is, is a
separate conversation that I,
I'm happy to have, uh,
certainly, but
It's not the scope of this bill,
and it's not, and I don't think
that putting term limits in here
in forms.
Keep the voters at the ballot
box about what they're voting on
more so than than they would
know already from the language.
But I appreciate that. I think
uh.
My
perspective.
The
precipice on my boat is I to
term limits, so I, I can't
support it without term limits,
but I would be happily to do it
with term limits. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block for a second time. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam Chair,
I want to make sure I understand
this right, um, because again, I
go back to Senator Townsend's
concern. Are you, are you
telling us as a legislative body
that when this comes on the
Senate floor, we can make
amendments to put term limits in
here.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think that
any senator can make any, try to
make any amendments, they, they
wish to, uh, whether that's
going to be accepted by the body
or within the scope of the
legislation. I think that would.
We would remain to be seen, but
A senator always has, has the,
the right to offer an amendment
on any piece of legislation.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I guess I want to
understand uh walk me through
your comment where the voter
wouldn't understand.
If we had term limits in here.
Uh, combined with legislative
salaries because I, I think, I
think the voters would be more
inclined to support this.
Uh, with a term limits.
Term limits in legislative
salaries in here.
Uh, I think a voter is is um
aware enough cognitive enough
and smart enough to say, oh.
So what they're trying to tell
me is.
You pay us, but only for a
limited amount of time and we'll
term limit you, I'm trying to
understand what what do you
think there's confusion if we
added term limits in here?
Mr. Chair, Senator, so what I
was asked by Senator Townsend.
I would I support adding term
limits to this so that voters
would understand what they were
voting on. I, I disagree with
the premise that voters aren't
going to understand what they
are voting on.
Without that amendment made, I
think you're right, our voters
are smart. I think they're going
to look at this and and
absolutely understand what they
are voting on.
Regardless of amendments that
might be proposed, so I think
Perhaps there's a, a, a
miscommunication.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think we're kind of talking
past each other. I, I was trying
to understand what you were
saying because.
The voters are smart enough, I
think we know that to know what
they're even though reading some
of this stuff you gotta be a
damn lawyer and some of these
geo bonds to understand how I'll
concede that point to you.
But the constitutional amendment
like we just had for the
veterans, uh that was that was
pretty simple to understand
based on disability rating tied
that to their property tax
exemptions.
Um
I
I don't know if this is the
right time, like Senator Brantly
talked about putting an
amendment on here, but I, I, I
think um.
On the Senate floor, it would be
probably an appropriate time to
have that discussion on the
Senate floor, probably not, not
right here right now. I'll, I'll
give you that, uh, based, based
on some time.
Of an hour and 15 minutes of
talking about this particular.
Um,
A piece of legislation or
resolution so.
Um, again, thank you for
clarifying that. Uh, I'm not
sure we did.
But we're talking.
And you gotta talk to understand
each other. And uh I'm sure
we're gonna keep talking on this
one, so thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
Send her to hit, do you
remember?
Uh, I'm not quite sure when it
happened, but
We had a log rolling issue uh
with one of our constitutional
amendments. And if you talked
about this when I had to step
out, let me know.
OK, so,
Uh, so I don't know if putting
term limits on here would bump
that up, but it's something to
think about. We actually had to
throw out, I believe, one of our
constitutional amendments that
passed, um, because the court
said we put too much in the
constitutional amendment.
Um, maybe we could do some
research and find that, uh, I
was pretty shocked when that
happened. I think it was in the
early 90s, um, but I could be
wrong, so you have to, you have
to think about these
constitutional amendments. Uh,
the same way we have to think
about log rolling up here. But
we sometimes are accused of that
with the tax bill because that
tax bill tends to have a lot of
stuff in it. Uh, as long as it
all relates to taxation, we get
away with it, but uh we just
have to be careful.
about what we do, uh, with these
constitutional amendments, so I
really think the idea of another
constitutional amendment to deal
with term limits, if that's what
you really want to do, it's
probably the way to go.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. And before I go to
the will of the committee, I'd
like to make a few comments and
I want to thank the two of you
senators for bringing this
forward. In 1986, I was 1/4
grade student in Esperilla
public schools and our teacher
Miss Angela Maestas during the
governor's race did a weeklong
lesson on what it meant to be an
elected official, and I remember
I doodled a campaign slogan and
a campaign sign, and on that
Friday, the last thing that the,
the teacher told us is, and, and
Most of you know this, I, I come
from very humble beginnings. I
lived way below the poverty
line. We weren't strangers to
getting food baskets. We weren't
strangers to going to the local
community center for Christmas
for a gift. And I remember the
one impactful statement she said
is, when you're elected, elected
officials help their community.
And the 4th grade Leo Jaramillo
stood up and proudly said, I
will win an election one day to
help the people of Espanilla
Valley because I wanted to help
those who helped me, but it
wasn't until I became a boy
skater in high school that I
realized that members of the
House and Senate weren't paid.
So people like me couldn't run.
Her voice was silenced and we
would just have to elect those
families in northern New Mexico,
who were legacies of elected
officials. But I chose not to do
that, I chose to ensure that I
would be a voice for people who
were raised just like me, and
I've had to make a number of
sacrifices to be a senator. I'm
fortunate that Los Alamos
National Laboratory allows me
flexibility to be here. But in
order to be here, I have to work
20 hours a week, which means I'm
up at 4 a.m. and I start working
at 4.
30 a.m. and I work 4:30 a.m. to
7:30 a.m. to ensure I get a few
hours then and then get ready
and come to do the work of the
people as a senator and then try
to sneak in an additional hour
during the day to ensure that
it's the 4 hours. If I don't
keep up to those 20 hours a
week, I then have to pay the
laboratory back $1700 a month
for my benefits. And so I'm
making a major sacrifice to
represent the valley and a
Senate district that I
Absolutely love. Those of you
know that I don't have children,
I'm the only openly out gay
senator, we do have a couple of
lesbians, but I like to tell my
district that.
You're gay.
We all carry the rainbow for
like, but what I do like to tell
my constituents as I think of my
Senate district as my child. And
I'm trying to raise it the best
way that I can with as much
love, support, and attention
that I can give it, being a
common voice of someone from the
valley who has lived experience
of the people that I represent,
by ensuring it's a paid
legislature and that people,
anybody can have the dream as a
4th grade student to run, won't
be limited if they have a
flexible employer, or if they
have the means to serve. And
with that, what is the will of
the committee?
A chair and move do pass. No.
Centermatics.
Can I try it?
But I'm sure, I move a do not
pass on SGR one, but it do pass
on the committee substitute for
SGR1.
Ocean has been made to do pass
the substitution.
We did, and we, we voted on the
substitution and then went into
discussion on, well, we went
into discussion and there was no
opposition. We, we adopted it
for the purposes of discussion.
And so now that is what's being.
There's been a motion, do not
pass on the bill, but I do pass
on the substitute bill, and with
that, if I can have a roll call
vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Uh
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart. Yes.
Senator Townsend, Senator
Jaramil.
Senator Duha. Yes.
By a vote of 7, yes, 2 no, and 1
excused senators, you move on to
your next committee.
And with that, congratulations.
I'm going to then hand the gavel
back over to our chairwoman who
does have a few comments before
we break.
Mr. Chair. Thank you, members.
We got.
Thank you all. Um,
We have uh an internal committee
issue to discuss. I'm gonna ask
Sergeant at Arms to please clear
