Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Center I'm meal.
Senator McKenna now in center
Mars.
Centerman yes.
Senator Neville etcetera now.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shendo.
Etcetera cells.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you we are back on line.
objection we're in that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
I thank you very much Mr
president first up on top you
consent to allow cameras in the
Senate chamber.
orca thank you so much Reverend
for your words on respect and
unity.
And all of the various faiths
that exist in our peoples lives
make your today is New Mexico
Public Health Day at the
legislature and it's sponsored
by the New Mexico department of
health New Mexico Alliance for
health councils in the New
remove Senator moral forty eight
for the president's table.
I see no objection will remove
Center memorial forty eight.
The memorial declaring missing
will be Senators committee and
that is to be read and he's
already ready to go on that Mr
president's consent to remove
Senator moral forty one Sandoval
County one hundred twentieth
Thank you Mr president that will
be Senator Shendo and that is to
be read and both US senators
committee and Shendo do have
guess Mr president one let you
know about that ahead of time
house comes over to enlighten us
will start that process of
moving over there and that Mr
president do want to let the
body no the members of the body
that we will not do regular
third reading today we will be
doing those two memorials and
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
is hosting its bishops luncheon
today at the la Fonda hotel at
twelve thirty PM by invitation
only.
thirty PM that's also by
invitation only.
And Mr president are growing up
New Mexico is hosting its early
childhood legislative reception
seven thirty A. M. in room three
twenty six is going to be
tomorrow tomorrow morning the
Lenten service at seven thirty
AM in room three twenty six
followed by the distribution of
order business announcements
miscellaneous we have center
diamond wishing to make an
announcement Senator Diamond.
Good morning Mr president
unanimous consent introduce my
cowboy hats in the roundhouse
you know that's what they're
doing promoting the good work of
our farmers and ranchers this is
a dear friend of mine Lisa Ogden
from Carlsbad chance honey is
Thank you senator Damon Center
CENIC's.
Thank you Mr president I don't
have a guest today but I I do
capitol Mr Esteban Lopez who
negotiates our water rights from
the Colorado River we'll be
doing a presentation from eight
thirty to nine thirty A. M. here
thank you Mr president I too
want to introduce some guests
here we have a couple of
students and the
in the dean of students from.
crystal but her name means
warrior goes back to raid so as
a ranger guy introducing her I I
love that name of she was going
better we also have Devin
Lansing whose from coyote canyon
and unfortunately he's going to
go to US senator Morris little
community college in in
evil and the very cool book well
leather bound books so that we
can keep track of what it is
we're doing so if you please
help me welcome my guests.
Thank you Mr president I guess I
I I had a couple conversations
in as you all know I've been
gone at the birth of our son
he ended up being incredibly
Lee PO Mr president I appreciate
you and so many of the phone
calls but gives the messages in
the log on spring a tear to my
eye and not and not cry as much
wearing a mask I can't afford to
get sick in the bring that home
so I appreciate you all
appreciate the love you've got
showed us I will say that he has
already received is first
division one football offer from
thank everyone in this chamber
of and the love that you guys
are expressed myself to Lisa and
our baby little.
Thank you senator Morris center
more just out of curiosity which
university provided the D. one
scholarship which universe is
the first to find that the one
scholarship.
Back how college down south and
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
Committee assignment to Senate
transportation committee.
But I have spoken to a committee
chairs and members of the Indian
Affairs Committee thank you
senator Senator Kernan can you
portion of gross receipts tax
revenue to municipalities and
counties distributing a portion
of gross receipts tax revenue to
the all cities and counties
to make unanimous quest to have
that means unanimous consent
please.
Seeing no objection we're
removing Senate bill five
fourteen from the Senate into
rural cultural affairs committee
Thank you Mr president a.
Appreciate the opportunity that
the Senate again.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Wirth.
Si no further announcements
six ashes will be distributed up
to nine AM I said starting at
nine AM of correct myself it's
up to ninety M. thank you very
much Mr president so with that
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that duly
enrolled in in gross copies of
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
same here with respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
The general reflect that the
bill one of five as amended by
the house.
House rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
gentle reflect that the message
from the house has been
received.
Senate majority whip Mike over
there to take us to the next
order of business I thank you
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president so we do have a couple
more items were going to do
before we start third reading
memorials so I just want to
remind senators committee Center
moral forty eight Senator Shendo
message from the governor the
reader to read.
The honorable Mimi Stewart
president pro tem and members of
the New Mexico state Senate dear
president pro tem stored and
Senate bill three sixty four as
amended enacted by the fifty six
legislature first session twenty
twenty three respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
The honorable Mimi Stewart
president pro tem and members of
the New Mexico state Senate dear
president pro tem stored and
members of the Senate in
appointment as secretary of
economic development for a term
commencing January first twenty
twenty three to serve at the
pleasure of the governor James
Doucette junior for appointment
as secretary of the General
Services Department for a term
commencing March fourth twenty
twenty three to serve at the
pleasure of the governor Arsenio
governor Ian Thomas renewable
for appointment to the board of
trustees of the New Mexico
museum of natural history and
science for a term retroactive
to January first twenty twenty
the board of trustees of the New
Mexico museum of natural history
and science for a term
retroactive to January first
twenty twenty three and
concluding on December thirty
January sixteenth twenty twenty
two and expiring on January
fifteenth twenty twenty six I
say ease empty for appointment
to the constant structure and
trust fund board of trustees for
a term retroactive October
thirtieth twenty twenty two and
expiring on July first twenty
expiring on July first twenty
twenty six these appointees will
serve and have all duties
responsibilities and authority
of their offices during that
time prior to final action by
Senate majority whip my
completed as the next order of
business thank you very much Mr
president let's uh units consent
we will be going to committee
reports here shortly for a
committee chair so I just wanna
make sure that you're ready for
that Mr president another
announcement on our Lenten
service tomorrow we we do
believe that that event gets
be followed by distribution of
ashes all the way up to nine AM
Mr present with that
We do have further announcements
want to follow up on the bill
that was referred into Senate
tax Senate bill five fourteen
that was an emergency bill and
report out of the regional
committee was referred into and
then it comes to the majority
office to be referred so I just
want to follow up in that's
spoke with the secretary for
Indian Affairs this morning we
have quite a few members out
Senator Pinto I did not have a
not related to that particular
committee but more so to the tax
committee this is a bill that
we've been kind of waiting for a
to be drafted and sent over from
the house and so that's the
back to the committee I I'm not
quite sure what I need to do at
this point.
Senator yes thank you said thank
you Senator Kernan I think what
referred that back down to the
floor and then we we actually do
new referrals for the bill so if
it's if it's currently up been
get it done so we get it done
today so you're good but I'm
pretty sure there has to be a
committee report that comes out
of the Indian Affairs before the
bill can actually be moved are
That that was my understanding
that's why those kind of.
About the process.
Because I don't think we've gone
The thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Senator
senator Wirth will go ahead and
will go through that process
will have you communicate with
your chief of staff and then
we'll give direction Senator
miscellaneous Senator Brandt
thank you Mr president
And I want to go back to what we
just finished on with one of
these really finish the the body
moved from the Indian Affairs
Committee to another one now
that the process been explained
a little bit more in the future
we can do it the way that the
Well Mister chair again
I didn't really realize what was
happening because obviously I'm
visit with my chief of staff and
then I'll be happy Senator
Brandt Snedeker motion to move
it back and go through the
normal process again we had this
issue years ago where emergency
issues we need to look at on and
get this right so we'll look
into it and I'm happy to make a
motion to to get to get this
right and do it the right way
but you're right there was a
Senator Kernan spill at same
time I think it's important we
do get this right.
And
If I may Mr president.
Senator Pinto I think at that.
Because we are offline there for
a bit thank you Senator Brandt.
The group's president
The bill is being is going to
correct committee at this point
I yum.
some discussion as to how these
were going to be done.
I really don't understand the
reasoning for the process and
Second half of our session and
the body has chosen to move this
bill to the appropriate
committee for what the bill is.
Thank you Mr president and
I think we need to move on.
perfectly appropriate to move it
back out of the tax committee
into the proper committee what I
would respectfully ask as you
allow us to figure out what
this was an emergency bill when
it was ready and it took me a
minute to figure out what was
happening but I just want to be
very clear nothing prevents the
body from making a motion to
move it back and go through the
get this right I'm not trying to
slow it down but at the same
time again there's a process for
referrals and you know to do a
single referral in this manner
with Senator Baca and happy to
do that but on this but I don't
even know what the bills about
having a look at it to know what
the proper committees it should
go to so again I appreciate what
proceed thank you Mr president.
Senator Brandt.
disagreement between myself and
the Majority Leader
and
So the the body has moved it's
in the record.
think probably the fault rests
with me this is the first
emergency bill I've ever done
and I was checking with the
drafter and she indicated to me
I didn't understand the process
and I thought all I needed to do
was just moved it from there to
the appropriate committee I
don't think this is going to
delay the bill just to get it
I'll do whatever the body wants
to do but I think probably.
Eight it senator Wirth will do
his due diligence quickly and
time in the process is important
and when when I didn't realize
what that was then.
That that's my phone thanks.
Thank you Secretary.
information of the body the
joint session will be ready for
us here shortly so we are going
to in in may I'm gonna make a
motion here in a little bit I
wanted to ask Mr president will
come back after the special
order business committee reports
the reader to therefore.
Is present your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill sixty eight
as amended has had it under
president ask unanimous consent
Senator be allowed to read all
the committee reports from
Senate Judiciary that we act on
them with one motion but that
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually
Senate bill ninety two as
amended do not pass but that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
Senate bill two forty seven as
amended that it do not pass but
that Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye
those of those may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted in the journal reflect
their acted upon individually.
been referred to Senate memorial
line has had it under
consideration Reports that same
has been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory to signing by
the officers of the Senate
report centers we have a motion
to document report all those in
favor signify by saying aye
those opposed may the committee
boards have been adopted and the
General reflect that they're
The reader to read this
president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate memorial thirty
two has had it under
consideration reports that same
has been duly rules and
Senate bill two thirty three to
pass on this referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two fifty I do pass
Senate bill two eighty seven to
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two sixty do pass as
amended and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report as we have
Senator Stewart and takes the
next order of business thank you
the thank you very much Mr
president so for information the
body we do have two very
significant memorials are we're
gonna come back and do Senators
meaty Senator Shendo so after
the joint session if you can
session with the two members of
our congressional delegation.
Sergeant arms.
Mr president sergeant arms Mr
Would like to welcome the
representatives to the chamber.
Please share your message thank
you Mr president the New Mexico
house of representatives has
joint session thank you right we
thank you for the invitation and
the message from the house has
been received Senator Michael
Padilla thank you Mr president
so once again I am asking is
I thank you Mr president seeing
no objection.
We will meet as we usually do
rate in the quarter for the
joint session and head on over
to the house chamber.
