With all of our friends
beginning right here in the
Senate chamber eleven thirty A.
Mr president today's lands water
and wildlife day in New Mexico
highlands university day at the
capitol so there's going to be
some information in the hall of
history in the rotunda you may
want to stop in their members
Seeing no objection will remove
Center memorial forty five from
the president's table we place
it on today's calendar etcetera
but the thank you Mr president
should have done that you looked
a quick certificate of
recognition for social worker
students advocacy day it is a
certificate with the for Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino who will be
handling that one today.
I see no objection over removing
center more fifty three which is
New Mexico highlands university
day off the president's stable
to be placed on today's calendar
etcetera but the thank you very
capital prayer gathering at the
First Baptist Church in Santa Fe
at sixteen oh five old Pecos
trail starting at six PM today
by invitation only.
school heritage academy high
school here today as well as the
activities director who's with
us I want to recognize Mr
president and members senior AJ
Martinez I'm gonna have him
Honor Society AJ also serves as
the New Mexico associative
association of student councils
Central District president
holding a couple of presidential
hats Mr president AG plans to
attend the university of New
be an athletic trainer and his
dream is to be a trainer for a
professional sports team or
power five university if the
body can give H. A. president AJ
Martinez I have.
please stand he is a senior at
the school heritage academy high
school Patrick is the student
body secretary and member of the
student council Patrick is also
a member the National Honor
Society in the math honor
And that Mr president there
adviser and and the activities
director and literally someone
who I think does every single
job with the largest high school
veteran of it of education and
the parent of a senior at the
school heritage academy high
school in that's why she looks
so much like the student body
president can we give Jessica
hand as well.
Priscilla well that is Caitlyn
thought is and again Jessica
Martinez if we give them a hand
welcome them to the New Mexico
Senate.
to make sure that we properly
introduce our guests I'll begin
with Senator Kernan followed by
Senator Camlin centers the a
Lopez center hoping they'll a
pope and we'll go from there
Maryland and the purpose of the
foundation is to establish stem
classrooms across the United
Lea County two classrooms in
libraries in southeast New
Mexico and three in boys and
girls clubs and the the thing
that you have on your desk
classrooms are established.
Through partnerships with
industry members across your
area so if you have a school
district that is interested in
these partners and they
typically last about five years
consumables are also provided by
the foundation it's really a
Santa Fe and other areas of the
state so the cal Ripken
foundation is ready to come in
and help New Mexico at no cost
and we have classrooms all
across our elementary schools in
Eddy and Lea County so I
encourage your her card is in
sight please don't play with the
instruments from this one item
this is just Representative of
what the cal Ripken foundation
includes in their stem
classrooms so if you would help
boys and girls club knows how to
reach the foundation to maybe
spread these all across the
state of New Mexico so please
help me welcome Shannon.
because this brings back
memories of when I was a kid and
had a board unit that had all
the I I the diodes and
everything where I could make a
radio I can do all sorts of
the house today they are all
over the place and I have behind
me to folks I have Jordan Hicks
your mind standing up Jordy is
been a teaching since editors
outdoors all the time so we get
to bring that passion to his
students he also teaches dual
credit geography to choose going
today he's here with some of his
nascent National Honor Society
Society students here with him
today.
And then secondly I have Maria
Marquez Mr of Maria Marquez
Candelaria Mr president she's
been in the activities office
students of the H. a student
council which we've already met
so Senate body if you please
will welcome Maria to this to
the chambers as well.
two committees and the one of
them I would like to introduce
esencia it's SNC of Archuleta a
freshman and interest heritage
varsity softball with a three
screen her goal is to become a
nurse and is interested in
becoming a traveling nurse.
And I'd like to introduce
she's taken honors AP English
throughout her high school
career she plays varsity golf
and is also in your school
archery club the blazing eros
she plans to attend UNM to get
possibilities of capital outlay
and who has jurisdiction over
streets and street entrances so
would you join me in welcoming
them.
rules can she would please stand
up she's a junior Crisco
heritage academy high school
she's treasure the class of
twenty twenty four and captain
of the cheer team she enjoys
Honor Society and loves to help
our community she's in the top
fifteen of our classes going and
is going to be going to the
university of New Mexico to
study psychology and become a
child psychologist for children
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent to be able to
president at Rio Rancho high
school.
She is also in the key club
she's in the National Honor
Society at Rio Rancho.
commitment to New Mexico state
so Senator Hamblen you've got a
an Aggie the the future a year
with you Senator cels
she she's still unsure about
junior class vice president at
Rio Rancho high school.
She is also in the National
Honor Society and she's on the
Rio Rancho to dance team and
another year before she has to
decide what what school she'll
go to but with the members join
me in welcoming my two shadows
for the day Jillian want us and
Emma Garcia.
consent to introduce my guest
this morning hearing no
objection proceed Senator Mr
president joining me this
morning on the floor is
Christopher Silas who is the
activities director at Rio
all I had about a lot had for
via our she's a senior to Tresco
heritage academy high school she
participates in sports and clubs
including soccer track and field
can help me and welcoming my two
guests.
Thank you.
Senator Pirtle.
here I do have two more children
we're thinking about starting a
band by the school bus and
touring the country so if you do
have one that you're not gonna
need please bring it by I know
at least two more kids and
our first session post comment
you know as a as a courtesy to
other members of the legislature
usually if you have a bill in
your own committee you go last
time if you're gonna have to be
there anyway you might as well
go last Mr president thank you
Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Any further announcement Senator
Steinborn okay.
really at atrisk heritage
academy starting directly behind
me I have Isabella put out that
and is it Isabelle as a junior
hard work if you would like to
enter the you have been accepted
now and okay should like to
enter and get and get except in
the than the B. A. M. D. program
applause.
Thank you so much and I'm also
joined by haven't Alaska's and
having as the student body
sergeant at arms and I asked her
if she's like our sergeant at
captain of the jaguar dance team
and she's looking to attend the
university of New Mexico to
study technology and pursuant to
degree in cosmetology and for
Thank you and we also must
present like to acknowledge
Jessica they're they're
fantastic teacher who mentors
the students and helps helps
give us these opportunities to
Senator Steinborn we do have
further announcements Senator
missus thank you Mr president
unanimous consent to introduce
some guests here no objection
proceed Senator thank you Mr
that is a leader of a one of the
leaders of jaguar's for positive
change which does a lot of
community work there in
Albuquerque fantastic student
Honor Society of various
community service clubs and
please vote varsity basketball
and golf and she will be it
she's applied to some schools
back east and also apply to New
Also Mr president I have some
special guests in the gallery
that it's a beautiful surprise
for me today one of my lifelong
friends brother from Los Lunas I
want to welcome him and his wife
were spending the day with us
Senators.
I
see no further announcement
Senator Michael for the to take
us to the next order of business
I thank you very much Mr
love to say that and that's why
there were so many students here
today and I know a lot of them
are going on into their next
portions of their lives and I'm
very proud of every single one
of them and you can all count on
me as your state senator thank
business committee reports the
reader to read the report.
This president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill eighty
Mr chair by the Mr presents his.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
Senate bill one fifty do pass as
amended.
Senate bill one eighty seven to
pass.
Senate bill two twenty four do
pass respectfully submitted
Those opposed may.
Good try their center Pirtle.
The eyes have it the committee
point have been adopted in the
journal reflect their act fund
that it do pass respectfully
submitted senator George when
you lost chairman.
Senator Rodriguez.
Adaption of the committee report
together thank you
Hey there we go thank you I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
Actually thank you see no
objections the reader to read.
Senate bill one thirty six.
As amended do pass.
you lost chairman Senator yes.
Move adoption of the committee
report we have a motion to adopt
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
thirteen has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two forty five do
pass.
as amended do pass.
Senate bill three eighty one do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two eighty eight do
not pass but that Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty eight do pass and this
pass but that Senate help public
of public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill three
sixteen do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman.
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report centers
we have a motion to death
Committee for all those in favor
your Judiciary Committee to whom
has been referred Senate
memorial fifty five has had it
under consideration and reports
that same has been duly enrolled
Sent Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
members of the body at the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Center
memorial fifty five.
Senator Michael but it'll take
us to the next order of business
legislation center by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
I move that Senate memorial
forty five B. not printed not
referred to committee in the to
be read for the third time in
The New Mexico as good will
ambassadors for its work in
promoting New Mexico and its
culture around the world and
requesting the governor to issue
time you guys than level may go
was officially established as a
women's organization separate
from New Mexico Amigos and
whereas laws Amigos than level
level maybe Mexico has the
mission to promote New Mexico
and its unique culture by
traveling around the state
country and globe often with an
annual trip to a specific
to our Mexico City and con Kuhn
and whereas Los Amigos then well
maybe go is an example of
friendship tolerance and
community building with its
state of New Mexico that last
eagles then level medical be
recognized as official goodwill
ambassadors for its efforts to
promote the state of New Mexico
Los Amigos that meet US than
level may go as official
goodwill ambassadors and be it
further resolved that copies of
this memorial be transmitted to
Dole in the City of Santa Fe
Senator Michael by the US
senator Linda M. Lopez how we
see Morales president sherry due
to Lujan chief clerk New Mexico
state Senate.
substitution see no objections
center for the explain.
Thank you very much Mr president
and you deserve here of the
elegant eloquent words from the
reader this is a group that has
for a approximatelyof forty
nonpartisan group that just you
know couples there dollars
together and goes to the side of
the planet and tells people how
wonderful things are as we all
know here in New Mexico from our
to set an example for friendship
tolerance and community building
is the reader said Mr president
and so we're very proud of the
work that they do they are
seeking to be the official
goodwill ambassadors for New
any other comments Mister
president thank you so much
Senator by the US centers we're
debating Center memorial forty
five.
Anyone wishing to debate.
more forty I do now pass and
pass is consent of the Senate
that all forty two members and
you Sir the lieutenant governor
be shown as voting in the
affirmative.
the.
Thank you very much Mr president
with that I will
move of yes consent to take
because of that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
and I will yield to senator
social work the act legislative
action day.
I hope the legislative Peter has
a certificate Judiciary if the
reader could read that Mr
president thank you.
twenty twenty three social
workers students legislative
advocacy day in the Senate or
just social workers play a
crucial role in the nation's
end of whereas the primary
mission of the social work
profession is to enhance and
meet the basic needs of all
people and advocate through
equal rights for all people
regardless of their race culture
religion sexual identity gender
gender expression or abilities
and whereas today there are over
pipeline at New Mexico highlands
university in western New Mexico
university New Mexico State
University and eastern New
Mexico university and throughout
the state and whereas
and communities in crisis and in
need of help and whereas
professional social workers
provide services across the age
spectrum from treatment prenatal
courtrooms health clinics
hospitals senior centers
homeless shelters nursing homes
military disaster relief
create changes to make society a
better place to live including
advocacy for voting rights
criminal justice reform a
minimum wage and social safety
development into distinguished
positions now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate the state
of New Mexico that recognition
be extended to professional
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator Gerald
Ortiz Y. Pino Mimi Stewart
president pro tem sherry do
recall each year before the
COVID to changing in in our
lives
each year a large delegation of
supposed to be today of the the
actually planted important to
have two full bus loads of
students come from Las Vegas
where New Mexico highlands has a
Mexico state similarly and even
from the highlands training
program in in Albuquerque they
were all going to come here
today and and me with us about
various pieces of legislation
canceled they're going to
reschedule it for next week but
we went ahead and read the
certificate today because the
schedule for certificates and
and memorials is so jammed up
recently the City of Albuquerque
begin hiring social workers to
do what they call community
safety work and that is with the
police department it becomes the
alternative response to calling
necessarily trained to respond
appropriately to those they've
hired social workers to do that
and that now has become a trend
interviewing the social workers
that have been hired by the
police department to to
complement the the work of law
enforcement officers so there's
a variety of ways it's social
work can be used and one of the
ones that did also didn't get
I'm in this in this body I think
senator John Pinto also used to
refer to himself as a social
worker because he had worked for
guy a ghosts and I think I'm
hilly Mexico Rubio but I'm not
sure about that at any rate
social workers a profession is
beginning to to to really step
members of I just wanted to add
my voice to the to the wonderful
words of the reader read about
the certificate and to alert you
that sometime in the next week
president thank you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Si no further discussion.
Senator Padilla.
Takes the next order of business
returning to New Mexico now so
it's really happening here all
those great facts about social
work in New Mexico with that of
Mr president I'll take as to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation will
gonna go through the script
because I really really would
like to have if you will all
forty two senators and
lieutenant governor consider
this as
their support if you will of New
in full as a continue to go
ahead and proceed thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Campos percent thank you very
much Mr president members of the
over the years in fact over the
last hundred twenty years have
come forward and have received
their education from there
they've gone on to many great
of an educator whether it be a
person who works as a support
staff member whether it be a
student regardless or even a
community member the whole key
particular track if you will in
education realize that it's
going to be how do we build
community how do we.
what it is we combine our best
skills and from there whether it
be a student again a professor
it be an administrator it be one
about it's about who we are who
are going to become and then how
we take care of those students
who go through our doors and at
wishes to talk a little bit
about.
The cowboys at New Mexico
highlands university.
Thank you Senator Campos centers
right abating Center more fifty
visited by the highlands
leadership team and they are
just amazing young people that
are working on their own
a capital outlay for their
student project which I gladly
do every year so it's a
wonderful thing that highlands
Campos for offering this thank
you Senator Stewart.
Center for the thank you very
much Mr president also rise and
support in New Mexico highlands
day I have to say that one of my
retired and just terrific and
whenever I happen to be in the
news and if I say something
incorrectly like one day I said
I should admit this on the
Senate floor Mr present but I
will.
a great guide and also want to
thank New Mexico highlands and
Senator Campos for all of the
work they've done over the year
and social work we heard about
social work students here New
Mexico earlier and I know that
Thank you senator that Senator
o'neill.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
support of this of this memorial
you know there's some about the
combination of the city of Las
the history there is palpable
but also I just really like
their logo I admitted I met you
know the cowboys that that that
purple logo is pretty awesome
thank you thank you senator we
do have other centers would like
to speak on this memorial
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I to
stand in support of this
can he went on to become of Los
Angeles ram was part of the
fearsome foursome Charlie echo
in and and it all started it at
they have of of produced for our
state I was very proud of the
ones we had it in less committed
that do when I was there and
then my final highland story is
thank you for bringing this this
bill thank you centers the
Lopez.
Senator Shendo.
of my mom's younger brother my
uncle Joe Caro ran track in the
also plays football at highlands
back in the day in a I want to
say maybe about a decade ago he
got inducted into the athletic
have a connection to our our
family a lot of students from
Amos have gotten their degrees
there as Mexico highland so I
send support thank you
submission del Center three
familiarity other than to say
that I think president Sam
Minner is is an outstanding
outstanding leader and watching
him through his time here at the
legislature think Las Vegas in
president thank sent thank you
Senator Steinborn.
Si no further discussion Senator
Campos to close thank you very
much Mr president members of the
Senate
highlands university and I think
some people have referred to
this as a bottle opener but if I
may I would like to indicate to
each and everyone of you this is
bottle opener please remember
what I did today and that is
that I want to make sure that I
keep my eye and my focus on New
Mexico highlands university and
that the role has been called
and all forty two senators and
the lieutenant governor shown
voting in the affirmative on
Senate memorial fifty three.
much Mr president and so with
this special guests that are
with us and there's a other
people that are in the house of
representatives there several
displays that are going on in
the rotunda but the people that
relations we have Cody Rivera
who is a legislative leadership
fellowship student art New
Mexico highlands and he
shattered us on many occasions
already this session and then
thank you New Mexico highlands
university.
Thank you Mr president you
Senator Campos Senator Michael
Senate bill three thirty two as
amended with emergency clause
thank you for those listening to
webcast and those listening to
resume I do want to let that
emergency clause Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill three thirty two on final
public entities to apply to the
public project revolving fund I
think many of us if not all of
us are familiar with this fund
list is not a guarantee that
these loans will be will be
approved for any reason but the
authorization is what they need
to be able to apply that's
bill three thirty two as amended
Ms reminder there is an
emergency clause anyone wishing
debate.
See no debate Senator Rodriguez
negative by a show of hands
Senators where voting all
senators to your seats.
All cameras turned on.
By a vote of thirty five in the
we'll go on to the next item
this item number two.
That's item number two Senate
bill one seventy eight tobacco
fund not a state reserve fund.
one seventy eight on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
permanent fund which was through
the settlement with many states
in the U. S. government with the
tobacco companies and it has
been producing revenue going
was taken out of the permanent
fund to prop up the general fund
reserve.
Now that we are doing much
that in the general fund reserve
the ability to generate
significant investment returns
as much more conservative and in
the tobacco permanent fund
fund gets generated is larger
than the settlement that comes
in year by year through the work
number programs at the
university of New Mexico HSD and
Department of Health for all
related to smoking treatment
dollars and we are really
getting close to that point
where we're going to be able to
generate more income from the
now vaping and so forth so Mr
president I am open for debate.
Thank you Senator Hickey centers
question or two Senate Bill.
Mister chair Mister Majority
Leader.
Thank you senator so I just want
permanent fund as as a reserve
fund will no longer be able to
use in that in that capacity is
that correct.
Thank you.
Senator just reminder to go to
the chair.
Mr chair I'm so sorry yes thank
you Mr chair Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so.
sometimes hard to follow exactly
so tell me exactly what so we're
just making a monetary transfer
here I just explain it one more
generating more interest and
investment revenue since that is
not in the general fund reserve
and it is back in the tobacco
permanent fund where the
point where once it's greater
than the than the income that is
generated by the attorney
general's office and the
settlement it can be used for
so in terms of.
The investments.
Portfolio that becomes available
I know one of the issues is
because of the way we've treated
in any way change the the
ability the portfolio type
investment or does that happen
only if we eliminate this as a
as an actual reserve.
Senator had.
in a reserve fund it has the the
investments have to be much more
conservative and that's generate
less funding and in a permanent
president and center Hickey what
I'm hearing you say is we still
have this as a reserve fund and
I just think that as we move
forward this is something we
that we're still using this fund
it just it really should be used
for treatment and cessation and
should be invested in a way to
get the best possible return
without thinking of it as a
fund and Senator Ortiz Pinos got
a bill that I hope we can have a
discussion about that we'll get
all that money going to
treatment I just think you know
when we have pockets of money
those programs and not being
used for other reasons thank you
Mr president I really appreciate
you explaining that Senator for
bringing the bill.
Mister president senator Wirth
fund and so in the permanent
fund it does generate more
income other than what it is now
doing in the reserve fund so
getting the money another money
to again this little complicated
to surpass what comes in from
the attorney general's office
understanding as well thank you
Mr president senator Wirth
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Senator Hickey I
appreciate that and again I just
legislation but this is a step
in the right direction and I
really appreciate you bringing
the bill.
Thank you senator Wirth any
further debate centers.
pass pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
Including senator Morris.
Also if you wish to vote no
please raise your hand.
firm is here on the negative
Senate bill one seventy eight
has passed the Senate Senator
Hickey thank you Mr president
thank you colleagues going on to
that the record show that all
action replacing Senate bill
three fifty one on final passage
has been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
create new interim committees at
that time we put a prohibition
on anyone serving on Legislative
Council from being chair vice
it allows Legislative Council
members to also be voting
members it keeps in place the
prohibition from council members
Senator Stewart Senators we're
debating Senate bill three fifty
one Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president bush
Senator yield Senator Stewart
detailed certainly.
that was meeting a need a quorum
I could to go to that committee
and create a quorum or would I
need to be named to that
committee as a possible voting
member.
we've got the leadership from
both houses and they can't be
voting members on the majority
of the committees so it just
says created a problem.
were committee here that was
meeting and they needed a quorum
but anyone from the council
service go and make that quorum
if it were the for the house or
Senate Mr present like I said no
voting members for that
committee.
All right thank you that's what
I was curious should apply to
all committees.
No matter what the what the
status was thank you.
few committees we're gonna have
a larger pool of people that can
be on these committees and maybe
I will feel so much pressure in
the interim to to show up to so
many of them so I rise and full
I see no further debate Senator
Stewart because thank you Mr
president I move that Senate
bill three fifty one do now pass
Senator is here since.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator sweeties voting no.
More or.
Senate bill three fifty one
Legislative Council members in
interim committees Senator has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate.
seventy two hours and all you'll
to Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action to place committee.
Seeing no objection Senator
Diamond to explain thank you Mr
president and members of the
Senate we bring this important
bill today forward to address
thirteen CYFD removals he was
removed returned and removed and
returned to be beaten to death I
Later five year old from
Albuquerque a girl was removed
from her home three times.
When we received a text message
which she was being sold.
This bill is designed to stop
that to stop the revolving door
before higher management was in
CYFD or ultimately a judge if
necessary.
As expressed in committee this
bill does not solve the greater
to work with the agency and
getting this bill drafted it
seems to address their concerns
and also the concerns facing our
children.
to determine if a child should
be returned currently they have
only two days before they must
return that child this bill
allows them one additional day
leaves the case workers task and
is then seen by higher
management within CYFD today the
normal deadline for them to
process that is three this bill
will extend the time to five
cause hearing within five days
we have also granted a clause in
there where they can request up
to a five day extension.
For further details within the
bill I would now like to to
appreciate of.
CYFD secretary Vigil.
And and the folks who came and
talked to us in terms of this
and nuance some of the some of
the things that need to happen
in the and abuse and neglect
cases.
As Senator Diamond indicated
we're giving though the rank and
child needs to be if it needs to
go to court and then if it's a
child that is being removed for
a second time within six months
it gives actually five days for
so we recognize.
That within CYFD their
tremendous.
Our resource allocation problems
resource issues and with that we
have to stand for questions
thank you Senator Diamond center
every Soto we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
clause amendment sponsored by
Senator Pirtle.
Center for removing explaining
amendment move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
substitute you'll see a line
three where it talks about the
apartment executive manager or
acting department executive
manager essentially we were
putting in the statute
after we we discover that so
we're just putting in place
positions that actually exist
and then there's language that
ensures that if somebody is in
in that role than who would take
that up so that there's not an
department thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Pirtle we are debating Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
oh seven with emergency clause
Judiciary thank you Senator
Pirtle for bringing four we
would consider as a friendly
amendment we do have further
debate Senator o'neill thank you
Mr president I rise in strong
nimble view so we shouldn't be
A position should not be
imaginary that's all I know like
you thank you center on L. we do
have further debate on the
amendment Senator Stewart I
thank you Mr president I rise
and support I want to thank
because I would like to vote for
this bill so I hope the body
supports the amendment thank you
thank you senator any further
debate on the amendment we do
have for the debate on the
That doesn't create a problem.
Your July Senator I'd like
senator by the Soto to yield
Senator Ivey Soto deal.
Certainly if we if we adopt this
amendment gives the because the
secretary opportunity to
authorize certain persons above
the supervisor level to do
these.
amendment Sanchez Senator
Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president
that's exactly why the the merge
Clause is being removed that way
doesn't affect immediately that
the department does have time to
Si no further debate on the
amendment etcetera Pirtle to
close on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president I move
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
There's been a request for voice
floated up senator member number
one all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it senator member number one has
Si no further debate on the bill
Senator Diamond to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
those voting although the
present if so on voting in the
affirmative except those but
again the negative by a show of
hands thank you just a reminder
all senators to your seats all
you Mr president we want to
express our gratitude also to
CYFD for working with us on this
bill this is a good compliments
to the governor's emergency
declaration order together and
Soto thank you very much Mr
president members of the body
and I also do want to thank
Senator Pirtle for listening to
what was happening in the
committee and didn't just say
that's I don't I sent a bill to
a six forestry Division
procurement exemptions you know
you'll to Senator Hamblen thank
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
president I would like to plant
the seed of my co sponsor
senator Pat Woods if you want to
say a few words after I finish
my presentation I would be more
than happy to have his input in
minerals and natural resources
department all referred to it as
EMNRD from this point on to
distribute federal grants to non
governmental entities and
individuals that have already
been selected by the federal
law to administer the suite of
important wildfire risk
reduction programs EMNRD is
forced to go to duplicative
process these to administer the
funding and unfortunately the
situation is not covered by
existing sections of the
and training materials purchase
of livestock at auction and much
more this bill helps remove some
unnecessary restrictions that
are hindering EMNRD's forestry
division's participation in the
individuals selected through an
application process for programs
for wildfire prevention or
protection urban forestry forest
and watershed restoration and
protection reforestation or
EMNRD right now to work with
other groups and agencies that
have the capacity to do the work
that EMNRD cannot do at this
moment at this point Mr
president I would like to offer
explain this for well thank you
very much Mr president center.
Value added agriculture here.
Mister chair Mister president
Doesn't have to use the
procurement co but this is use
an already qualified people and
individuals that have been
particular bill thank you Mr
president thank you senator
thank you Senator Woods thank
you center Hamblen centers we're
debating Senate bill two oh six
anyone wishing to debate.
agencies on the ground and so at
this point I move the Senate
bill two oh six do now pass and
I ask unanimous consent the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called in that
all those present voted in the
Has passed the Senate Senator
Hamblen thank you Mr president
thank you Senate body one on to
item number six on today's
calendar Senate Judiciary
much Mr president us instance
into the scent of the record
show that all actions for
placing Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty.
On final passage is been taken
presented Senate bill one eighty
cut the some of the committee
substitute essentially what
we're doing here is we've had
some C. R. N. A. certificate
certified registered nurse
anesthetists that in practicing
that New Mexico siRNAs will
continue to work to their full
potential their full training
education competency etcetera
and it's really going to ensure
that we can continue to bring
vital health care to the most
you name it you know that those
are sort of the some of the four
corners or portions of our state
Mister president it includes
independent practice language
for all advanced practice
work the bill will allow for
clarification for C. R. N. A. so
that they can take a look at New
Mexico from other states and
provide our state very
attractive to come in and and
seventeen that was enacted there
and then we did add a
significant definition on the
term independent role on page
three and so I think they were
in good shape there I do have a
This actually is a very
important bill as we're dealing
with shortages and and health
care providers all across the
spectrum but the siRNAs perform
very valuable services
not be able to be undertaken
people would have to travel
incredibly long distances it's
very difficult to get
anesthesiologists to into those
Senator Padilla noted
people from other states will
look at New Mexico actually code
is good because the demand is so
Padilla for bringing this bill
forward and also as I noted the
other day the incredible work
that he and I and the the
future so I certainly encourage
everyone to support thank you.
Thank you Senator Hickey center
for the any further information
on the actual and then Mr
around the state thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Senator is remaining Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill eighty Senator
about this.
Padilla to just make sure that
I'm understanding the bill and
all my colleagues are
understanding what the bill does
so with the sponsor yield and
center by the deal I will yield
Senator about this Senator
operate independently and this
would change that is that right
center for the that's correct Mr
president simply for the reason
that some of the most rural
parts of New Mexico that have C.
has to be this language put in
place to allow them to continue
practicing.
In this present over my question
was different my question is the
existing law right now stature
requires that C. R. N. A.'s
bill will take away the
requirement that C. R. N. A.'s
are under any kind of a team or
under any kind of supervision
from medical providers saucer
That's correct Mr president
they've been doing that actually
for nineteen years Mr president
and now we're simply codifying
that that practice in law with
this legislation.
And an agency presents are you
of a team and to be operating
operating under the supervision
of of practitioners health care
provide practitioners with a
great deal more education
experience and they do and
doing here is we're we're
codifying a law that this group
has this group of practitioners
very valuable for import people
but if they've been ignoring our
statute in a requirement that
they operate under the
practice should maybe make us
recognize that maybe were
passing laws appear that people
are just routinely and the
professions ignoring.
and is that a really is that a
good thing.
supervision of individuals that
we as a legislature had decided
they need to be operating under.
I'm conflicted by this because I
recognize the importance of my
essential practices essential
needs being met.
But but that this argument
that's being made is that we're
only authorizing them to now do
something that they've been
And I hope my colleagues will
understand that we see the scope
of practice issues all the time
in our committees and I I really
dislike them because I as well
as an attorney I have no
business trying to tell C. R. N.
a scope of practice legislation.
We did this and we said C. R.
A.'s have to operate under a
team approach with doctors and
other providers and all I'm
debate maybe a better
explanation for why then there's
a better explanation for why we
just decided we knew better than
the legislature in state law
thank you Mr president.
debated this bill It links in
committee and you know I tend to
agree with what's been said but
you know I wanted to point now
the fact that you know the scope
of practice laws and how we
practice in an effort to really
put a bandaid on the medical
issues in the state and the
problem we have with retaining
good medical professionals and
us to keep our eye on the ball
Mr president and the draining of
the medical resources in the
state and it's really due to our
policy we need to take a big a
continue to farm out this help
to a nurses or pharmacists or
other professionals we're really
we're we suffer in the B. and
Mister president that's all I
have thank you.
Thanks evacuated are for the
debate Senator Hickey.
practicing in in the state for
multiple reasons but I would
also like to point out to that
Senator Cervantes also makes a
good point we and and health
decision by Darling and nineteen
eighty four almost everyone was
in the hospital and Dawn
hospital staffs in that law
to look at it as something I
tend to bring forward to next
year in terms of how do we
assure that all health
professionals whatever their
license whatever they are on a
research to see what other
states are doing but he he makes
a good point I would also like
to point out that and I believe
able to allow nurse anesthetists
to practice independently again
because of shortages that were
occurring at that time and they
as of that time and actually as
of if if if you're nurse
anesthetists or Nancy easy I'll
just you're putting the patient
surgeries themselves they are
anesthetized thing
the.
building in place now how that
gets specifically legislated and
so forth is something that we
need to look at in the future
but anyway I just want to assure
then Senator committee Senator
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president would
Senator Hickey you'll just for a
follow up question etcetera
serve on days maybe that that
the C. R. A.'s have been working
doing this for nineteen years
kind of in violation of those
plain meaning of the statute
certainly when you read the
Medicaid and what specifically
governor Johnson did in this
case nineteen years ago that
resulted in the C. R. A.'s.
to grant Mr president excuse me
Mr president and senator Wirth
he did grant that authority to
them which was granted by CMS
doing whatever procedure and
they also do some type of peer
review in compliance with that
law that that governor Johnson
signed.
executive order signed by
governor Johnson can override a
state law and we could spend a
lot of time.
Talking about down on the floor
effect codifies to me really
does make a difference I will
tell you I I share one hundred
percent with Senator serve on
days a huge hesitancy to move
forward on scope of practice
here between the A. A.'s the C.
R. A.'s but the the ETS are not
practicing in the rural areas so
I don't think we kind of got
there but the reason I I
supported this bill is I thought
quo of how things have been done
for nineteen years arguably
would have to be rolled back and
that would create a tremendous
disruption in the rural areas
that have become used to
I went ahead and voted for this
and would encourage members to
just consider that in the
overall mix of the uniqueness of
this particular version thank
Senator Kernan for second time
Senator Hernandez.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and and I
want to talk a little bit more
about what will happen with
governor Johnson because we've
order actually I that is not not
correct so what this CMS rag
said was a governor can request
that is consistent with state
law and it's about very
specifically
so there's no ego there's no
loss signed governor Johnson
accurate when that letter was
sent
the CMS rag also said we're not
going to double check you we're
just gonna take your word for it
governors so there was simply a
was accepted and that is all
that happened that allowed this
entire profession to ignore our
state laws the last nineteen
years.
was the executive branch of
government disregarded the laws
passed by the legislature and
nothing was done about it for
nineteen years and now we're
branch of our of our and three
independent branches and and we
we can ourselves more and more I
when when things like this
Senator Hickey said these folks
work in teams will continue to
work in teams the work that they
do is inherently one that is
interdependence working with a
team.
Lee the intention is that they
continue to work independently
and so why this language change
is already happening in it not
with siRNAs but but but in
places that have docks there and
they have other dance practice
nurses who can practice
and don't get me wrong Sen Ron
if you are in a medical
situation where you need can I
mean I think that that is a
great resource to have but these
group I.
The the authority to use these
drugs who can do that without
anyone looking over their
shoulder without a doctor being
on site
president we do have further
debate we have centers meetings
followed by Senator Kernan.
Senate committee.
Thank you Mr president
I've been service here in As in
Hobbs.
Roswell.
Gallup Albuquerque.
What do so the so the members
about a understand what we've
basically gone to now.
residents in an academic setting
that's you know in time just
talking in generalities here in
the C. R. A.'s are covering you
know they're covering rural
Okay.
so I I have the.
Nothing but good things to say
standpoint I do not have any
concerns with this legislation
but to echo what has been said
earlier you know we have
decided it would be a good idea
to raise risk for doctors.
Very bold very beholden
initiative made national
headlines in you know COVID
And I have I have friends or is
easy all just that we're given
very short notice him these
they're given very short notice
that their job was being cut.
of mine she scramble for job
moved to Florida she's gone.
These doctors are leaving
leaving leaving so this is a
good bill it is not requiring is
is not going to affect quality
but it's the bigger picture
that's the problem you know we
wouldn't have these coverage
problems if we weren't chasing
our health care professionals
literally out of state.
into it we did a whole we put
your back into it.
and and and let me also remind
the members of body that it's
I mean this is you know this is
been in existence for.
You know for for decades.
So I just want to remind people
Mexico because of our anti
health care policies.
but you know that's kind of a a
negative there but it has to be
talked about it has to be
And so I A. I'm very rude you
know just Moores full that we
have chased a lot of of M. D.
anesthesiologists out of the
state.
wonderful job and they're
providing good care and they're
doing it all over the state and
I can attest to that as as a you
know direct
health care professionals so
the table so so kudos to the
sponsor for doing that I'm very
happy that the A. legislation is
moving forward I'm happy that
this legislation I am predicting
Who loses out if we pit people
against each other.
All the people New Mexico do
that need anesthesiology's
anesthesia services if if we
allow one of these groups to
way sponsor this legislation
it's good for New Mexico but we
we just can't forget what's
going on the background thank
you Mr president thank you
center street is Senator Kernan.
The next size by S. C. R. N. A.
I've had surgery using siRNA and
I will tell you my husband's a
medical doctor and he never ever
would have allowed that if he
they have operated in a team
situation and I'm not sure that
any law has been broken the
going forward and that's what we
need to do today is make sure
Mexico you would basically have
to shut down the surgical suites
in hospitals in rural New Mexico
because we can't operate without
them I have all the confidence
thank you.
Senator about this for a second
time.
This presents residency Centers
maintenance is a little bit of
sorry Senator Hickey so
Yes.
Thank you senator you know it
matters a lot to me as Senator
drugs part of money concerns
with this and and I want to
thank center doing for really
kind of giving us a pretty good
history of about what really
happened here and I I don't
misrepresent the federal
government about the status of
New Mexico law in getting what
they want to get accomplish the
time with the Johnson
administration did so and your
ears are my fundamental concern
some of them significant I I
don't know who's really perform
the procedure to be honest with
you it didn't really matter to
be added mask lot of questions
about who's going to be
administering the anaesthesia
keep my my experience rowing up
is up to have lost a high school
classmate.
who was going for a simple knee
procedure so help me of center
if you and your own experience
as a professional and in my
overly concerned or my or my
right that that this is a very
anesthesia can be fatal and and
the fatal in very short matter
of seconds or minutes.
Senator thank you.
Thank you Mr president and
medical science and the use of
drugs and anesthesia
there has always been a risk.
That the administration of some
three percent chance that are
irrespective of it and not
negligence that there is a a
potentially maybe a drug drug
interaction that the patient and
don't understand why some of us
with COVID get knocked out like
I did and and my wife has a
couple Sniffles and it has to do
with the make up of your T.
can have a fatal outcome under
any kind of anesthesia even a
local anesthetic can have that
impact that whether it's
and malpractices you the the the
practice of being sure that
people who do get hurt with this
to negligence or whether again
monetary compensation for it but
I do want to emphasize to you
that
you know there's a cute little
raised about what happens in in
supervision in the operating
suite learning this trade they
also learned that died
tactically in classes and
they've learned the for the
do you would not want me putting
you under because I haven't had
those thousands of hours of
experience and anesthesia so to
answer your question the there
they they it is explained that
in a very small percentage of
the time there can be a random
interaction with whatever in the
body or with the individual it
subject to the the the reason
that I asked in the that one the
question really is that when we
get into the scope of practice
areas the one thing that always
challenges me the most is the
silence and so in part of the
malpractice I think I think the
doctors of very candidly are
badly misled by hospitals and by
the corporate actors we did
increase medical malpractice
is negligible I hope all of you
have more auto insurance than
that because if you don't have
two hundred or two hundred fifty
thousand dollars of auto
insurance you ought to be
doctors on doctors is chasing
doctors out of state really
ignores what is going on
and and we don't need to get off
too far into the medical
malpractice to right here and
explanation for why they
medical.
Professions are not.
Taking a position on this
legislation that that really is
my question that that's that.
because I respect the provision
so much logic you know as I've
got a new doctor the family a
lever that she's working as a
resident fourteen hour shifts I
I you so respect what you all do
Mr president and Senator
Cervantes I would point out to
you that I am a member of that
profession as is my colleague
senator smitteez who knows much
more because he he is in the
and she slapped my hand because
I was shaking so that's that
that's as much experience as I
have around that particular area
and Mr president I'm informing
examiners has approved the C. R.
N. A.'s and and their their
scope of practice a day due to
supervise that I can't tell you
a parade for it but they're not
objecting to this bill and if
the if they you know if they
really were they would have been
having that kind of negative
parade but they're not do it
needs to be modernized and we
don't have a good representation
of New Mexicans in our
legislature I think it's a good
moment so we've got to doctors
in here of which is is a great
but but you confirm also my
observation that we haven't
heard from the medical societies
we haven't heard from the
anesthesiologist as a group as a
profession as a as a a position
includes whether it's a
discussion debate about medical
malpractice or insurance or any
of these other issues we've got
to be got to be able to talk a
little bit more of together so I
for another date and time thank
you Mr president thank you we do
have further debate will have
several nail and seen on I also
have Senator Baca center o'neill
particular issue I do have a lot
of anesthesiologists M. D. as in
my district and when this bill
came my way I'm used to like of
you know there's no drama here
but actually listening to the
debate and especially the
comments by my chair Sir Senator
scientists and co chair and vice
important for me in the future
to really consider the larger
picture just because I'm not
hearing any opposition that
doesn't mean that that it's it
here and and and and again it's
just not enough I think when
we're looking at these bills in
the future you know it's great
no opposition seems like
thank you Mr president I want to
I want to address another
elephant in the room which is
the fact that we really don't
pushing for this bill I need
more information as a legislator
to understand the full
environment ecosystem of where
this bill came from who would
benefit from it we hear about
didn't hear from him doesn't
mean that in way in.
there are certainly those and by
the way I wanted to say at the
outset I've known unearths nurse
anesthesiologist I know their
But but the point is is that.
We need more transparency in our
process to make better decisions
a lot of the questions we're all
asking about where it we're are
put out a plug Mr president
colleague and we have a bill
sponsored bipartisan we have it
every year to actually require
that those that advocate for
bills report on that so that
Rio Chama on a phone call in a
hallway or in a committee room
and so that's Senate bill to
eighteen it's waiting on first
hearing in the Senate rules
no this person on this
particular bill but obviously
we're doing within SEC ology
this is a matter of life and
death it's important we get
these issues right so I hope
these bills get heard and we can
Senator Baca.
I thank you Mr president I just
wanted to stand in a I guess a
big elephant back up if you will
Roswell for me to in Albuquerque
many dozens of doctors and
medical professionals along the
way and just to just to give
your to their concerns and you
I had no idea hadn't heard about
the other scope of practice
bills either well let me tell
you what I heard about I heard
about medical malpractice that's
brought up I think I think we
need to be clear of what they're
facing we're going from six
hundred thousand in medical
malpractice caps to seven
hundred fifty thousand in
increase in response to that
medical malpractice insurance is
going up on the order of forty
to fifty percent from those that
I spoke to.
about so we're talking here
about this this is the C.
Arnie's role in Anastasia.
round house more than I have
ever seen again not one of a
mention this bill but I do know
what they want to talk about
medical malpractice the range
thank you very much Mr president
I am incredibly an immensely
grateful for the comments that
were made on on in support and
opposition I think it's helping
us Mr president on a lot more
does is bring certainty to the
profession we have six hundred
and fifty C. R. Morris few more
than six hundred fifty just
hearing aids in the state this
allows and to continue to
provide the excellent service
five weeks Mr president and so I
just want to let everybody know
that for sure there's been work
over a couple of years but the
built in file for you know for
five weeks I think if if the
legislation and there was a many
opportunities for various
organizations to weigh in and I
just also want to reassure my
colleagues that in support of
the legislation is the New
president who brings bills who
once had to have built brought
here the only people I heard
from on this particular piece of
legislation and the only thing
we have here in this building is
appreciate all the comments that
were made today with that Mr
president I move that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill eighty do now
pass and I us and consent of the
Senator is where voting.
How Senators tier seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator want this voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
We have three in the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
subset percent ability has
passed the Senate center by the
thank you very much Mr president
members of the body and
and I yield to senator Munoz.
I ask Miss consent of the Senate
the record show that all action
for placing Senate bill one
forty five on final passage it
lenders out there like to allow
them officers from the police
chief and Anthony who used to
work for legislative and the
monthly.
you Mr Johnson will get his name
in the second.
So Senate bill one forty five in
twenty thirteen there's changes
to the to the para and.
We inadvertently left out
excluded in that and so it does
that for permit officer sergeant
lieutenant captain and the
aircraft Division
and so it holds their wrecked
thirty eight percent so is over
funded and with that Mr present
I'll stand for questions Senator
is very debating Senate bill one
forty five.
legislation and just bring a
couple of state police experts.
And the crippled.
Senator me us to close on the
bill.
Mr Browde you can have a better
feelings with that Mr president
I move that Senate bill one
forty five do now pass and pass
this consenus at the record show
that rules being called and all
those present voting affirmative
Senate bill one forty five state
police retirement changes has
duly passed the Senate sentiment
us thank you Mr president.
Center how to mail Mr president
I move with unanimous consent to
expunge the Senate rules
committee report which is read
out on February second twenty
tabled on a vote of six to one.
I
see no objections Senator
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto agency
president so the but the
committee report.
Sending it to to finance that
was.
the bill is that correct center
how to mail Mr president that is
correct however the bill did die
in the table on a table vote of
six to one and should have never
the committee report okay and
very well and Ms president
center how to build has it
actually taking on the bill and
finance center how to mail Mr
president no action has been
you'll send me a detailed yes so
this was a minute Mr president
Mr chair this was a just a
complete accident in a verdant.
Center for the.
That's almost president back to
sender.
Send me a you made a motion to
want to make a consent.
To expand explains the committee
report.
Seeing no objection.
Will expunge the Kerner report
for that specific bill only
you Senator how to meal not
taken so that our business
committee reports or in that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
tax business and transportation
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman Senator Stefanics Mr
president I move adoption of the
The eyes have it the committee
report has been adopted.
Senator by the thank you very
much Mr president I'll take as
to that order business now in
its consent for that order
business introduction of
introduced by senator Neil
Memorial declaring March second
twenty twenty three recognition
of fallen firefighters date in
the Senate Senate memorial fifty
Senate memorial fifty eight
introduced by Senate by the our
memorial recognizing the history
and contributions of the
Albuquerque metropolitan Arroyo
proclaim March twenty six twenty
twenty three Albuquerque
metropolitan metropolitan Arroyo
flood control authority date
statements Morial fifty eight.
Senate memorial fifty eight.
While fifty eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not refer to
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for house
bill thirty three and act
relating to land grants
including the crystal whether
chapter forty nine article one
NMSA nineteen seventy eight to
certain land grants receta this
amending a section of the NMSA
Is not order it's referred to
the Senate into rural and
cultural affairs committee then
Senate conservation committee
that's house bill thirty three.
the health care purchasing Act
the public assistance act The
New Mexico insurance code the
health maintenance organization
law and the nonprofit health
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee house
bill seventy three.
House bill one twenty six
graduation requirements for
students entering ninth grade
and the twenty twenty four
twenty twenty five school year
house bill one twenty six house
House bill one forty eight.
Introduced by representative
Lente a and act relating to
early childhood authorizing the
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
Education Committee then Senate
finance committee house bill one
forty eight.
House Bill three sixty eight
elect to pay and entity level
tax amending the definitions of
base income and net income in
the income tax act House Bill
house bill three sixty eight.
Senate Majority Senate majority
whip my career to take us to the
next order of business thank you
business announces miscellaneous
center by the thank you very
much Mr president just want to
remind the body we will be
coming back tomorrow at eleven
we will be coming back on
Saturday if you work here at the
some amount announcements we'll
start with senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so Senate
bill five eighteen is an
police to be the highest paid
law enforcement officers in the
state.
It's currently in **** which is
the our health health public
affairs which is the correct
after the health public affairs
committee first referral.
Many animus consent request.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
at eight thirty room three
eleven we've got to House Bills
we're gonna be hearing a couple
of bills that were rolled over
Center stores in their semi
committee will be meeting at two
o'clock we'll give you about
fifteen minutes or so to go
ahead and and do what you need
to do will be in room three
thank you Senator Hamblen
centerman us thank you Mr
president members of the body.
All our capital sheets are up
with the exact the house has not
that that everybody's.
In order and and we know what
we're doing but that's the issue
we're having right now so on
Capitol where she wants to
participate with us as a no
we'll try to figure out a system
to let you know independently or
come to one on one with staff
say here's the participation and
and and then you can fill in
your numbers with you guys
in just one bill would probably
to do it
The state to thirty for Senate
finance everybody time to take
that Mr president next week and
we were gonna work hard over the
that have funding in and we move
some of those long and wait for
House Bills to match up so with
that Mr president thank you
thank you seven yes.
sentiment HSD L..
Yes.
Mr president Senator would you
Mr president etcetera so the
sheets we filled out the Senate
set up we said you know whatever
projects for members want to do
that and three from the house
together so you'll know how the
governor's going to participate
so it's basically the house
seats need to be set up so the
governor can say these are the
projects all all
You don't have a timeline that
that is what I understand is
that correct Mr president I'm
this presents center every time
we just set a time line the
changed the capitol timeline to
make sure that everybody's in
alignment with if the exact
gonna participate that's the
number one thing want to do is
aligning on projects where we
present with the chairman of the
Senate finance yield sentiment
HSD yield.
Call the state police back in
and change it to a stop sign.
Yes.
I don't know if they have that
rule over there.
Are you saying that they can't
get their seats together.
chairman of finance please yield
seven we just need of Mr
president I guess I'll just
yield everybody's of the got a
question of the standard Senator
funded on the end of the
executive and therefore our
contribution is not needed for
that project if that money does
million dollars in capital to
put somewhere and I fail to put
that into a capital project what
then happens to that capital.
there's over funded here's
here's where we're at so that's
why will probably slow down
capital of for we'll just kick
it back one day for right now
until we get those sheets and
perfect example in the yes
there's funding for chill talk
chapter for water lines they're
requesting capital from the
governor there question capital
for me and so I need to align
to do it right so you know other
depending on the house and the
reconciliation sheets for the
exact then we'll then we'll
start our capital let you know
that.
I'm correct tomorrow at noon
does that at noon deadline
tomorrow for capital submissions
a still stand Senator yes.
supercenter date noon and we'll
see what happens with the sheets
today and then I can give you
more information on the floor
more.
Thank you Mr president thank you
fourth at nine AM in room three
twenty one we'll be hearing bill
from senators as defend X.
Maestas Lopez Brandt Stewart and
one from Representative Penske
Sentiment which room would you
be meeting at eight thirty AM on
Saturday three twenty one thank
you senator Neville any further
announcements Senators.
we will let with units consented
to in recess until tomorrow
morning at eleven AM.
Seeing no objection the Senate
to Senate recess so eleven AM
