Senator Hickey.
Senator my S..
Senator McKenna from the
Center Marcin.
Senator Padilla Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator also your.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You you do not have a quorum
Mister president I'll senators
to the chamber we are lacking a
quorum.
today by chaplain captain Thomas
rural New Mexico Army National
Guard ninety third troop command
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be that
today.
By Senator Neville.
Please and chairman of the
Senate and those in the gallery
it's a pleasure an honor for me
to be here this morning is we
seasoned with that grace and
reconciliation let us pray the
name of the father the son and
the Holy Spirit mighty god who
In these days when nations Rajan
war threatens to up in the
fragile world we call to you
with humble hearts that you
faithfulness with comfort of
your constant care.
In your great mercy heal our
world leave those who call upon
those whose courage grows faint
whose souls language in the
midst of violence and oppression
in requests just your piece may
feel powerless look within for
deeper strength as they seek to
perform works of lasting justice
for your people may the members
lord help the Senate to.
Construct renew trust and draw
together in establishing your
beloved community here in this
great state of New Mexico may
the backbone of this state and
may your peace be on them as
they serve the people of this
great state of New Mexico we
welcome everyone to today's
session.
Ideal to Senate majority floor
leader Peter Wirth to take us to
the next order of business good
morning Mr president and members
unanimous consent we go about
Senate majority whip Mike over
there good morning Mr president
thank you and thank you to
members of the body units
consent to allow cameras in the
Senate chamber and in the Senate
gallery hearing no objections
Senator the.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president and thank you chaplain
our country also I really
appreciate your invocation this
morning and just thinking about
serving with grace and peace and
those are important things in
the last little home stretch of
year of bilingual multicultural
education from the president's
table in place that on today's
counter seeing no objection will
remove Center memorial sixty off
the president's table we'll
about the memorial and then also
today we will do Senate Morial
forty six that Senator Pirtle
Mescalero reservation hundred
fiftieth anniversary that
and this is good news for the
members Dr new CEO will be here
Monday in the Senate lands
giving Napper Pathak treatments
another pitch that tonight the
hundreds bill party hosted by
center my Estes and
Representative Serrato and
also attended but unsure Center
masses will be filling us in
throughout the day on that and
with that Mr president I yield
other members to introduce
guests before we get to the
introduce to the Senate my guest
for the day my sister in law
this is the judge Melissa
Kennelly she's a District Court
judge in the tell us.
hearings there a judge contently
is a.
The widow of my sister Loretta
or cheesy Pino who is a a
pediatrician inTaos for many
Thank you senator participate OS
Center could Hemphill followed
by center o'neill then Senator
student from apply to middle
school and I'd like him to stand
and be recognized and please
join me in welcoming Devin
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
president members I just wanted
to
elaborate on on the card that
you have a at and everybody's
I you know it's it's held at the
St Francis auditorium which is a
beautiful space in the museum of
New Mexico museum of art poetry
schools across New Mexico
compete for first place in the
winter receives two hundred
dollars an all expense paid trip
to DC for the finals look this
everything from Edgar Allen Poe
to more contemporary stuff and
it's just remarkable and and and
I just really look forward to
this every every year and
happily it's happening during
creative they are thank you.
Thank you senator nail with
Senator Sanchez.
then ask the body to help me on
introducing here today.
Mr president I am a guest with
me today and I got my wife
Sherman you know so she got a
smooth ride and Senator want
this was our pilot this morning
up.
Any further announcements
Mr president and so what we'll
deal with these memorials I
think we'll do Center Hermio is
going to do the first one seven
moral sixty that one is ready is
on the counter based on the
afterwards just for the members
we're kind of looking at item
one through eight.
On the calendar and we'll see
how we're doing and where we are
not be read this morning Senator
is aware that order business
third reading legislation and
I ought to Senator Leo how to
mail Mr president I move that
Senate memorial sixty be put on
is the fiftieth anniversary of
the New Mexico bilingual and
multicultural Education Act
which I've been referred to as
the B. M. E. A. from here on out
some of the oldest and most
unique languages of our
indigenous pueblos tribes and
nations a unique Spanish
language of these bins of
staying for more than five
twenty eighteen the act because
of the Legislature together with
the executive branch to work
together to support and invest
in initiatives and programs the
of the B. E. M. A. totaling four
hundred eighteen schools across
the state which are implementing
bilingual multicultural
education programs in nineteen
eighteen our judicial system
recognized by legal education as
a foundation for ensuring
education equity following the
Martinez Yazzie court ruling for
memorial thank you senator
Senator is going to be sending
moral sixty.
Anyone wishing to speak.
the lieutenant governor be shown
as voting in the affirmative
seeing no objection.
By a vote of forty three in the
affirmative you're on the data
center moral sixty the year
Senator Majority Leader Peter
Wirth to take it to the next
order of business thank you Mr
president to unanimous consent
we go back to the or business
announcements and miscellaneous
see no objection or on that
we'll get that in and we'll roll
the clock C. unanimous consent
we go about our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the reader to read.
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted the
senator Shannon D. Pinto
chairwoman Senator o'neill I
adopted.
Senator Pete or think it's the
next order of business thank you
Mr president I miss and we go
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous.
Mr president your Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
to whom has been referred house
bill one ninety eight has had it
under consideration reports say
with recommendation that a do
report centers we have a motion
to adopt could report.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee port has been
adopted Senator Peter Wirth to
president having eleven fifty
nine AM I move we adjourn until
twelve or one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Thank you Mr president us is
consent that the rules be
that the rules we suspend of the
record show that the journals
and read in full and approve
subject to revision and approval
the Judiciary Committee saying
no objections so ordered.
Mr president as he is concerned
that the rules we suspended the
record show that the journal the
show all those present this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session hearing
no objection it is so ordered.
the Judiciary Committee hearing
no objection so ordered.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
Senator is we are in that order
of Business surgery legislation
we do have guests here for the
memorial I would ask that we
keep the volume down.
Senator Pirtle representative
final passage has been taken is
now debate open to debate
amendment or substitution.
Sen objects in the reader to
read.
Mescalero Apache Indian
reservation was established by
president president Ulysses S.
grant on may twenty ninth
eighteen seventy three by
hundred nineteen square miles or
four hundred sixty three
thousand acres and whereas
Sierra Blanca or white mountain
sacred to the Apache people is
Pam and chief Jericho Apache
bands of Apache and whereas the
Mescalero Apache people have
called the lands of New Mexico
until nineteen oh five when they
join the Mescalero Apache on the
Mescalero Apache Indian
reservation and whereas in
majority of the two echo of
Apache chose to make their homes
on the Mescalero Apache Indian
reservation where they were
welcomed wholeheartedly by the
tribe has been at the forefront
of the fight for tribal
sovereignty at the state and
national levels and to preserve
its culture language and
connection.
its sustainable forestry
management public campgrounds
and big game hunting program and
whereas the Mescalero Apache
tribe is proud to share the
result resort and casino the end
of the mountain gods and whereas
the Mescalero Apache tribe is
proud to call the Mescalero
Apache Indian reservation it's
Mescalero Apache Indian
reservation be recognized and
celebrated by the Senate and
throughout New Mexico and be it
further resolved that a copy of
cliff R. Pirtle how we see
Morales president Jerry do Lujan
chief clerk New Mexico state
Senate.
Mescalero Apache reservation is
is one of the most beautiful in
the state and really it's almost
like a small New Mexico it goes
from everything from grassland
is where it discusses the fact
that there's three bands of
Apaches that join together to
form one tribe the chair call of
the pan and the Mescalero.
I have walked hundreds of miles
or rode a train hundreds of
miles with only what they have
on their back that we have
brothers and sisters that have
president is what the Mescalero
Apache tribe representative to
humanity in general and what we
could learn from them as we
celebrate the Mr president with
Shendo followed by Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr president I to
stand and rice's support center
memorial forty six in
recognition of the.
that's a as we've heard you know
many many tribes were moved from
their ancestral homelands in the
late eighteen hundreds.
others.
just.
Forty minutes from here east of
here is pickles Pueblo.
That Pueblo was abandoned in
other total speaking village
left.
So in eighteen thirty that was
eighteen thirty eight and in
nineteen thirty eight.
Two act of Congress.
And we celebrate to feast days
August second which is the feast
of the person who lived in Los
Angeles which was their patron
and I think this is just one way
we're Mescalero open in on their
lands to other Apache nations to
join them and have thrive there
so with that I I stand in
senator Byrd followed by Senator
Griggs and center how to meal
thank you Mr president thank you
for the time and I appreciate to
my fellow senator bringing this
have drawn closer with the
redistricting
and my district now moving into
work with Nesler's it's it's
it's a true pleasure and you're
new governing board this is is
amazing there's an energy and
there is a will to make things
better than they already are
and we certainly are in the
legislature willing to help in
any way shape or form that we
can't they finally Mr chair not
to miss present not take too
restitution for fires.
In our force land.
And I've always said that the.
The people who really take care
and then literally go across the
road and look at the Lincoln and
I'm not not not in the link and
I'm just saying you will be
amazed at how well the Mescalero
hundred trees on an acre you
know you have selected trees on
an acre that allow the force to
growing faster
these folks really know how to
to support this memorial and
look forward to drawing closer
working with the tribe as we
move down the road thank you Mr
president thank you Senator Burt
support the recognition of the
tribe
You know I grew up down in
Alamogordo sure I've not been
far for Mescalero for most all
the the approach is that they've
taken on on forced health but
also on the.
On the economic opportunities in
guides is one of the premier
facilities.
Statewide nationally as well I
mean they have done a remarkable
Mescalero show us hal to manage
the forced and we choose to
ignore that.
In operating it in a different
national force in New Mexico
they don't.
They don't show we see a
difference and we see it because
attention to New Mexico needs to
embrace and we need to be sure
that the federal government.
In braces it is well so much
of New Mexico and made it what
it is today mated and Alex
standing part of our state we're
In these individuals here or
show us how to make the southern
part of the state.
privilege for me to call
Southern New Mexico home but
it's a great privilege and honor
to be able to support this for
more because these individuals.
Thank you Sir great center have
a meal followed by Senator
Brandt thank you Mr president I
want to thank Senator Pirtle for
bringing this forward and for
the comments of both Senator
Griggs and senator Byrd as a
the interim committee meetings
we talked about how Mescalero
Apache connects with the
environment like all of our
native brothers and sisters and
the story that meant the most to
you have some time today listen
to them hear their stories here
what their beliefs are and
you'll see that they're all
United in what they believe is
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president I don't
need the sponsor yield I I stand
in in strong support of this
memorial in and you know what a
blessing to have the mask or try
already told you in person but I
I just really appreciate hi how
you.
How much we can learn from you
and how much we can learn from
coming down and spending time
Choose to do that.
But to make it better.
You know as I talked to several
years ago one of your your main
And so I asked how many you know
what what what would you say
agency so they need to cut down
out about eighty percent so that
they'll be healthy.
As a what's better for the
a lesson that I have told the
the federal suit for service
management people several times
I don't know if they've ever
actually listened because the
federal government rarely
listens.
and I thank you for honoring us
with your presence here today
thank you thank you Senator
Brandt Senator Hamblen followed
by Senator Gallegos and seven
my mom is a single mom would
take my brother and I to New
Mexico for day trips are for
weekend trips and you know the
the Mescalero Apache lands of
inner tubing when it snowed
before it melted at noon and
during the winter and camping at
the Silverlake recreation area
which you manage so beautifully
being here and for allowing us
to experience the beauty that
you continue to nursing care for
so thank you.
Thank you Senator Hamblen
Senator Pirtle for this moral I
had the pleasure to meet some
tried tribal members from
Mescalero in December really
Mustang at that time even though
my brothers and I loves to ride
in that car but anyway Mr
president we took a wonderful
trip to Care is those and then
senator and so just wonderful
memories I also cherish what
window Chino did for the tribe
agent of advocacy for all
indigenous tribes in New Mexico.
In this nation so thank you
again Mr president as senator
Senator Pinto in center city
Lopez.
Thank you Mr president and I
want to welcome you to the
roundhouse into the Senate and
and you are probably carrying
the flag for southern New Mexico
but I you know I can I COVID my
appreciation I I know of course
your know your force management
preserve your history your
culture for future generations
and I know all the work you're
doing and and you know my work
with your former governor on on
is so important and I just I
want to honor your work and you
know your your culture your
history and and again thank you
all welcome what the legislature
And.
To get to this moment in time
you know our leadership our
native American leadership that
got us to here is very essential
memorial is here to kind of
remind us gently that to we will
celebrate in that sense of being
cared walking on this earth and
I welcome you to our chamber
Aspects of issues and I think
it's very important that we
raise that bar each time and
those expectations are there in
order for our people to make
there are meetings down south I
always try to make sure our try
to figure out a way how can I
get to go fishing over there and
people are tied to the land
speaks to the care that to
embedded within us passed on
down down
to ensure that as we take care
because I've traveled to quite a
few reservations from the west
coast to the east coast and see
the differences and always like
having the.
understand that relationship of
kinship and family with each
other and look for to the
celebration that is coming up.
and support of this memorial
I am just in awe of this moment
toward the relationships between
the state and our tribal of
brothers and sisters are so
such a moving moment I also
wanted to to comment on the
beauty of of the lands down
south and how the really
important stewardship that had
have always had so with that
again I think the I think the
Mescalero people for being here
and I think the the sponsor and.
Senator Pete Campos I thank you
very much Mr president of course
members of the Senate and I go
back to when I was representing
Lincoln County and there was a
and along with that over the
years what I've seen is of
course the vision I've seen the
independence I've seen the
development of the economy I've
seen
come in and the elders would be
there they would go up to the
elders and the elders would help
them to better understand not
only their culture the
environment but also to help to
and relationship with Washington
one of the things that I've
always seen is that there has
been the independence here and
that's what is truly help them
to grow the economy to go and be
continue to grow but it's
because they have helped
themselves and that's what I
encourage the people to New
Mexico to do take this as an
example of how you can build
and that's what they do they
work together there might be
differences but they do work
together.
And then lastly I just truly
want to go ahead and thank the
sponsor Senator Pirtle because
how we can work together and
that's where the real difference
comes but the example before us
today of course is the Mescalero
reservation and a hundred and
fifty years.
much for bringing this
particular memorial forward
thank you Sir Campos.
I
no further debate.
And I'm proud that I get to say
that they are my friends that
we've.
I've been there Senator for over
ten years now and during
redistricting.
belongs I'm I'm not ready to to
give up on them and
unfortunately because of the way
it all works senator Byrd is
going to be the the new
fortunate Senator that that gets
to call you part of his district
Apache people simply because
from day one phone calls were
made I was called welcome to
congratulated the same back the
feel extremely special and
humbled that you would allow me
into your cultural events your
special occasions and treat me
culture but now to have that to
truly understand as people we
all have to respect and give
each other the dignity that we
all deserve and with that Mr
voting the negative with a show
of hands Senator Pirtle if you
would
Provide me with some of that
love and appreciate that.
In this franchise unanimous
three in the Fuhrman is here on
the negative side of a moral
forty six has duly passed the
Senate Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president and and we have a few
members and by a few I mean
every tribal council member in
Tribal council.
Marilyn Blaylock tribal council.
I della Star tribal council.
have by Garcia Mescalero
prevention.
In our dina Orozco Mescalero
prevention.
counsel she was here just in
case there were tough questions
Mister president.
Mr president in the gallery we
also have the Mescalero
prevention program Mescalero
community library in elderly
centre Mr president if everybody
help me welcome Mescalero Apache
people.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
let's do a little bit of the
work up on the table unanimous
The honorable Mimi Stewart
president pro tem and members of
the New Mexico state Senate
Senate executive message number
rules committee the following
nominations for appointment
Katrina hope from Lopez for
re appointment as the secretary
of aging and long term Services
the Ph.D Fauria appointment as a
member of the New Mexico State
University board of regents for
a term retroactive to January
first twenty twenty three and
concluding on December thirty
institute of mining and
technology board of regents for
a term commencing upon
confirmation and concluding on
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight Paul emir Blanchard
as a member of the university of
Paula Tackett as a member of the
university of New Mexico board
of regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation and concluding
on December thirty first twenty
twenty eight.
three and concluding on December
thirty first twenty twenty
eight.
Cody Dennis Rivera as the
student member of the New Mexico
student member of the S. eastern
New Mexico university board of
regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation and concluding
on December thirty first twenty
twenty four.
December thirty first twenty
twenty four.
Adrian Joseph cells celu street
as the student member of the New
Mexico institute of mining and
Garrett Daniel mostly as the
student member of the New Mexico
State University board of
regents.
On the the term commencing upon
confirmation and concluding on
December thirty first twenty
twenty four.
final action by the Senate
respectfully submitted Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
The journal so the message from
the governor has been received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president Ms because that we
go about our business messages
Committee substitute for House
Bill to seventy seven.
House Bill three fifty three.
House joint resolution I.
House labor veterans and
House Bill three forty two as
amended by the house and request
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
our business announcements
miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Peter
Wirth thank you Mr president so
we're going to go to third
reading of legislation
check with Senator Sanchez and
make sure his expert witness is
ready to go.
I see he's on the floor so
that's perfect so with that Mr
and fish outdoor youth programs
Senator Stewart on that order of
Business third reading of
legislation Senate bill three
ninety two and I yield to
senator Joshua Sanchez.
is now subject to debate amend
or substitution.
Hearing no objection Senator
just explain the bill.
you please introduce your expert
witness Senator Sanchez thank
you Mr president my expert
witnesses Braden McIntosh.
It's a wonderful expert witness
that you have Senator Sanchez
proceed.
So thank you Mr president a
little back story on this Mr
Macintosh and his mom were here
touring the capitol and there
it passed so he stumbled into
Senator portals office in my
office and we started talking to
this young man and he had a
great idea so we took his idea
and we've came up now is Senate
fishing or hunting.
It's all voluntary but you can
round it up if you have forty
two dollars and ten cents he
rounded up to the nearest dollar
hunting and fishing shooting
camps responsibility hunting
programs archery in schools that
they have now the off road
this is all voluntary and it
goes to existing youth programs.
So and this does not cost the
state of things and we do have
came efficient support of this
sponsor senator Clifford.
And thank you Mr president just
to echo I just want to think the
game and fish department for
knowing whose office this in
this young man to if you wanted
followed up and and just went
above and beyond for this young
man in the experience not
knowing that you know this bill
would would become so popular
and with the dust senator
have debate on Senate bill three
ninety two and I yield to
Senator Brandt followed by
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president with this with Senator
Mr president let me think about
that for a minute yes this would
be my first bill on the Senate
floor.
Senator Brandt Senator Sanchez
Mr president center I believe
you themean under the age of
eighteen.
Thank you Mr president center
would you qualify as a you.
presence so so these programs
are already available for for
our our youth out there.
Mr president center yes I only
a little lecture funding Mr
president Senator Mr presence
would be okay if we amended your
bill to put in you know
something about you know anyone
to check with my co sponsor.
Senator read.
You know that's a so I I really
appreciate you know the programs
that are fish and game
department does for our for
young people helping them
understand our environment
five so that people like me
could still be part of those
programs so thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Brandt we do have further
debate.
Steinborn thank you Mr president
senator do you know how many
species of wildlife and plants
there are New Mexico well you're
Senator Sanchez.
Mister president senator we're
Senator Sanchez Mr president
Senator seventy three.
This site is to present your
expert would you believe it if I
Okay he shaking his head he's
believing me so far.
Mr president Senator your expert
witness would you believe it if
I told you.
That there's over four thousand.
share with the body New Mexico
has four hundred for sorry four
thousand five hundred and eighty
three known.
species in the state of New
gentleman Mr speaker center
that's pretty amazing right.
Do you agree with that statement
senator Sanchez Mister president
endangered meaning there's
limited populations of them and
they can go out of existence all
together.
And that's something that
sometimes our state try to pay
Mr president center we do agree
with that awesome Mr presents
and I mention this to you
because I think this is
something really important some
feedback I have on this this
this bill that you have is that
to educate young people about
these four thousand.
Five hundred whatever species
with educating about threatened
care of this earth in these
wildlife after we're all gone
and so we need to teach you
about this and teach about the
environment and that education
part of it which is part of your
fine but can we agree Mr speaker
Senator and your expert that
some of it should really be
about education about just
nature in the needs and all that
good stuff he shaking his head
hope that we can encourage came
efficient they're listening that
this also be part of educational
programs to enrich our young
people but I thank you and
sponsor but I just want to rise
and support and I was very
impressed by meeting his expert
witness earlier today and he
immediately knew the bill number
need immediately knew what is a
big three points for and I'm
very impressed with them and and
the chamber say no objection.
Further debate with senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield senator Sanchez
deal.
I'm looking at the F. I. R. on
this bill.
And I'm noticing that there
might be a.
Minimally positive fiscal impact
guess my concern though is that.
The game protection fund will
actually lose some money based
on this fiscal impact report it
says that there is a
Mister president senator.
To we need to send this to the
Senate finance committee for
them to take a look at that do
you think we should do that.
Senator Sweetser do agree.
Mr set Mister president senator
that's the right answer.
Now Mr president I appreciate
coolest things that I have done.
As I've served as get a chance
to work with.
Young young adults like his
expert witness
and and actually get it right so
you get it down to the floor so
I'm not going to make another
motion the Senate the Senate
finance but I just wanted to
stand up and.
Give you a little bit of love
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill three ninety
two amendment sponsored by
Senator Baca.
amendment number one to Senate
bill three ninety two.
See no objections center market
explain what has amendment as.
I thank you Mr president you
know I think this is a pretty
it a it delays the enactment of
this bill.
Indefinitely.
Thank you Senator Baca centers
Mr president Senator we would
find this as an unfriendly but
amendment I think I've ever
seen.
Senator is very debating Senate
floor member number one.
Two Senate bill three ninety two
Senator Baca close I thank you
Mr president and I
you know this this bill is
really a great idea and in all
not not just a not just a
neighbor of mine down in
Valencia County but I consider
my brother I consider him one of
the his family is close to my
There has been a withdrawal of
Senate floor amendment number
one.
But we do have another floor
amendment.
president of the sponsor please
yield Senator Sweetser do you Mr
president I do.
Thank you Mr president senator
Sanchez which please ask your
braid in your expert I know we
have three Pirtle kids but other
than six youth hunters are there
any other youth hunters in the
state how many would be
impacted.
support of this thank you Brady
for bringing this forward on on
behalf of Kate and restyling
they thank you as well and we
stand support of all the youth
the great youth hunting programs
have center how to meal followed
by Senator Stewart Mr president
with the sponsor yield center
such as detailed Mr president I
do.
road ATV program with helmets
and archery in schools.
Center thank you Mr president I
don't have any further questions
but I do want to thank his
all over New Mexico and so I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward for your
expert witness thank you thank
you senator Neville we do have
further debate we have Senator
Stewart.
Senator this is kind of taking
me back nine years ago when I
had my first bill here and they
could cover the liabilities
Foley and so that song I sang
was the wheels on the bus.
I occasionally have nightmares
about that.
song so could you ask your
expert if you can think of just
a short little song that he
knows that you know that might
relate in some way to having a
Mr president Sir we're going on
a few words but we're gonna try
Mr president here you go.
You and me going Fishin in the
Mr president center you are just
the best sport I've ever seen
thank you for that and think
that expert witness and maybe
you need to single more with him
so you have a little better
Excuse me senator Morris.
Mr president that I got moved up
this present in body one bank
of.
there and do at one of our lakes
they do a lot of gifts for the
kids they do a lot of taking of
the fish they make it a full day
things that are different it
takes us back in time to things
that we did as a kid but in less
they're out doing.
forward having this idea and to
be able to see it happen on the
house floor of the Senate is
really important for me and I'm
sure that he'll remember this
day forever but I totally
Say no further debate.
Etcetera etcetera etcetera
thanks for with this to close.
Thank you Mr president thank you
bill three ninety two do pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that all records
shown that the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
Senator is we are on a roll call
Senators your seat.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator about this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg sorry.
Can I start over Mr.
Brandt.
Senator Brandt votes no center
for.
Senator Burt both snow Senator
Senator Duhigg votes yes center
guy across.
No Center guideposts votes no
center Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
His centreman votes yes inner
hip health center can help those
CS Senator Hickey.
Senator meal Senator meal votes
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan votes yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Moores boats yes
entering your house.
Senator Neville.
Center Neville both CS Center
o'neill.
Yes Senator Padilla both CS
Center Pinto.
Senator Pinto votes no center
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Center pope.
votes yes interest smitteez.
Senator smitteez about snow
Center Sedillo bass yes a
request to explain my vote
Shendo.
Senator Shendo votes CS
Intersil's Center so small CS
interested phonics Center Stefan
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth votes no Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes no center
Stuart.
Mr president.
Senator Wirth unanimous consent
to change my vote from no to
yes.
Seeing no objection.
We'll have a reconsideration of
the vote.
This.
Mr president I move that the
vote in their formative except
of those voting the negative by
show of hands Senator is where
voting all senators to your
seats please.
firm is in the negative Senate
bill three ninety two has duly
passed the Senate we have center
CO Lopez and Senator Pirtle to
expand their vote centers the
Lopez thank you Mr president I
just want to congratulate my
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president give a use of fish
feed him for a day teach you how
to fish the state gets his
license fees for the rest of his
lifetime.
made me blush a lot but thank
you for all the stuff I
appreciate all of you thank you.
miscellaneous senator Peter
Wirth I thank you Mr president
or Pinto had some special guests
and we want to make sure we get
a chance to introduce them
on our day so you'll to Senator
today in front of us had the
pleasure of performing up in the
rotunda and so they are here
there from eva B. Stokely
This is a state bilingual
multicultural program it's in
its twelfth year it's one of the
longest running bilingual
here are mistrusting Joan Smith
so Libya and Janet Charles
members of the body please
welcome my guest here a little
Thank you Senator Pinto.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms miss and we go back
to it or order business third
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the rules we suspended
the record show that all action
this solely for placing Senate
bill number two on final passage
has been taken and it is now
that I have an expert witness
Senator if you identify who your
expert witnesses Mr president I
ask unanimous consent for the
Chief Justice of the Mexico's
proportion making to be present
Senator on this explained the
bill.
Is present is present this is a
piece of legislation that we
passed a strongly by this
is based on the federal
magistrate level but a little
bit differently the federal
magistrate level is the lowest
salary of the federal system the
this would tie that salary to
who are applying for a judgeship
so I just like to always
illustrate with this simple when
we had a last vacancy in the
federal system here in New
Mexico federal measure position
there were fifty applicants for
difference in lawyers with
experience and seasoning and the
broad range of skill in in all
areas a law that we're looking
for on the judiciary is is
what we did last year support
this bill.
Thank you senator Montez centers
we're debating Senate bill two.
Anyone wishing to debate Senator
could use to actually put this
into losses it was vetoed.
Mr president I assume that
you're referring to the an
override of the veto and you're
Instead of just doing a veto
override.
it doesn't really make sense to
me
you know as the last person
process if you would like effect
I could even start it for you if
you would like but it seems like
we don't need to run another
bill that's the same as the one
I'd be glad to the state.
The president and center could
you hum a few bars of that for
me please.
in office
I'm not really sure if there's a
song for that but yes it comes
with a price but you know
sometimes we have to have the
the governor can veto it again
thank you Mr president.
We are debating Senate bill two
we have further debate Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I just
stand to disclose that my
I'm not us individually that I
am still allowed to vote for the
bill but I feel comfortable
disclosing that that issue and I
constantly stand up and disclose
The same is present with the
bill sponsor yield please
Senator what is the you thank
very much Mr president and
etcetera so it's my
from last year okay Mr president
center
Could.
I I think it was very
disappointing.
To both the house and the Senate
that this was vetoed.
again this year Senator.
Mr president I think it
inappropriate for me to commit
to of the two all right but I
would tell you a couple things
that with the year of reflection
and perhaps the opportunity to
think about the issue with a
little bit more inside
information from the judiciary
the governor will see this.
With a little bit different
a.
A different sense or or is that
just your your your experience
with how the sessions going or
has it been specific
communication.
judiciary and the governor since
last year's session since the
veto and I think there's a group
a greater sense of a commitment
from the governor to the
legislation issue then and there
anything that's an appropriate
order box you and but I just
think that if if it's clear
during the debate as I'm sure
the fourth floor of somebody up
there is listing now if we can
that would would put.
Even more pressure on the
executive you just go ahead and
sign in now.
so that's what I was kind of
hoping for and maybe maybe will
be someone else stand up in the
time it does make sense and
happy to support it hopefully
won't get to the to this time
thank you Mr president thank you
people and not us individually
and that was my understanding of
the rules but I just heard from
the the vice chair of judiciary
judgment and so I ask unanimous
consent to be recused from this
vote.
Seeing no objection.
Any further debate senators.
appreciate the observations with
regard to the legislature's
authority when there is a veto
to take action that that not and
any good policy initiative and I
override session and I think
that that's important for us to
re establish the legislative
branch as a co equal branch on
the executive check amounts and
I would hope that would be true
whether a governor's Democrat or
the executive branch and the
legislative branch to the need
here in the need is to make our
salaries competitive with the
federal judiciary which is
competing for the same New
except those voting in the
negative slide show fans all
Senators tier seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative to the negative
Senate bill two.
affirmative to the native Senate
bill two has passed the Senate
Senator about this thank you Mr
president for isn't last year's
vote had for an opposition
issues only to I'm sure those
two is going to make all the
We're going on to the next item
on the counter that's item
number three Senate bill two
twenty three as amended.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
president members of the Senate
SB twenty two hundred twenty
three was born when I served on
the child support review
commission this past interim.
The bill has amended solves an
in the bill today and move into
the New Mexico administrative
code.
As long as those detail dollar
amounts remain in the statute
legislation to up the update
federal funding to the state.
This bill includes some
important guardrails to ensure
that the guidelines have both
upper and lower limits that are
tied to statute today with that
See no debate.
Senator Sedillo Lopez to close
in the bill.
affirmative except those voting
in the negative slide show hence
also register seats where
voting.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you members of the body thank
you Senator Peter Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous is
that we go back to it or
business announcements and
miscellaneous where that order
business announcements and
reports the reader to read.
This president your Education
Committee to who has been
referred house bill one fifty
senator William P. souls
chairman Senator souls I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion that the journal reflect
committee.
House joint memorial three as
amended.
Do pass respectfully submitted
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee part is been adopted
and the journal show they were
acted upon individually the
reader to read.
This presents your finance
submitted senator George when
you lost chairman.
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
do pass as amended.
Senate bill four sixty eight as
amended do pass respectfully
submitted senator George manuals
The those opposed may the eyes
have it the committee port has
been adopted in the journal show
they were acted upon
individually reentry.
that it do pass and that's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
respectfully submitted Senator
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually
hearing no objection the reader
to read.
Senate bill four fifty six do
not pass but that Senate
Senate bill four sixty four do
not pass with that Senate
conservation committee
substitute or Senate bill four
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill four seventy eight
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee.
recommendation as amended and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate joint resolution twelve
community park all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
All those suppose may the eyes
have it Canadian forces been
thirteen has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that a do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
the journal reflect their
actions on individually there
are no objection the reader to
read Senate joint resolution DO
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill to sixteen as amended
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator.
This president of the Canadian
airports we have a motion to
in the journal show their act on
individually.
This present your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate memorial fifty
seven has had it under
Kerry Hamblen senator cliff far
Pirtle co chairs Senator Hamblen
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report centers
we have a motion to adopt
committee report.
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Center
memorial fifty seven.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president we're gonna go back
bill nine is twice amended that
Senator Stewart unlawful access
to firearm by minor.
Senator Stewart.
line as twice amended on final
passage has been taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
Senator Stewart to explain the
bill.
amended it over here it's easier
to read that way just wanted to
have the body to be able to read
it.
So Mr president members of the
Senate.
A misdemeanor published a
punishable by up to a year in
jail and resulting in great
bodily harm or death a fourth
No crime is committed if the
minor obtains the fire arm in
the following situations if the
firearm is kept in a locked
person within close proximity.
If the firearm is locked with
the safety device that rural
renders it inoperable or if the
minor obtains the firearm in
Every year thirty three teens
and children die by guns half of
these deaths or suicide forty
Albuquerque was killed by a
classmate who brought his
parents going to school.
Hargrove we shot six times as he
brother with his father's gun
his father is Santa Fe police
officer kept his gun in a
kitchen cabinet behind coffee
mugs.
mandate that owners secure their
fire arms while another fifteen
states have passed these cap
laws similar to house bill nine.
store fire arms so that children
cannot gain access polling
conducted in twenty twenty to
confirm that sixty five percent
again this year by introducing
house bill nine child access
prevention bill which will hold
adults responsible for keeping
guns out of the hands of
Mr.
I think.
ago I introduced the state
storage bill but it wasn't
constitutional and since then I
have learned a lot about.
proud of this bill because of
all of the sponsors have worked
so hard to make sure that it is
constitutional it does comply
is a spill on H. B. line is
twice amended.
Senator Mr president I know
share you go ahead and talk.
Mr president it is my pleasure
for pleasure.
Mr president I gladly yield to
the gentleman from the northwest
Center share Mr president I
think he's busy at the moment.
but in New Mexico certainly
children can only rifles.
So would not be more appropriate
Senator Mr president so the
reason I ask that is because
there are certainly people that
have you know of a fear of
the the the sixteen year old
agency.
Is not brandishing which it also
talks about in here I just
carrying it is carrying it from
New Mexico and the soul of the
certainly I can see the the part
about you know waving a firearm
around that ought to be a
problem but.
That's different I think than
what the in the intent is here
so I that's why I think that
hand gun makes a lot more sense
to the purpose of the bill.
And
rifle to the
The gun shop to get it worked on
or things like that but it might
be out in public and so you know
of a
gun store to have it worked on
that could be.
That can be is it considered
intimidation by people that just
have a natural fear of firearms.
question Mr president Senator Mr
president I believe the
amendment is here that's correct
we do have a floor amendment.
The reader to read.
Senator Steven P. Neville
Senate Bill to move and explain
the amendment Mr president I
moose informing the number one
to house bill nine is twice
amended.
nine Chevy pickup had a gun rack
in the back window and I had a
shot gun there were during dove
season and.
Twenty two rifle the rest of the
year and that's not uncommon in
their children are often allowed
to do things with firearms that
may not be appropriate
Albuquerque and I grant you
sponsor that your car culture
your culture totally different
add the following with the
authorization of the minor's
parents or guardian for lawful
hunting lawful recreation use or
any other lawful purpose not
changing the intent of the bill
and if some incident happened
With the not this would not
apply them to the to those
parents so that's what the
amendment does and I'll stand
Daymon Martinez who works
currently for the City of
Albuquerque.
Seeing no objection is sergeant
Larson please escort our expert
witness into the chamber and
I see no objections sergeant
artist please escort.
Our expert witness into the
chamber.
So Mister president I need to
Senator could also check on
that.
Well I consult my expert witness
thank you chair Mister president
Madam.
Senator Stewart so Mister
president senator we we don't
think this is friendly we also
don't think we need it because
this bill really is focusing on
kind of storing of this firearm.
Senator is.
Senator debate senator member
number one senator bill to to.
The misdemeanor and or felony
depends with cases.
If an incident happened with the
young person who is given full
permission to to have the
there would be some protection
assurance for the.
Of for folks not just rural but
for folks that allow their young
people use of illegal firearms.
at number two under C. on that's
really all already covered
because this is when the minor
will not will be exempt or when
exemptions because this is
exemptions for when you don't
have to to be in safe storage.
Centers we're debating senator
president need the sponsor the
moment T. O. but rise to urge my
colleagues approach the
amendment very cautiously hi you
very much appreciate the
Which allows and recognizes that
sometimes a minor may have of a
weapon or firearm for lawful
hunting lawful recreation the
the reason I urge members to
That that is so broad and ill
defined that what we're really
doing is we're saying you can't
do this unless you can do so for
a lawful purpose and that
there's a circularity to that
exemption that I could support
we're it's a minor in possession
of a firearm under the direction
authorization of their parent or
guardian but I think there has
that says that the authorization
would be for any lawful purpose
that language being so broad and
again without any definition
really could be argued to make
number one we have Senator Lopez
on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president the bill
also does not even cover a minor
who is simply transporting a
weapon because a minor as used
minor with intent to intimidate
or injure a person so simply
carrying a firearm would not
subject them
to coverage by this bill.
Senator detailed yes hello you
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president senator I didn't quite
catch
your rebuttal to the amendment
with regard to proximity can you
And and thank you Mr president
and senator I am
curious as what we're going to
consider as close proximity with
section but what would close
proximity to include in this a
portion.
Mr president if you look at the
first part of that sentence it
adult here so if
the minor is in possession of
Maybe if Google use go out and
the adult stays at the pick up
truck and the two Utes get maybe
three hundred yards away is that
close proximity what are we
they're out hunting hunting
somewhere over here somewhere
over there it doesn't matter
we're not talking about children
that are out with their parents
mean to conflate this to be able
to talk about where kids are
with their parents all the time
this just says you know in that
really need to be clear in the
legislation what we want the
dust to do not leave it so much
to interpretation but I will say
I do stand in strong support of
culture what we do for fun a lot
of times you'll you'll stick
your nose up in the air would
you find out what we do for fun
but you know what we enjoyed
it's simple there's not a lot of
issue with some of the things
boxes twenty two ammo and go
shoot jackrabbits till two
thirty in the morning.
And there wasn't I guess
somebody over the age of
eighteen or a guardian anywhere
were on a friend of ours ranch
and we were helping control the
pest population of rabbits and
we were all minors and we were
doing it legally and so I I
think there is some concern here
ambiguity ambiguity with the
language or any other lawful
purpose because there are only a
few things that are lawful with
a firearm now and so I think
those are the those are well
Senator Brandt on the amendment
thank you Mr president and
I also rising in support of this
in the see your doctor as
California and within walking
distance was the National
Forest.
I had a hunting license.
And I would take my.
With this bill currently with
the with the sponsor of the bill
yield.
Senator.
Mr president so.
wouldn't apply to you because
you own the gun it was will to
you.
Senator Brandt so Mister
present Senator wears a state
that in the bill.
isn't about hunting it's not
about gun that you own as a
child because it was will to you
to chase to consumers had been
cut off so I live in Albuquerque
now but I certainly understand
these issues I believe the bill
is written so it does not
That it doesn't so let's say
that gone hadn't been will to me
and that was my father's gun and
so my father said you know use
it anytime you want to go on to
squirrels.
Whether or not it's against the
law or not.
Based on their interpretation
we're the ones will be put law
and put in the law.
And I don't understand the issue
father's given him permission to
do that.
I mean I just don't I don't I
don't understand
we're trying to make sure this
is clarified so we don't have a
Says that a child is anyone
under the age of eighteen.
Thank you Dr for the can have a
gun.
because the although it's not
that far of a drive to the
National Forest in fermentable
kirke.
Because we live in a state where
there's all kinds of National
So it doesn't take very far to
go hunting in the state and I
don't think this bill is clear.
Yes a young person who wants to
that gives them permission but I
think that this amendment
clarifies that thank you Mr
president any further debate on
the amendment we do have further
debate on the amendment with
Senator Woods.
So with this I've got.
Two grandsons and a
granddaughter that live out
there.
left in those pick ups in case
we come across an issue that we
may need to kill something.
Is there a rattle snake of
Scone.
packrats but if anybody ever had
a vehicle get infested with
packrats you much.
The unbelievable how much damage
they can do and if you could
Then we have those farms out in
those pick ups and and my
grandsons are minors even though
they both that hunter safety
In that situation of with this
bill with with the.
Something happening with the
president.
Should be looking into you
should be looking to to.
Mr president I would just a
sponsor of the of the amendment
if you would comment on that.
that would
because you if it's your firearm
to be charged.
If your grandson did something
to criminal prosecution as I
understand it and have a the
Sanchez I am I correct deal to
sponsor but I think that's what
the bill does is that correct.
stored and that child gets set
like the two instances that I
mentioned.
Mr president I think that's the
point of the bill and I I don't
proposing is for the situation.
When you have allowed your
grandson to use a firearm and
they do something that's
teenager does something that
Is is not right or accidentally
the brandish it in front of the
the local John armor or the
the felony or and or the a
misdemeanor is whatever the case
is
because you did allow them to
have access to the firearm and
they went and did something
that you as the owner of the
firearm that authorize your
teenager to go do something
proper and they didn't do
something then do things right
so this is about.
it's about protecting you your
legal position in the event
something unusual happens like I
have just described.
Etcetera what.
you would yield Senator Woods
detailed.
Yes Mr president Cinemark's Mr
president Senator sounds like in
your neck of the woods yet a lot
eat pack rats and rabbits.
You know they do when they get
to very thick
I don't know how graphic to get
here is anybody eating.
Mr president so if one were
her her
system was not large enough for
that kid to get out that echoed
And with that situation.
I'm gonna shoot ever co that I
can choose Mr president.
Senator Moores thank you Mr
Senate committee.
Is present
I'm I'm looking at your
amendment and the language is
familiar because the language of
lawful hunting recreational use
And so Mister president and
senator.
If the we talk about the
scenario where you are trying to
amendment in your opinion are we
increasing your liability for
providing a firearm to a minor
to go hunting.
That is exactly my point you
could inadvertently be charged
with a misdemeanor or felony
depend on the circumstance when
your teenage son goes out and
Thank you Mr president and
etcetera that that's why I
really support this amendment
and I I think we have current
law if someone provides a
this language in this bill is
now we're not talking about the
adult having intent you know
providing farm Hey go go hurt
someone now it's just saying if
you just legislative negligently
understand this I mean this is
not overly broad this is
directly I mean you you're this
is directly from the
constitution of the state of New
Mexico.
that raised other lawful
there's an intent for harm it
just says they use it in a
manner that causes great bodily
harm so if they go hunting and
they shoot and it causes great
bodily harm to somebody whether
it if we don't take this
ammendment I am concerned that
we are going to a bridge that
ride because you are now adding
liability to the adult.
does and I think when when we're
talking about fire legislation
eight it's really does us good
to include and and take
constitution says consider that
we we don't I really don't
believe it's the intent of the
bill to add liability to an
adult for providing firearm for
for hunting I really don't and I
think this is a very fair
on the amendment thank you Mr
president the intent of the
amendment is not to alter the
bill it is just to give some
clarity and some comfort to the
folks particularly in rural
mind in knowing that if they
allow their youngster to do
something that would.
Happen today without this bill
and something goes awry it would
young person who did something
improper would be punished
accordingly but to punish the
parent for something that is in
a inadvertent his is just not
Senators we're voting to your
seats please.
Where voting on senator member
number one if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Center male voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Senator my SS voting no.
Senator Ortiz C. Pino voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator McKenna voting no.
Senator is the Lopez voting no.
Senator thank you Mr president
for ****.
We do have another floor
amendment the reader to read.
amended amendment sponsored by
senator William E. share.
Senator to move in a statement
president I move Center for
excitement just give a moment
Senator so the members can get.
The Amanda handed to them.
You Mr president we have to wait
to senator Sanchez gives the
okay I understand.
is this is really for
you know the English teacher of
on page three it says.
securely stored or kept in a
location that a reasonable
person would believe to be
secure when obtained by a minor
repetitive and redundant and we
ought not be repetitive and
redundant both at the same time
sounds superfluous to me.
Thank you senator Senator that
at the amendments and context
because that portion was amended
and that certainly having it be
at how we amended the bill in a
bipartisan manner I might add in
Judiciary to make that language
read better.
Do is the.
The one in context and certainly
I ask Legislative Council to to
draft this.
kept in a locked container and
securely stored so I'm not sure
what locked container and
Senator Stewart Mr president we
want both.
We want both in the bill it's
line so it reads that was either
kept in a locked container.
And was securely store.
For.
and judiciary and we just pulled
it out put it back in and had a
good time with it so I think it
reads well now.
Was securely stored.
So kept in a locked container
Of a gun safe of of box that you
can put a single a single
handgun in in.
A gun safe which is bigger new
we're going to go redundant and
repetitive and superfluous would
that be enough or do we or we
just happy with just redundant
and repetitive.
stored or kept in a location
that a reasonable person would
believe to be secured I believe
that's proper English I believe
might be better this is the
policy coming over from the
house that this is how they
wanted to read we just maybe
read better.
Senator sure we we do have
others on the list I wish to
amendment because you can have a
locked container and not have it
be securely stored one example
that I've heard is somebody who
and so it that securely stored
is important
And then the second part captain
location the reasonable person
would believe to be secure
be able to afford a large
container that is you know a
quicklaw container or something
like that and then based on the
circumstances for example if you
It might not satisfy the second
so both of those are necessary
to protect the public.
Senator share to close on the
amendment.
So Mister president.
Locked container number one
In a location where a reasonable
person would believe it's secure
absolutely.
But all three of them.
all three of those okay one
would be enough kept in a
location that was the regional
person would believe his secure
but I left you with to.
I left you with kept in a locked
If it's not were a reasonable
person would consider it secure
because it was a jewelry box
that had a little baby lock on
This is just this is just a I'm
surprised the judiciary let this
get that out because you know
they they have a habit of.
Of
that Mr president I move that up
Senate floor amendment number
two to house bill nine is
already three times amended do
now pass can ask unanimous
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator want this voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator McKenna voting no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator souls voting no.
Senator Nancy Rodriguez voting
no.
Senator Hamblen voting now.
How does the body I accidentally
support the amendment what I
meant to say aye opposed the
amendment.
We're back actually we are not
back in the bill we do have
for the thank you Mr president
use consent to excuse enter when
you us until he returned to the
chamber.
Hearing no objection.
Centers we're back on the bill.
followed by Senator Pirtle.
Then Senator Brandt Senator
Gallegos.
Paul Jones I was out of the
chamber for the start of the
bill but I do have a couple
questions Senator deals I have
to deal.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr pro tem um trying to figure
out
at home and kept her protection
in her night stand mixer which
she with your bill be a
criminal.
defense of another person.
At four in C..
So that would be an exception
A criminal Mr this presents
center Senator Stewart.
Mr president only if one of her
Mr president and then pro tem
I thought earlier it had to be
the exceptions is for the.
Person one of the exceptions as
for self defense.
then she can have that farm for
her protection in her house I'm
and unsecured in her night stand
as long as your children do not
Mr president center so if.
If her kids it goes madam
president Mr president a man pro
ten with one of the amendments
decide to take that farm knowing
that she has that there for
protection how then president
center would that be her fault.
That's when the crime is
committed.
When children get these guns and
kill other people heard other
people take them to school way
lives we've tried to write this
to cover everything certainly
that sounds like a complicated
situation to me but if she is
doing that for self defense
Mr president and then pro
tempore generally our legal
system doesn't punish someone
for collect criminal acts of
someone else and I see this in
French president center I do
have a lock box
if someone were to Mr president
center break into my house break
into my lock box would that make
Senator.
Is present in center Madam pro
If it is used when present of
Mister president Senator David
I'm still not the criminal it's
the person the broken my
vehicles at understand Mr
etcetera I still see that we're
putting.
Honest law abiding citizens I
into an area that can put them
in as criminal and
another topic is present thank
you thank you thank you senator
because we do have further
debate Senator Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president I'm
sorry I did stand up earlier to
written the bottom of page two
is you have to lock it in a box
put in the state for the drop in
the bottom of the lake in order
asleep on the couch and awoke by
the sound of my front door being
violently kicked.
Well thank god that my gun
get the person who's trying to
kick my front door down to stop
because now their life was in
danger.
and so I think there's there's a
lot of issue with this because I
understand there's for self
But it's against the law if you
have it somewhere you can access
it and then one of your children
god for bid do something else
with it.
crime to the cops show up and
you have a pistol accessible is
not locked away that's not a
crime is only crime if then
somebody takes that farming
commits a different crime with
have the farm acceptable for
whenever.
Somebody with ill intent comes
to my house
are not toys that we don't play
with them that you know I'm
gonna at least high did the best
I can but this idea of having of
a firearm for defense that's in
sponsor the yield I do
appreciate the intent I really
do.
with all sincerity Mr president
and
Madam pro tem I just don't think
that although they have great
intent I don't believe we'll
achieve what we all in this
building want to achieve and
that's an into these senseless
acts but the the unfortunate
thing but I just would hate to
see somebody who accidentally
leaves a pistol or a firearm out
their child does something with
slammer for a period of time so
you can really have time to
think about it thank you Mr
president we do have further
debate on the bill Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and I I
have a few concerns on the bill
and I do thank you first for
some of the
If
You were talking about self
defense and that that's covered
in the bill.
Not that the firearm can be
accessible for the minor in for
self defense but only if the
excesses that in the course of
Senator so Mister president if
But the course of self defense
that that just means.
Whatever you're doing to defend
If it's locked up.
Mr president that's the idea of
the bill we certainly want it to
This primarily is a safe storage
with these exceptions.
Otherwise if I'm storing it in
my.
Budget stand next to my bed.
For self defense.
Then that wouldn't count.
see first a person does not
violate subsection a or B. so
they're not guilty of a
misdemeanor or a fourth degree
Was carried on the person that
they're with
was locked with the farm safety
device that didn't work in the
course of self defense or
them from but the first order is
that the gun has to be kept in a
us keep for store the firearm in
I miss press I did not hear the
question.
Could you remind us of the
definition of minor in this
bill.
If my.
Seventeen year old son.
And I'm giving philosophical
Well first of all I don't how I
would because I'm not allowed to
give him the combination to my
gun safe but if he does and gets
Some is present it doesn't sound
like it was negligently stored
it was in a gun safe.
What about if my firearm is
capped at my bedside.
the evening if someone tries to
break in it's there.
And that I did do by the way
with my children they knew
exactly where my gun was and I
What if my son Brenner just
remind you go to the Chester
president sorry one of my son
Takes the gun and.
yard carrying the gun on in a
holster on his on his belt.
Senator.
We can't where would that be
covered.
Senator yeah the floor it wasn't
clarify that because you know so
you know I I appreciate Senator
Pirtle sharing his story and
I'll just say we live in a
Twice.
Someone tried to break into my
home.
Fortunately I kept the shot gun.
Barking like crazy I thought my
oldest son and suck out the
house again.
I go to the door and someone is
trying to Jimmy the door open.
Happened twice within just a
couple months.
So.
I want to make sure that it's
Knowing our kids in those
situations not me my family or
the person that tried to break
into my house please never did
find them but none of us died.
guns can be used for self
defense.
In fact.
In Heller.
the yourself with the gun you
had to keep it in operable.
As H. B. line requires the
Supreme Court has H. behind
requires as this the Supreme
That firearms in the home be
rendered in captain operable at
all times this makes it
impossible for citizens to use
them for the court lawful
What was the what was the the
store what was the what what was
it that the supreme court said
was keeping a firearm
inoperable.
The law of the law in the
That was in operable.
Didn't say that you had to.
Keep it where you couldn't use
it.
times by law enforcement
Albuquerque.
take you can ask the commander
for someone to kill you.
Senator well it depends.
For someone to break into your
home.
Senator it depends on your home
isn't designed to keep guns away
from you that's why we don't
say you need a lock box you need
to separate out the ammunition
from your children that's all
this does.
And we certainly have exemptions
from a charging parents with
these crimes which we have a
parents are negligible and
negligent and when they're not
so almost all of the
we're talking about here so
You know I I understand the
concern about this but I'm
hundred eighteen are wounded are
suicides among youth have gone
up our homicides of course have
gone up gun deaths by intent
gun deaths in the states we have
twenty three states that have
the self storage cap child
eighty five percent fewer
unintentional injuries state
storage laws incentivize better
practices with researchers
home your personal property so I
believe that we have crafted a
good bill certainly Judiciary
made good changes to it every
The president does senator thank
you I did ask you those
questions but I appreciate the
The information.
How many people die from a child
getting a hold of their
other legally obtained drugs.
But we're not doing anything
Nothing about those is used to
protect myself when someone
breaks into my home.
Yet.
In our state there's a lot more
people dying.
From road accidents due to D. W.
eyes.
But we don't.
Right.
This presents senator.
For every complex problem
Mr president we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
move
foreman number two to House Bill
number nine a stress and.
Sen of action Senators maybe
Israel's final gentleman does
If this man is put on.
I come from a very pro gun
district.
Nine tell you stories about
that.
Got some funny stories but I
what this what this does is that
there's a problem and I very
much respect the sponsor putting
in that number four exception in
the course of self defense it's
great.
exercise not in the course of
self defense let me give you a
couple reasons number one if
it's in a gun safe takes too
long to get number two if if you
have a like a key trigger lock I
hands would be shaking and I
don't think I could keep my cool
enough to get those tiny little
keys they're they're they're
pretty small to to get in one of
these locks.
is what centers pirtle and
Brandt have been talking about
so all this does is it makes
number four the self defense
member number two and I yield to
the sponsor Senator Stewart.
Mr president this is also on
friendly I I understand the the
negligently cetera that's the
standard this creates a new
standard and doesn't even have
to work responsibly and that so
Senator Baca followed by Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you Mr president and thank
managed to yield a yield Mister.
So Mr president and senator so
so let me understand this
If you are following this law
properly.
Well Mister president center I
actually wouldn't quite go that
far I wouldn't say it's
impossible I would say it's
Well actually no I actually I
take that back in the I would
take that back Senator I I was
going to give you an example of
if it's stored in a safe and
then the minor gains access and
because it's going to be readily
accessible and it's impossible
to keep in a way that you're
gonna use it quickly in self
defense I I I I would agree with
Of the yes I'm trying to think
of that scenario where Mr
president where I've followed
this this new law correctly and
I've kept it in the lock
container.
Then how could a person to use
it in self defense I I see that
that would not be possible so
thank you thank you for the
clarity on that Mr president
thank you senator we do have
the amendment yield Senator
managed to you'll mistrust.
Mr president and etcetera I
appreciate your amendment and
actually solve some problems but
gives me an opportunity to have
it in a it usually just a
acceptable assessable location
going backwards Mr Mr president
went through the scenarios the
of scenarios I had if the child
were to have a gun
for protection then it was not
If the wife has the farm there
for protection more things
through the violence a she's
gone through a year bill your
presence I under yes it would
now I would I would put a small
Astrid by that in that every
every home is is different the
of manner
but but the the scenario that
you lay out yes and I want to be
clear on this
If if you if you have a farm
that was access on a on a coffee
table.
You're gonna have a hard time
that especially the child harm
someone or themselves yes that's
one of all for this bill if we
take the amendment.
But if it's if you tell the
judge will judge they can exit
Senator Gallegos Mr president
etcetera a still living with
your amendment don't think I can
go as far as to vote for but it
makes me feel better but Mr
it take for you of from being
awakened from bed to get to your
safe to unlock it to load and
prepare yourself to protect your
depend if I.
Kept the gun it was in a safe I
don't actually own a gun safe
I'd I'd we do different sorts of
locks and things this is the way
my home my home is set up
so I can't really give you a
about sixty seconds to just to
get down there and then another
two minutes would like I said
it's it's hard to say I mean I'd
say at least three minutes the
reason is because in a home
a key lock a gun safety lock
sorry a gun safe lock it you may
not even be in emailing me able
to get there has to be so just
so nervous but I'd say at least
wished you would written in a
I menopause for the person
coming into hurt this lady of in
your in your amendment so that
You have for them it further
debate on the amendment we have
center Maestas followed by
Senator Pirtle then Senator Ivy
Soto center Maestas thank you Mr
president with the.
Gentleman yield.
center my SS thank you Mr
president thank you gentleman I
may not ask you a question but I
want to be prepared Mr president
I think
There's just a bit kind of a
In a manner that negligently
disregards of minors ability to
access the fire so that's where
the first prong of the of the of
Would not attach there would be
no crime but this is the crux of
the matter as it relates to to
folks safety and concerns of
home home defenses up like this
You know in a way programs is
not really necessary but
paragraph C. says a person you
know specifically doesn't
violate this statute.
or when it's within the person's
immediate control in other words
if the person's home.
This this statute yield was when
the when the parent is not home.
And take it to school or take it
down the street or take it
wherever and so if a person
feels compelled to sleep with a
nine millimeter underneath her
bill becomes law because it's in
your possession it's in the
person's immediate control.
Mr present I read this does
control so I want to get too
controversial with cut cowboy
fans but we all know how that
playoff game turns out every
year but it's in your immediate
control Mr president you're not
family that you can't currently
due to date.
So I think there's just a
misnomer with regards to to what
prompted this this this
amendment I totally get where
president Representative further
debate we're still on the
amendment to have Senator Pirtle
followed by Senator something
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president thank you senator for
bringing this amendment I think
written is still Mr present when
you read it that was.
Either kept in a locked
container and was securely
stored or kept in a location
those reasonable person would
and how a lot of people do that
for security purposes I can tell
you I do have a safer that's
because that's where all my
extra farms go Mr president the
ones that I don't use for self
the the real misnomer here is
that there's not a crime
committed when my firearm is in
the fake clock.
stored away this is a common
defense.
But it would be if for some
reason a child got a hold of it
and and god forbid committed
suicide.
written it doesn't make not
storing your fireman I I wish
you know we could get that
straight that having it on the
table three hundred sixty four
days out of the year would not
storage or storing it out of
sight from from kids in a
consistent manner that's not
what this bill addresses and I
think that's one of the biggest
issues with it Mr president so
stated earlier that if the
parents home somehow it's not a
crime at that point no in here
to see if with grandma's home
and and the kiddo gets a hold of
really this amendment makes it I
don't know if I could support
the bill I would have to really
consider it I think this makes
it do exactly Mr president
with with the way it's written
I think it does put a little bit
of protection for those people
that will still secure them
maybe not in lock box inside of
technology which I don't think
the bill really addresses that
there are things like that and
so this would just make it where
those of us that like to keep
firearms call.
debate we are in the minute
Senator Ivey Soto.
This president
So I I I just want to.
Unpack a couple things on your
proposed amendment.
As senator Maestas was pointing
out.
The crime.
And to.
No matter access is the firearm
and displays a branches fireman
threatening manner cause injury
to the bottom of the person not
result in great bodily harm or
self defense.
I guess I guess I want to go
with a with a hypothetical that
was raised of of keeping it in
kids than I can count at the
moment
and I'm sure a few more to come
but the.
I I go to bed after my doctor's.
In any way violated.
This.
Statute because because my
daughter's going to bed.
As I get ready to go to go to
work if I lock the.
Your.
Then.
that scenario why do we need
this ammendment.
Mr president Senators Senator.
Mr president and senator I think
but I think you're covered right
now in in your scenario so I I'm
not considered I'm not concerned
about your scenario about you
being charged
to vote for the bill but
Okay so so that's another
scenario this president Senator
speed is let's say that I'm
Except now instead of a nine
year old I've got.
Sixteen year old which means
that I go to bed and she gets
up.
I've letter no trainer because
of that in that right because
that's what a responsible gun
owner does a printer.
And so every morning.
Before I leave for work I check
every night are but every
morning I checked to make sure
the gun is there.
How I violated.
Hi violated anything in this
But I I don't think how we train
our children is in the bill I
think you'll be very difficult
to legislate that.
I I actually thought about that
even I think last year I thought
ability.
We're talking about a physical
ability you know if you have a
if you keep a gun way up you
that they physically could.
Access the firearm but they're
trained not to.
And that's one of my concerns
senator Munoz I.
You know it's difficult to
legislate good parenting is
difficult to legislate.
Confidence and public officials
it's it's it's you know there's
certain things we just.
I see an end in other words if
the if there was a period.
Right if a person could of the
crime that the person gives a
star firearm in a manner that
that was Jill just guards
matters ability to access the
Sanchez didn't appear there they
put a semicolon followed by an
and.
So that doesn't get you charged
will get to charge them.
Is that in addition to that.
To the minor to another person.
I would use the use the second
example of keep you got next to
front door if if my daughter
It would be negligent for me to
leave that connects to the front
door because there's other kids
of the house and I'm trying I
don't know what their
experiences are with cuts.
I would move that back to my
bedroom on those nights.
it's the end.
That exist there on page two
line one.
assurance in terms of this bill.
And that and that as I read the
amendment that you've written
that I understand where you're
coming from on this ammendment.
do respectfully disagree with I
think the the concern is that we
don't know what's gonna happen
in the future right.
we we don't know it in and after
Intentionally or accidentally
now brandishing is covered
brandishing is clearly defined
in the bill though.
That's that's with intent.
up today tells us that
responsible gun owners must
thoughtfully and carefully
evaluate their homes who is in
their home what the situation is
someone develops a mental health
problem in your home well that
should probably affect the way
that you store your firearms.
But how can we provided all of
They're impossible to rule out
because it's impossible for the
going on gun or can predict the
future and know if they're going
to use that firearm to cause
great bodily harm and it could
by the minor totally unintended
it was captain a manner to be
you know it will be with you
know in various various
and I somebody so that that's my
concern I I what I'm saying is
if you can tell a judge and
prove to him or her that this
was in a a reasonable place for
don't see how we can we can
store firearms and and then also
try it be held responsible for
not predicting the future
the summer party scenario.
Leave the gun by the front door.
I think it's negligent.
And I wake up in the middle of
the night to find that the to
the sound of a gunshot.
Your record for bed.
does that can get their how they
can get in our hand it happened
because of my negligence.
I'm not the one to pull the
trigger of the one owns a gun
I'm the one responsible for the
home.
are with guns maybe I should
move the gun back to my bedroom
tonight.
That's the negligence we're
talking about.
That's been responsible.
Alright over the door and the
guns not there.
And so I don't think this bill
does not stop anyone.
From self defense.
This bill does not stop anyone
We're not trying to micromanage
how people do things.
Know your surroundings.
Know who's present.
And don't be negligent.
members of body so just just to
summarize this I I am okay
voting for the negligence peas
I'm okay with voting for the
feels like it's stored in a way
where there is I mean I'm
telling you your hands are
shaking your heart is beating
are you really going to be
And once again with this
ammendment we do allow the
responsible gun or to have a
reasonable storage plan.
people under understand what
what the intent of it is so once
again negligence is not okay but
micromanage these decisions for
every scenario in every
responsible gun owner in New
Mexico.
So once again I will keep my
promise keep my promise Mr
all want we do not want the
negligent storage of firearms.
In people's homes we do not want
are on drugs they got guns line
all over the house.
I would if I found out about
that I would withdraw my
children from that school.
I'd like to move Senate floor
amendment number two to House
Bill number nine stress amended.
And as for roll call vote.
the native by show of hands
centers is better requests for a
show of hands.
We're voting a senator member
number two if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting no.
Senator Maestas voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator Hemphill voting no.
Senator souls voting no.
pass the Senate Senator
committee.
Thank you very much Mr president
and like to thank everyone who
voted no for the amendments and
I don't have to have a five hour
town hall my district explaining
Misprision with the then pretend
yield again just a few more
questions Senator do yield yes I
will.
versus private safety in his
debate he talked about and he
will talk to you Mr Mr this
presents center is talking to on
the amendment that he brought up
considered a media control Mr
president Sir.
Mr president that's kind of a
messy answer
but it's not it's not well
defined it would be something
the DA would look at.
Senator gave us misprints
Self defense of self defense
we're not we're talking self
defense that's that's not part
of this.
That lady if that person had
left her home and had that farm
in her.
Senator Stewart.
Mr president would it would
depend in part on how old the
child was and what that child
did with.
she were to be in another part
of the house her child take the
farm from the drawer in leave
the back door
in that scenario Mr president
control if she's in the home I
would say she should be safe
because she still there
protecting your home this
presents center would that be
correct.
president center so if she's in
the home and child left would
she still be considered under
the media control if a child
left the home did anything with
immediate control of the weapon
that this is talking about.
It's as an exception.
This presents center that's why
I was asking the distance
A large room for for for the
kids are I'm just trying to set
up I would think of media
control would have a certain
distance between the owner of
Mr president you you pretty well
have to be able to see the
control see the firearm tab in
your immediate control it's the
these are complicated
That's why we made this bill the
way it is so that we're not
requiring lock boxes we're not
requiring certain things to
these kinds of life incidences
we believe we've crafted it well
enough to cover these other dust
can understand and see what's
know it's it's just hard to
answer you with I mean I'm
hearing from the do a ana
commander and and they're both
saying the same thing up but
areas are going to create pro
policyholder this one lady you
know this victim of domestic
violence I'll go on to next
question Mr president center so
Empty in the dresser and the
ammunition in another drawer and
the child came and went through
all the drawers to find the gun
answers to these scenarios
there's not enough information
so I apologize but you know I
just don't have an answer for
that.
Senator Gallegos.
center what constitutes
brandishing I've known to Kerry
my farm out to my truck what I'm
going to a.
misprision center Senate
president we certainly do thanks
to Senator Ivy Soto have a
definition of brandished
brandish means to display or
make a firearm known to another
Brandishing is threatening
people it's waving it around.
Many people are afraid of guns
brandishing means wrote Senator
Senator misprision Center and I
appreciate that waving in the
face point I do have my get my
granddaughter Kerri to my truck
and I just want to make sure
that as long as she's not
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield Senator Stewart
detailed.
Certainly.
Where we talk about that is
going to be in a locked
container and securely stored
Mr president sponsor the the
Or so and then agency president
and senator.
Then has to be in a gun safe for
we're not in a box for gun shave
potentially putsch the.
The gun owner in a negligent
doesn't require you to put it in
a locked box it certainly is
either kept in a locked
container and securely stored
doesn't require certain devices
but it does require you to
either keep in a locked
container that securely stored
or kept in a location that a
just struggling with reading it
exactly that way and I'm I'm
concerned that if you know if
you've got a a weapon firearm
with a.
door and in the closet I yes
but.
I'm afraid that that because
it's.
I I think we just leave it open
for for debate
It should certainly be secure.
Whether region shedding on the
on the bedside table for which
concerned about that so thank
you Mr president thank you
center.
Sinister and Mister president
you can also look on see see
so that says right there that
That you don't need a lock box
you can use that other device
thank you madam.
So Mister person I want to thank
the senators for this debate the
appreciate the debate
I just want to close with that
these child access prevention
children killed or injured in
unintentional shootings and
substantially reduce child gun
suicides this legislation
doesn't require gun owners to
criminal charges when a
negligently stored fire arm is
used by child to harm themselves
children that are being killed
it's certainly not always this
way but this is one message that
we can use here in New Mexico
I move that house bill nine as
the race amended do now pass and
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show the
register Caesar has been a
request for a roll call.
The clerk to Colorado.
Senator Baca.
Campos Senator Campos votes yes
interest about this.
Senator Vontaze both snow Center
diamond center diamond both snow
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs both snow Center
Hamlin Center Hamlin votes yes
inner entail center hand built
Senator Ivey Soto votes yes
center Hermio center media votes
yes inner Kernan Senator Kernan
both snow Center Lopes's.
Senator my Estes yes center my
centerman yes votes yes internet
avail.
Center Neville both snow Center
o'neill Center o'neill votes yes
pirtle center part of those snow
Center pope.
Center pope both CS Center
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez votes test
DO Lopez both CS Center share
center share votes no etcetera
Shendo center Shendo both snow
Center cells Center San votes
Stewart votes yes inner Tom in.
Center top.
Etcetera Thoman both CS Center
I would like to correct my vote
to be yes.
By a vote of twenty four in the
affirmative six in the negative
house bill nine is three times
amended has duly passed the
People in homes with good hand
guns more likely to be shocked
that this is an article from the
guardian which is
internationally just distributed
newspaper out of the Great
but a study published this week
suggested people who live with a
hand gun owners are shot to
death at a much higher rate will
think about it somebody comes
into your house with a gun.
self defense so I contend that
you're actually better off if
somebody comes in your house if
you have a gun in a lock box
you're better off leaving the
gun in the lock box because
three seventy eight as amended
and I yield to center there has
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
president cash finite financing
for twenty twenty three this
year a capital outlay with
general fund
rather than relying on bonding
projects we get to save quite a
bit of money and so this bill
merrily ensures that the savings
from not bonding that the state
Thank you center the biggest
Senators we're debating Senate
bill three seventy eight as
amended anyone wishing debate.
Representative Gaydos.
Is present with Senator yield
bonds in distribution have
is transfer it or determined yes
Mr president Senator guy a goes
first let me explain that this
going to we're not gonna have to
pay so we're gonna save it put
it into the gender into the
severance tax permanent fund for
ten years and then it generates
ninety two million in revenues
the market value of the fund is
kind of confusing but there's a
formula in statute that allows
four point seven percent of the
This presents center thank you
for that explanation I yield.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator any further debate
senators.
Si no further debate center the
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands also
senators to your seats please.
We're voting.
no objection.
If you wish to vote no please
By a vote of thirty nine the
formative zero the negative
Senate bill three seventy eight
amended and I yield to Senators
cels.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate health
and public affairs committee
objection Senator to explain the
bell Center souls explained the
bill.
They thank you Mr president what
this is is it's a temporary
three year suspension of.
shortage of workers that we will
not be charging license fees for
initial licenses and it's a for
three years ended after that
can do this within our own
department without any
additional money or fees for
putting in for up to cover the
licensing costs it's good
from other areas to move here it
is only for you the initial
license not for re licensing and
with that I'll stand for
questions senators we're
debating Senate health of public
detailed yes I will.
And thank you Mr president
Senator I'm trying to find which
specific licenses are going to
have the suspended fees.
licenses there were a couple of
professions that indicated that
they're happy still paying the
fees that it's not a problem
many of these are in areas like
education optometry
try and help fill those.
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
president I will just the state
for the body I I don't think I'm
I think this is great that we
can do these for those that
people to operate in the state
and and I I understand the the
need to do what we can but it's
kind of interesting to me that
you know we punch somebody in
Si no further debate center
source to close on the bill
thank you Mr president I move
that Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one eleven as
finished here suits.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Moores voting no.
I.
Thirty seven the affirmative one
three year time line at that
point we'll look at and see
whether we ought to extend
beyond that if it's being
affected thank you going to item
number six on today's calendar
Senate bill three eighty three
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objections Senator to explain
the bill I thank you Mr
president so the public
education department conducts
current state law is not in
compliance with federal
requirements so this bill brings
us into federal compliance so
PED can continue to perform the
amended.
Seen we do have debate Senator
percent above the.
Senator two thousand six excuse
me Senator guide.
Mr president I move that Senate
bill three eighty three as
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show thrill has been
three eighty three as amended
has passed the Senate Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president you do
look at I amended his motion
yield to senator Munoz Mr
president was she asking about
amending looks or something.
Mr present ask then consent of
the Senate the record show that
Mr president Senate bill two oh
two all it does is allow us to
study I. N. G. in higher ed we
hear about inequities in
qualities and and we looked at
scholarship we do lottery we see
this reaction to higher ed about
tuition increases and we're
trying to do a study to figure
out where are we really with I
questions senators are debating
Senate bill two oh two is twice
amended anyone wishing to
debate.
Say no debate senator Munoz to
vote in the president except
those one and negative by show
of hands also this tier seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
bill.
Two oh two is twice amended has
passed the Senate Santo Domingo.
Thank you Mr president and
manager looks there.
Thank god item number eight that
placing Senate bill one sixty
eight is twice amended on final
passage has been taken that is
now subject to debate amendment
and substitution seeing no
within the public health act to
add registered nurses who work
for hospice agencies to the list
of professionals who may
pronounce a death currently
CENIC centers we're debating
Senate bill one sixty eight is
twice amended.
Say no debate.
Senate that the record show the
rules been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senator seats where voting if
Senator Baca voting no.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative three in the nation
order of business thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business messages
from the governor or in that
order the Business messages from
the governor of the retreat.
president pro tem Stewart and
members of the Senate in
accordance with article four
section forty two of the New
Mexico constitution I hereby
submit to the Senate rules
committee the following
predecessor commencing upon
confirmation and concluded on
December thirty first twenty
twenty six.
William Phelps Anderson as a
member of the New Mexico
twenty eight and Raymond Joseph
Birmingham junior as a member of
the eastern New Mexico
university board of regents for
a term commencing upon
confirmation a concluding on
prior to final action by the
Senate respectfully submitted
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
the journal so the message from
the governor has been received.
the reader to read Mr president
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the house has passed
house bill two oh seven as
amended by the house House Bill
three sixty as amended by the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal so the message from the
house has been received.
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two fifty
one as amended has had it under
consideration and report same of
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
committee reports vote on them
with one motion in the General
flecked their active on
individually no objection the
reader to read.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
Senate bill three thirty four do
pass.
Senate bill four thirty do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted senator George when
The eyes have it committee
report has been adopted a
journal show they were acted
upon individually.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
that it do not pass but that
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty five do pass respectfully
signify by saying aye.
Those of those may.
The eyes have it the committee
fort has been adopted.
The reader to read Mr president
your Judiciary Committee to whom
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs Senator Hamblen Mr
port has been adopted and like
to announce to the members of
the body that the officers of
the Senate have signed an open
session Center memorial sixty.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
Post joint resolution I
introduced by Representative
Alcon for the military and
Veterans Affairs Committee a
joint resolution proposing an
hundred percent disabled
veterans and their widows and
widowers to veterans with less
than a one hundred percent
disability and their widows and
widowers and basing the amount
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee that's house joint
resolution I.
House bill one seventy five
eliminating the grant
administration agency creating
the crime reduction grant Fund
making an appropriation house
bill one seventy five house bill
House bill two forty introduced
by representatives worked as and
Castellano and act relating to
motor vehicles providing for a
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee.
That's house bill two forty.
a survivor or refund
beneficiary pursuant to the
public employees retirement act
the judicial retirement act the
survivor beneficiary House Bill
three oh four House Bill three
oh four hundred been read twice
by title is referred to Senate
health Public Affairs Committee
relating to education aligning
the uses of education savings
plans provided for in the
education education trust act to
that's house bill three forty
two.
House Bill three fifty three
introduced by Representative
south campus tax increment
development district declaring
an emergency house bill three
fifty three House Bill three
fifty three having been read
twice by title is referred to
Duncan and others and act
relating to motor vehicles
requiring the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
revenue department to apply for
a license to use Smokey bear
of issuance based on new
issuance and renewals making an
appropriation House Bill three
sixty three House Bill three
sixty three having been read
twice by title is referred to
I like that a Mister president.
The title is that House Bill
three sixty three.
a license to use a Smokey bear
image and name providing for the
issuance of Smokey bear fire
prevention special registration
plate providing for cessation of
send a text business vegetation
Committee Mr president isn't
that where the do with
cigarettes and isn't that we're
smoky the bear's fire started
the some matches and cigarettes
bear Senator.
What's the difference Mr
president that.
Well that's an English lesson
today.
to health insurance updating
coverage for individuals with
diabetes requiring consistent
and timely delivery of medically
necessary diabetic resources
been read twice by title.
Right rephrase that house bill
health health consumers at the
house health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirteen and act relating to
public projects and acting the
partnership board creating the
public private partnership
project fund providing for an
exemption to the procurement
code authorizing grants loans
delayed repeal requiring reports
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirteen.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to thirteen.
House government elections an
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
parents of firefighters killed
in the line of duty from two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
to one million dollars making
applicables to the deaths of
those first responders in the
line of duty on or after
February twenty fifth twenty
twenty two.
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
seventy seven having been read
House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety nine and act relating to
construction industry and acting
House Bill two ninety nine.
House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
Peter Wirth tickets to the next
order of business thank you Mr
president New Mexico their
business announcements and
miscellaneous we are in that
order of Business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth
Senator Baca this is amber are
read the title first to relates
to public peace peace health
safety and welfare provides a
supplemental salary increase for
state higher education and
Bill so we want to change that
to from Senator Stewart to
Senator manuals and Senator
Stewart as the sponsors the bill
is currently in the Senate
primary sponsor for emergency
bill Senate bill five twenty one
the change from Senator Stewart
to Senator manuals and Senator
Stewart and at that bill stay in
Thank you senator Senator Moores
for which purpose do rise I
wanted Jack to this Mr president
we actually start calling him
dummy bills again it's this
emergency bill thing is some
kind of an old we go back to
what they're actually are Mister
can keep calling him whatever
you'd like to call on but I'm
gonna keep referring to him as
emergency bills agency press
what the the younger members
didn't know what the note did
objection.
So ordered senator Wirth Mr
present is one more one more
thing for the members are sars
an arms I want to be to run
remind everyone when you have
see the sergeant at arms and get
your expert witnesses batched up
before doing that with respect
to tomorrow we will be on the
floor starting at noon tomorrow
would yield to other committee
chairs to announce committee
meetings this afternoon and
tomorrow and Sunday we are that
order business announces
miscellaneous ideal to center
to the workers plus one everyone
should have had tickets if you
if your office did not please
let let me are the clerks no six
thirty to eleven hundred party
president thank you center
masters we do a further
announcement Senator Ortiz if
you know thank you Mr president
the Senate health and public
affairs committee will meet at
Shendo Maestas.
Hickey and compass have built
before us today and then we also
have a Sunday afternoon session
luxurious more expensive one one
really fitting befitting our
expensive agenda it's mostly
house bill's though so maybe you
will need to be too big thank
you Mr chairman thank you
three eleven we wrote most of
our bill so from yesterday but
we're gonna start with the the
bills that have to do with gross
receipts so we'll start with
and Senate bill four forty eight
sweeties and Morse.
Thank you Senator Shendo we do
have further announcements
several.
Thank you Mr president I just
lose two times on our turf and
we did build them out two times
still undefeated we're we're
champs thank you Mr president.
Thank Senator Pirtle we do have
further announcements with
after the floor that's gonna
make about four forty five
please be on time because we'd
like to be able to have a hard
stop and allow staff that we
have been working very hard on
our committee able enjoy the
depending on what time we get
out this evening or by about
nine thirty I think Center were
to to recover the floor what
time tomorrow.
Mr president noon night so well
we'll plan for a nine thirty
Senate finance has a budgeted
for them so nobody has to go to
committee they're not in the
budget so everybody can just
enjoy their weekend not worry
and language tomorrow we're
gonna come in the Senate finance
tomorrow ten AM wrap up language
get House Bill to package it up
as we move forward and Melissa
it takes about seventy two hours
to print that bill and its
format and make sure
everything's correct and will be
looking at house bill two next
Senate finances announcement of
I'm real privilege she was
willing this morning taking out
a for some flying lessons and we
were going to fly to his home of
of social product care is own a
Calumet so it's kind of
Musselman else's we say when it
comes to pop pop piloting in he
was just happy that he was able
Mr Mr president members.
Thank you Sir Sir what is
shocked that estimate Donald's
has a big enough driveway for
the plane to land.
altitude the plane and maybe
I'll show you the pictures of
window rock primary nice
pictures window rock because
when in but it was a little
foggy today and and my wife did
make him breakfast this morning
Surface water coffee in we we
came home.
Thank you senator Senator about
this and for a special
announcement Senator Baca.
I'd like to thank the staff
as starting with the the chief
clerks office and now actually
the Senate chief clerks office
I'm sorry there's a misprint
room you do I. T. journal
maintenance payroll proofreaders
the legislative building
services including security shut
out David legislative education
secretaries in alleys the
sergeant at arms legislative
assistance and of course
Lorraine monthly of the hearing
course you lieutenant governor
of for running such as some
show.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president
commander Kyle Hartzog road
haiku for me before he left that
Any any further announcements.
Si no further announcement
Center Peter Wirth I thank you
Mr president thank you members
unanimous consent the Senate
