Inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill two as
amended by the house with
emergency calls and requests and
Wirth thank you Mr president Ms
that we go that our business
introduction of legislation that
order business introduction
legislation the correct right.
Bobby Roberto Gonzalez Pam Pam
LDS Hendren and have been March
and Representative Martinez and
act relating to household relief
authorizing the transfer from
the tax stabilization reserve if
revenues and transfers are not
sufficient to meet
by title is referred to the
Senate finance committee that's
house bill two.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president M. S. since we go to
that our business announcements
tuned up for the day and we're
going to seven and hopefully
we'll be back around seven
thirty right in there and back
to the floor and and here house
bill two.
bill all day long so we should
be back around I my guess is
seven thirty to come back on the
floor wrap it up and.
Head out
yes that's room three twenty two
do is come back at seven forty
five to give set the finance
committee time to do the
committee report so with that
