Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Ingle
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator our meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Etcetera Novell.
Senator o'neill.
Center to the Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Here Senator share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth Senator Woods.
today by pastor Matt bridges St
John's United Methodist Church
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to that
today by Senator Hickey
legislators and Spanish to be
Matt bridges I was born and
raised in Los crucis and I'm a
proud Los crucis high school
bulldog in a proud you NMAA you
grad even though I love my love
those as well.
invocation thank you for this
opportunity let us pray.
Most high and gracious god we
come before you now to ask for
your unifying presence for the
passion compassion and
dedication to the wonderful
people of New Mexico pour out
your spirit of discernment upon
them from the analyst a column
to the left from the Sunland
there and for those of us who
observe this season of lent and
Easter help direct us toward
unifying Graeser for all in this
time in Jesus name I pray amen.
of the United States of America.
medica galloper impact can
represent the see on.
Good morning would like to
welcome you once again and start
things off today I yield to our
major furniture Center Peter
Wirth thank you Mr president
and.
bridges for being here I think
given the basketball game
tonight the Ag in local
references are very appropriate
although we certainly are
guidance and wisdom and our our
appropriate send and again it is
amazing state we live in and so
if we're all looking forward to
walking out the other side of
have some box box lunches that
are going to come and we'll let
you know when they're here
they'll be in the lounge they're
being provided for the Senate by
the center for civic policy and
we appreciate them doing that so
introduce up front and then of
course as I mentioned tonight is
the hoops for hope legislative
basketball game at the Santa Fe
Indian school gym on serious
going to play we're certainly
hoping for a big Senator win yet
again we just miss having Mr
president on our team I think
those were good old days when
it on so with that Mr present
ideal Senator Padilla first and
then the other members to
introduce guests Senate majority
whip senator Michael Padilla I
thank you Mr president and I'm
hoping to get at least forty two
Eunice consent to allow cameras
in the Senate chamber.
See no objections cameras are to
be allowed in the Senate chamber
today Sen Michael Padilla thank
you very much Mr president yes
announces miscellaneous in a
service Senator Kernan thank you
Mr president today I have this
thing with me Austin yes Susan
politics his parents are
courting you sing you yes I also
have Ashley Molina she's ten
years old is a fourth grader at
**** elementary and Wylie Texas
in his interest or soccer
taekwondo for he has earned a
blue belt in there with your mom
John it's.
of Espanola so Senator harm me I
think that your brother has come
down and met them and we just
want to be sure and welcome them
to the floor of the the Senate
thank you very much.
I'd like to introduce my brother
to the chamber this is my
brother Alfonso how to be on
he's the one who really got us
organized and into politics at
an early age he attended New
them in our family he's one of
our rocks when our dad passed
away to make sure that he kept
us together and ensures that my
mom is healthy and safe every
single day of her life and I
school basketball shorts.
The store to get to make sure
that I I I might be the eight
scored tonight and I'm gonna
make those three pointers rain
Thank you senator had a mail
centre souls.
faculty at NMSU health science
as professor in the college of
nursing and also with me I have
Serra Nugent who's a second year
nursing student in P. eight
morning just got watch the
processes so you'll help me and
recognizing my two guests
Barbara Daman Dr Barbara Damron
and Serra Nugent.
notice I want you to notice the
little button on your tables
today and I want to explain a
little bit about that if you
would give me just a minute.
destroying the healer riparian
area and terrorizing bikers are
hikers.
The fact is that the United
States for server shot nineteen
three utilizing thermal imagery
and visual SS the target area
over a three day operation
nineteen head.
judge leaving carcasses to rot
on the wilderness floor.
Because no such as a network
that.
immediate action had to be
taken.
The Four service told the judge
that they were giving absolute
power but Congress under the
to no one.
And we're not wanted due to
disease.
The fact of it is stray cattle
eight seven seven fourteen
thirty six.
And The New Mexico last out
board.
Directive prove that the cattle
could be humanely captured and
have survived are multiplied for
several years if the dust if the
animals were diseased.
seven to eleven as used in the
last code says Hey animals or
livestock means all domestic are
domesticated animals that are
captivity including horses ****
mules sheep.
Go one by in poetry.
Ostriches emu three us coming
include K. nine are female on
the land animals.
I ask you today to please take a
picture.
What's your federal legislature
It just a perfect example.
Of federal over burden for our
state Mr president thank you for
the opportunity.
Thank you Mr president no
members leader Wirth had already
mentioned this a little bit but
on today is transportation day
of this is the perfect place you
know if you have any questions
there also have a you know offer
a known job applications so
have further announcements
Senator nail thank you Mr
president members all right this
is the night all right just need
people to show up we just the
basically just got off the phone
with coach Gonzales from UNM and
we're sites we we just like our
roster the key again as we this
there's and you know they're
newcomers makes up for some of
the losses we've had they keep
in mind so we have this famous
amoebic defense right for those
moving trees K. in and together
we just we just freaked the
house out because they know that
they can shoot any of number of
angles that we're we're gonna do
It's our guys schools underneath
and Pirtle that and they're
they're the scores right so when
you're on the court thank you
know be looking for them.
going to you know knock on wood
I like our chances getting that
trophy back it deserves to be in
this chamber so so that's my pep
talk if you can get there before
thank you thank you senator.
Any further announcements
Senators.
of the plan today in terms of
third reading is to do items one
through fourteen we are going to
skip item.
consent we goes out of business
messages from the house where
that order business messages
from the house the reader to
read the message.
Mr president I'm directed to
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
general show the message from
the house has been received the
reader to read Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed house
house and requests the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal showed the message from
the house has been received the
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk journal show that the
message from the house has been
received.
Senator Peter what is the next
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
four oh six has it had has had
it under consideration report
Senator anticipate a Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion but that
the journal reflect they were
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill four thirty one to
pass and thence referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill four fifty I do pass
oh one do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
House Bill two oh nine do pass.
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman I
move the adoption of the
committee report Mister
president Senator is we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Committee too who has been
referred Senate bill three
twenty eight as amended has had
it under consideration a report
the same of recommendations that
a do pass respectfully
submitted.
Senator Wirth move adoption
committee report.
This presents of the readability
read all committee reports that
once we vote on them with this
one the motion on the record
reflect their act on
bill four sixty four do pass.
Senate joint resolution thirteen
do pass house bill one thirteen
Senator Campos move adoption
committee for centers we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes habits
Committee port is been adopted
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president appears
we have some guests from the
house
so why don't we give
sergeant arms going to give a
microphone and they can tell us
defending the house after many
many years of defeating this
chamber we plan to do it again
Mr president that is our
Representative welcome to the
chamber.
We we want those toes trophies
to be recognize that they're
going to stay in the chamber so
I just want to make sure that
going to get all blocked that
Votto.
That by the.
That by the you're going to have
Representative.
year we will be defending the
house and bring in the trophies
back to the house their rightful
place and by the way we do have
a handicap our big guy Brian
President I do want to let you
know that you are challenging
The New Mexico road runners
tonight in honor of was women's
we defeated the Lobo's every
single year for sixteen years in
a row when we were named to that
back at NMSU so we're going to
bring it back thank you Mr
president thank you for joining
have lots of fun.
that also Mister president we
are going to we have a consent
calendar we've got a group I
want to give everyone a heads up
on this on the pink sheet is
serve as our consent calendar
team they'll be looking at at
bills there's all memorials on
here today to determine which
ones they believe will be able
immediately gets pulled back to
the regular Senate calendar so
after item fourteen today will
go to the consent calendar I
just think they're gonna be
working on the counter looking
Majority Leader on who's on the
consent of committee again could
you name the people that are on
that secondly a permanent a
permanent sitting committee
evening certainly if if members
have a bill I think might be
qualified as one that we could
do on consent they can presented
to that committee all for them
will will put him back on the
floor.
About the Spanish present what
would be the procedure for
objecting to some it's on the
consent calendar so madam
object I think a little six
minute filibuster would take
care of the deal also you know
to the extent we we for example
I would just level the members
know I was thinking of putting
to work and I think is the best
way
And certainly if if if we'll
have this out early in the
calendar so everyone can take a
look at it and if if a member
Thank you Mr you for answer
those questions.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president I think would jump
business third reading of
legislation.
We'll go to item number one the
Senate bill one eighty one.
Any other Center souls thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
no objection Senator also
explained about thank you Mr
president this bill is really
just a quick clean up language
several years ago we passed a
to go with that and it indicated
that there need to be written
directions on the use of that
and included in that that
immediately after administering
one and so it didn't make sense
for somebody to administer the
naloxone and then call
themselves to show up because
there had been a reversal on an
one.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Say no debate Senator is to
close on the bill thank you Mr
president I move that Senate
bill.
in the negative by a show of
hands Senators tier seats
please.
Also Mr seats where voting.
If you wish to vote no.
passed the Senate Senators souls
thank you Mr president going on
to item number two Senate bill
four seventy one with emergency
clause and I'll Senator mantas
thank you Mr president agency
amendment or substitution say no
objection.
Senator want this explained the
bill thank you Mr chairman
president this very short bill
add some language to the end of
to participate in any medical
aid in dying including the
refusal to provide information
on medical aid in dying to a
patient and refusing to refer a
adopted a stand for questions.
Senators we're debating Senate
bill four seventy one with
emergency clause we do have
debate Senator committee.
we both know this was prompted
by a lawsuit is that your
understanding center Senator
what this agency presents under
Thank you Mr president senator
and
from from your your not
knowledge of the law and what
this bill is doing.
Satisfy the the parties that are
involved in this lawsuit.
Senator about this.
Mr president I've got an expert
here may I have unanimous
consent Senate having experts
Thank you for joining us here in
the chamber Senator maintenance
did you want to restate your
question thank you yes and and
question was is this going to
fix the there's there's a
federal lawsuit where there's
some parties that have a problem
with the statute as it's
currently written and I was just
wondering if this built in a
remedy that disagreement.
Senator about this Mr president
Senator I can't answer the
question knowing that with any
certainty having communicated
with the partisan litigants that
that litigation.
Thank you Mr president center I
I would agree with you you know
I've I've looked at this issue
And it seems very clear to me
of life what was what they see
as as a D. as a a being involved
in and killing someone.
And I realize it's a complicated
very strong it says that they
don't have to find information
they don't have to refer.
but it's see I just want members
of the body to.
I debated just add nauseam
multiple multiple times trying
to explain that the conscience
so called conscience protections
were insufficient.
in the informal care decisions
act no it's not it's not because
if it was we would not have a
federal lawsuit moving forward
And so I I just would like to
urge the body I I think it's
it's an issue that we need to
really take great care.
we have other bills that we're
going to we're gonna hear very
objection or or non religious
conscientious objection and we
very sensitive to to those
issues now I do have one one
last question Mr president
Senator
And the section that immediately
precedes this seven C. dash six.
I'll just read it says a health
ill patients that meet the
standards of care for end of
life care.
So my my question is we still
have in law a an affirmative
problem at hand and when we have
a statement center that says a
health care provider shall
inform.
relates to and immunity for
purposes of criminal liability
licensing sanctions or other
professional disciplinary action
of the this exercise of
Thank you Mr presence and I it
would be my my preference if we
change that as well I'm I'm sure
they're not gonna make that
suggestion but we we I just want
and then in the the last thing
here is that this was actually
brought up by a physician in
favor of this legislation during
a public hearings.
we're we're still gonna have
where health care provider shall
inform and the problem with that
is that doctors are in a state
of of the forty.
initiate a conversation about
end of life option.
There is coercion inherent
coercion.
Hey you have you have stage four
B. cancer it's it's inoperable
we don't have any.
Curative treatment for you.
But then the next sentence for
shall inform that termly ill
person that.
Hey that this is an option have
you ever thought about taking
medication to end your life.
I wish that we weren't getting
once again getting in the way of
the doctor patient relationship.
Bye bye coercing people.
And so I think it's great that
conversation anymore they'll
have to participate then left
providing information for that's
great but if you don't have that
objection Mr president.
If you don't have a
conscientious objection you
But we shouldn't be coercing the
doctors it may not be the time
maybe the doctor knowing this
patient very well says you know
what commitment maybe maybe
a good bill I do I do think it
addresses the issue at hand of
our federal lawsuit.
but I will once again in closing
I would I would urge the members
that either half past this
chamber or are about to pass
this chamber are making an
identical miss.
Thanks committee where any
further debate Senators Senator
Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator bonded to bring this
forward we had a good discussion
And that was a cornerstone of
the original legislation and
this ammendment brings it back
to that thank you very much
thank you Senator Mannix any
further debate centers.
X. just covered up she asked me
to work with her and co sponsor
this bill and and I consider
that a great of respect to my
concerns when the bill was
originally pass and I want I
conscience and many of you all
know I ran into a little bit of
issue with the members of my
clergy in the church over this
bill in other positions that
I've taken but but it was
extraordinarily of welcoming of
those concerns and and allow for
those changes in the original
adoption this bill.
and and many of us felt it was
it is not our place to tell
doctors how to do that level of
their practice and and and
Senators maintenance we're we're
their options and that's a
that's a legal duty that exists
and I do a lot of work in the
law on that area so I appreciate
those comments as well too but
this is important is just
reaffirms the conscience of
seventy one do now pass.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the records show the
rules been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
thanks of those voting in the
negative I show him thank you
president before right before we
the chamber saying no objection
Senator Brandt.
Yes consent excuse and remorse
sorry say no objection centers
we're voting tier seats if you
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative you're on the
four thirty three and I yield to
senator Byrd thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill three four
thank you Mr president very
simple bill a based on ability
to Senator Gonzales passed about
three four years ago and all
this does is enhance the
enhancement Act and I would like
to defer to my co sponsor
Senator Griggs if he has some
comments as well Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president this bill
just allows more communities
crucis even as well who may want
to fly regional jet service from
Alamogordo to Phoenix Alamogordo
Thank you Mr president so we are
open for discussion or there is
very debating Senate bill four
thirty three and I'll to center
Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr president I don't
need a.
been a very successful in the
different parts of the state and
this is one way to.
Remote this kind of economic
development in the rural parts
Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president Center of
Burjeel.
Senator DS Mr president I will
yield center brace yourself.
Services just what was your
speaking
Yes Mr president as senator yes
this would that open the
capacity from all regional jet
jets are I are there about fifty
passengers or ninety nine
passengers and those the ones
that typically fly out of Hobbs
in Roswell right now.
or seven around the state that
could.
handle that kind of capacity of
jet.
This presents an overview and
senator Gregory in charge of
hiring the flight attendant.
president and the Santo Domingo
now.
Senator Ingle.
Present your issues to have
such.
and the quality flight
attendants I know they will have
I mean Senator Woods and I
projects we just can't handle
that kind of job because no no
looking for new challenges and
new opportunities and the
entrepreneurship they he exudes
would probably allow him to open
up a smaller company that would
Any further debate senators.
Say no further debate senator
Byrd to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
affirmative except those running
in the negative by show of hands
Senators tier seats please send
us your seats.
senator Byrd thank you Mr
president thank you members of
by we're going on to I don't
know for Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy five and I
placing Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy five on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendments or
allow my expert witness phone
Mr Rick certain of cabinets for
the department of transportation
to be my expert witness see no
Thank you Mr president
with
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
For the department and the the
state road fund receives eighty
four point six million from the
vehicle registration fee
vehicles and trucks have been in
effect since March of first of
two thousand four since two
thousand four N. M. D. O. T.
produce price index for
construction material the
purchasing power of the revenue
collected from the registration
fee has steadily decreased over
charged by other states.
And also Mr president and
members I will at this time
he's back I know idea how tough
the legislation was that he's
Sanchez Mister president and so
this actually was a very big
lift we had to have several
hearings to make sure that we
decades and the reason this is
important as you heard is a
hundred fifteen percent
increasing construction costs
for roads that is dramatic when
you think about it in just such
just need to kind of modernize
and update these fees in the
Senate finance committee we did
at a series of taxes to
registration for electric
vehicles which are coming on
wait of electric vehicles are
harder on our roads and so
that's going to help us to
maintain and keep those roads in
great shape and I yield back to
the sponsor.
Say no debate Senator Gonzales
to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president hello
Let the record shows that.
The role has been called in that
all those present voting in the
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no yes.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator gave us voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
That's a team work spirit right
there Senators.
negative Senate finance
committee sub two percent a bill
to seventy five has duly passed
the Senate Senator Gonzales
thank you Mr president thank you
members thank you were going to
Run Senate bill one seventy six
as amended and I yield to
senator how to meal.
six as amended be placed on
final passage and on final
passage has been taken and that
it now be subject to debate
amendment or substitution say no
objection center how to manage
happened in northern New Mexico
are a secular as we're
devastated not only was it the
runoff from the spring that
brought all of that debris down
as when money is needed during a
disaster to ensure that they're
protected so waters continue to
flow note that Mr president I'm
gonna yield to my co sponsor
Senator Campos Senator Campos
New Mexico and of course in the
entire state as we continue to
move forward the whole issue is
with all these disasters that
have occurred how are we going
to continue to address if you
but with this particular
disaster relief initiative what
will happen in the future is
will be able to address this and
hopefully in a lot of cases
we're available for questions
senators we're debating Senate
bill one seventy six as amended.
right time to be proactive as I
know that the next season is
going to bring a lot of unknowns
and I think this is a very great
proactive measure and it creates
a fund that can be tapped into
it at just the right time and
is really going to ideally shore
they're at their finances up in
and hopefully been of those fair
to Midland size farmers ranchers
at center they're gonna need
these waters to be flowing this
chamber thank you senator for
that scene objects in.
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate center how
to meet a close in the bill Mr
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands senators to your seats
please we're voting.
I to thirty for the firm is in
the name is Senate bill one
seventy six as amended has duly
passed the Senate center how to
meal thank you Mr president on
for Senate bill fifty and I
yield to senator Wirth thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent Senate the rules be
spent in the record show all
action replacing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
bill would create the right to
repair act to set requirements
for both purchasers and sellers
of a residential dwelling single
or multi family home for
before a legal actions filed to
give the purchaser and seller a
chance to address the issue
that's causing the problem so
the purchaser we would be
the seller would forward that to
the subs that were involved and
in effect this would create a
sixty day window within which
causing the problem this this is
important for both the purchaser
and seller because for the
purchasers got a problem with
their house going straight to
moving for that there was an
alleged the fact it just makes
sense to give the parties a
chance to work that work the
issue out of before you head to
court if they can't get it
worked out then basically they
Or the court depending what the
house that's what to build us
thank you senator Senator
debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty.
See no debate etcetera etcetera
voting all senators your seats.
Mr president you make motion
Senator Senator go ahead make a
long thank you Mr president I
move that Senate Judiciary
Committee sub two percent of
Senator Ingle for which purpose
by the decision to repeal.
on the third reading calendar I
just wondered who were who
touched it up.
Thomas present had a lot of
money for that touch of.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill fifty has passed
the Senate senator Wirth thank
you Mr president thank you
members.
just roll over real quick I've
got a little technical fix
coming down from eight council.
In center now that Senate bill
three eighty eight age limit for
children in custody and I yield
to you to.
And that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
no objection center o'neill to
may be held in custody or
detained from eleven years old
to twelve years old so no no one
under twelve years old is sense
into the juvenile system and
without all stand for questions
Thank you Mr present with the
sponsor yield.
Senate Bill yes I yield thanks.
Thank you Mr president center so
what would happen instead of
them being placed in the
juvenile system just explain how
what this comes from is the
recognition that there's a huge
difference between age eleven
and age twelve when you're
talking in the context of
consensus is that a low eleven
years old is too young to be
placed in into the in a juvenile
prison system.
committed in our state that
they're in prison for today or
in the juvenile system for today
Mr president at I don't have
that specific information is
just a range of of crimes I can
Mexico so it's not a whole lot
of numbers obviously I mean I
don't have access to the case
files of each situation but
the judges it's it's just an
initial detention of youth is
determined by the the risk
assessment and so forth.
this is just basically again the
judges have embraced this the
juvenile judges of support this
Senator Representative this
president center thank you for
that I just I had seen the bill
and trying to figure out what's
to actually stop that type of
behavior because if they're put
in the system it wasn't for Jay
walking.
It wasn't for shoplifting at
sense Mr president yes it
totally does I just having
worked in this area you know it
seems like a long time ago but
boy they have all kinds of
kinds of alternatives to to
place in a kid and and as that a
jail or prison you know a
juvenile facility at way too
young of an age so again we're
can then I'll need to be traded
in a more appropriate way.
Most present center thank you
for answering my questions thank
you Senator Brandt any further
debate senators.
that the Senate bill three
eighty eight do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the rules from called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
Senator Baca voting no.
When I stepped over item number
nine for now we're gonna go to
item number ten on the calendar
for Senate finance committee
says two percent of bills I
twenty one as amended all you'll
to sentiment us.
Senator centerman us run item
number ten Senator Pirtle is not
ready to present the line so
we're going to you for item
number ten thank you Mr
president I move that Senate
finance committee substitute for
no objection sentiment us to
explain the bill Mr president
this as a one percent increase
for health care for all state
in E. R. B. with P. R. A. that
is in the budget for thirty two
million so we brought that
parity up for for teachers and
those teaching staff in the
budget and now we're adding
budget for state employees this
as an additional one percent for
additional health care costs if
we look over the year there's
been about a four percent from
twenty twenty to twenty twenty
debating and we do have Senator
Kernan followed by Senator Woods
thank you Mr president will
sponsor yield Senator steel Mr
president yes thank you thank
Mr president center yes this
covers every employee in the
state.
Mr president I may be thinking
of another bill but I I want to
instance are they also receiving
additional funding to cover that
one percent.
Mr president center this covers
legislative judicial state
sponsor would you sentiment Mr
president I will slowly.
Senate president and senator.
One percent tax are one percent
I don't see it in here anywhere.
The one point four percent to.
Can accommodate that in your
budget for your estimate of the
board for for look legislative
judicial state alright everybody
covered under CPO higher
education and public schools I
don't on the way here accounting
dollar increase in wages he also
increase benefits and I was
wondering if the budget was also
brought into this figure when
health benefits on that it'll go
up the one percent whatever that
is on the employee side and it
is is absorbed in our total
going to health insurance cost
one one percent increase in
wages but eldest offset the
employees.
no we did it five of five
percent across the board for all
state employees and we're saying
because of health care costs
we're actually adding a one
their health insurance if we did
that then all the period
employees all the higher and
employees everybody that's not
included in that class would
one percent to their pay.
On top of the five percent that
we that we already have
calculated house bill two in
order to say we want to treat
everybody equal health care
costs so this will be in their
Okay.
I understand and I agree that's
way I read it but when I was
thinking about it last night I
where I was getting at here and
understand this one percent goes
on their paycheck.
But there will be another cost
to the state as near as I can
tell and.
Say no further debate senator
Munoz to close on the bill.
Mr president I do now
pass and pass as consent that
Senate the records show the
rules being called and all those
present voting the Fuhrman
except those already negative my
show and.
With Senator share voting no.
Senator Byrd voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senate committee voting no.
Center was I believe I saw your
hand up is that correct Senator
Woods voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
passed the Senate Semenya's
thank you Mr president.
Senator Pirtle you ready to go
with your bill.
We'll go on to item number
eleven that's going to be Senate
seen objects or in that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Peter
Wirth thank you Mr chair and
give everyone a heads up as we
work to the calendar once we get
done with item fourteen we're
so Senator Stewart I know is on
forty number forty three Senator
Lopez forty four I'm on forty
five Senator fan exes on forty
roadmap so with that unanimous
that we go back that order
business third reading of
legislation for that order
business serving the legislation
I yield to center complex thank
you very much Mr president
subject to debate amendment or
substitution say no objection
Senator Campos explained the
bill thank you Mr president
members of the Senate during the
twenty twenty legislative
term Services Department to
address high priority services
for senior citizens and adults
with disabilities in New Mexico
to include transportation food
and security physical and
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president and I don't need to
Senator yield I just want to
comment publicly thank him for
championing the seniors in our
dear to his heart and I just
consistently seeing the Senator
really always keep us focused on
seniors the wrong ability and
how we need to be doing more
than we have done and so thank
talking about to help help look
after seniors and you know also
help out the Kiki submitter Fund
Mr president I don't eat the
sponsor to yield but I want to
thank him on behalf of the
residents of northern New Mexico
I heard from seniors from Rio
Arriba county of Los Alamos
County who were in favor of this
senior center and so it in our
senior centers we notice that
this is the hub for our seniors
to have interaction and I just
want to thank the senator for
looking out for senior citizens
Senator Campos to close in the
bill thank you Mr president
members of the Senate I move
that Senate bill three forty six
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six in the
pharmacy on the negative Senate
We're gonna go on to the next
item that's going to be item
number twelve.
Senate bill eight and I'll to
center to subpoena.
Senate bill eight on final
passage is been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
Say no objection center this
Help New Mexico because get
situated in a way that will
enable it to take full advantage
of one of our great natural
resources our geo thermal of
some real technological
improvements that the of oil
drilling industry has shown or
make it possible to tap into the
layers of the earth that are
department to to shepherd those
projects forward it creates a
center of excellence at New
Mexico tech.
Where the research into
geothermal can be done in
to provide grants to state
departments and to it higher age
institutions of higher education
so that they can carry on
The Senate finance committee
Took out the the actual money
all the appropriation from the
bill but we.
excellence and that the energy
minerals and natural resources
department will be able to
utilize other state funds in
order to create to the positions
that that that the bill
committee for the two big funds
that were deleted and with that
I'll stand for questions thank
you senator anticipate a Centers
are demanding Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
Mr president I I think it went
by real fast how much is
available right now for this
fund.
Mr president Senator Lopez how
center of excellence in New
Mexico tech has four hundred
thousand dollars in the budget.
The
Energy minerals and natural
dollars for a variety of of of
of of positive energy projects
among which would be of adding
of vast of adding a little bit
more.
Mr president Senator I believe
that we're about to vote on
house bill two you today or
case I think there is a great
support for this idea and we
would be able to find the the
resources for those funds in the
future.
thank you Mr president any
further debate Senators we do
have further debate with Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and with
the senator yield.
I I saw I think the the sister
or brother to this bill in the
tax committee and
as you know I actually am a
These geo thermal wells.
Mr president Senator Brandt
We happen to be positioned
would be required to reach rocks
hot enough to generate
electricity and the yes well
that was drilled just drilled in
UNAM us down in the boot heel
skill of the petroleum industry
we think we've got great
opportunities in New Mexico.
This press service pretty
who was it that develop that
technology.
Industry Mr president and and
and the Senator
developed that some of the
national labs thanks and it
played a role in that.
Thank you Mr president Sir I
think it's it's amazing how
well.
you know we can actually we're
one of the states that can have
it all and have a great if we'll
just get out of our own way and
that's what I think is really
great about geothermal uses the
fracking we figure that out in
our committee meeting with your
expert but it does use the
lateral drilling to make sure
that we can get that heat that
you can but I I believe they
what look what that is but sleep
and it's safe for environment
provides us another source of
energy and I guess my point is
we just we need to support of
all and just keep making cleaner
for bringing this and I support.
Thank you and ended Mister chair
Mister president and senator I
would be
Of of of past the initial
geothermal bill that created a
framework that we're now able to
build on so this is something
that that members of both
parties I think can get behind
Thank you Senator Brandt any
further debate centers.
Si no further debate Senator
dissipated because of the bill
Mr.
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands.
Senator is to your seats please
Mr president and thank you
Senator Woods I I apologize I
neglected to to to yield to you
to give you a chance to speak on
this bill my mistake thank you.
two and I yield to senator Munoz
thank you Mr president has Maez
consented the record show the
real at all action for placing
Senate.
And Senate bill three eighty two
we created the biosciences
industry in New Mexico which
gave us a step up into the bio
industry which covers everything
from agriculture pharmaceuticals
two to one match from the
biosciences so if there's an
industry that comes and it
creates a pharmaceutical if the
state gives a hundred thousand
they're going to have to have a
industry and then they end up
leaving the state if the
industry that we partner with is
successful then we either get a
share of the company and the
company is sold and we take our
Senator debate is Senate bill
three eighty two as amended.
We do have to make Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino followed by Senator
Steinborn Mr president to.
the most promising areas and in
in committee hearings in the
past we've heard presentations
on the incredible creativity and
building not just jobs but whole
industry in the state so thank
you very much for bringing this
forward and I hope members will
passes thank you senator
participate we do have further
debate with Senator Steinborn.
Mr president center do we allow
this fund to co owner going to
partners ownership cope
partnerships now with companies
sciences and twenty seventeen so
we are allowed to comb because
we are an investor in the
company so as we invest we take
stocks part of ownership into
company.
Senator time I think you Mr
president so I'm just trying to
look at it looks like the new
language in the bill starting on
page two that we allow
provisions instituted with the
bioscience Authority for
investments.
Mr president center when we
invest with these companies were
creating a fund that like the
it's the same exact model except
it's a two to one match and so
there there could be lawsuits
that could be great wins but
they have to be in New Mexico
expert witness Mr Paul are
briefed on the floor sentiment
yes man was consent to ask my
expert witness Paul are to be
brought before.
Seeing no objection is sergeant
question okay Senator somehow.
Thank you Mr president we didn't
so I'll ask it again
you know with leader let me just
take one step back once present
it advance at the time because
we didn't have some of these
checks and safeguards that we
have in leader they're very
important with economic
development.
And these are the same questions
Semenya's Mr present it in me
going to talking at leading to
help everybody looks at the LFC
then the coming back in the back
in and say those employees are
existed and at and adding the to
dollars that's the game that's
played with Lita.
And economic development but
there is no clawback provisions
for this.
mean I see that that you know we
have a match requirement and
they have to have a business
operation in New Mexico.
Do have other requirements as
far as the income level
Present the current requirements
is that they have to remain in
the state for five years and
there's a higher requirement in
right now.
Okay was present you said that
they have to stay in the state
so this is one of the reasons
I'm asking the question you know
through the years you see a lot
this investment you don't create
this opportunity otherwise this
is a hand out to somebody's
already doing what they're doing
and so when you said well
they're going to stay in New
Mexico.
This is why I'm asking the
question Mr president trying to
get at is this more economic
development are the protocols in
place like they are in for Lida
presents on Mister present if we
if we look at this we're
creating companies we're
creating companies and jobs with
requirements that they have to
hire New Mexicans with the
center heard that if he was in
committee and and finance where
the investments that he's make
gets taken over by a company and
they look to get bought out by a
larger company that comes along
Mexico we look at and this is
sits at university New Mexico we
look at the technologies that
those research universities are
doing for Ag or business for
pharmaceuticals for bioscience
make something out of a cancer
diabetes problem and there's a
pill and not a shot and that's
developed through bio sciences
technology and that companies in
New Mexico this fund could grow
United States and around the
world because we look to Israel
we look to other countries for
other medicines that are cheaper
to if they sit on the bioscience
Authority they are sworn in on
under the Senate rules they are
confirmed by the Senate they
follow government conduct rules
say to your expert because I
know back in the day this was no
are now it's got a little bit of
history I would definitely
encourage the adoption of if you
we can put in some good economic
development best practices that
we make sure that we're actually
making smart investments
that otherwise wouldn't happen
Thank you Mr president I need to
sponsor to yield I just I rise
in strong support of this bill
and again I think this is one of
it does involve a little more
risk but it's got a two to one
match and one of the challenges
with you know the funds at the
of fiduciary responsibilities
and getting our rates of return
that that are the highest
possible and some of the risk.
variables they just can't go as
our non recurring money to
really make investments and you
know if if a number of these are
quite frankly even if one or two
of them hit it is a big deal a
great direction for our state
fully supporting the measures
thank you.
Thanks Center worth any further
debate senators.
Seen since center by the thank
bill thank you Mr president I
want to remind the body of
something may they may not know
this but one Adrian of a lot of
work to my office work for me in
twenty seventeen who has a bio
exist in twenty seventeen he
worked hard on this bill to make
sure passed but you look at
people in New Mexico that have
degrees in Adrian has eight or
from Oxford and he knew what
biosciences is going to need to
New Mexico he changed the face
of biosciences in New Mexico
when he passed when we pass and
the Fuhrman except those voting
negative slide show hands
Senators tier seats where
voting.
If you wish to vote no please
I have a thirty five deferment
is here on the negative Senate
bill three eighty two as amended
has duly passed the Senate
center among them when yes.
Thank you Mr president members
thirty two as amended and I
yield to Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
two thirty two as amended has
been taken now subject to debate
insurer provider info and
reimbursement.
Sanford to moving explain
amendment real quick Center part
has ammendment been handed out
to the members.
Senator moving explain the
moment move Senate foreman at
commas save lives and so we just
need to get that fixed quickly
before we send it to the house.
Thank you senator Senator as
we're debating senator member
Thank you Mr president it would
Senator Pirtle yields Senator
Pirtle Dale Mr president I yield
the center this is been a so
our committee to add in that
fifteen day period are you
taking that out is that what
this amendment does Senator
Pirtle Mr president Senator it
it does not it essentially
remember correctly it said up to
and it needed to say strike
through to ensure that we did
have that fifteen days extra for
those that had been red flagged
the HMOS this is still intact it
just fixes a little grammatical
error that is quite important we
want to get a grammatically
correct and we've done that with
Senator major debate on the
amendment.
Center for close on the
amendment.
I move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill two
you Mr president consent to skew
Senator Shendo into the return
to the chamber hearing
objections and approach it like
to make that into unanimous
consent motion.
This presentation for women
There has have it your bill's
been amended so now we have sent
a bill to thirty two just twice
amended we're back on the bill
we have center Steinborn on the
from.
Well Mr president
It came from Legislative Council
back in two thousand sixteen
real pay kiss Medical within
Rossell there executive director
came to me and he brought
work so it was hard for small
practices to bring in doctors to
our rural areas to to bring them
in and get them paid and so we
thought we'd fix a loophole but
to prevent having to pay some of
these positions that we're
seeing patients and so we've
we've create we've fixed the
loophole that credential means
credentialed and then we pull
that back from forty five days
getting reimbursed it was
through working because I had
done that work for in two
thousand sixteen on the
credentialing that the medical
society came to me because I did
you Sir appreciate the
explanation the history so I saw
that if I have some concerns
about funding.
What are your thoughts about
what they brought up in there by
it's an issue nobody's come to
me to talk to me about it I
haven't heard from from anybody
else but I would caution most
people not to read the fires.
continue listen to debate thank
you miss present thanks in thank
you center summer we do have
further debate was Senator
Kernan followed by Senator to
subpoena then Senator Hickey
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president I don't need to
and he had to hire to the
physician to come in and treat
they got credentialed I think
within the time frame but then
they didn't low that drive in so
support this and I don't think
this is just that relative to to
the Roswell area think it's
across the state thank you very
much thank you senator Kernan
center participate off of us
other day in support of this
bill we certainly liked it when
we heard and and Health and
public affairs so I would hope
that members would we join in
supporting this bill I think
Thank you Mr president top.
I also stand in support of this
bill I've had the.
bill and I applaud the sponsor
for bringing it forward the I've
worked very closely with the O.
S. side the only thing I can
think of because I I know they
supported in a lot of the region
credential but loading into a
claims and gin which is this
very sophisticated I. T.
process.
Can take a long time if you let
so they were losing money so
this allows the doctor once they
are credentialed to start seeing
patients and even if there is a
but that's okay that's what they
do is they they fix these claims
engines all the time in this
bill just makes it official so
thank you very much for bringing
it to Senator Pirtle thank you
two thirty two is twice amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show the rules been
called all those present voting
the affirmative except for those
voting in the negative by show
Those.
I have to thirty eight in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill two thirty two is
twice amended has duly passed
the Senate Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president members
consent of the Senate that the
record.
Show that all action for placing
Senate bill two of three is
amended on final passage is been
Senate bill two or three as a
result of the work that was done
over the interim between an
organization that represents
direct service providers staff
developmental disability
community providers.
Those two groups were at that
that at odds over legislation
the agency's disagreed with the
idea that a flat percentage
could work of the the direct
service person felt that they
meetings that Senator that got
much more in harmony this bill
is a result of that process and
what it does is it asks it
doesn't it doesn't settle the
decision about whether the the
the reimbursement rates are fair
or not or whether they need to
the health department would
begin doing a cost reimbursement
study
every two years and and that's
more than the three years
would the department have a
basis for coming to the
legislature with a realistic
budget for these developmental
disability services and finally
services last year.
But the reality is that to get
off of the waiting list does you
absolutely no good if you cannot
find a provider who has room in
people to carry it out into the
future and that those people are
paid a salary at least
sufficient to keep them in that
field so that they're not
attracted away by the high wages
three as amended anyone wishing
to debate.
See no debate center participate
or to close on the bill.
consent of the Senate the record
show the rules been called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands Senator seats where
much members of the Senate thank
you all yields are Senate floor
Majority Leader Peter Wirth to
take us to the next order of
business.
You Mr president we're gonna
stay on third reading but we're
going to the consent calendar
believe that we've done in quite
some time so I just want to
explain the the the Senate
consent calendar works if you
look at your pink slip that has
the items on their.
bills are memorials then you're
going to explain either the bill
our memorial if there's any
questions or questions will be
directed to the sponsor but
again with only a five minute
forward to take the vote so we
have those in place and started
us off today Senator Pirtle
curious through the consent
calendar etcetera Pirtle agency
present ask unanimous consent of
Senator Pirtle to explain that
would yield the Senator Padilla
Senator Padilla thank you very
much Mr president and Los Amigos
as as we all know they've spent
a lot of time here in the
building they are good will
paid for and they do a lot of
different things in in that
manner and so to.
Mr president with that I uh us
is consent that the Senate that
the record show that all action
for placing senator memorial
many of these folks they live in
their communities they on their
own time get together there
there and travel around the
world to share New Mexico's
culture our cuisine are
questions Senator Pirtle the
agency present I just the
quickly for information I
already put on final passage so
if it during this you will need
to do that just explain your
you just wanted to get that
taken to that point enrollment
and into.
Senator Pirtle take us to that
point.
Mr president I move the Senate
Joint Memorial three do now pass
thank you thank you senator
thank you Senator Lopez.
By a vote of thirty six in the
pharmacy on the negative Senator
placing Senate memorials three
is been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
and I would deal to Senator
Stewart on the item number two.
Senator Pirtle will go to item
number four.
Number three or four Mister
amendment or substitution St
Onge section.
Center for.
And I would yield to Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
It's a really good memorial in
oasis is fantastic and I hope
we're not at a time.
I've taken several classes at
oasis is for older Americans
it's for people that are a
little retired or have plenty of
time on their hands and they've
Albuquerque area so I thought
that I would join in in
supporting this memorial thank
you senator anticipate a any
further debate.
Senator Pirtle yes please.
Thank you your your your
December provide yield to
senator Purnell Senator Pirtle
the mysteries I'm of the Senate
memorial fifty nine do now pass
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
president that some of those one
day oasis courses are a lot like
listening to Senator shares of
filibuster so they're very very
informative.
substitution no objection
Senator Pirtle I would yield to
senator serve on this Senator on
this rigorous rigorous present
this last summer had a chance to
tomato ranch when I want to
encourage all members to go
Mexico over a million acres he's
got sixteen ranchers throughout
the west of the twelve closely
with the largest land owners in
the country but in western
United States has branches in
including through Vermelho one
of those were things I learned
in the time that I spent there
is the efforts of the Turner
foundation to be restoring
native species they have
to try and restore protect that
that species and everything else
with plans and so on this
memorials to recognize the work
of to turn this contribution and
the fact that he's created a
had a really wonderful time
information so getting to meet
him and the and his daughter and
other family members to just so
committed to New Mexico they
love our state and we're very
fortunate to have them and I
Thank you senator Montez Senator
debate and senator Morris sixty
two an ideal to Senate
committee.
Agency presentation
Respectfully rise in opposition
Zamora is no disrespect to this
individual or their family I'm
sure they're doing a lot of
opinion I don't think we give
enough respect to private land
ownership in this state to the
the small you know the person
that has a small little three
acre plot that that's their life
memorial for them where the
bills for them was a legislation
for them for the person that
owns two acres and once again
that's their greatest asset in
their life and and and we just
Much respect and and god bless
your family of you know the
turners this is not I'm so my no
vote is not about you all it's
debate center for them I thank
you Mr president just consent to
skew Senator Shendo.
Say no objection to return to
the chamber see no objections.
Any further debate Senators.
sixty to do now pass us Ms
consent of the Senate that the
record showed rules been called
all those present in the
affirmative set for those voting
negative by show of hands
Senator seats where voting.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
This.
Semenya's you wish to vote.
Forty seconds.
I love that radio voice Senator
Hamblen thank you thank you very
senator Morris sixty two has
duly passed the Senate.
Senator Pirtle Mr ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate memorial fifty
eight on final passage been
it is a good idea that we
recognize the Albuquerque
metropolitan Arroyo flood
control authority a mask as we
call them if you're a legislator
from central New Mexico really
neighborhoods in a lot of
different things that they do
for us they have had some
massive
public works projects that
they've undertaken and if you're
homeowners insurance flood
insurance portion of their
homeowner's insurance for
approximately fifteen thousand
homes in that area because of
this one particular project they
more fifty eight anyone wishing
debate.
Say no debate.
Senator is present I move Senate
more fifty eight do now pass
session Ms consider the Senate
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president.
And so there's a good job on
that concurrence calendar this
is that something that will be
doing as we get closer to the
end of the session so Senator
prepared we're gonna go item
number forty two to forty seven.
And so senators in the order
that you'll be presenting this
center Hamblen Senator Stewart
two Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
president Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the rules be suspended in that
the record show that all actions
placing committee substitute for
house bill ninety five on final
five formally establishes an
office of renewable energy at
the State Land Office and just
to give you a little bit of
background I'm like speaking in
the same rate as everybody else
agency when we met that goal and
we're on the cusp of quadrupling
at that means more clean energy
diversification of our revenue
increased earnings for public
projects is a strong but none of
this would've been possible
without the agency's office of
renewable energy and office of
the commissioner established
back in two thousand nineteen to
provide the agency the resources
the progress of the agency's
making staying the course for
years to come the bottom line is
industry needs a partner to get
these deals done and if we
continue to talk about
diversifying our revenue stream
discussion will come from this
body.
Centers we're debating house
energy and natural resources
committee to house bill ninety
five Canadian cents to per house
bill ninety five anyone wishing
would just let them go first.
He goes a lot longer than me
With the search sponsor.
Office seeing no objection at
the start of our LESC order
expert witness into the chamber.
Senator Brandt.
but I don't have any objections
of this particular expert
witness so I'm trying to
understand what the need for
this is since you made it sound
like they already have this.
one of the things that we have a
tendency of doing is not looking
at what we can do down the line
and so by having this office
officially established in the
state land office will ensure
the renewable energy is it would
that be the land commissioner at
the moment.
Mr president Senator yes it is
the commissioner the land
commissioner at the moment.
Mr president and senator the the
common terms of geothermal wind
and solar.
Thank you Mr Senator have Mister
president sorry Senator
Senator Hamblen Mr president
Senator the PRC can determine
body has already we passed the
energy transition activists say
what actually qualified as
renewable energy or was that
does not necessarily pertain to
the State Land Office at this
moment.
Center right.
is present Senator I I think my
concern with this in putting
said since a line of C. nineteen
so.
Thank you Mr president thousand
nineteen okay so it was fairly
recently under this land
commissioner we've established
to be tying the hands of our
future land commissioners to
determine
for themselves what is consider
renewable energy you know the
renewable energy do we want the
land commissioner.
To determine that I think not
and not not this land
commissioner no land
act before ours and they
actually had to come back a few
years ago and do what I.
You know like to refer to is the
the new some amendment.
natural gas and they're actually
one of the biggest
producers of geo thermal energy
in the world so it's not like
they're not doing other things
renewable we need to be able to
adjust to that and not just let
the land commissioner decide
that for him or herself.
This is an elected position I
for the debate we have center
share.
Thank you Mr president I was
just starting to get a little
concerned that I may not be able
to talk because all those that
Mr president the sponsor would
yield it.
Absolutely Mr president thank
you so Mister president senator
does the land office have any
seven oil and gas office.
Commercial office.
Okay thank you
and then.
In this particular case are we
trying to.
Mister president senator this
State Land Office only has a
mandate to work on state land.
You know Mr president I
understand that but.
versus putting it on Senator
Woods land for example sure that
Mister president senator yes
actually they would because
that's how they bring in
revenues for school districts.
much revenue have they produced
this is just save in twenty
twenty how much revenue did they
produce and twenty twenty four
schools.
Two point four billion dollars
for school districts and.
And of that twelve million was
for renewable from renewable
energy.
Okay so Mister present I do
agree with Senator Brandt here
that this is an elected position
and like all elected positions
Mister president senator it's a
very good question this the the
benefit of this bill is that it
is
up to the state land
and so it what it does is it
just creates that room for the
state land office to use that as
an opportunity to develop
revenues but it doesn't mean
that they're going to spend all
that time in that room.
are doing however they do that
the best that's that that's the
charter that's their their
mission.
And and I just wanna make sure
that we're not doing anything
and we just want to make sure
that we're not doing anything.
That would potentially harm
their ability to do that I also
energy needs change how we
produce energy changes.
And currently it's changing
pretty fast so I just wanna make
whatever the new technologies
are so certainly we talked about
some deal thermal but there's
all kinds of other things that
might pop up there they're just.
The.
Renewable energy's.
Twelve million dollars over the
year that's don't forget just
Currently today the oil and gas
industry is paying a little over
a million dollars an hour.
To our schools so million
dollars a month for six million
dollars in our work.
Do you for more anything else
all those are important we
should be in all of the above
package I just want to make sure
that we all hear no.
Million dollars a month versus a
having to close thank you Mr
president body for the
conversation and the debate Mr
president body the passage of
committee substitute for house
bill ninety five would formally
establish an office of renewable
public schools this is a benefit
to our tire State Mr president I
move the committee substitute
for house bill ninety I do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
Senator Byrd voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
By a vote of twenty seven in the
thank you Mr president Senate
body thank you we're going on to
item number forty three and I
yield to Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
objection Senator Stewart to
explain the bill thank you Mr
president of this bill sets up a
yearly day for us to celebrate
our Asian American Pacific
Senator Moores district has the
most and I have the second
having the international
district we have over sixty
thousand New Mexicans under
islanders and thirty five
percent American patients they
speak twenty one languages there
and every county I'd I'm sure
February in each odd numbered
years stand for questions
Senator Stewart Senators are
debating house bill two seventy
four as amended.
Anyone wishing debate.
with would this be a like a
Fishel.
Paid holiday for state employees
or is that just say Hey these
folks are here cool we love
them.
sponsor field Senator studio
certainly.
Mr president Senator I'm I'm
wondering why the every other
year.
currently how we do
A native American day
so we do during the sixty
because the thirty day is just
too short for us to have that
just for us to celebrate it or I
thought was for the whole state
though.
Mr president of course is for
the whole state but we're the
ones that offer it.
year people gonna get confused
by that for expecting people
around the state to actually
celebrate the state
anniversary and you know what a
fun time my wife and I had we
went to the the dole factory
several times probably too much
It's every other year because
that's when we're in the sixty
day session so that we can have
them come in and.
Celebrate with us we are the.
This presents exactly right
Senator Stewart because Mr
president I move that house bill
two seventy four as amended do
now pass ask unanimous consent
isn't the record show that all
rules been called all those
And Ortiz enough to the return
of the chamber no objection
centers where voting to your
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
I have a thirty two in the
affirmative zero the negative
house bill two seventy four as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Stewart thank you
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill one to seven
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
personnel act to increase the
statutory minimum licensed
educational assistance salaries
to twenty five thousand dollars
annually effective for the
thousand Mr president members of
the Senate the last rays that
we're that was given for the
EA's was back in two thousand
and four when they received a
minimum salary increase to
Senator Brandt center how to
mail thank you Mr president I
just want to thank the sponsor
for this bill as a former
educator education assistance do
so much for us in the classroom
and I want to thank you for
bringing their salaries up and
for ensuring that we're looking
Lopez thank you Mr president if
you have further debate Senator
Brandt Mr president I I asked
the center yield Senator Lopez
detailed Mr president yes.
because I'm pretty sure they got
the race last year and the year
before in the that we give to
everybody Mister president
senator you are correct.
Thank you Mr president sars one
critical to to helping our kids
with their education helping our
teachers be able to teach and so
I think this is a a good idea to
to raise our minimum salary
have further debate centers the
office.
Thank you met Mr president
well the sponsor yield Senator
Thank you get above our state
minimum wage don't they.
Mr president Senator they they
do yes but.
cost of living increases
so this actually as Senator
Brandt did mention this
establishes the minimum salary
for person entering into this
thousand dollars convert to
more than fifteen dollars an
hour because we were promised
last year that everyone would
read every state employee would
receive more than fifteen
not directly a state employee
that's a negotiated rate that
goes of course through the
unions etcetera and also the
local school boards but this is
mandating that there at least be
schools also said that they were
going to do this without it the
need for legislation and I guess
my my hope is that they did at
least give them fifteen dollars
At least fifteen dollars an hour
after the last year increases
and I hadn't heard that they
didn't until now it kind of
raised a question about whether
assistance they provide our
students and teachers thank you
Mr president.
Any further debate centers.
Si no further debate Senator
Lopez to close in the bill.
role has been called that all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Senator seats were voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
affirmative zero the negative
house bill one twenty seven.
Has duly passed the Senate
Senator Lopez to present Mr
president thank you thank you
members of the Senate we're
taken a stance of the debate
amendment or substitution.
Hearing no objection Senator
Wirth to explain the bill thank
you Mr president this bill just
nine accounts allow anyone at
any time to open account for
someone to save the future
education expenses tax free the
federal changes broadened the
the ability to use those
repayments for Roth IRA
rollovers and tuition for K.
twelve schools so all consistent
with the federal changes and
again I think this will really
this passes this would just stay
in line with federal law.
Senator is weird.
Senator is renovating house bill
three forty two as amended
anyone wishing debate.
bill three forty two as amended
do now pass and pass Ms sent
Senate the records show the
rules been called all those
present really affirmative
except those voting in a
negative by show of hands
Thank you Mr president you
ladies and gentlemen Senate go
on to item number forty six on
today's calendar that's going to
be house joint Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill twenty seven as amended
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection
certificates thank you Mr
cost unfortunately if the
results of the mammogram require
a follow up exam to discern to
determine if the patient has
breast cancer or if the patient
cancer and nearly three hundred
died of this disease this year
alone as we all know early
detection and diagnosis is key
it this bill will significantly
improve access to the follow up
imaging that women need by
eliminating the cost sharing I
stand for questions or debate.
learned a lot about this topic
and the individuals that have
seen success and done these
things in other states have
really helped a lot of of their
president units consent to skew
Senator put a hand on his return
to the chamber no objections.
Bill twenty seven as amended do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows role has been
called and all those present
voting the affirmative except
I to thirty five the Fuhrman is
here on the negative house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill twenty seven as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senators appendix thank
you Mr president thank you
consent of the Senate director
show they're all action for
placing House Bill to ninety
eight on final passage has been
taken and that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution hearing no
point two million dollars from
the public project revolving
fund to for identified funds all
it does is transfer funds into
into that with the four funds
thank you center there is
centers we're debating house
bill two ninety eight as
amended.
Anyone wishing to make.
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present or in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
Senator is very voting your
negative house bill nineteen
ninety eight as amended has duly
passed the Senate Senator yes
thank you Mr president members
of the Senate Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth to take
us to the next order of business
Mr president your engine Roland
cultural affairs committee to
whom has been referred house
rural rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
respectfully submitted.
Senator Shannon D. Pinto
chairwoman Senator L..
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
The reader to read house bill
thirty five as amended do pass.
House bill one sixty one as
amended to pass as amended and
the committee report have a
motion to doubt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed thank the eyes
have it the committee report has
been adopted in the journal
consideration and report same of
the recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
hearing no objection the reader
to read.
Senate memorial thirty eight do
pass Senate memorial forty four
do pass.
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman Senator Stefanics Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report we have a
show that they're acted upon
individually the reader to read
this president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate health and
public affairs committee
As amended respectfully
submitted senator George when
you also chairman.
Center for them.
hearing objects in the
refrigerator.
Senate bill four ninety three as
amended to pass as amended
respectfully submitted senator
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted in the journal reflect
that they're acted upon
individually.
The reader to rape.
Mr president George Disher
grossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part has been
adopted I'd like to announce to
the members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
introduction of legislation
we're on that order business
introduction legislation the
reader to read.
House Bill five introduced by
Representative Kate's and others
legislators and public officers
and employees adding the
exchange of officials of
official acts for sexual favors
to provisions of quid pro quo
other indicate when appearing
representing or assisting
another person in a matter
before a state agency
House Bill five having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
Vance Senate finance House Bill
I.
authorize corrections of minor
drafting or clerical errors or
omission in recorded instruments
of real property house bill two
fifty house bill two fifty
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and act relating
to cannabis regulation creating
a cannabis nursery license
license the licensing department
from the provisions of the
uniform licensing act
restricting the synthesis of
cannabis control division of the
regulation and licensing
department specifying here
procedures granting subpoena
powers providing for
distribution of assets of
House Bill three thirteen.
House Bill three thirteen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Judiciary
our business announcements and
miscellaneous in that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Wirth I
thank you Mr president so that's
it for today for committee
chairs tomorrow we're going to
session as well so with those
time frames in mind ideal to
chairs to announce committees.
Center how to mail.
Mr president the Senate rules
consent to put on my Espanola
valley high school basketball
shorts over my suit to get me
ready for this game.
Senator souls Senate education
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine thirty you get sleep in a
little bit as we are relish our
win tonight in the basketball
meeting at two forty five in
room three twenty one we have a
full list we start off with
Senate bill two eighty one from
Senator Pirtle and then go to
Bobby can Senator Gonzales
be worth the money alone just to
see Senator how to meal do a
couple of chairs thank you when.
Yes Mr president I yield to my
colleague I thank you Mr
president a question with
regards to last year's game if
my memory serves me correct or
game is that correct Mr
president coach said you Mr
president Khalid yes but it was
actually I believe it was three
years ago there was an
oh I thought it was a joke you
know the the the the state
police the patrolman was there
and and our former well and
David to tackle is Erin like I
belongs all right so is so yes
and we have a legitimate shot
tonight so by all means down
everybody calm if you can and
was a real win Mr president
thank you Zachary thank you and
just for clarification of the
Senate was pounding the house
when they left the score was six
to four in favor of the Senate.
This press six to to just for
clarification we we had three
hundred percent of their point
so just when you when you fix
factored in that way it was in
twenty nineteen and then in
twenty twenty we have the the
ended up winning so I I think we
need to put a couple asterisks
on the trophy when we get it
back tonight just so that for
perpetuity the public knows that
they they never really beat us
through the second quarter
wasn't in.
Senator Pinto Mr president that
sounded like a stall strategy
Senator Pinto any further
announcements.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you members with
that unanimous consent the
