Jump over to the consent
calendar so we need Senator
Pirtle in to run that consent
calendar and then we're going to
thirty nine Senator Gonzales
forty Senator diamonds forty one
is Senator Lopez forty two is
Senator souls and forty three as
that'll be our work for
tonight's
Mr presidents and nabbing eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM.
is so ordered Mr president us as
consent that the rules we
suspend of the record show that
the journal's been read in full
and approve subject to revision
and approval of the Judiciary
The Senate will come to order Mr
president asking is consent that
the rules the suspend the
journal show all those present
in this morning session are
present in this afternoon
session.
Committee there's no objection
it is so ordered Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president
Mr major web how about three
times.
Mr president of eleven fifty
are present in this afternoon
session there's no objection it
is so ordered.
Mr president asking is consent
that the rules basically from
the record show that the
journal's been read in full in
and first item seven eight and
nine so unanimous consent we go
that our business third reading
of legislation I yield the
center Brandt for item number
for placing Senate bill one oh
eight on final passage has been
taken is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution seeing
no objection Senator Brandt
explained about.
multiplying the membership in
Department prove CTE courses by
multiplier of point two five
these units will be added to the
program cost is determined in
several years for CTE career
technical education it is one of
those areas that is really
needed in our state we only have
them ready to go straight into a
career we also have a situation
where our labor force is not
ready.
To go straight into the.
provide CTE courses so that
program can be paid for that's
all of us thank you senator rand
Senator debate is Senate bill
one oh eight now you'll to
Senator how to meal followed by
Laboratory and I'm the chief of
staff for the laborers who are
craftsmen and women and this
bill is something that's
definitely needed we've seen
when there was a big push for
you for bringing this bill
forward thanks and have a more
we do have further debate with
Senator Hamblen followed by
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president I don't need to set
the sponsor to yield I'm sending
in strong support of this as
needs to go to a four year
college and that we have a
higher return on investment
right now with these positions
and H. back and plumbing and
electrical and we need to
continue to support that and I
of the art it's fairly new
during the interim we had a
meeting there at sea tac and
they're teaching young people as
part of their high school
education these trades and their
learning incredibly valuable
Senator Hamblen we've center but
they have followed by Senator K.
Hemphill.
A much Mr president I don't need
gone down that path and these
are valuable skills I mean you
can take a look at your car Mr
president for example and I know
you drive a Lamborghini out
there you know so.
their families so I fully
support I want to thank senator
Graham for doing this thank you
thank you senator Senator could
entail thank you Mr president I
to stand in support of this
legislation want to thank the
students who are interested in
going into career technical
Education options so thank you
Senator Brandt for bring this
This present I move that Senate
bill one oh eight do now pass
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the records show the
roll pin call then all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
around at that you're gonna ask
unanimous consent for enrollment
there.
What.
We my vote.
By a vote of thirty two in the
Fuhrman is there on the night of
the Senate bill one await has
he was asking yesterday one more
when he's bills are gonna be
heard and finance it that was
quick.
It's a power rolling the clock
Senator.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
for.
Senator Hemphill we are I did
work on this bill with Hobbs
district to make sure that we
got that number we'll probably
have to come into just that
Mr president Senator by the Mr
president consent to allow
members to remove their jackets.
Saying no objection.
Jack is maybe your.
seventy five.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
seventy five on final passage is
been taken is now subject to
fuel in the United States there
is somewhere around I have the
number here three hundred twenty
one and a half tons of lead gets
dumped in the atmosphere because
is now a move to get unleaded
fuel in the aviation market and
with that there are a couple of
fuels already available but
there is been some reluctance of
the fixed base operator that
provides viewing services at
airports or municipality that
runs an airport from prince
preventing someone from coming
in with unleaded fuel and making
senator Neville followed by
Senator Ingle then Senator
Steinborn Senate Bill thank you
Mr president with the sponsor
there Mr president that would
have to be modified and my older
plan I had to put cylinders on
it so I could run different
kinds of fuel in it but
information if there's been any
information on how many of the
older planes would need to have
the letter would be better if
they have the lead.
are turbines that run on jet
fuel but the Justin engines
approximately seventy five
percent of the fleet can run on
unleaded is called mo gas it's
in order to avoid knocking
require the tetra ethyl lead in
it the solutions that are coming
up now are some that are going
to be a hundred octane unleaded
forty years a reason to change
but it doesn't require any
modifications for the.
The newer fuels that are coming
on the market that are the
happy with auto fuel of but.
I I know that there were some
aircraft that some of my friends
had that would have required the
this available but how readily
available to going to be.
Seneschal Mr president of the
group and it's called the eagle
and it's I'm trying to remember
what the acronym stands for but
they have a deadline of twenty
thirty two have the transition
there Senator fuels available
the problem is getting those
particular formulations out to
still yes selling the old
hundred low lead doesn't prevent
them because they've got an
exclusive contract to sell the
other fuels I'm not sure if I
thank you senator Neville we
have further debate we have
Senator Ingle followed by
Senator Steinborn center in the
US thank you Mr president I I
don't need to sponsor yield but
mechanically and there's lots
and lots of fifteen twenty year
old planes that are here and
thirty year old planes they go
through annual inspections and
thing about is is I think we
there is this year's coming and
it is common and by twenty
thirty and there's a reason for
that because there has to be a
airports have older planes the
USM person for a lot of
different things mostly for
pleasure and things like that
but just an annual on a plane
every year cost two or three
older airplanes to a lot of
experience that we just don't
really need to write the present
time thank you.
debate so that the policy is
Senator thank you Mr president
to sponsor you.
Yes I will.
Mr president Juan airports
guests there are not any that
I'm aware of that is about
selling this with ninety four
unleaded or the VP racing
hundred unleaded fuel but those
And Mr president I mean I burned
one hundred eleven at the
airports and I haven't been to
any airport and just put a new
that Iran one hundred low led to
break the engine in and doesn't
say anything about the use of
any other eight subs to fuel
that can void my engine
warranty.
been tested has there been any
any
Field issues where the engine
shut down because of field do
you have enough lead in it or.
Senator souls.
like Cummings continental's the
other major air.
In
engines all run perfectly fine
on at the FAA has been dragging
allow the sale of leaded fuel
this is the one that just says
you cannot prevent the sale of
unleaded fuel so the put center
Ingle was talking about I think
is the other bill all this does
what's the cost of the fuel
compared to one hundred eight.
Mr president there's only a few
airports are out in California
that are running it right now my
understanding is it's running
the market takes over but it is
inappropriate for us to continue
to dump leaded
particles into the atmosphere in
New Mexico alone it's probably
comes to about half a ton a year
look and on on on for flight and
and wonder low it is not
available then and my only
choice is to use this I I just
don't know what it does to an
but the expansion I don't know
do you know any appeals in New
Mexico that would say Hey I want
to switch to this right away and
in.
becomes available and somebody
wants to come in that they are
not prevented by the FBO or the
airport administration from
switching.
who's going to do and when
they're going to do and how
they're going to do it and and
it's a little cautionary tale
for me because you don't have
too many places you can stop and
they're playing at a gas station
motor fuel you can run on leaded
fuel on certain engine is that
still allowed by the F. A. F. A.
A..
Mr president requires an STC
ones most of them have been run
successfully without any
incidents and in fact most of
those get a higher TVO by
reading the unleaded fuels and
you don't get the problems with
Thank you seven yes we do have
further debate we have Senator
Gallegos followed by Senator
Steinborn Senator Gallegos.
Mr president with the sponsor
be by twenty thirty that this
unleaded would be the only
option is that what I'm
understanding this runs on our
and so Mister president that is
the goal of this eagle group
testing some require
certification but yes the goal
is by twenty thirty to switch it
over completely and less the EPA
comes in because of the lead
some fearful that that's a
little bit too quick if we don't
have this already in place but
my next question Mr president
center of how does this affect
affect them it's wherever they
would get the fuel that they're
putting in their airplanes that
if somebody wanted to put in an
unleaded
Mr present center that is is not
a mandate.
A tear point until the twenty
third is that correct.
Sen missiles Mr president yeah
hi this current time it's not
somebody wants to put one in
they are not alone you cannot
prevent them from putting it in
because you want to sell only
your hundred low lead.
senator because we have a
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr presence there with
the senator a was senator you
Senate souls do you yes thank
sale unlimited fuel is that
correct Senator souls Mr.
Mr president Senator Steinborn
that's correct and as I heard
you state agency presents enter
cell.
Senator souls Mr president
center yes thank you thank you
Mr president Senate and so and I
assume a lot of fuel is a heck
it actually has five times the
tetra ethyl lead that was in the
gasoline that we got out of the
system back in the eighties.
Well okay so not to be confused
lead so it is incredibly more
fuel of.
Friendly or environmentally
friendly because it doesn't have
the dangers lead then the EPA
has determined there is no safe
**** field comes online.
Does this create a point going
to rush out and and and get
enter into contracts for this
will specifically seek out those
airports to land so that they
can buy the more environmentally
friendly fuel and so this really
is part of the transition in the
help clean up the environment
thank you Mr president
ThinkCentre.
Si no further debate.
Senator also closed on the bill
the permitting upset those voted
in the negative by show of hands
all Senator seats we're voting.
Senator Gallegos voting no
Senator Ingle voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
duly passed the Senate Senator
souls thank you Mr president as
we're transitioning to cleaner
fuels this is just one step in
that process thank you going on
to item number nine on the
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Thank you Mr chair and
colleagues Senate bill four
fifty three.
Addresses how the state
school authority for teachers
outside Albuquerque APS for
The Albuquerque school district
because of the different nature
center there Senator Hickey
excuse me centers we can please
keep the volume down.
There's a lot of side
conversations going on and it's
difficult to hear the debate
Senator Hickey.
people in Medicare with Medicare
advantage plans was sixty
thousand I and they only have
about twelve thousand pre chair
so it really addresses the first
and this bill calls for the same
to continue but only for one
more purchasing here the four
year cycle is coming to an end
and is now working its way
through the house where
consolidation of purchasing and
the law of large numbers of
insurance comes to apply so
powers agreement and they do it
in consultation with the DFA and
the legislative finance council
purchasing that there be active
involvement of marketing of
planned so that there is really
good competition right now there
signal only has three hundred
because basically they've never
really had a chance to do open
marketing and the other thing is
does it start to lay the
groundwork which is coming
when APS it's only up to about
twenty sometimes thirty percent
for average it's hard to say
even that out through the entire
state and make it fair so this
works so that the state is
getting a fair deal for it to
health insurance and with that I
Thank you Mr president if the
sponsor would please yield.
Certainly Senator what's.
Is that you need a big volume of
participation.
And you need a broad spectrum of
insurance so in other words to
reduce the cost of the plan you
would need a broad participation
think you pretty much hit the
nail on the head the law of
large numbers of insurance
basically
says that at a particularly in
happens they use up about fifty
percent of the entire premium
the next day twenty five forty
percent fifty percent use
care and you're correct it's
usually the younger people but
that's the idea of insurance is
that your a lot of people pay
and you pay in a lower cost than
understand what you're trying to
do there but we're I have a hick
up in this is that the other way
they're not over charging ends
way understand the spill was
that we want to get them to a
hundred percent of Medicare
payments.
and senator if I'm wrong or
mistaken on that Mr president Mr
president and Senator you're
in every state and a percent of
Medicare but most hospitals will
negotiate rates that are around
two hundred percent of Medicare
different medical specialties
or what have you but as I I
think where you're going is that
in the rand health care study
which looked at New Mexico and
year by a hospital
then that has ended up having
New Mexico being one of the for
down about two hundred and
twenty four percent.
Senator Woods yes Mr president
and and senator.
Our provider aren't out there we
don't have people out there you
know on during many of these
debates of tell that same story
I don't see how that's going to
increase.
My health care in the rural
areas.
I don't and and that's one voted
from the center of the medical
profession in New Mexico which
is Albuquerque.
And so.
And right now it's closer for
state you know there's a.
And and providers and special in
your carry some kind of
insurance there's there's of
Usually.
An emergency room doctor is
directing that helicopter to go
In our local areas like at one
time there were.
And to get general
practitioners.
We can't just keep.
How many how many
good question Sir Mr president
and senator.
How many.
Mr president and Senator Woods
it depends upon the profession
if the the if it's a
psychiatrist and they're doing
talk therapy they might only see
thirty a day because a lot would
just be hypertension checks
colds and and what have you the
neurosurgeons again it depends
and and and I'd be happy to
opine more if you would like and
what what is potential what what
what this bill helps set up so
that we can actually get
Tell me how this bill.
Helps get doctors in the rural
areas Mr president.
they have to meet adequacy
network adequacy standards and
to meet network adequacy
do is in the rural areas we
would pay substantially higher
rates because there's fewer
doctors and for us to say we're
percent in order to be able to
meet the requirements in the
contracts with the state that
through these health plans are
from the larger health systems
who are able to charge up to
five hundred percent of Medicare
we we definitely are going to
have to raise the rates next
year I will bring a bill forward
and I have to learn about the
behavioral health I have to pay
particularly in primary care and
not just physicians but PA's
that they have to be reimbursed
I had an idea.
And I found that it was already
in practice and that is on loan
repayment.
And when I went to higher ed and
started talking to a woman I
said yeah we've already got
that.
But we have more.
People wanting.
can you imagine that and so when
I tried to put that varies on
top of that will you can imagine
that didn't work very well so
For for the
Loan.
For service repayment.
it's only for through a four
year period.
We might they might the place my
grown who knows hopefully with
and they divide you know get a
debate Sir I appreciate you you
shared with me today your
knowledge of there's I've got a
lot to learn thank you Mr
president.
Mr president I move that Senate
bill four fifty three do now
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
Senator is we are voting all
senators to your seats.
If you wish to vote no please
Senator Baca voting no Senator
Diamond voting no.
Senator Woods voting no Senator
And senator bill voting no.
Five of twenty six in the
affirmative twelve the negative
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill four fifty three as amended
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Ingle to explain his
vote.
the governor's health care
authority that will basically be
completely governmental control
medicine for the state of New
Mexico this is how you start
these things and this is how
will be gone because businesses
and things like that look at
things like this for others the
medical care for my employees.
the doctor and everything will
be concentrated in the urban
areas and eventually if you're
in New Mexico that's the only
place you can get care.
Thank you Senator Ingle Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
colleagues.
I yelled out to Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth to take
us to the next order of business
thank you Mr president just
Mr president your disarray
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill seventeen
has had it under consideration
reports and recommendations that
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports we act on them
with one motion with the journal
reflect that they were acted
upon individually in public the
One committee report Senate bill
three fifteen do bass.
House bill thirty one committee
report three as amended to pass
respectfully submitted to also
serve on this chairman Senate.
Senator about this.
Excuse me
Mr president I I got your county
because I think there should be
more committee reports then you
County business you know that
districts have occasions Senator
you you did ask for him to count
for you to master in the county
Count Dracula is that correct we
reports red in the right.
And and I I think there should
be a few more than yeah just
for.
The reader to tell Senate bill
for twenty six do pass as
amended.
Thank you.
Senate bill for twenty eight six
committee report as amended do
pass but that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill five thirteen do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman Senator office Mr
present before I make that
motion how many committee
reports again did you just read
Mr Chairman.
Senator is we have a motion to
adopt the eight committee
reports.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
order of business thank you Mr
president so we're going to go
to Senate consent calendar
number one and Senator Diamond
is going to lead us through that
so unanimous consent we go about
action for placing Senate bill
three ninety eight on final
passage has been taken and it is
now open to debate amendment
substitution and I will yield to
Senator Rodriguez see no
Housing Authority boards they
establish their own boards and
they're able to serve kind of
county departments but there was
a a yeah provision in the law
ninety eight.
Say no debate a Senator three
ninety eight center diamond
thank you Mr president I Mr
Senator Diamond I apologize
call say no objections centered
I'm gonna close.
Thank you Mr president of the
Senate bill three ninety eight
do pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role as my
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Here's the.
I have a third in the Fuhrman is
in the negative Senate bill
three ninety eight.
Has duly passed the Senate
four on final passage has been
taken and it is now open to
debate amendment or substitution
and I would be able to Senator
Griggs Senator Griggs.
to pay for a merging season
unforeseen repair reconstruction
or replacement of court on
property and expenses incidental
thereto.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president I move
that Senate bill three seventy
four do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
president I'm I move I'm sorry
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill for seventy
present this bill quite simply
makes it unlawful for a lender
to refuse to provide pay off
balance to any with the borrower
on a home loan retail
the time of the inquiry they
would have provided an inquiry
by mail a few days later which
would have then been already
stale by the time I got the
I'll take any questions was
present thanks Senator what the
senators are debating Senate
bill for seventy two.
Center for the thank you Mr
president units consent to
excuse under common to return to
to Senate bill for seventy to do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
has duly passed the Senate.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president that
concludes consent calendar.
Senate the records show all
action for placing House Bill
one forty eight on final passage
has been taken that is no
subject to debate amendment or
eight proposes is required to
early childhood education and
care department to enter into
inter government agreement with
the tribe is the tribe request
programs use in their own
culturally and linguistically
relevant education standards
assessment and evaluation.
As members of the body as many
of you know the history of
education this country.
culture we're very lucky today
that in New Mexico we still have
tribes in our have our this was
speaker languages and it's
really important for our young
the world so at this point now
as we now stand for questions.
Thank you senator Shendo centers
were debating house bill one
forty eight anyone which is a
debate.
forty eight do now pass and pass
and consent of the sender the
records show.
That the role has been called
and all those present voting
affirmative except those voting
in negative bushel pants Senator
duly passed the Senate Senator
Shendo thank you Mr president
thank you members of the body
we're gonna go on to item number
thirty nine in a calendar and I
yield to Senator Gonzales.
action for placing House Bill
tool one as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
it's Mrs Linda Trujillo
superintendent of licensing and
regulation.
There's been a request for an
expert witness.
Thank you Mr president
of course some.
House Bill tool one as amended
this is coming from
extending the termination date
of the licensor board for
veterinarian medicine architects
professional engineers and
The second part of it is that
this eliminates the termination
date of the licensure for boards
for optometry.
essay of nineteen seventy eight
Mr president members that's what
this does thank Senator Gonzales
seven remaining house bill two
one is amended senator Morris to
end there's a list about six or
seven boards that were removing
the sunset date completely that
they will no longer have to go
through sunset review as I what
I just heard you say Mister
going to see come before sunset
because that's a that's a huge
change in policy that we're
gonna be doing by not having
sunset clauses on these boards
could you tell us which ones we
podiatry pharmacy acupuncture
and oriental medicine dental
health care.
state policy for these just five
or six boards after all these
years because president senator
Senator Gonzales.
eliminated several years ago.
Mr president center can you tell
us what other professions are
boards we do not have sunset
clauses on.
sunset on the sign language
board.
Senator Gonzales president
Senator yes.
Action is present we don't do
that I knew the answer to that
question before and senator we
don't do the that they don't
have a sunset clause or longer I
just think it's up the body this
this as part of the what's
typically the renewal process
that someone struck these sunset
clauses and I think it's a
obviously debate that is worthy
done in this manner agency
presents all the body obviously
has this is all those who have
had licensors in the past think
about what we're doing here for
these particular boards and not
does force the boards in the
profession to come back before
this body from time to time and
explain themselves and what
they're doing I think that some
accountability that these boards
should have it sounds like we're
a pretty big change of public
policies are headed down and I
don't think we actually had a
debate here on the floor about
the significance of that so the
Senator Gonzales you Senator
Gonzales G. of.
Mr president you.
Senator I want us here I've been
here a long time and we've.
Sure fire I'm I'm just curious I
I'm not aware of how many years
but I know it's awfully large
number.
boards but not all of them fall
under the regulation licensing.
Center I have a friend of mine
is an attorney that was in the
Okay well I just wonder wonder
if he still had a job is there
you know if it is a is a to
representative that board and
anyway I it's one of those
with your debate you're did you
ask a question.
Senator yes.
Thank you Mr president of the
sponsor you.
Senator Gonzales G. L.
of scheduled to roll at the same
time and I don't White House
extending the dates for those
three.
Mr president in the Senator home
the the ones that were extended.
And this presents an but nobody
ever said why they wanted him
not to fall at the same time is
that the rest of them was there
a reason why we extend those for
a longer period of time.
that that is normal schedule for
six years.
Okay Mister president I just
seen by the house amended it to
extend those look beyond what
that you know some of these
commissions we really need to
clean them up and when we're
hearing these and LFC I think
there was three people that had
a license for interior design
list to get rid of to the animal
shelter in boarding the boards
never meet they don't have
enough people on the boards they
don't do anything they're not
have three people there watching
commissions but we need to start
consolidating those we can't
just keep adding and adding have
have boards and commissions and
they really don't really
accomplish anything they don't
have enough people pointed to
Thank you centerman us with
senator to subpoena.
Thank you the madam president
president Senator Gonzales I'm
trying to figure out what you
know for in the bill it talks
about the.
elimination of the sunset clause
The podiatrists the pharmacy the
pharmacists.
And the acupuncture and oriental
medicine people that I don't see
that in the bill to it am I
the all those numbers.
Is that it madam president
Senator yes thank you madam
president Senator okay so my
boards who's the.
Life expires at the end of July.
And they weren't extended.
development board the animal
sheltering Committee the
interior design board the
athletic commission medical
advisory board advisory to the
it was a conscious decision not
to extend them.
Madam president Senator yes it
podiatrists in the others by
repealing.
That and then the ones we just
allowed to die.
Who.
Some.
Senator Gonzales.
If if if the sunset clause kicks
in and we don't extend their
eliminated.
Madam madam president and
that the way that works madam
president Senator Gonzales madam
president and senator that is
correct thank you very much
thank you madam president.
Thank you senator any further
debate on.
Thank you madam president I move
that the house bill tool one is
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
a Centers we're voting on house
bill two oh one as amended two
years suits if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
now.
Senator share vote.
Senator diet goes folks know.
Senator Shendo votes no.
So Senator current Hemphill
votes now Senator Wirth votes no
Senator Duhigg votes now.
By a vote of twenty three in the
affirmative sixteen and the
negative house bill two one as
will continue working with.
Thank you.
So let's go on to item number
forty of with Senator Diamond.
Thank you madam president I ask
debate amendment or substitution
Senator Diamond to explain the
bill thank you madam president
this is a bill that has passed
the house unanimously it is also
pass the Senate rules
to support program goals of all
other executive branch agencies
this bill is supported by the
New Mexico tourism department
because it allows them to
enterprise service and so
there's no additional
appropriation in here as the
services within be charged to
the other agencies.
It is supported.
Department and the state
personnel office and without
madam president I stand for
questions is there debate on
house bill three seventy seven
the house is that a older
version of P. Harmon.
bill Senator share this madam
president I actually want to
admonish you because the vote in
the house is completely
irrelevant to us so madam chair
amend madam president you should
admonish the senator that set
that.
I do have a real debate I really
really do I just want to the
body to know.
That I believe this is the very
it's the best idea since sliced
bread it's the best ideas since
the pocket owner sure you know.
So I would encourage.
The other debate Senator Padilla
madam president I just don't
need the Sanchez deal as they
were seen Senator would so
worked up and excited.
Thank you madam president we do
that again.
question do you yes I do madam
president she does thank you
madam president serve question
is kind of an appropriation
question resource question
if the tourism department is
first of all it's gonna take
resources is gonna take staff
and you know this is a the.
The department the comes before
us and talks about how you know
sell so I saw originally there
was a fifty million dollar
appropriation in the bill which
that was kind of interesting
with that was stricken so for us
Senator I think you said that
there's no there's no
for the tourism secretary was
explained to me that the fifty
million dollars was quickly
removed the appropriation was
removed from this bill because
the tourism department is going
to operate using their
legislation is bill the other
agency another agency let's say
CYFD or workforce solutions for
their time to do that and so
there was no appropriation
required they would just be
I welcome I would welcome an
answer from whoever but but
you're sure Senator that madam
president that the tourism
Thank okay what is the correct
answer this question and not and
I'm I know you're you're you're
gonna give it a correct answer
which is just can that took
tourism department actually
welcome an expert witness
senator Jim try a shorter to the
to the chambers place with you
I'm I'm sorry you Secretary with
unanimous consent of the Senate.
explanation on how the
enterprise services.
Function works and how we charge
at other agencies so they can
pay for these the person.
staff forty developed to do this
are we going to hire additional
people once this bill passes.
Madam president yes the at the
FTEs in the positions are
questions thank you very much
and thank you Secretary for
joining us.
Let's not forget Senator Woods
wants to work in that
department.
witness deal sentiment matter
present idea.
Thank you madam president
Senator on page three is
concerned it's a has a word in
there I kind of flag every time
source of section B. not
withstanding.
Be not withstanding the
provisions of the open meeting
that.
of the open meetings act why in
this legislation first off which
is not withstanding and we'll be
simple open meetings act as a
pretty big and I'm I'm being
withstanding madam president
Senator so if you look that up
and find out why as a body we
would be doing that and justify
Senator Moores and actually then
present I was are currently
drafting amendment and so debate
was starting to a close so if
anyone else wants to the the
senator Morris I'm learning here
that that language is existing
language in relationship to the
New Mexico partnership.
Currently.
shouldn't debate why it's in
there so my presence Senator
figure Asher expert witness why
give me a reason I should not
draft this ammendment quickly so
Madam president at this time we
would invite ask unanimous
consent to invite Jason Espinoza
is expert witness to join us on
the for.
president Jason Espinoza all
right seeing no objection of
archer farms Representative what
is his expertise.
Senator Diamond.
With New Mexico broadcasters
Madam president I see that the
senator.
Is visiting now but just to
Public record as well.
Yes get there what will drop the
amendment so we can have that
debate to find out if it's
maybe it is the right policy
decision exempt them from the
rope in meetings act but usually
whenever I see that we're not
withstanding and then the next
census open meetings act I think
for us to have madam president.
Madam president and senator I
think that the idea of this is
to protect this nonprofit allow
Can I have an on that point
Madam no we don't do on that
points here we can get on the
list.
think there would be a public
policy decision for including
that I do not like that language
it does go on to say in the
statute that is about corporate
acts I do not like toward now
was standing but I do see just
as a cursory
evaluation of this I can see why
they might have put that in
there so I I do withdraw that
Senator Tallman to wish to
debate the bill.
Thank you Mr president does the
Madam president senator Tom and
the base budget is around twenty
three million.
hundred percent increase their
time madam president senator Tom
and appropriation was struck
early on so there's no
appropriation included in this
bill.
difference Mr madam chair madam
president.
Between the.
What this bill is a proposing to
tourism is to promote tourism
throughout New Mexico specific
to this bill is it creates a
marketing division within
tourism so that there's a
directly from the participating
agency would would pay directly
into tourism for their services.
Sir Thomas.
question or debate thank you
madam present movie sponsor you.
Madam you Shiels.
Madam president then Senator was
This is a madam president
senator Munoz this is best
practice language a specific to
just heard the Senator the good
center from Albuquerque talk
about it but one that works in
the side the partnership it's
done for marketing reasons so
that that way is tourism.
Department planning on doing
that too.
You madam president Senator many
of us know the language in here
You madam present but the
language also says
notwithstanding some the the I
don't think the partnership
language has that contained and
I can't look it up that quick
and that that.
language or use that language
for if they had to go
entertainment business and
nobody knows about it it's done
in secrecy so nobody knows
what's happening at those
dinners or if they're buying
Madam president center then yes
yes those those figures will be
reported.
Mr present the net madam
president they know what they're
at a restaurant census going
downtown Francisco to entertain
a
marketing partner for dinner in
the cost of the new no till
thank you Secretary just wants
to note that you can opt into
this program thank you do not
have to use their services.
Then present but but think they
can take the money and they're
Yes madam president yes senator
Munoz those receipts would be
transparent for both agencies to
look at thank you madam
president.
Madam you I do Scheels
Madam president when I was
working with this inter agency
Is that correct.
Madam president and Senator
Sedillo Lopez at there is a
mechanism to the department of
Madam president and senator by
statute the tourism department
has a non reverting fund that
Madam president and senator
there's an MO you that would
exist between the two existing
agencies.
you clearly states all the
services in the terms of the
agreement and it's done on a
regular basis already through
the department of tourism with
other agencies including the
department of game and fish
senator the secretary announces
tonight that she has not had any
problems receiving payments from
other agencies.
That's great because I heard
I've heard of many problems with
money was stripped from the bill
how much money is in the budget
for this
Project madam president and
senator there is not an
appropriation line in this
whether it CYFD the New Mexico
department of game and fish what
other agency has contracted with
the Department of servitors and
will be directly invoice for
be a self self funding where
other agencies to mate all of
the we wish to utilize their
services will still have a
marketing budget within their
own department budget.
a unique well I guess madam
president to have another
question has this been done
anywhere else is a model for it.
Madam president senator right
have have had trouble with with
some interagency trouble of
transfers
but maybe they didn't have the
M. O. use in place.
I see none Senator Diamond.
I apologize politics you were
standing upright Senator Burt.
In this will be the one.
Kind of funnel through to make
this thing happen.
If you will remember one of the
few agencies in the state who
research they came up the truth
program which is known all over
the state quite frankly all over
the country specially in the
marketing areas.
Pardon me in the marketing areas
with cultural affairs and other
agencies within the state so I
really encourage the body to
allow this process to go
forward.
the state of New Mexico thank
you madam president.
Thank you senator.
Any other debate now.
Senator Sedillo Lopez for a
madam chair thank you any other
debate saying none Senator
Diamond close thank you madam
president.
What what this bill offers is
tourism department for planning
and executing marketing measures
to be clear every executive
agent still can still contract
outside for their marketing
kind of the silo efforts from
these entities and so with that
madam president I move that H.
House Bill three seven seven as
Senator three voting on house
bill three seventy seven just
thrice amended to go to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
Photo thirty nine in the
affirmative zero the negative
house bill three seventy seven
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
Sixtyeight as a month.
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to Sixtyeight us amended.
On final passage has been taken
Madam president I would at this
time ask unanimous consent to
allow my expert witness by the
name of our through our to let
into the chamber.
The land grants has a political
subdivisions of the state which
is the status that they do not
currently have and which is
house bill two Sixtyeight will
outlay from the state to address
the needs in the centuries of
all consistorial lands eighty
five percent of the forest
common lands of the lower
and Herman takes fire.
The current non governmental
status disqualifies them for
this funds which could be
applied to a forest in the state
kills restoration initiatives.
know that political subdivisions
and with that I would stand for
questions.
We do have an amendment.
substitute for House Bill to
sixty eight as amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
Antoinette Sedillo Lopez Senator
Sedillo Lopez to move the
amendment.
Senator Sedillo Lopez to explain
the amendment thank you I want
to start by saying I believe
this is a friendly amendment.
People came up and said what are
currently operating as political
subdivisions under the Land
Grant general provisions.
The nineteen oh seven act the
created the land grant general
provisions did not specifically
covered by the Land Grant
general provisions this
ammendment remedies that.
Naming all the land grants
covered by the general
provisions in the statute
provides clarity to federal and
nine article one this is
necessary for state and federal
agencies would determine
eligibility ability for funding
for specifically target to land
grants a clarifying
transfers of property ensuring
compliance with anti donation
clause of the New Mexico state
constitution.
Now the reason this is necessary
to ensure that all of them are
covered by the Land Grant
general provisions be designated
in the statute therefore if we
don't amend up to sixty eight to
list all of the currently
so this is a really crucial
amendment
so.
I move the amendment.
So I stand for debate in
education.
I stand for debate on the
amendment.
and recognize this as a friendly
amendment.
Debate on the amendment.
Senator Stefanics.
We are missing one or two land
grants in this entire list.
And I'd like to know where she
got the list from Senator
no that madam president I
believe that of both.
Will you yield.
I understand that you have Mr to
look to their would you ask him
their and just different statute
so it was a necessary to listen
to this one.
So madam president that's my
point is
And including it in this
New statute and excluding
others.
covered in this ammendment or in
other statutes or the original
statute that is the intent and I
believe that there was a
comprehensive effort and that
effort to comprehensively cover
A seeing further debate Senator
Ivey Soto through much madam
president then president with
the sponsor the moment yield you
yield yes madam president I
But I don't see the Ortiz Y.
Pino Land Grant on the list.
Madam president that is not my
Actually madam president Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino would yield.
Do you Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
madam president Senator the that
like many other of older
families there were private land
grants issued as well as.
Miller says community land
And and it but it's but it was a
private land grant it wasn't
community land grants.
And so like a lot of others over
the years it's been divided sold
some Texans which came right
before it was also given to my
dad and his siblings by a and.
The air the great land granted
Miguel and Santa Fe counties.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you well
actually if if part of those
given to their sizes and maybe
to make sure we weren't leaving
and historic land grant out.
Of the list so thank you very
much better present thank you
more debate on the amendment.
with the
I'm sorry with this Amendment
house sponsor you for just a
quick quick question Senator
Yes madam president it was dealt
with or if these issues were
addressed with the land grant
center to try to find out why
it's such a large amendment.
now at the late hour.
Center city Lopez.
Thank you my understanding is
the process of
Thank us member center I
appreciate that I just want to
make sure that we didn't miss
any of them that we did the
you further debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none of the Center state
Lopez to close on the amendment
thank you madam president this
very diligent and thorough
attempt by the institute of land
grants at the University of New
Mexico and I was asked to carry
this
this amendment this friendly
sixty eight do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
religion class for a voice vote
time to actually get some sleep
but I'm still going to vote no
we can do that.
But I have to yell louder.
Okay let's go back to your
voting on Senate floor amendment
number one to house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to Sixtyeight as amended if
you wish to add to your seats if
Moores voting no Senator share
voting no Senator Brandt voting
no.
President.
We're in the middle voting.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you madam president that
the central going to questions
right any further debate on the
bill.
House so Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty eight as amended twice.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
voting in the negative but show
hands centers we're voting on
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty eight is twice amended
tier seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hands.
Thank you madam president thank
you members.
Thank you at school on to number
forty two Senator souls thank
you madam president I ask
amendment or substitution
Senator souls to explain the
bill thank you madam president
this bill is a bill that has a
universities for high school
credit and also towards their
college degrees it so that's why
it's called dual credit accounts
both places there is always been
community colleges and high
schools think it's a good idea
but it's the management actually
the funding of it and all the
details around it this would
create a task force that in one
Seeing none their souls to
close.
Madam president I move that
house bill one twenty five as
amended do now pass and pass
agency consent of the Senate
amended if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
affirmative is here in the
negative house bill one twenty
five just amended has duly
passed the Senate Senator souls
thank you madam president thank
you we'll go on to number forty
placing House Bill three seventy
on final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
Senator Lopez to explain the
bill thank thank you very much
honored to be the one of those
Sanchez on that I know we worked
with senator share and several
others on this floor as we a
and that was with the assumption
that the state would have to set
a reimbursement rate based on
data from New Mexico department
of health all payer claims
madam president is is extending
the sunset date
So it would be July first twenty
twenty eight and a step for
questions.
those question
Senator Lopez to yield madam
president S. shields thank you
sending you surprise bills.
madam president what what the
bill actually was is to
that is your arrives in the mail
for out of area of services
provided in the intent was to
make sure that we are
protecting the consumer set up
some claim on that one madam
president.
Madam presence in and and I
think it's a good idea but I
think we need to look in the
future and I'd love to work with
hospital because I don't know if
any of you have been in the
hospital or had a child in the
hospital but after you think
everything's paid.
and so that's something we need
to fix thank you and and I
support extending sunsets this
can be fixed but we need to fix
that as well.
you very much madam president I
now move that Senate and house
bill three seventy.
I do now pass and I ask
bill three seventy tier seats if
you wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
I to thirty six in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house bill three seventy has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Lopez thank you madam president
item number six and a bill for
forty two as twice amended and
yield to senator doing.
Thank you madam president I ask
debate amendment or substitution
Senator do had to explain the
bill.
Thank you madam senator so.
commissioner of public lands was
in two thousand one the salaries
have not been adjusted for
inflation sense that I what this
bill does is it adjust them for
Thank you and we do have an
amendment the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill for forty two
number one to Senate bill four
forty two as amended Senator
Ivey Soto to explain the
amendment thank you very much of
Madam president enterprises I
looked at the list I noticed
Our.
As a matter the lieutenant
governor to the old to the list
so the next time we do this
they're all there at the same
time.
the third one there is that
repeal the section of law where
the lieutenant governor's salary
has been which is eighty five
thousand dollars a year which is
the same amount that the other
eight six I did notice that when
people
step in for the governor.
They get paid a per diem for
since nineteen twenty.
Every secretary state elected
has been female.
than the secretary of state so
that anybody serving as governor
program will get paid the
additional amount thank you
madam president.
Senator Morris to debate the
amendment thank you madam
president I have one up on
Senator Ivey Soto about the
issue lieutenant governor and
the salary so I will entertain
him with some knowledge had
saw the constitution for
presiding as president of the
Senate that was the compensation
for lieutenant governor that was
it so except for when they were
secretary of state has always
been in the office of officer
and had a salary even back in
the old days results in a
governor got ten dollars still
does get ten dollars a day every
issues so thank you Mr president
sent figures Sarasota.
So that in the constitution
where we're supposed to pay the
governor five thousand dollars
Hi other debate on the
amendment.
Seeing no answer I asserted
close.
Madam president thank you so
Moores for this lesson although
that and I don't know who's
seventy one cents a trivia
question for later on in the
evening in the meantime I move
that that Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill four
If you're in favor of the
amendment signify by saying aye.
adopted that Khan debated the
bill is our debate on the bill
as amended Senator Moores.
I just needed to stand up and
say I was right there was over a
month ago on thank you I just
Thank you madam president.
And.
I I think I think I see I'll
just confirm here so it looks
sis thank you senator I'm just
confirming the effective date
was it looks like I just found
here in health and public
affairs was added in section two
Madam president okay so so
without that effective date that
But initially madam president
and and senator looks like it
was in the only in the title
thought process or the debate
and Senate finance in removing
that
that effective date that
actually would have enacted it
let's council had added that
reference to twenty twenty seven
in the title looking at.
salaries during their term.
Let's council was not aware of a
of the fact that we actually did
this in nineteen seventy one and
this in nineteen seventy one we
increased the salaries of.
Bruce king David nerve Norvell
and and all the other folks
fascinating history lesson of
the constitutional convention in
nineteen ten and what he found.
Overall what he found was that
that language
that limited it to not during
their terms was only good for
the salaries were paid and so
and it was never challenged
again.
So we have president for doing
this we have done this before it
then present I want to correct
something I said at the
beginning I said that this
adjusted them for inflation this
actually doesn't even get them
up to the amount that they would
I thank you madam presents our
editor up but but that was in
excess of the question I asked
and so I think that would be
more appropriate for closing of
the bill or or more debate but
will while you're sitting in
office this is going to if
passed go to the house and and
later go go up stairs where
we're forcing the executive to
manner if we if we enacted these
types of statutes to to coincide
with an election cycle you know
nature and so I I just wanted to
point that out to the body and
called some attention to that
back and forth with the
effective date where it appeared
which would have added to the
body of the statue which I feel
would have been the proper way
to have drafted the bill and
then now again going into
in effect of the statewide
offices and the executive will
be signing into law their own
pay race thank you madam
president thank you next we'll
Sponsor of the bill a test of
the bill Senator Duhigg yes
madam president shields it
doesn't address all the offices
bit under be sick on line to the
get the salary and it would be
the next governor who succeeds
to that office.
don't necessarily read it that
way but but I can I can see what
you're saying madam president I
was county commissioner long
time ago and we had a court case
don't have open right here but I
think it's Representative if our
I think our courts have ruled
already that you can't get a mid
term Harris I think that's
court.
to to these officers again mid
term parents says that you can.
I'll defer to your your
expertise chair the attorney I'm
not but I'm just going from if
thank you we'll go next to
Center manuals.
Thank you madam chair and and on
the Sanchez deal for second but
judges get a paying crease our
judges in New Mexico get a pay
increase and we follow some
guidelines with that if you look
you know people ran for this
legislators authority to
appropriate how they want to do
pay increases throughout the
legislature will whoever we give
it to we give it to state
employees we give it to the
pay raise well should we had a
CPI to this and say that
disinflationary and that it
should go up just like the
judges to when federal or should
we say it should be tracked with
another state the same
right now and so if you take a
basis and say Hey what's a fair
rate lets a fair balance and you
haven't had a raise in twenty
years
this morning the rules and I sat
and heard there's there's no way
the public likes this at all
they don't like paid politicians
state and so that's the big
question.
Is here we need to be
competitive we don't care who
the governor is we don't care
which governor signs this I
think every other governor has
have a secretary of state that
makes eighty five thousand
dollars a year I don't know and
maybe that Sanchez will yield I
think I'm a sponsor to but maybe
that sponsor will yield.
ahead and madam president
Senator I think there it's it
varies from state to state I
think we would still be below
that that's a question you want
to be below average in New
Mexico all the time or do you
want better people running for a
position that they can live
their life with I mean that's
the question it's the same
is part of the quality people
running for elections they they
got to spend a lot of time they
spend a lot of money and so
that's the question we're trying
to answer are we equal and are
our friends over here trying to
help our friends over there no
we want to make sure when these
people will run and win for
office that they serve the state
and then they can make a living
dollars I mean that's the same
question we ask her every single
day with the with our complete
problems throughout the state
should be competitive we should
be fair twenty years with no pay
increases really sets a bar
really low saying do we really
Thank you we do have an
amendment to the reader will
right.
Senate floor amendment number
madam president I move Senate
floor amendment number two to
Senate bill four forty two
Sir to see panel to explain the
amendment.
unanimous vote this is a very
divisive issue.
They should wait until the next
group of public officials are
Ran for office knowing with the
salaries were.
I know that you know it may be
viewed as a hardship to be paid
that we should wait and make it
effective in twenty twenty seven
Senate finance committee reached
a different conclusion I'm
simply proposing an amendment to
give the body a chance to make a
it it hands a very difficult the
pops a very difficult decision
in the governor's lap does it
look like she's trying to get
extra money in the middle of
discussed it with her but the
issue really is.
What we communicate to the
public about our attitude about.
the.
And senator doing his mentioned
that she knows of the case were
that was allowed.
I'm not an attorney all I know
is the optics of the situation
you madam president this is an
unfriendly amendment I I I I
hear what Senator Ortiz the same
and I I understand the argument
serving will happen I believe
the longest serving secretary of
state in the history of New
Mexico
who will have never been paid an
out my understanding is that the
governor will sign us
but regardless of that she's a
pretty tough lady madam
president I'm I'm pretty sure
Thank you madam president madam
president
I looked up the section article
I section seven real quick and
whether the so the question now
is
The governor get the money or
not does that put pressure on
earth and I think it does I
think it might be difficult we
everybody and and pay scales and
and right order we got adopt
this amendment just for that
reason thank you madam
president.
Thank you more debate on the
amendment etcetera Thoman.
Yield thank you it's late so
either of all the a lot of these
situations over the years were
there was of legislation to
agree with Senator Baca I agree
with senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
we was senator Munoz to should
definitely not be effective
city manager Santa Fe makes more
than a hundred forty four
thousand so I'm not against the
tax increase the salary increase
but certainly up pose the the
You madam president respectfully
to my neighbor.
I rise in opposition to this
amendment.
Is an issue of self dealing.
And so that when senator
Neville.
Was on the board of county
commissioners.
Well that is self dealing.
The
and municipal elected officers
themselves.
Who's making the decision here.
Is not the secretary of state
and it's not the lieutenant
governor.
And while there may have been
It's not the governor.
I don't want anybody else but
none of these people contacted
me.
None of their staffs contacted
Potentially.
One could perhaps say there
might be with the governor if he
signs it.
Sign it.
And indicate that she is going
to donate the additional amount.
your restaurant salary those are
decisions for her to make.
What I know is she's not
involved in this debate.
What I know is.
Absolutely nothing to say.
Hi you very clearly when Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino says they knew
I knew what that salary was when
I took it.
Over time.
I still anticipated getting a
raise.
The last time.
We have the political will.
Collectively.
It was.
Back in that area.
Where somebody probably got a
raise.
With the least.
Bill for me.
It is about respect.
We have a commission public
lands.
Thank you right now ninety
thousand dollars a year.
We have an attorney general's.
Getting paid ninety five
thousand dollars a year right
now.
Easily he can be making three
times at.
We have the secretary of state.
And yet she is the lowest rate.
Full time secretary of state in
the station.
And we should respect the fact
that their servant hearts we
should also respect the work
that they do.
Thank you members I'm challenges
were on this ammendment and it's
a challenging amendment so I I
probably ask I think the
that happen I'm just trying to
figure out what the best way to
do this with the governor's role
involved in I'm this is probably
a the question really for the
sponsor of the bill itself I'm
the governor's signing a
legislation that would affect
your financial interests would
be four three felony and so you
know I I don't want to the
governor that position but I
want her to sign this bill so
official from taking any action
or using their office anyway for
financial gain how do we how do
we do that other than by the
amendment here which would delay
the implementation because
government conduct I would
suggest that doing so would be a
felony.
Duhigg do you yield yes ma'am
president secretary general that
question.
the part of the body to do that
we should just car about the
governor and these other
constitutional officers should
not.
know me I I hate to do that to
the governor but you know there
was a suggestion I think by
Senator risotto well she could
do for her compensation herself
but I don't think that obviate
include the governor shall use
the powers and resources only to
advance the public interests and
not to obtain personal benefits.
Then that same section reads no
public office again that would
receiving of money or thing of
value.
And then that guy Act because on
any person who knowingly and
willfully violates this is
guilty of a for three felony in
that that said section tend at
that section under section ten
dash sixteen dash for the
government conduct that.
Which raises unlawful for public
officer again that would include
the governor to take an official
this section is again guilty of
a fourth degree felony.
And then subsection B. of the
sessions as a public officer
gonna governor shall be
disqualified from engaging in
and I think it's it's
unfortunate that we have to have
us a circumstance like this but
I've got to believe that the
governor would be very cautious
the government conduct I can in
the language I just revenue act
as good language we should be
commended for having very strict
prohibitions on using a
political office for financial
might very well veto this simply
because she's in that box and I
think the way easy way to
resolve this is to
is to unfortunately but but take
always confront so I see lots of
folks conferring.
And and I hope maybe they're
gonna come up with a good
solution maybe print maybe they
maybe they can persuade me that
I'm reading the government
in my mind and so I I rise to
support the amendment unless the
the heads were all conferring
with the sponsor over there have
a different solution but
otherwise I think without the
amendment the governor would be
Senator Baca.
Representative withdraw my name
from the list for the moment
let's get this right and so
rather than trying do this on
the fly and and end up in a
situation where we're sending a
bill across that's not correct
it's better to get it right so
it on the fly and trying to
exclude one I want to make sure
that you know if if the argument
the Senator office is making is
and and the position he's taking
with that so with that I'm let's
just roll this over and and call
it a night tonight and fix this
up and we'll come back first
thing in the morning to subpoena
you so Senator Wirth thank you
madam president Mrs and we go
that our business messages from
the house.
Seeing no objection were on that
order this legislation in the
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The messages from the house will
be entered into the journal.
Senator Wirth.
three thirty as amended by the
house house bill two eighty as
amended by the house house bill
four oh one House Bill for
entered into the journal Senator
Wirth thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
our business committee reports.
I see no objections were on
committee reports the reader to
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman.
Center to subpoena madam
president ask unanimous consent
no objection the reader will
read all the committee reports
Senate bill four ninety seven do
not pass but that Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate before
House bill one thirty four as
amended to pass.
House bill one forty five to
pass.
House bill two four do pass.
House Bill for eleven as amended
do pass.
House government elections and
ended first Committee substitute
adoption of the committee report
credit up to the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the report is
adopted.
objection more on introduction
of legislation the reader told
me.
House bill one eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Brown an act relating to
eligible employees of south
southeast New Mexico college to
participate in the alternative
retirement program.
Conforming to the required
is ordered referred to the
Senate Education Committee house
bill one eighty nine.
House bill two eighty introduced
duties required request for
proposals for the operation of
the Senators making an
appropriation house bill two
eighty house bill two eighty
have been read twice by title is
Lujan and act relating to
workers compensation removing
the exemption for farm and ranch
laborers House Bill three thirty
House Bill three thirty am and
introduced by Representative
Ferrary and others and act
relating to motor vehicles
amending sections sixty six dash
veterans special vehicle
registration plates in excess of
the two plates provided to
qualified persons without a feat
provided that the qualified
person pays the standard plate
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee House Bill three sixty
six.
House Bill three ninety five
introduced by Representative
Kate's.
employees amending a section of
the developmental disabilities
act regarding the determination
of rates paid for support and
services House Bill three ninety
House bill four oh one
introduced by Representative
Bryan Baca and act relating to
public education renaming the
technology for Education Act as
technology opportunity program
and other sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill four oh one House Bill for
one and then read twice by title
is ordered referred to the
clarifying the appoint of
authority for the apprenticeship
council updating personal
references.
House Bill for twenty four a
House bill four sixty six
introduced by representative
Nibert and act relating to
ethics terrifying state ethics
commission jurisdiction
providing procedures for
House Judiciary substitute for
House consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill three
Bill three oh six.
What.
This.
oh six.
substitute for house bill three
oh six seven hundred twice by
title is ordered referred to
Senate Judiciary Committee House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer Public
thirty seven and act relating to
the early childhood education
and care department providing
definitions expanding department
duties on conducting background
twice by title is ordered
referred to the judges Judiciary
Committee House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill three thirty seven.
clarifying definitions and
provisions of the uniform
licensing act terrifying present
provisions related to incomplete
applications hearings an
decisions allowing for some
reason spent an of a license or
appropriations of a license
licensee in certain cases and
required a court to issue a
preliminary injunction in other
regulation and licensing
department changing requirements
for interior design licensure
and the renewal the Nile
suspension and revocation of
Department providing for
expedited licensure of licensed
physicians veterinarians and all
reconstruction services
specifying limitations on on on
on licensed persons providing
for license fees and bi annual
enacting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House governmental actions in
any Affairs Committee substitute
for House government election
the new pairs Committee
Affairs Committee substitute for
House cover Alexion setting
fares Committee substitute for
House Bill three eighty four.
authorizing the New Mexico
finance authority make loans or
grants from the water project
fund for certain water projects
declaring an emergency house
agriculture sectors in water
House agriculture acequia some
water resources committee
substitute for House Bill five
twenty five hundred twice by
title is ordered referred to the
Senate conservation committee
Bill five twenty seven and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
creating the opioid settlement
restricted Fund creating the
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Wirth thank you madam president
Ms that we within our business
announcements miscellaneous
saying no objection or
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you madam
president normally on a Friday
we've been thanking all our
o'clock and then we're not going
to do a split floor session so
we'll do one floor session at
one o'clock and then on Sunday
we'll do one floor session at
chairs for announcements on
committees.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
madam president of the Senate
health and public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow
we have a couple of Senate bills
one house bill and then a whole
bunch of memorials Senate and
house so we hope to clear out of
the way and and get ready for
meet tomorrow in room three
eleven at nine thirty.
Thank you senator Munoz thank
you madam president Senate
finance we're going tomorrow
nine o'clock well we're gonna do
senator from judiciary is not
here so I was wondering if he's
going to go home and make some
hallmark cards force I think
that's what he's doing Judiciary
he made the comment of all this
legislation is hallmark cards I
it's a very complicated bill
this year and we're gonna wrap
that thing up and here in the
floor next couple of days we
never seen the less that we
don't know if things are double
funded trouble funded or not
funded so everybody should look
at the cap alley kind of quickly
card tomorrow cause further
Danny DeVito for.
Senator do hit madam president
Senate judiciary will meet
tomorrow at nine thirty I
believe in room three twenty one
teach us to write a need session
Monday at six o'clock it's our
annual strategy session Mr madam
president.
What do you strategize about we
What we need something for
basketball players they they're
the rock stars heroes so let's
think about that other
announcements Senator my Estes
madam president girls girls
In three AA to Hachey defeated
SantaFe in in school forty six
twenty four and and and quite a
Gallup Gallup defeated Kirtland
get any better than that madam
president thank you so glad
you're here to keep us up to
date on that Senator serve on
this thank you madam president
then present a couple things the
that's because the roll over
tonight and the thinking that we
might go back to Judiciary
tonight so you all are spared
that and and I want to make sure
that you commend the leadership
for not having Judiciary tonight
days here in Santa Fe everybody
has to get a ribbon and
everybody has to get a bill
passed everybody has to get a an
award or trophy it's a it's
something that I remember
growing up with my kids and
notice there was absolutely no
credit given to me whatsoever
during any of that presentation
is because I wasn't there last
night but I still got a
certificate of accomplishment
ribbon and award I want to thank
those of you who may that
happens thank you all very much.
No where is the award for the
Quickly other announcements.
Seeing seeing no other
announcements Senator Wirth
