Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez Representative
center my Estes here miss madam
president.
Center male.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Center share.
Senator Shendo.
Santo Tom in.
Senator Wirth here Senator
Woods.
You do not have a car madam
president.
My father see a fund Mackey
priest of St chose Chopra put
child's Ukrainian orthodox
senator Linda Lopez and the
pledge to this and the salute
plaque.
By Senator Pat Woods.
merciful and deeply
compassionate who loves the
Johnston shows mercy upon the
center who called us all to
salvation through the promise of
nothing in face I embraced by
words lord and bow before that
goodness guide I pray our
leaders and representatives in
the ways of justice and peace
lead us to provide peace respect
and freedom unite us in the
making and sharing of the tools
of peace against ignorance
begin this work and bring it to
a beneficial completion in the
name of the father and of the
son and the Holy Spirit and.
This is the other SUNY those
Salute the flag of the state in
New Mexico.
and Spanish we heard you loud
and clear.
miscellaneous seeing no
objection more announcements and
miscellaneous Peter thank you
madam president I did think that
was super cool with the kids and
just just for the members you
I thought of him this morning as
the kids let us so I thought
that was super good.
Thank you pastor for being here
for your words for your work
certainly you're indication this
morning.
Was meaningful and helps guide
us so thank you madam president
before I go through the run of
show I want to yield to our web
consent to allow cameras in the
chamber and in the gallery.
Seeing no objection will allow
cameras in the gallery and on
the floor today thank you very
much madam president members of
this every year I do just as we
do every year madam president
that the flight flashing light
be turned off while we're in
session on the floor I see that
most of been turned off in the
gallery but if you're on the
to see them but I can't see
anything.
Lou life so thank you for that
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
third reading tomorrow I think
we'll have plenty on our on our
plates couple reminders deadline
for bills being drafted is
wildlife day and victims of
violence day in the halls of
history and I know there's some
rallies and different events
going on upstairs for those it's
lead on that and then we've got
all of our west side senator
Senator my Estes Center pope
Center Lopez Senator DS and are
doing some Ortiz Pino.
who may have a little bit going
on out there in the state given
the weather madam president
unanimous consent to remove
check New Mexico day from the
presence table placed on today's
calendar madam president that'll
be the second
that memorial will be read and
that'll be Senator tall men when
hosting the west side day
reception tonight at the Rio
Chama from five to seven the
Hispanic round table of New
Mexico is hosting its
provided dinner at the la Fonda
in the lot ten oz a room from
five thirty to eight thirty this
evening by invitation tomorrow
morning The New Mexico press
only we is that
madam presidents I think I know
Senator hotter meals got some
gas and there might be some
excusal let's just do for those
president and says the special
guest with us today who are up
with you on the rostrum now New
Mexico department of
transportation.
Workers are with us so they
represent more than two thousand
like today when it's snowing or
right here on the Senate floor
the men and women of NMDOT are
ensuring the safe efficient
sustainable and equitable
integral part of efficient
transportation system and M. D.
O. T. not only maintains madam
president are state highways
throughout the year but also
cleaning and replacing drainage
structures bridges guardrails
pothole plucked up patching
signs and fences are conducted
delivered life saving PPE
throughout New Mexico during the
pandemic trained in wildfire
response by New Mexico state
forestry cutline and haul water
storms like today and joining me
and madam president on the
rostrum if they can stand when
they call their name are now
send it to us us deal called it
is that a low our highway
maintenance lead Cory Gonzales
district wide creating area
maintenance supervisor and
Fernando Goulet fifties area
join them overnight on ensuring
that we claim New Mexico
highways so many New Mexicans
don't understand the hard work
the NM DOT employees put into
ensuring their safety I'm gonna
Mexicans are kept safe and to
document the hard work that they
put into that ladies and
gentlemen of the Senate and
madam president if you can
please help me in welcoming my
Thank you madam president be
sure to watch us on Facebook
Thank you very much madam
president I have a very special
guest with me today that I'd
like to introduce to the entire
Senate this young lady has been
individuals and she has and I
call it an array of experiences
that you sharing with us and she
is going to stand please
she is currently the president
of this year's and loss of
program she is also involved in
your school's biomedical club
she is put a part of of and US
environmental science members of
the Senate if you please help me
welcome Melanie thank you very
much madam president.
moments and for US side
legislators if you will wait
till after that to introduce
your guests so we're just doing
guests that are related to that
right now.
And her name is more clear I
mean just having on this and
actually Senator how to me and I
are sharing her this week but I
without colitis G. well as the
others that you are you survive
rather what is the annual their
master's program you're going to
status in the those Los LA
that's the point in time and use
back at any cost for of meet the
the in U. N. M. E. that are
quite keen so second diploma in
criminal justice iota and it
master's program is that the
company a.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Her name is Jordan Torrez she's
a student at centennial in Los
crucis she's like the other and
I say students is been here all
week and was in the house
Mexico state for as an
alternative and hasn't quite
decided yet which of the two her
plan is to major in in
biochemistry and I wish the
Thank you senator Maestas thank
you madam president and I also
have a shadow of a net losses
is a senior at the end of the
Vista high school please welcome
Fernando Muslims thank you.
this is Israel's if here he's
eighteen years old he is exudes
very confident personality I to
say and very inviting and and
he's already started talking and
these chairs madam president
he's told me that he wants to be
president of the United States
and so I'm very proud of him and
I think he's definitely get
there let's give a welcome have
Senator Peter Wirth thank you
madam president I think now
would be a good time to do the
west side day.
Yeah we're good center but is
got a couple of excuse those and
HB prepare their I do have some
excuse Eunice consent to excuse
the following centers until they
return to the chamber except for
the purposes of a call senator
Liz Stefanics Senator and
just doing some work upstairs
madam president.
Just seeing no objection they
will be excuse.
Thank you very much madam
president as you can see we have
six hundred homes six hundred
students here today along with
family friends teachers various
community leaders that you're
gonna hear about from some of
our colleagues here and this is
actually half of our largest
your building so with that madam
president we're going to hear
from some of our colleagues here
in a little bit but I would like
Eunice consent to allow the
reader to read Albuquerque west
side day in the Senate
proclaiming February ninth
twenty twenty three Albuquerque
west side day in the Senate
whereas the west side of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county is the fastest growing
business development and job
creation and whereas website
Albuquerque schools have
steadily improved their
graduation and dropout rates and
whereas community members and
western gateway to Albuquerque's
historic route sixty six
heritage and whereas the west
side has the highest percentage
of Hispanics in Albuquerque
and Manzano mountains and
whereas west side residents take
pride in calling themselves west
siders now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
Senator Michael but the US
senator Linda M. Lopez Senator
on donor Maestas Senator Herald
sherry do Lujan chief clerk New
Mexico state Senate.
Senator Padilla thank you very
much madam president I just a we
took the time to put this in
hundred students we had a great
town hall here on the Senate
floor right before the session
began madam president with
almost all the students that
you're seeing in the gallery and
somewhere down here on on the
interesting for me also as a
legislator to hear their
perspective so that was actually
very helpful to me as well the
other thing I just want to
mention here Madam president
Dale is the west side of
Albuquerque is one of the
guess now or after the
Well let's see if there's other
folks that want to comment about
the certificate and then I'll
by the.
I stand in support of the
certificate that has been read
the west side of Albuquerque
Albuquerque our students that
are here with us and they're
still back at home are wonderful
they have much to offer for us
in our future I know that even
know that we have some future
legislators who are sitting up
here in the gallery with us
today I know that we have some
others who are going to be
taking care of us and health
side senators that wish to
comment thank you madam
president I yield to senator mo
Antonio Maestas thank you Sir my
last thank you madam president I
organizers in our own and in
organizations that bring up the
students they coordinate with
principles and activity
directors who want to thank the
the staff the clerk's office
particularly the sergeant at
side is unique Albuquerque grew
on one side of its river what we
would do a very unique phenomena
because of the mess and the land
topography but now it's going to
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president I do also want to
acknowledge Senator my S. this
when he joined us from the house
is the original founding
legislator of Albuquerque Wes I
days I want to acknowledge and
for that also want to yield now
other was that colleagues have
already sent
handle so thank you again to us
under Maestas who I know has
works incredibly hard for for
West Side day every year and
folks that I did to interact
with that if there are others
all leave it to you.
So this is just on west side day
right now any other comments.
president because website is one
of the most
Participated in days all year I
won't recognize everybody in the
gallery madam president but I
have a few special guests here
that I'd like to recognize we
background in New Mexico took
her skills to Colorado did a
phenomenal job there had a good
portion of her career decided to
return to New Mexico to care for
her family and brought with her
welcome miss our tobacco to the
chamber.
And madam president I I I don't
opportunity she's also the
mother of our very very steam
Cassidy counselor cloudy so Pena
and she's just an all around
warm person you know they say
madam president it's not what
Thank you madam present all
you'll to others who want
introduce guess etcetera Linda
Lopez.
I think that would be great in
fact Madhu and I share the same
birth date we're both March
thirteen babies so it's like we
have that even that more of a
Clarissa Pena she's long been
active in our community a
community organizer president of
the southwest alliance of
neighborhoods this woman gets
excuse me Geraldine anybody who
serves as vice president of our
just to make I have to look at
this of west central community
swine I'm she's.
She's a phenomenal head that
also works in our community to
get things done and we also have
Geraldine's guest who's Mr
Senator my Estes thank you madam
president please hold your
applause till to introduce
everybody but just one of the
deal the second also with me
here on the floor is the
president CEO of the Albuquerque
westside business association
Melissa Sanchez we have district
Morris Baca please welcome them.
the first is Rachel Hernandez
who
anyone who is a goes to the
website at all there's no way
you will know her and her
community she went to both west
mesa and UNM and she's been
really active on the in the west
like community and is a
dedicated volunteer at the west
central community dot
and and all go through the the
others as well we also have
Rebecca touch in who is the
tribal field representative and
constituent in constituent
Laguna Ackerman's Dooney plus
Rama Alamo and Hajin the Navajo
nation's and the for sale that
sell patches and then finally we
senator Maestas until she got
snapped up by US city councilor
Dan Lewis and she is his policy
analyst now at City of
Right other senator Jerry Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Madam president I'd like to the.
Introduce my guest for the day
in welcoming county commissioner
Walter Benson.
to guess sitting behind me one a
west sider ones not but still
want to recognize him as well
first off we have our chair the
Bernalillo county commission
Barbara boxer that represents
Okay any other guests to
from one please to stand up and
he guess who is to graduate or
know a student at Gadsden high
school in Los crucis and he is
interested in politics he's very
Latino it's a let you know that
advocacy community and education
and it is a fantastic program
and I'm really proud to have an
intern with me please join me in
welcoming and.
less a shadow had to leave their
all on a very tight schedule
because they are connecting with
so many legislators but mine
who was just here some of you
may have seen her name is
program at Gadsden she when she
graduates from high school she
plans on pursuing her bachelor
of science in nursing at New
Mexico State University so that
have a tight schedule but thank
you Senate body for welcoming
all of the in Los A. shadows
today in in terms as we are I
show them what it's like to help
pass law in the state of New
president we are past West Side
day right but we are okay thank
you madam president I have to
all of my colleagues from
please give them a warm welcome.
Right any other announcements
consent we go about our business
third reading of legislation and
you'll Senator common percent of
moral twenty five.
C. seeing no objection we will
President pro tem.
I ask unanimous consent that the
role has been called I'm sorry I
move this is our moral number.
So Senator Tallman if you will
are we are we reading this one
yes so let's have the reader
read at this point.
America's graduates in New
Mexico also known as jag NM is a
state based organization of the
national nonprofit jobs for
America's graduates and is
employees in in school re engage
being gauge meant strategy to
help students at the greatest
risk of dropping out to show up
reconnect and graduate from high
graduates to successfully
transition into further
education and the workforce and
whereas the highly trained jag
NM specialists are full time
charge of their own education
and get back on track to
graduation and whereas over the
past eighteen years Jack and Jim
has helped to improve the lives
and futures of thousands of high
jag NM program is evidence based
and has proven successful in
helping New Mexico students
overcome barriers to graduation
and whereas the average
three be declared jag NM date in
the Senate and be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to the
eggs.
senator bill G. Thoman how we
see Morales president sherry do
Lujan chief clerk New Mexico
state Senate.
sponsoring this memorial today
recognizing jag in New Mexico
day in the Senate jag stands for
jobs for America's graduates is
No one the impressive.
Data about this program has
already been mentioned is the
fact that
over the last ten years ninety
successful in helping New Mexico
students overcome barriers to
graduation.
And president madam president as
you may know this program was
Indiana Missouri almost every
high school in those states have
this program unfortunately in
program is on is increasing no
more and more schools are
adopting it unfortunately in New
Mexico we're going in the
opposite direction I think it's
Mexico to adopt this program
thank you madam chair but yes
also like to recognize
The some folks in the gallery is
to thank senator Tom and for
bringing this measure and I
really love the new photos again
madam president the jobs for
America's graduates is a
powerful program at Rio Grande
beginning of the program first
is the end of your program and
they they talking to have a very
low a lot of rigor in terms of
how they they manage their day
and and and focus on their
recognize the program from that
standpoint thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
at a at a at a at a building in
the in the knob hill area and
that they use is as as part of
their work and I was very
impressed with the with the work
of the success of the overall
educational experience I think
this is a terrific program and I
want to congratulate them and
think Senator Tallman for
bringing the memorial forward
thank you.
get a Rio Grande High School of
course I made sure to talk with
Senator Padilla and Senator
Lopez make sure weren't stepping
on their toes you know it's
and we just had some great
discussions I was really
impressed with some of the
projects and what the students
were doing in you know I wish
myself that I I had a program
like this myself in it when I
president thank you any other
debate.
I see none senator Cormann to
close on debate and after all of
that then you can introduce yes
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that the role has been
called in all forty eight two
senators including new tenant
governor shown voting in the
affirmative.
affirmative has duly passed the
Senate.
Senator Tallman to introduce his
guess.
Thank you madam.
Yes they are great.
What are right behind you.
I know you we don't have time to
introduce all of them but I
of dedicated teachers like
candid the program is so
successful I'm sorry I don't
have is his name but I hope that
the work would stand up and then
Thank you thank you again madam
Senator Wirth are we continuing.
madam president there's other
announcements now would be the
time otherwise we're getting
ready to do had the third
gas or any announcements
Seeing none US senator Wirth to
take us back to third reading.
Thank you madam president so
we're gonna do items one two and
Stefanics so madam president
with that unanimous consent we
go back to that order business
third reading of legislation and
I would be able to Senator
o'neill for item number one
Madam pro tem and Senator up I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
bill thank you madam president
Senate bill twenty nine provides
that if you're over fifty five
and you're gonna die and you
haven't murdered anyone then you
Senator Brandt.
The madam president with the
sponsor yield.
Yes madam president I yield to
Can help help me out a little
bit more that explanation was
kind of short and I know you
know like me you tried to short
explanations but what what do
madam president and senator yes
all right they have to be
diagnosed as terminally ill it's
not like oh my back hurts let me
they're the gatekeepers for
folks that are being released
from prison so at the my
recognize this bill is that it
it was you know went through
dust the victims the public
defenders they all agree on this
bill this is came from the
sentencing commission and so
that's just that's just really
the end and that the art are and
making sure that this is an
abuse and it's not an automatic
at a prison free card it's you
know there's and wonderful
terminal is there a time frame
that they have to be within for
them to get out and I know
that's got to be very difficult
going through that with my
father in law right now so I
the doctors have to think that
it's going to be within a
certain amount of time or is it
just terminal over the next year
what what's the time for the
event of course a bill like this
committee like it they're all
kinds as of of standards and
guidelines so it would very with
each person but again the key is
know I just every situation's
different as you know just from
your own personal experience.
Madam president center that's
Madam president Senator yes.
Madam presents are what about
second degree murder or
manslaughter.
Madam president no let's just
add anything but first degree
that was the consensus and I'm
sure you know some people push
for more some people maybe said
no way no how for any of them so
and so that's kind of the
protections in there that even
the victims have to agree are
the victims families with week
with murder madam president
Senator victims and I know this
the quite seriously by the
individuals on the part of the
adult parole board so the
victims are very involved in not
like you know kept in the dark
Thank you.
Other debate Senator share thank
you madam president also
question if the sponsor will
yield.
Fifty five is like thirty five
once upon a time or we.
Why why did we draw the line at
fifty five I guess is the
five is kind of the consensus
eight and yeah that got my
attention to when I first saw it
but again
as the room when they were
you know fifty like state eighty
one as the new sixty five or
whatever but it's but it's been
all seriousness these people
these inmates are beyond any
Why not thirty five if they're
dying if they're terminally
terminally ill and they didn't
commit murder.
And they're really not a threat
Again you know as you know we
just rely upon the experts in
this area and
the that's what the you know the
that's what they came up with
No there's many reasons that led
this group to fifty five I'm
sure.
So madam president senator I'm
torn because I like the I like
fifty five and.
If it's fifty five and then why
not twenty five I mean if you
really are that terminally ill
what do we have anything at all
two numbers I I those the only
two numbers in this bill that
really have me concerned.
But I also know madam president
that geriatric parole seems to
It's because of kidney failure.
Because that's people think I'm
familiar with that of so they're
on dialysis in why can't they
Of so for not doing it now
what's the point fifty five and
if they really are terminal
what's the point having of of a
limited all those are the those
scares me because it seems
arbitrary.
You're dying you're dying if
you're not dying you're not
dying that matter what your ages
thank you madam president you.
president I yield thank you
president just for clarification
once the guidelines are
developed the parole board still
has
guidelines associated with the
kind of care they're going to
get upon release that would have
Part of the decision making with
regard to whether they should be
understanding or agreement that
someone will be responsible for
that and thank you madam chair
Senator yes just because I'm
familiar with the parole process
honestly you know again they're
subject to oversight by the
parole officer in question so if
there's any kind of monkey
business you know it's there's
So madam president
of course we just have first
remarketer with is the exception
but but I am more and wondering
even in their particular state
not be allowed to be around
children of a certain age would
that be part of their parole or
separate in the bill madam
president yes I mean again
because I just know how these
Thank you next we'll have debate
from Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam president
they're in in prison is there a
plan and resources or something
with regard to the conditions of
discharge.
So that you know it's so that we
madam president as senator could
question but again
again because I just I'm used to
this parole dynamic so the
parole board would be all over
that and these you know very
out on to the you know bus
station so so I just have
confidence in the way these
parole boards work and I just
know how how conscientious they
madam president I apologize for
not asking him to yield it it's
been a long time since we've
done this thank you.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you madam president
senator I would be glad to.
Representative center he's been
all I.
explain to us about whether not
someone's able to receive
Medicaid.
R. while they're incarcerated or
or or once they're no longer
incarcerated how does that work.
state says that if you're
incarcerated you cannot receive
Medicaid services a couple of
years ago we changed the law and
receiving whatever health care
or of addiction treatment they
needed upon release or or so of
mental health treatment as well
Medicare and in Washington it I
I'm not sure it's been approved
yet but it included a provision
that during the the last thirty
days in prison before release of
Pino this goes to also the
question Senator Sedillo Lopez
was asking about how will we
know that people will be able to
get care if they're released
from prison
eligible for Medicaid which of
course is not possible if
they're not documented in the
country with documents or if
they if they happen to be very
And madam chair will the will
the sponsor yield.
I'm yes I'm madam chair I yield
to senator ills thank you madam
president Senator
Our that
That the that the person has to
demonstrate before they're
eligible that they're not a
that would be taken account of
when they're considering whether
not to grant is that correct yes
madam president Senator
definitely.
Okay very well thank you very
Thank you madam president will
to sponsor you madam president I
yield yield thank you madam
president sponsor it either I'm
classifications of prisoners who
could be released on this
earlier parole one being a
geriatric inmate one being a
president Senator yes and and
those are you know again these
guidelines that the parole board
very clued into so they you know
terminal illness that's real so
that's that every lead
automatically puts that as the
subset of folks that they're
looking at.
ill you just have to be over
fifty five and she suffered from
a debilitating or chronic
infirmity illness or disease it
read this madam president
senator you don't.
Madam president Senator you have
to be terminally ill I mean
agreement but however that is
you know that to me that might
be something that the parole
board does with these like
whatever those three things are
specific and often times it's
it's not a whole lot of
individuals but with in that
case we would that it does apply
to a certain person it really
makes a lot of sense but I can
And then present thank you thank
you sponsor I just that's just
actually not the way I read the
bill but I think the bill is
broader than that and allows
that opportunity which isn't
necessarily a bad thing I just
don't as I I read it.
Read the requirement that they
Seeing none Senator o'neill to
close debate thank you madam
chair madam president I move
that Senate bill twenty nine do
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
The Senators we are voting on
Senate bill twenty nine the fuel
Senator Burt voting no Senator
Pirtle voting no Senator Brandt
voting no Senator Schmedes
voting no Senator Diamond voting
no.
everyone for the debate and so
forth and and everybody got
their donuts right.
I think any donuts just because
along to our next bill Senate
bill twenty one as amended
Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam president I ask
for Senate bill twenty one is
amended.
One final passage has been taken
and it's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hermitage PA calf canyon fire
today this bill.
Creates additional protection to
keep these types of fires from
ever happening again.
fire became the largest fire
ever in our state it was
partially the result of a
prescribed burn that got out of
had to evacuate not knowing what
was to become of their most
valued asset their house their
home.
This bill has had a unique route
and Senator Ivey Soto.
For helping craft this simple
and straightforward bill you
have in front of you the
involvement of the Ag community
yesterday stating that they
would no longer oppose this
bill.
Now under this bill prescribed
burns shall not be conducted at
prescribe Bernier's and
identifies certain agricultural
exceptions the United States for
service and the state for sure
are working on improving
And actually even though.
These procedural change will get
made there's no guarantee this
larger communities such as Santa
Fe.
In addition the eastern plains
are not exempt from fire.
to the challenges they faced and
continue to face.
This bill gives the legislature
the chance to weigh in.
And let those people know and
clarifies that they cannot be
conducted when a red flag
warning is in effect.
Simple and straightforward.
more of a COVID I to stand in
support of this bill scene when
it first came to conservation
and seeing the work that the
agency groups have done and that
some practicalities that need to
be in place to make sure that
those departments are able to do
what they need to do so I
commend the sponsor and I
commend the agencies and I just
wanted to make that comment that
Madam president I yield madam
president Senator
Griggs the
The substitute drops the notion
of.
So it is so we're preparing it
and the the amendment floor
amendment that would just do
that and kind of clean it up if
that's alright with you.
Judiciary wonder how that
happened.
Other debate.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president yes consent to skew
Senator Hickey into the returns
Madam president you poked me so
you know you're going to get
some debate there of so a few
observations that may be a
does not prohibit any burning by
agriculture agriculture uses in
our part of the state is pretty
common look at it Senator
Diamond others some comedy be
burning brush burning ditches
that is that true.
Presentation of the the Ag
community has in the prescribed
burn all certain exemptions and
so they are exempt from VAT a
the and the ruling in the law
allows for the act community be
exempted in certain ways and as
the with the way the bill one
that be addressed and thank you
Representative I want to stress
that but you're right the actor
community does not have any
opposition to this the the the
law also as it's written.
government or to tribal
governments is that is that
correct center.
Representative the are madam
president the a prescribed burn
Law dealt primarily with.
law purport to restrict or limit
the authority of the federal
government and tribal
governments to conduct a
prescriber.
Madam president center this law
and I think that'll be in
ensuring debate stability occur
someday when the tribal
government wants to conduct a
prescribed burn Mescalero do a I
their land I I to me I think
that wouldn't fly I think that
the same probably true with
regard to the federal government
but the good news I think here
I'm gonna support your bill
center is if I recall this is
this law there's no consequence.
Senator there is no consequence
defined in the bill.
Thank you madam president of
solar conditions are.
section not debate but I need to
excuse senator Morris and
senator guy a goes except the
purpose of the call.
Seeing no objection they will be
excused.
question if the spot sponsor
would you.
Madam president I yield heels
thank you madam president I
think you indicated that the
were there and just what you
heard from the forestry
department.
Madam president and senator the
state for senator she contacted
I think and I appreciate that I
think this when we heard this
bill in.
Senate Judiciary.
Yeah this really a common sense
an effort to carve out some
little niche may be uncertain
circumstance with a certain type
of juniper they might want to
use it but I just think having
a.
what this bill is now and so I
just commend you for sticking
with this as it went through its
journey and I think it ties in
very well with the bill Senator
are suffering as a result of
what happened but I also think
it's absolutely incumbent upon
us to be doing everything we can
we're gonna have a string of
bills coming through here and we
had a good discussion on one and
Senate finance yesterday that
will provide more more money for
forest and watershed thinning
which is going to keep part of
Has has everyone receive the
amendment.
Locate you Senator Sanchez.
I would like to move the that
the Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one be amended by by
committee Senate bill twenty one
as amended amendment sponsored
by Senator Ortiz the Pino
suppose Senator Ortiz painter to
explain the amendment madam
incredibly missed something I
just think this is a first for
all of us.
During the spring would be
replaced by during a red flag
warning thank you madam
that put or the red flag warning
is for anyway is to really
prohibit pertaining.
So.
mitigate what we talk about
several agencies want to talk
about the watershed level
It just seems like we're just
doing some work but we're not
on a closed on the amendment.
Madam president to I move the
adoption of Senate floor
we're on adoption of the Senate
floor amendment number one to
the conservation substitute for
Senate bill twenty one as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
other debate of the bill.
Seeing none Senator Griggs to
close.
Thank you madam president this
is this bill.
these things need to be properly
managed and taking care of we've
seen too many instances of
prescribed burns being out of
president I move that Senate
conservation substitute for.
Senate bill twenty one as twice
amended do now pass and I ask
Senator Wirth I thank you madam
president so the minority leader
just came over with a good
suggestion which is to consider
putting an emergency clause on
this bill
just go back to Senator Griggs
if you might want to wait just a
second while we do another
little amendment to get this
absolutely perfect but it's of
course up to Senator Griggs.
and our return to the chamber
except for the purposes of a
call.
Seeing no objection will excuse
Senators deal opens.
If the Senate will come back
together.
What.
So as Center Ivey Soto are you
number two to Senate
confirmation.
What skunk substitute for
Senator twenty one as I spend.
as amended twice amendment
sponsored by Senator Ivey Soto.
Insert section to emergency
clause it is in this.
clause it is necessary for the
public.
Peace health and safety for this
act to take effect immediately.
Soto explains absolute thank you
very much madam president yeah
we we kept debating whether is
health public peace safety but
and I appreciate the the for
side of both leaders the
majority and the minority leader
in terms of having this Commerce
Clause added to the bill thank
Madam president happy to and and
madam present I I think we may
have an issue with the amendment
I think
Pirtle you're actually correct
the title should also be amended
at the end to say declaring an
emergency.
And that a president I would
I think we have to follow proper
procedures let's see what the
Majority Leader thanks.
If I could just indulgence of
the body
and check in with the majority
floor leader I don't know if if
if we would want to set this
aside for a moment to make sure
withdraw this ammendment.
President I withdraw Center
floor amendment number two.
All right so a.
I don't want to be here till
This okay so will help wheels.
Stand in place until we get it
right.
So let's let's get back to work
Senator Ivey Soto to move the
new floor amendment.
In the form of the number to the
Senate conservation committee
substitute Senate bill twenty
one is transmitted.
Thank you the reader to read and
this time if you'll just to the
normal reading.
by Senator Ivey Soto thank you
Senator Ivy Soto to explain the
amendment thank you very much of
Madam present I'm checking with
Senator Sanchez to make sure
that everybody got the
amendment.
Okay very good
So that's it in the title and in
the body correct appropriately
all right any debate on the
amendment.
Pricing no debate on the
amendment of Senator Ivy Soto to
close on the amendment thank you
very much madam president madam
president I'm reminded of a
story my grandfather used to
tell me.
sure that we get things right
but with that madam president I
move of floor amendment number
two to Senate confirmation
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one is twice amended
and ask for voice talked.
signify by saying I.
All those supposed to me.
The amendment is adopted.
Thank you madam president.
I move that to Senate
confirmation Committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as three times
amended with an emergency clause
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
of senators to your seats please
we are voting on.
Senate conservation substitute
twenty one US thrice amended
with the emergency clause has
duly passed the Senate.
Senator Griggs thank you madam
president members of the body.
record show that all action for
placing Senate.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one on final
passage has been taken is now
outline and yield the senators
to fan X. who is the other
sponsor on this bill and
Representative Susan had a may
come over from the house Senate
choose to voluntarily join
together into a regional utility
it allows the ability and it
creates a template for them to
if they want to regional allies
they have to come to the
legislature and actually pass a
bill on two thousand nine
senator serve than
domestics and as a result of
that efforts which took quite a
bit of work to get past that
authority now does some really
systems it's able to get money
for projects I believe we had
testimony over seventy million
dollars they brought in that
that regional entity so as madam
so this bill does not mandate
anything no no into these going
to be forced to join together
it simply sets up a template so
that they can join if they'd
To be able to have this is an
option us Representative had
asked has I think more mutual
domestics in her district says
the fan X. I think has a whole
bunch as well but many times
now they have to because quite
frankly the wells are going dry
the infrastructure needs to be
put in place and so this bill
simply creates a template to do
It's it's a voluntary option
it's not a mandate on anyone so
we've had a lot of work on the
bill and I would be able to
Senator Stefanics who can tell
us how this would work in her
Miguel County down highway three
in L. by area there are several
small mutual domestics and some
because they had aging
volunteers who are taking care
of it they did band together
about five to seven years ago to
used to working in a group
together but for all of those
people who really wanted water
who really wanted to be ensure
assured of the future of water
Senate this can really help
communities but it's not an
overnight process it does take
time even once it's organized
some it's very very small
communities in Torrance County
that are without water depending
upon state water storage tanks
whether or not they could do
Creating some sort of workable
future for water in their
communities thank you madam
president.
Thank you.
deal but I I do want to rise to
we share some of our success you
know we need to recognize when
things go well for us and of
course point out the fact that
we had enormous success with
public resource Center worth
knows the story because he was
there we remember it the what
when I put this ago these
communities together limit some
escape the parts of of Anthony
because they had a service area
and they saw the possibility for
competition with an entity it
was in the form that might be
competing for the same resources
it's almost part of the state
most remote areas to to try and
advocate for this and was very
hard for me this is the lesson
that that I want to share with
all of you it's very hard for me
to pass this because it was
and be advocate or something
that you're largest population
center is vigorously opposed to
and I want that lesson you know
for all of us because now of
money coming into we can see
we've conducted solid eighteen
communities in that and the
growth of the servicers even
gone outside of the regional
area now we're up near Oregon
and other parts of the county
Lawyers one set of tracks one
set of tools as opposed to eight
and ten and twelve so it's been
an enormous success story but
but from my colleagues in every
now and then you've got to do
what you think is the right
thing to do even when you're
strongly opposed by your voters
the pot.
They all had their own water
white rights would have had
enormous Water Rights we've had
very little water right some of
them had lots of trucks lots of
collaboratively entirely
collaboratively that's really I
think what we're gonna have to
do with water in New Mexico's
we're gonna have to be think
it'll bit less about this is
mine this is yours and keep your
some agreement with Texas in New
Mexico I'll tell you that.
It comes at great expense to the
farmers of Southern New Mexico
and alphabet addition district
water being something that we
fight over divide over and this
is a good start to that
Representative Center worth bye
bye having as a law and has been
this together thank you present.
Thank you Sir any other date
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president you dance consent to
ex you centers my just this and
Hamlin to the return of the
Seeing none Senator Wirth to
close thank you madam president
thank you members and just just
one final thought it took a lot
of collaboration to get this
bill where IT is this bill's
appreciate the work of the
interim course corrections
Committee we worked on some
election language and and we
work with all in all the
constituencies and they
collaborated to come up with
because as as we move forward
and I'm looking back at Senator
Campos with that hundred million
dollars boy all these little
systems you know they're coming
members I move that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one do not pass
and ask unanimous consent that
the record show the rules been
called and all those present
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
By a vote of thirty one in the
affirmative seer in the
negative.
By a vote of thirty three in the
Senate.
All right I think that concludes
our third reading on go to
center worse for the next order
of business.
announcements and miscellaneous
and I'm happy to yield yes and
worth I have a very simple water
bill to that pertains to the use
projects which has been an
that scheduled for April
fifteenth.
That's one million interesting
session.
Okay we're announcements and
committee reports three degree
madam president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill money as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
you also chairman Senator
manuals reduction the committee
report.
One adoption of the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and vents referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
that the journal reflected they
were acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
read all the committee reports
Senate bill one seventy eight do
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one eighty one to
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one ninety three do
pass on that's referred to the
finance committee.
passed as amended and thence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman center Casey panel
Those posed nay committee report
is adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
congratulations certificate
number three to the following
just say Pete offense of linemen
for his role in New Mexico State
University I guess victory
against Bowling Green State
State.
great drop Bowling Green State
University falcons at the twenty
twenty two quick lane bowl and
directs the chief clerk to
Madam president ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports and that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
acted upon individually.
Mexico aids State University
Aggies in the team's victory
against Bolling's Bowling Green
state university's falcons at
the twenty twenty two quick lane
Mexico State University and the
Aggies to victory against
Bowling State Bowling Green
State University falcons at the
twenty twenty two quick lane
bowl.
university's Agpiece victory
against Bowling Green State
University falcons at the twenty
twenty two quick lane bowl.
Madam president and with the
committee reports.
Warner dot committee reports
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Madam president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificate of
recognition certificate number
seven to the following Nygren
to express the recognition of
the Senate Representative
respectfully submitted Katy M.
Duhigg chair.
the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion that the
journal reflect their acted upon
individually.
If there's no objection the
action crystalline curly for her
historic achievement.
Certificate number nine meals on
wheels for over fifty years of
dedicated service in the feeding
death of Gilbert L. ji Bo baka
junior.
Condolences restrictive get
number nine to family and
friends upon the death of don C.
Penner.
size and Johnny Snyder.
Certificates of appreciation
certificate number for miss
Navajo Nation Valentina let's so
Then president of the Canadian
parts for adoption of committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those post may committee reports
referred Senate bill eighty one
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
were acted upon individually
seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four do pass.
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one thirty three
the committee report adoption of
committee reports all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those pose nee committee reports
have been adopted in the journal
will reflect we were act they
referred Senate memorial
seventeen has had it under
consideration reports this that
same has been duly rules and
engrossed preparatory to signing
president I move the adoption of
the committee report on the tops
of the committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All those opposed nay.
Senator Wirth Senator Padilla
thank you madam president things
that order business introduction
provided the bids received
pursuant to the procurement code
shall be considered based on a
determination the best value
defining best value Senate bill
Judiciary Senate bill three
ninety.
Senator ninety one introduced by
Senator serve up this and act
relating to public finance
changing the appoint appointing
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the rules committee thanks to
conservation Senate bill three
ninety one.
Senate bill three ninety two
provided the opportunity for a
person who makes a purchase from
the department of game and fish
to make a donation to help
support the youth programs
affairs Senate bill three ninety
two Senate bill three ninety
three Unidos by Senator guy.
Senator Gonzales and act
relating to property tax
ninety three Senate bill three
ninety three have been read
twice by title Sir print
referred to the Senate
conservation committee thanks to
Senate tax business and
transportation Senate bill three
Committee conserved unimproved
land making an appropriation
Senate bill three ninety four
Senate bill three ninety four
have been read twice by tires or
Senator Pirtle and act making
appropriation for the
appropriation contingency fund
to the department of
transportation for
infrastructure projects on a
certain portion of United States
tents to finance Senate bill
three ninety five Senate bill
three ninety six introduced by
Senator Shendo and act relating
to transportation increasing
Senate bill three ninety six
Senate bill three ninety six and
I read twice by tires for
printed referred to the Senate
tax business and transportation
thanks to finance Senate bill
acting a new section of the
public health act to create and
operate school based health
centers Senate bill three ninety
seven Senate bill three ninety
seven have been read twice by
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
and act relating to minute
municipality ballot tease
allowing a commissioner of the
Housing Authority to hold office
for employment for the same city
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health of public
affairs committee thanks to
Judiciary Senate bill three
ninety eight Senate bill three
ninety nine introduced by
of hours and days and and maybe
maybe held in solitary
confinement Senate bill three
ninety nine Senate bill three
ninety nine have been read twice
by title sort of printed and
act making appropriation to the
public education department for
the redesign of middle schools
and junior high schools Senate
bill four hundred Senate bill
introduced by Senator Lopez and
Senator said the Lopez and act
making appropriation to the
board of regents of the
university of New Mexico to hire
printed to refer to Senate
Education Committee sense to
finance Senate bill for a one.
Senate joint resolution entered
consent to the secession of
three or more contiguous
counties Senate joint resolution
eleven.
Senate memorial thirty six
introduced by Senator souls a
memorial declaring February
fifteenth twenty twenty three
academic team Senate bill thirty
six percent of M. Morial thirty
six.
Senator moral thirty six
hundred.
Twice by title is ordered not
introduced by Senator pope a
memorial requesting the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs incorporated to
convene a task force to make
recommended that recommendations
federal prison rape elimination
act of two thousand three Senate
memorial thirty seven Senate
memorial thirty seven have been
Senate memorial thirty eight
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and Representative small a
memorial request in the state
alright the parks division of
park Senate memorial thirty
eight.
Senate memorial thirty eight
have been read twice by title
sort of printed referred to the
Senate rules committee thanks to
objection we are on
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator work thank you madam
president I think looking at our
chief clerk I think the tables
over in the house and given that
will we're not going to do third
reading tomorrow but next week
we'll start right back up on
Monday so now's the time for
room three eleven and madam
president you will be first and
then the couple built by me pope
Gonzales have built home and and
agencies to here and and the
junior is all wrapped up so
everybody knows we censure
language to DFA for approval
they're gonna get back to us
tonight if there's another issue
pretty good shape so thank you
madam chair thank you senator
Senator Hamblen thank you madam
chair the attacks Business and
transportation committee will be
Coming up in the in the
discussion so we look forward to
it so two o'clock Tax business
and transportation thank you
Senator to head.
Thank you madam president the
Senate rules committee will meet
and yourself madam president and
will also be hearing on
Centerville's constitutional
amendment.
Thank you other announcements.
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
But hearing no objection the
