And miscellaneous seeing no
objection or on announcements
and miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you madam president so
we're gonna do the work up on
do that the knights will hold
off on that so concurrence eight
is Senate bill one seventy eight
Senator Hickey
line is Senate finance committee
once we get done with the.
Concurrence calendar on third
reading there are two
supplemental calendars number
one and number two let me go
legislative ethics is Senator
Servan tastes so Senator on days
needs to come down to the
chamber
item number two is House Bill
And and again to the extent
members need to run to the house
are here with this will jump
around if we need to item number
four house bill four oh seven
despite the disposition of
Representative Lane and reads
bill item number six house bill
one seventy telecom cramming
definition that'll be Senator
Soto item nine charter school
expenditure will be Senator
Korea Hemphill that's house bill
three seventy five a ten house
Senator Servan tastes and item
twelve house bill seventy
aviation Fund G. R. T. will be
Center manuals I also believe we
have a consent calendar that
consent we go that our business
messages from the house seeing
no objection run messages from
the house the review to read.
seven House Bill to twenty nine
have been read in full and
signed by the officers of the
house in open session request
the signatures of the offices of
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the duly enrolled in
gross copies of house concurrent
resolution one house bill one
thirty four as amended house
officers of the center.
Go ahead and president in the
to meet with the Senate
conferees Representative Derrick
J. Lente day Representative
Micaela Lara Cadena and
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate bill one
seventy eight as amended by the
house Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety two as amended by the
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty nine as amended by
the house and request the
concurrence of the Senate to the
house amendments respectfully
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in it goes copies of
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty five Senate bill two oh
open session and returned same
here with respectfully submitted
the order and Marty's McCutchen
chief clerk.
A message from the house will be
entered into the journal.
Senate bill sixteen Senate bill
one forty three Senate bill one
fifty three with emergency
clause Senate bill two hundred
as amended by the Senate.
Senate bill two fifty one as
amended by the Senate and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Morty's McCutchen chief clerk.
emphasis that we are a business
committee reports.
Seeing no objection more on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman.
Senator Shendo Senator.
Hamblen.
Madam president I move the
were acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
will read all the committee
reports can you house bill forty
six as amended do pass and
Senator Hamblen madam president
I move the adoption of the
committee report production of
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
referred Senate bill two Senate
bill one thirty six as amended
has had them under consideration
reports that this that same have
been duly enrolled in in gross
preparatory to signing by the
Senator Hamblen madam president
I move the adoption of the
committee report production of
the committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
one thirty six as amended have
been signed up by the officers
of the Senate in open session.
is been duly rules and it grows
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Opposed nay.
Committee report is adopted.
Like to announce to the body
that Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety two has been signed an
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty eight has had it
under consideration reports that
same is been dually enrolled in
a gross preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate
president's.
I move the adoption of the
committee report the very busy
in the committee very we on
adoption of the committee report
all those in favor signify by
Senator Wirth okay wait like to
announce to the Senate that
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
eight has been signed open
session by the officers of the
president so we're going to do
the three concurrence Senator
Hickey center manuals and
Senator o'neill I don't see
Senator when yields here yeah
concurrence calendar number
eight we are on that order of
Business concurrence Senator
Hickey.
Madam president.
changes made in the house thank
you madam president the changes
are the effective date which is
now July first twenty twenty
to the body which way to go.
madam president
I'm move from the I want to I
move Senate bill one seventy
eight as amended.
Do now pass now.
recommendation is to pass.
All right we're on a vote to
concur with the changes made in
the house to Senate bill one
seventy eight as amended all
you Senator Hickey thank you
madam president.
Senator o'neill.
Thank you madam president I move
that the Senate concur with the
entitled to notice when they're
garnished but we change it so
that the debtor would get a
formal letter when garner so
with that that's the amendment.
o'neill to move for concurrence
I move to concur.
No she got a save the whole
thing I move I make a motion to
concur with the house amendment
Work with them on the.
All right that we are on a
motion to concur with the house
changes to the Senate bill two
sixteen S. amended and the
suggestions we concur all those
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president yes consent to skew
centers to Mannix and Gonzalez
before I forget to return to the
chamber.
Seeing no objection we will do
objection where announcements
miscellaneous Senator Hamblen
thank you madam president Senate
bodies several of you know my
guests today and I'm very happy
that she is here with me today
almost seven years now and
during the pandemic Debbie and I
worked with several business
groups to help them have access
to the assistance that they
needed and deserved also during
other initiatives together as of
the green chamber and the
greater Las Cruces chamber we
get to host we have an upcoming
green drinks and star event
friend Debbie to help get more
resources to our community and
our small businesses and so
Senate body if you please will
welcome my guest today be more.
business a seeing none Senator
work.
I thank you madam president so I
just was informed by Senator
pope that there is a Senate bill
we're going to do that right up
front so with that met so what
we'll do and just what we're
still here we're getting folks
back in what do center PO first
on Senate bill one.
that we go that our business
third reading of legislation and
I yield to senator pope seeing
no objection more on third
reading of legislation Senator
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject debate
amendment or substitution
Senator pope to explain the
bill.
Thank you madam president sent
about three sixty seven immense
appropriations service officers
offices and require public
schools to reduce reporting
for absenteeism.
remove students with ten or more
president I'm ready for any
questions or debate.
Is there debate on Senate bill
three sixty seven.
Seeing none Senator pope
Mister or madam president and
center did you say some about a
home school attendance.
Or did I'm did I misunderstand
you madam president center I did
not.
Madam president I move that
Senate bill three sixty seven do
now pass and ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the roll then
called and all those present
I to thirty seven in the
affirmative serum the negatives
Senate bill three sixty seven
has duly passed the Senate
Senator pope.
We now on supplemental one amend
present that's correct with the
Senate supplemental counter
number one and we'll work our
way down I believe that
president right Senator said
about this.
Thank you Matt house bill one
sixty nine thank you madam
president you know and and then
present ask unanimous consent
Senator von yes to explain the
bill thank you madam president
this bill this house bill
relates to the interim
legislative ethics committee
the existing law meaning that a
person making a complaint is
barred from being able to
discuss the complaint itself for
the investigation as it
progresses on a complaint that
maintain that confidentiality
that silence but the complaining
party does.
The.
This provision this
confidentiality provision or
about their own complaint or the
investigation ups as progress is
this bill would change that and
release what is effectively a
Seeing none of the Senator fund
yes to close the committee
president move the house bill
one sixty nine do now pass and
where voting on house bill one
sixty nine a two year seats if
you wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
Senator Baca voting no.
Five of the thirty four in the
affirmative to in the negative
house bill one sixty nine has
duly passed the Senate centers
around thank you madam president
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show all action
for placing House Bill four oh
seven is twice amended on final
passage is been taken and that
The summer the office of the
medical investigator in the
association for counties held
numerous meetings trying to work
on a dilemma this caused by the
and taking up considerable
amount of storage space this
bill is an attempt at updating
our statutes to make it possible
to fall they were at it they
took a look at some other
aspects how to notify the next
of kin who are the next of kin
what the prices for cremating
disposition of unclaimed
corpses.
Thank you is there debate on the
bill.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you madam president it's
to be able to unanimous consent
to be able to bring in my expert
witness the medical examiner for
the state Dr heather General.
Senator Brandt no thank you.
Madam president senator I.
I think I understand what we're
trying to do you but you you
said that we've also than
To have someone cremated.
For really no reason and that
the increase when in with no
action from this body and it was
pay a tax of like three hundred
dollars so can your expert
explain why the state raise that
from twenty dollars or twenty
five dollars to almost three
hundred dollars.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Madam president and senator of
the of the medical examiner is
the medical investigator is not
not an unclaimed body so I I'm
not sure what but you're
referring to.
Thank you madam president thank
you senator
hear about opening and closing
grades from six hundred dollars
to a thousand I mean there's
there's quite a bit more in here
according to your explanation
of.
this that the state and the
county have to somehow make
arrangements for so the up
updating of the fees had to do
grave and burying the remains or
if it's not cremation during the
entire body.
Center press Mr president center
so if if they're unclaimed
Madam president Senator Brandt
they are cremated unless there
is a religious or cultural
the question that popped into my
head as you said that is how in
the world would you know if
there's a religious objection if
there are no claims body.
about if we don't know about it
then they would probably be
cremated there's an attempt made
to notify the next of kin and
that's where you would probably
find out about that.
guess if you're wearing a star
of David you'd know that they
probably have a religious
exemption or don't want you know
that that wouldn't fit in the
religious beliefs of there are
But I do think has a body we
need to look at these these fees
that are being increased
throughout the state maybe not
dealing with this office and I
will say that the medical
up for cremations I just don't
think it's right to put that
extra burden on families when
they've just lost a loved one so
that's what we probably need to
look at the future maybe you and
senator so I have a a little bit
of a question but I'm gonna try
I'm not sure that a well I'll
just ask it which is a with
Senator you for question deals
madam president Senator
unclaimed decedent to reimburse
the county for burial or
cremation expenses and so what
I'm asking about is if someone
passes away.
And they're not really in touch
with their family.
the decedent would be charged to
reimburse.
What is that simply means the
assets of the person and that's
what encompasses the state.
Steinborn the the.
County pays for the cremation.
Unless there is next of kin who
the cremation otherwise the
county covers the whole cost
themselves.
Okay so Mister president if a
won't suddenly get a bill saying
Hey we know you're related to
this guy or gal here's your
bill.
Mr president Senator Steinborn
To pay the cost of the
cremation.
Time are all right think centre
thank you Mr president any
further debate senators.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
By a vote of thirty eight in the
calendar and ideal to Senator
about this.
That of the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill three oh six house is which
committee substitute is a House
consumer public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill three oh six on final
passage is been taken is now
crime on low of on lawfully
purchasing or transferring of a
firearm to another this would
prohibit make criminal a person
who purchased a gun knowing that
or who transfers of four of fire
arms for use of a felony or
misdemeanor involving a firearm
again would be subject to
criminal prosecution under this
I see no debate Senator modest
clothes we were present I move
that the Senate the move that.
With the house Judiciary
show the rules are called and
all present voted in the
affirmative except those waiting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator is where voting tier
seats please.
voting no Senator Pirtle voting
no Senator Burt voting no
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Womenfolk.
It's.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill three of six duly
passed the Senate Senator Brandt
explains well.
Thank you Mr president I voted
does need to be done in the
state and so I think it just
makes things more confusing but
if it makes people feel better
and we can pass and accomplish
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended in the record
show that all actions placing a
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president this is a
more bill to Senate bill eighty
three which of pass the Senate
floor several weeks ago.
changes and wireless technology
under the our nineteen ninety
nine statute customers could not
choose to have services like
enabling customers to authorize
charges for non community
telecommunication services on
their telephone bills.
New Mexico is the last state to
That concludes my remarks thank
you senator Tom incentives we're
debating house bill one seventy.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Senate the record show that the
roll then called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in a
negative.
By show of hands.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Diamond getting everyone
to vote no but not voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
By a vote of thirty one the
affirmative I in the negative
house bill one seventy has duly
passed the Senate Senator
Tallman thank you Mr president
as amended with an emergency
clause senators and I yield to
send over there yes thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
amended and
house appropriations and finance
committee be placed on final
passage that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution no objection
receive and it will be one fund
will be the permanent fund to
put the opioid just settlement
monies into it and it will reset
it be invested in receive the
from the permanent fund to be
allocated by the legislature
thank you Mr president that's
all is thank you center the
because centers we're debating
the committee substitute for
House Bill five twenty seven
with the emergency clause in the
health and Human Services
Committee substitute
and as amended in house bill
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show the row has been called and
all those present or the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator Diamond.
House Bill five twenty seven as
amended has passed with
emergency clause center there is
thank you Mr president members
of the Senate go on to item
number eight House commerce and
actions for placing House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen as
amended on final passage has
been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or
inspectors act passed and one of
the things that we had no
sectors act was that they had to
pass an exam developed by the
party credited as complying with
the prevailing standards of the
standards for education
psychological testing on this
issue and that also complies
with the requirements of
Senators we're debating.
We're Senators committee.
Thank you Mr president would my
neighbor he'll please.
Is there gonna be a cost to to
take an exam or or is this just
kind of clarification of which
type exam I'm I'm just wondering
if the home inspectors are going
to pick up some kind of extra
cost really.
Okay and so the Mr president
Center made to is this going to
change the exam.
They're doing now Senator Ivey
Soto this resident it is going
to his exam because coming
national exam
exam where they cannot do that
right now Senator Schmedes okay
is present thank you I I have a
I just remember this bill first
came through I have the
constituent that was really
involved actually to
Si no further debate Senator
Ivey Soto to close on the bill
thank you very much Mr president
as president I move that house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
negative pressure pants senators
to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six and
affirmative here on the
negative.
Senate majority whip Michael for
make sure so we finish number
Representative we turn over were
over and item number nine okay
so just go on to the list there
yes this presents a center
coordinator Hemphill.
three seventy five on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Hearing no objections center
percent of a charter schools.
Generated program cost instead
of exactly two percent so
currently charter schools
provide two percent of their
transparency on how their use so
these dollars are originally
appropriated to the students of
the charter school so
accountability on these dollars
is the importance of the bill
authorizer to withhold less than
two percent if they choose and
with that Mr president I stand
for questions.
Senator is very debating house
bringing it this is long overdue
right now the law says they have
to take two percent whether they
want to or not whether they need
to or not they have to take two
percent this gives the
stand support and hope that the
body will support.
Thank you Senator Brandt any
further debate senators.
Si no further debate center
could Hemphill to close thank
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
Senators we're voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
item number ten that's house
bill three oh nine all you'll to
Senator many of us thank you Mr
president us as consenus and the
record show that all action
the gross receipts tax on to the
aviation Fund and if the taxes
on turbo prop and jet type
engines and fuel on that about
Bill else bill three oh nine
actually increases the play from
four thousand to ten thousand
this is where Senator Ingle my
expert witness over there that
and now pass need to be moved
ten these are for the nonprofit
gaming companies Elks looses
the PO's and now all of.
Thank you senator Munoz we have
can Mr president to get money
into the aviation Fund hopefully
the moose the moose lodge won't
one object thank you Mr
president.
Thank you thank you center just
a Senate further debate.
president I do now move that
house bill three line pass it
pass as consenus into the record
show that all present voting for
me except for those wanting in
my show hands.
Senator Wirth voting no Senator
souls voting no.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pinto voting no Senator
Ivey Soto voting no.
I have to thirty two in the
affirmative seven the negative
house bill three oh nine has
president's unanimous consent of
the some of the rules be
suspended the record show that
all action for placing House
Bill ninety on final passage is
been taken that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
with tonight is that amendment
to the uniform commercial code
which is part of the uniform law
commission process this amends
several sections of the uniform
commercial code to conform with
Okay you proceed all right.
Missing from commercial code to
address emerging technologies
including commercial
differently than we did years
ago this is a and that temp to
amend uniform commercial code to
address the way we bank
including principally electronic
means of records in
I see no debate Senator month
this to close.
Agency president so sentiment
does get up with the microphone
was were there from it because
present there's two different
people.
I appreciate senator every so
you know I want to make sure
that I honor the good words of
John Dutton that lawyers are the
the Senate director show the
rules when called in all those
present voting affirmative
except those wearing the
negative by show of hands
Senator Stewart voting tier
seats please.
By a vote of thirty nine the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
house bill ninety has duly
yield to senator Munoz thank you
Mr preservationists for the
record shows that all action for
placing House Bill seventy eight
as amended on final passage is
this is actually where the
sunset on the aviation fuel had
seconds you're paying attention
the sunset on the aviation fuel
for jet fuel and and internal
Thank you centerman us.
Senator the meeting house bill
seventy eight as amended anyone
wishing to debate.
Pinto and so then I made to get
fuel in window rock so colonel
John Pinto over here not related
to Shannon Pinto but Joe Pinto
help me out that one day we did
amended and ask Miss consent of
the Senate that records show
that all action for placing.
I'm sure seventy eight is
amended.
The record show that all action.
record show that the role as
being called and all those
voting affirmative except for
those involved in negative by
showing thank you to order.
More voting senators if you wish
I to thirty seven the Fuhrman is
there on the negative house bill
seventy eight as amended has
duly passed the Senate sentiment
us.
business announcements and
miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Peter
Wirth thank you Mr president
what we're gonna do is to the
being handed out with four built
on it so we'll do that consent
calendar and then we'll switch
over to Senate well we'll take a
break after the consent calendar
the reader to read Mr president
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the house has passed
Senate bill seventy one as
amended by the Senate Senate
bill eighty one Senate bill one
Committee substitute for Senate
bill forty one Senate bill one
forty five.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty five.
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk.
Journal show the message from
the house has been received.
by the house Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill three oh nine as amended by
the house Senate bill two fifty
as amended by the house and
the house has been received
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth status and next
order of business I thank you Mr
president I miss that we go that
our business concurrence and I
Thank you Mr president I move
that we concur on Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety two.
there and so this is the
concurrence on the junior bill.
Senator is very debating Center
finance committees have
supercenter bill one ninety two.
Was it the one that we got
before.
All the okay okay the one where
something's hidden inside very
good thank you thank you so very
subtle.
See no debate.
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety two as amended.
Voice of my voice.
I think you're waving at me I
ninety to all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the Senate has
concurred with the house
amendment to Senate finance
All Senate senator Peter Wirth
today is that next order of
business thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business announcements
miscellaneous we're in that
eighty that'll be Senator Shendo
item two is house bill for a one
and that'll be Senator souls
House Bill three Senate memorial
our business third reading of
legislation I yield to Senator
Shendo for item number one house
bill two eighty.
unanimous on on item number one
and what will Senator Diamond
will run all of these just get
used to doing it one way and
consent is all for show so ideal
debate amendment or substitution
and I would steal to Senator
Shendo Senator Shendo a yes Mr
president it's not to it's two
substitution and I would be able
to Senator Shendo Senator Shendo
thank you Mr president
What what that house bill to AT
established yes Sir tribes
nations in pueblos in
geographically diverse areas of
the state the centers will work
in partnership with tribal
governments education agencies
schools and state agencies to
develop culturally relevant
Thank you senator send us
centers we're debating house
bill two eighty as amended.
See no debate centered I'm gonna
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands centers we're voting to
your seats please if you wish to
bono.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six in the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
house bill two eighty as amended
showed all action for placing
House Bill four oh one on final
passage has been taken and it is
now open for debate amendment or
substitution I would be able to
act it has a definition changes
that has some updated language
technologies change
substantially in the last ten
years and that's what the bill
does I'm open for questions
thank you center so centers
president I move that house bill
four oh one do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present are shown voting
one has duly passed the Senate
Center cels thank you Mr
president thank you Senate.
Senator Diamond Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
very much Mr president what
Senate memorial seventy is
Housing is to honor Anna and CDS
Thank you Senator Lopez senators
are debating senator Morris
seventy.
See no debate Senator Diamond to
close Mr president of the Senate
of hands Senator seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative you're on the
negative sentiment moral seventy
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate we'll go on to
sea Clause has went on final
passage has been taken and it is
now open to debate amendment or
substitution and I would yield
to Senator Stewart Senator
the power plant closes this bill
deals with the displaced worker
assistance fund this bill
expands the eligibility for
displaced worker assistance by
twenty associated with the
closure of the funds were not
available at that time we don't
want those workers to miss out
on assistance so that is the
purpose of the bill I stand for
See no debate Senator Diamond to
close.
Mr president I move that house
bill four forty nine with the
emergency clause do now pass and
seats please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
of the body Senator Diamond nice
job guiding us through that
thank you.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth think is that next
order of business thank you Mr
president amicus that we go
about our business announcements
how far we get let me go through
the list of items item number
one house bill one sixty Senator
Padilla item number two house
house bill three sixty five that
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino item six
house bill three sixty eight
Senator Shendo item seven is
Brandt ten HM to Senator Stewart
and eleven just jam one that is.
Senator pope and then we do have
get that done and since it does
need to go to the other side so
with that Mr president Ms Oakes
and we got our business third
reading of legislation I yield
to Senator Hickey for item
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
four oh two as amended on final
passage is been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
Does two things are The New
Mexico
venture capital program in the
projects in New Mexico that can
be invested in start ups in New
Mexico also brought in a company
that and this year fifteen
million dollars was placed into
House Bill to to supplement that
fund and what this bill does is
expands the capacity for the
investment opportunities such as
allowing equity funds not having
to match equally so that various
secrets and with that I stand
for questions thank you senator
Senator debating Senate bill for
a two as amended center seal
Office.
Senator Hickey are there is
currently thirty five million in
the fund is originally put in
last year and it has taken the
since then the time to get the
up projects and so there they do
not have a track record as of
yet but they are now ready to
start this bill would add
another fifteen million for that
thank you Mr chair so how how
where do they get the funds to
to get the contract to set it
all up so thirty five million is
still intact Senator.
Si no further debate.
Senator Hickey to close.
Mr president I move that Senate
To vote in the affirmative at.
With the exception of those
voting in the negative by show
of hands.
Senator menulis voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no Senator
Gallegos voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator center burger voting no.
amended has duly passed etcetera
etcetera Hickey thank you Mr
president thank you college.
Want to the supplemental
calendar number two and I yield
that all actions for placing.
H. R. D. L. C..
House bill one sixty on final
critical broadband bills for the
session Mr president this
initially what it does is it
gives the department
transportation the ability to
set the conditions for the
installation of fiber cable
by ways etcetera it also gives
the D. O. T. the ability to
waive fees that qualify for what
is defined as under served or un
served areas Mr president.
center for the health I yield
thank you Mr are present the
senator you said this is the
most critical broadband bill
we've had the session how many
broadband bills that we had
is brought number of bills are
Mr president so nobody how many
broadband bills have you
introduced at the session
Senator Padilla center for the
Mr president surprisingly only
Say no further debate center
politicos thank you very much Mr
president broadband broadband
broadband Mr president I move
that.
rules and call all those present
one of the pharmacist was for
the native by show of hands
Senator has more voting tier
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
I affording the Fuhrman is in
somebody will go on to item
number two that's going to be
house bill one eighty million to
center Hamblen thank you Mr
president Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules be suspended in
that the record show that all
have to think back to the when I
was in high school and college
and I had my headphones on my
Sony Walkman and I was listening
to hall and Oates and air supply
to pull documents from a
microfiche.
We remember those little film a
film film that had the accord
that had documents on it that's
decades if not more and this
requirement is placed an
unnecessary burden on not only
the office of the courts but the
state as a whole and these
documents are these are public
documents but they are either
manner and there is no cost
impact and they are having to
maintain the paper a great
expense or place it on a
microfiche to great expense and
so Mr president I look forward
to the discussion of this bill
want to ask the sponsor she was
all alone.
Senator Hamblen home Mister
president senator you we've
talked about that this is going
Senator Representative I don't
know if I've seen you that right
we.
Mr president we did work in
their supply lyric into this
legislative session.
well girl you know it's true
girl you know it's.
Tomorrow is going to be to the
punch line I actually I is there
easy to do electronic records
but they're very fleeting and
you know we look back as a as a
history buff hundreds of years
and sometimes we get our
which has happened in New Mexico
microfiche deteriorates.
Preserving those documents might
not matter a lot to us it might
seem mundane United Mr president
resigned his appointment or
election to the Rio Arriba
county commission and he wrote
that letter to governor Lujan
Wallace which I think is
through some papers and looking
through it and you know in
nineteen seventy or eighteen
seventy when that happened and
what probably wasn't that
meaningful a lot of state
now are going to be interested
leave it or not and our our
silly little the base here on
the floor and we're government
does.
because that intrinsic value of
having that piece of paper or
microfiche yeah a lot of them do
deteriorate there's no question
now no wonder why lieutenant
governor Morales on propose for
Senator Moores and write a
letter on it those are stored
documents in as a history buff I
to do electronic storage it is
in the walkmans of the past.
Our our care but sometimes you
know you you look at records no
records for the first time in
who would of thunk when we were
all in the we're all jamming to
believe in million all those
bands of the eighties at CD's
would die and records will come
back.
so like the the Cimmerians did
and then preserve those records
you know what when I look back
at some area they're able to
piece back how life was like in
and I'll climb those temples and
and in Mexico in the lease and
it's meaningful when you look at
that so I just in on I'm I'm
obviously rant a little bit but
disappearing and mark Office
deteriorating.
Nothing is quicker races some
electronic documents out there
in the cloud or something
someone hit the wrong key on a
in so I stand opposed to this
because there is I'm history
buff and I love looking back at
history and I think future
generations will look at this
and say gosh I wish they hadn't
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I haven't
I have not seen this bill so I I
have a question about
to bring my expert on the floor
yeah and and I would hear expert
witnesses Senator absolutely
that's Cassandra Cain whose
chief technology officer for the
This Senator Hamblen would you
Residents Senator the courts
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
With.
Thank you Mr president when
documents are authenticated in
court you have to prove that
And and I this is the first time
I'd seen the bill
I hadn't seen any my committees
so just curious if they if the
bill addresses the issue of
Senator Hamblen Mister president
senator it's not in this
particular bill it's not related
court documents and that way.
Senate Bill Evans.
I'm just curious about how
they're going to be used
authenticated so that they can
be introduced as evidence in
court.
And provide for how they'll be
authenticated.
Senator Lopez it has been a
little while since I practice
but there still has to be a
something to prove that it's
authenticated will that be
somebody provided by the court
but will not by the courts but
by whoever whatever agency
Estonian of those documents as
the chief technological
technology officer Senator Lopez
thank you Mr president so a
state official will be available
to do that.
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president with the senator yield
for a question Senator Hamblen
do able yes Mr president I yield
thank you Mr president senator
and a year experts probably
we did have it all and we got it
with them took this years to get
the archiving but now five
years.
Legislative Council so the
question is this would they fall
Basically in perpetuity so I
guess kind of a two part
question would they apply and
then how long are they required
to keep records under this act.
any of the requirements for that
their room and they are
maintained in perpetuity.
For this is that.
legislative branch for that
matter do they fall under this
when we say a public officer of
the state with that include of.
electronic record by well how
long were they required to keep
that electronic record.
Senator Hamblen.
just wondering to do they store
audio records.
And if so what's the kind of
standard of how long those are
kept for.
Or video files.
president center I mean you
could you could interpret it to
be included because certainly
are proceeding of our committee
list of what should be capped
but it just says all records and
then says papers or documents so
I would assume that this would
constitute a record obviously
Okay this presents under.
I'm still at appreciate it you
know I kind of blindsided you
with this question a little bit
your expert I'm just wondering I
super important and I think that
we should go longer than five
years on what happens here
because sometimes it's very
historically important but just
as far as establishing that
record including for the courts
thank center thank you senator
Simon any further debate centers
we have further debate center
gave us.
This presents the sponsor he'll
to.
A limited things on let tronics
with the stroke of a.
Just hit a raise for it does
the third have a secondary site
push present.
To be.
This merely gives the office the
option to begin the electronic
copying of those documents.
caution you that even if.
Hello computer gets damaged it's
hard to retrieve the information
I did have a now the question Mr
Senator Hamblen Mr president
Senator absolutely.
Mr president center that gives
me good rational I was audited
receive the reserves states and
if it's not rentable they do not
credit you for it so I like the
idea that we're looking at other
options Mr president center and
guess we do have further debate
with Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and
retention of records or
something that isn't
and and check records or you go
back and look it at County
courthouse documents you go to
the to the county clerk who's
responsible for all of the
the.
Early nineteen hundreds what
those documents are are there
actually hand written copies of
property you had the abstract
but as things have changed with
that abstracts of call it kind
forward from hand writing the
document to making electronic
copies of them and they're all
They continue to progress though
from that and they moved to
microfiche records.
check workers are the big books
we can actually look at it she
and holding touch it and all
that stuff but
Act is times are changing things
way it's headed.
I just hold the do you go along
you know you can still have
maybe access to some of that
were you can if you need to
the historical are aspect of
that.
Whatever it may be the records
of the property records of your
family however it might be but
that's.
not gonna have fires or floods
in courthouses it destroyed
records show less just as hope
the dishes the a good way and
the best way that we can can do
Hamblen to close on the bill
thank you Mr president body I
appreciate the discussion on
that Mr president I move that
house bill one eighty do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator committee voting no.
By a vote of thirty seven
affirmative three in the
negative you're so close Senator
to have a unanimous vote I guess
Moores explains vote center
happen thank you Mr president I
wonder how long you've been
sitting on that I appreciate the
discussion thank you Senate body
Senator Moores I I really think
history will look back at this
and say kasha which they haven't
done just because we don't know
what was going on back then and
I think this is a sad day for
history and I really do believe
to seven and I yield to Senator
Shendo.
Thank you Mr president.
I ask unanimous in the Senate
the directors so that house bill
two sixty seven.
bill two sixty seven of final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objections Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president and body.
medical and vision records to
determine if a driver should be
granted a license with or
without restrictions under
current law and we do maybe pull
medical experts to review a
bill will allow in the do to
rely on medical records
submitted but the drivers
medical professional.
This bill also abolishes the
obsolete health standards
B. D. regulations MBT has not
been able to find physicians
willing to become board members
of the board is currently not in
operation.
Thank you etcetera etcetera.
because Mr president I move that
house bill two sixty seven do
now pass and pass them sent to
the Senate the records show that
the rule has been called and all
those present voting affirmative
My vote affording the firm is in
the negative house bill two six
seven has duly passed the Senate
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president members
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty
seven on final passage had been
that we passed a bill like this
a few weeks ago about public
education the FBI has told the
state of New Mexico that unless
The ECECD is required to conduct
these national background checks
utilizing FBI databases protect
our children comply with state
law and also to receive a
Senator is we're debating House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty
seven we do have a floor
amendment.
see no debate Senator Stewart
closed.
Mr president I move that the
house Judiciary Committee
Senators we're voting all
senators to your seats please.
You Mr Rono please raise your
hand.
By a vote affording the Fuhrman
is here on the negative house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty
seven has duly passed the Senate
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show all
action for placing House Bill
three sixty five as once amended
thank you Mr president members
this is the the house version of
the geothermal the resources
development bill that senators
but it but it does has money in
house bill two so we can get
this thing off the ground and
make some some real progress in
utilizing one of our finest.
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill three sixty
five as amended amendment
see it it would be good.
Senator do have.
The amendment at your desk it's
a.
Senator will just stand in place
Okay so Mister president yes we
we we we need to do this Senator
sure Senator to spend of you
Transaction center field explain
with them and us well I think
this is this was a amendment
recommended by the Senate
finance committee in order to
subject to legislative
appropriation and if that'll
stand for questions.
Senator is we're debating the
amendment senator member number
one.
number one to house bill three
sixty five is one seven and I
just that we take a the voice
vote on this Senator which
elected consider unanimous
consent or unanimous consent.
one has been added to house bill
three sixty five is now twice
amended center anticipate this
thing about thank you so so I
think as I said earlier this now
Thank you senator subpoena
centers we're debating anyone
wishing to debate.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Mr president but part of what
some of the analysis says
according to the C. M. D..
The federal grants that will be
charged with applying for are
usually awarded to universities
stronger applicant and N. E. C.
M. D. would support their
applications did you address
that Mr
Mr president Senator is if you
components will be the the
center of excellence for
geothermal development at New
Mexico tech
They would be able to apply for
constructed a requests can be
made to universities in the
state and and to departments of
the state but the loans would be
and what would be available to
it was going that ECM do was
going to be the grant
application agency but if it's
if it's optional or if it's the
center that applies to the
university's applies that of
I see no further debate Senator
anticipate to close on the bill.
that all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands centers we're voting to
your seats please.
By a vote of thirty seven the
pharmacy on the negative house
bill three sixty five is twice
amended.
Has duly passed the Senate
center to subpoena thank you
very much Mr president members
directors so that action for
placing House Bill three sixty
eight twice amended on final
passage has been taken as those
subs to bake a member
substitution.
if you recall we passed to the
governor signed house bill one
oh two that build allowed the
pass through entities like LLCs
work around two to ten thousand
ten thousand dollar cap placed
on personal income tax
deductions for state and local
taxes in the on the federal
income tax with the federal tax
practice each we want to to did
not work as intended we are now
joining all of all of the states
in making changes to the
mechanism of this tax benefit so
This is what all other states
are currently doing effect
Colorado just a recently made
this change so this bill makes
some technical changes in again
drawing on experience with the
Thank you senator Shendo
Senators rated baiting house
bill three sixty eight as twice
amended anyone wishing debate
centers around us.
entities do the same and so hi
take advantage of them would
have a direct financial interest
in SB excuse.
Senator.
Mr president also asked to be
excused.
Mr president.
want to I want to kind of raise
an issue here you know we're
about to pass an omnibus tax
bill that's going to affect
every single what member in this
chamber and just because you
you and so again I don't think
you really need to say that you
need to be excused from the vote
it's up to each member to ask
but if we start doing that we're
disclosure I do have a couple
LLC's.
Senator Morris yeah I think we
all use passers so I I kind of
object to Madam it's not
everyone on this for has a
I feel the need Mr Mr president
I feel the need to disclose that
my husband and I also have an
LLC owning a rental property.
Senator about this Mr president
I know it's a good human I
and I would maintain that
request this case because I know
this tax opportunity to use it I
know exactly how it's done I
work in my account to do it we
maximize it and it is a
companies I I know how this is
done thank you.
Any further debate senators.
Etcetera etcetera because Mr
president is anybody left to
the record show that the the
club needs records show that the
rule has been called and that
all those present voting
affirmative except those one
we're gonna go on to the next
item on the calendar.
That's going to be House
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
placing House Appropriations and
finance committee.
for House substitute for House
Bill five thirty three.
On final passage has been taken
and that is now searching debate
Bill five three three immense
two sections of the statute to
increase the minimum share of
total health insurance premiums
for school districts charter
schools and other entities
participating in group health
of insurance of an employee
whose whose annual salary is
less than fifty thousand will be
covered by their employee I mean
but will be covered by the
employer.
be it will be covered up by the
employer.
And for those making more than
sixty thousand at least sixty
percent of the cost of insurance
And our state employees with
that Mr president I'm ready for
debate or any questions thank
you senator Senator committee
house appropriations finance
thank you Mr president and
certainly support this and in
light of what we need to do for
public schools I do know that
some higher education
this mandate that we're also
including them and I think
unless the bill's been amended
any impact on our higher ed
community
mandate that they're going to
struggle with.
Mr president center I remember
you asking these questions and
Senator cation and I would ask
expert witnesses into the
chamber.
And Mister president Senator my
apologies I wonder if you could
repeat the question Senator Mr
how this might affect some of
them none of them what what that
might do to them with this
mandate.
receiving I. Angie funding and
they should be able to cover the
help those health insurance
costs at the heart institutions.
and I do wonder maybe if we have
to come back another year and
and may be exclude the the
higher ed I don't know but maybe
could look into that for for
do have further debate we have
Senator Gallegos.
Is present with the Sanchez deal
for just a few questions Center
there's below fifty fifty sixty
and above can you tell me how
much the district has to pay on
those segments can.
percent of the cost of insurance
for those making fifty to sixty
thousand dollar range
the school district will pay
center and I appreciate that it
sort of goes back to the same
conversation Senator Kernan had
as far as on funded mandate how
This Mr printed president and
senator the funding for this is
available on house bill two.
Senator Gallegos.
Misprision Serra Preciado thanks
thank you.
Thank you senator goes any
further debate.
Senator Woods.
I do not need to ask Miss stood
it this way so that's my
objection Mister president thank
you.
Any further debate senators.
Say no further debate Senator
pope to close on the bill.
now pass and pass out instead of
the Senate that the record show
that the roll then called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative to accept those
voting in the negative by show
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator committee voting no.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative in the negative
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five thirty three has duly
passed the Senate Center pope.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent in the Senate
that the record show that all
actually placing House Joint
Memorial two on final passage
memorial as a duplicate to one
that we started in the house up
between me and Senator side
current Hemphill there's got
over here quicker so we're
eighteen ninety these are women
who work on education on
historical preservation on
patriotism to some recognition
year anniversary of the passage
of the nineteenth amendment
which again most women the right
to vote of title stand for
questions thank you Senator we
wanted to thank the sponsors of
this memorial for bringing it
forward it's so important to
recognize this history in New
Mexico and and the history I
eighty one in Los Lunas Nino
Terrel Lauren was born she was
later recruited by Alice Paul to
lead the suffrage movement in
the early nineteen hundreds
credited with New Mexico
ratifying the nineteenth
amendment and even though she
experienced great success with
running as a Republican but her
uncle who was that territorial
governor actually leaked to the
media that she was divorced and
of schools which she won she was
superintendent for eight years
she fought for bilingual and
bicultural education repair
dilapidated school buildings and
fought for better teacher
that Mr president to all yield
back to my co sponsor ishe madam
president.
Madam Prataap.
Senator we stand for questions
word that I don't think many
Americans truly appreciate the
origin of the words it goes back
to liberty is about being able
government and that's why as
Republicans we stock about talk
about liberty a lot and I am so
proud the congressman Terrel was
Republican because she stood for
liberty to participate if you're
going to participate in
government to be ruled by the
laws that are implemented you
have the right to participate in
freeing the slaves to so
suffrage that is with the
Republican party's talk about is
liberty to be able to live free
at participating government and
for liberty Mr president so if
anyone want to see what
congresswoman of terror looks
like we have her picture up in
our office right now and we're
proud to call her Republican
systems president thank you we
really excited to learn about
that the picture of one of my
relatives the report Republican
wall she was a Republican the
grandfather Santiago with
federal was cousins to denote
that a Warren
and and so she was raised in
Valencia County and actually the
changed dramatically after her
father was killed and her mother
married her stepfather they
moved to Santa Fe the stepfather
was very involved in politics
is when she advocated for the
nineteenth amendment she got a
lot of backlash and antagonism
from some of the more
traditional Hispanics Hispanic
definitely make going to visit
the minority party's office and
see my relative I know what she
looks like we have several
also signed on not as a plus
sponsor but has somebody who
really strongly supported this
and I think the sponsor for
bringing this this plaque.
Thank you Mr president
appreciate the Senate members
debate it's it's exciting time
when we can talk about our
Sedillo Lopez with that
I move that the house joint
memorial two do now pass ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
to has duly passed the Senate
senator Morris to probably
explains vote.
I'm very probably spend a vote
you know how we know about that
is because we have history and
we have Representative written
you Mr president I wanted to
thank the donor of that
particular print to his name is
Michael how to meal he happens
to be my brother in law and he
those with the good senator up
earlier last session thank you
Mr president thank you Senator
Baca.
We don't usually do this after
vote but senators if you'd like
to give a round of applause
please do so.
Senator Majority Leader Peter
Wirth takes the next order of
business thank you Mr president
Ms that we go about our business
messages from the house we're in
that order business message from
the house the reader to read.
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four as amended by
the Senate and further amended
by the house and request the
concurrence of the Senate to
have to the house amendments
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed Senate
Joint Memorial thirteen and
return same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's my cut and chief clerk
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred in the Senate
amendments to house bill thirty
five as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate
house bill one ninety one as
message from the house has been
received the reader to read Mr
president I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the house has
concurred in the Senate
amendments to house today Shuri
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk.
It'll show that the message from
the house has been received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth takes the next order
of business thank you Mr
referred to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty nine as amended
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
General reflect their voted on
individually hearing no
objection the reader to read.
House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill three
all those in favor signify by
saying aye those opposed may the
eyes have it the committee
report has been adopted in the
journal reflect they were acted
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
servant this gentleman Senator
about this.
no objection the reiterating
number two the house commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for House
Bill to twenty eight do pass.
Number four.
House bill four sixty two as
amended do pass.
Senate bill five oh three do not
number six.
Senate bill five oh three do not
move adoption those seven
committee reports.
Centers is a motion to doctorate
reports all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
of business thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection Senator
Wirth thank you madam president
so that Mr president I'm sorry.
floor tomorrow I do want to
announce that the house business
the house.
House Bill five forty seven tax
bill conference committee will
at nine o'clock in the morning
and with that ideal to different
chairs for announcements thank
you one that our business
forty it is a driver's license
bill for people that are a death
in allows them to to get a
medical issue they'll put that
on the license so I'm and ask
Miss consent for that.
Senator venter question has been
sent any questions.
Senator Brandt.
Just wanted to do was to speak
on this this request no I just
heard him say something nice
about the Judiciary Committee
sides got kind of all tingly
there for a minute sprints.
transportation fund for D. O. T.
and I'd like to re election as
consent to release that from
Senate finance.
Centers is been requesting
animus consent.
know we're getting pretty late
in the game.
but I do think that that for our
process the bill should at least
be heard in a committee in the
Senate
so I I agree.
Republican leaders on Senate
finance and and we agree to
those I think you're floor
leader looked over in the other
day I had no issue with them so
It's been a request unanimous
consent request any objection.
Seeing no objection center many
us thank you Mr president we
will not be meeting in the
nine thirty we have a memorial
in one bill if everyone gets
there on time we should get out
of there fairly quickly so at
nine thirty room three eleven
for education.
Thank you senator souls Senator
Griggs.
around nineteen hundred and it
was formed and named for former
governor territorial governor
Miguel Otero and it was created
fountain and he's shown he can
re Albert are wrapped all over
Lee and Jim gill and refused to
surrender to Pat Garrett who is
surrendering to they ultimately
created Otero County named after
former chair good territorial
governor Miguel Otero and the
And what should be the most well
known most famous trial in the
history of New Mexico occurred
in the community of
Hillsborough.
We're all overly engine Gillen
Trial lasted seventeen days it
was
it was covered by newspapers
from New York Chicago San
that line come back and start
deliberating in the morning the
attorney for all of Ridley
gentleman by the name of Albert
fall.
in just a little less than ten
minutes after that and gave a
not guilty verdict.
Shown one of the biggest most
famous trials in New Mexico that
hardly anybody knows about.
prosecution they both became New
Mexico's first two state
senators George curry the chair
of became one of New Mexicos
ever heard so thank you Mr chair
and thank you members of the
body thank you sending bricks.
Senator serve on this thank you
Yes Senator Griggs Mr chair and
and Senator someone is is about
to make a movie of this
particular video so hopefully
that'll all come to pass in the
deserved while we're at it you
know one of these days I'll give
you all plugged on Jennifer's
movie coming up but anyway it's
well well we're plugging movies
let's forget about tonight we
were going to meet in Senate
judiciary the weather's bad I
to do between the start time on
the floor in the morning so be
prepared and let's go to work
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator on the Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I have
the organ donation for disabled
people being protected passed
the house floor today
unanimously and so it goes up to
the governor so I want to thank
you all for your support and all
Senators center for them thank
you very much Mr president with
that the Senate will stand in
recess.
