Everybody's talked about crime
and where it's going to go and
how we put a pack package
together what was in the budget
already on our side and what
really works today and and
handed over to Senate center
someone's.
Valentine's day to everyone the
lovers in the world
We George and I thought Senate
finance chair and I thought that
it would be appropriate to bring
our two committees together
spend time on the things that we
have learned work as opposed to
things that sometimes are are
more a simple approaches or
quick approaches to the crime
mayor of the city of Albuquerque
we've had presentations by the
district attorney of Albuquerque
from the chief district attorney
for the state we've had
presentations from LFC we've had
this combined committees and the
public that we've really been
able to root out where the
problem lies and and and it took
some work.
Make some progress with those
things that we know that does
work but also today to talk
about some things that we
realize clearly do not work so
Mister chairman appreciate you
in a crime package is provided
cannibalism Public.
And we provide accountability
and in what works in law works
that's the most important thing
we can do as a legislator is
account to the public of what
works and what doesn't work in
crime it's different in every
community across.
there are cops on the street
working crime and just plain
flat truth.
Center.
You know me to speak up.
on the streets working every
single day every hour of the day
you turn on the TV and what
happens.
It's something happened in
we're willing to do that with
and so LFC and and.
Has worked over the summer to
look it at.
I miss use and prevention.
things but behavior health high
quality treatment.
Housing child well being
But in order to address today's
creating pressing crime problem.
officers stipends and retention
statement stipends.
And it's got to be a balanced
approach that we deal with crime
in all areas that we can deal
with that.
have a great report over the
summer about pre tile.
The trial detention services and
we'll start there and and just
give us an overview in a brief
and I don't know if they can put
Good morning everybody John
Courtney deputy director at the
New Mexico legislative finance
committee I oversee our program
presentation LFC update on crime
trends and bail reform and will
be assessed discussion
discussing as the chair
mentioned some work that we did
increase in Bernalillo county
New Mexico generally speaking
some of the some of the data in
here will also reflect the work
that we've done and public
safety and our program
update of issues of current
concern to the legislature will
briefly cover recent crime
trends the system's response and
we'll take you through some
that you have in front of you
today.
let's see here so just to start
if we turn to slide to.
conditions are are set by the
courts or pre trial detention
subsequently
If you go to the next slide.
You can see across the current
crime trends and this is outside
of Albuquerque.
that the New Mexico violent
property I'm sorry The New
Mexico violent crime rate
without Albuquerque has declined
and the New Mexico property
You'll see that at least twenty
communities did see a violent
crime increase from twenty
sixteen to twenty twenty
Saw that same decrease in the
property crime rate that we saw
statewide.
But while property crime has
fallen in Albuquerque violent
crime has plateaued at a high
level
twenty fourteen that sharp
increase and then we see later
on that that again that property
crime rate falls the violent
if you've been following the
news you'll know that
Albuquerque
last year
Order a record number of
then during that a Q. rise in
homicides and twenty twenty one
it kind of mirrored a national
trend a lot of folks.
as part of that analysis that we
did over the interim we found
that guns were involved in
seventy nine percent of
homicides that's slightly higher
than the national average and
it's an increase from historic
numbers to.
officers and and from digging a
little deeper is that some ideas
behind the driving factors in
the increase in homicides
includes more guns being
released a progress report on
substance use disorders finding
that.
Overdose death rates increased
significantly across the state
report found that the system
wasn't keeping up with rising
crime Albuquerque experience an
increase in crime starting
around eleven when metrics of
poverty homelessness and income
and crime over and while crime
increase social to conditions
deteriorated.
analysis also I looked at what
works and preventing and
addressing crime ensuring swift
and certain accountability for
And we'll see that we we took a
look to say okay so house since
took twenty eighteen.
How is the system responding and
convictions present entries
And you'll see that the gap.
Hasn't necessarily closed a lot
and in the most recent year has
president missions you can think
of this like a like a set of
dominoes and if you don't have
If you don't have felony arrests
you're not necessarily going to
well it's very possible that
That it's diversion programs
that are the answer maybe more
people are going to substance
seen
utilization of those programs
decrease pretty.
reinvestment the fact that our
prison population is lower than
it's been I I think and and
recorded history we give a
who puts out a present a
forecast each year doesn't
necessarily believe that it's
going to be
increasing much from there.
remain relatively flat through
at least seven years of rising
crime.
Some of the trend we saw on the
previous slide there there's
that wide widening
accountability gap for the most
serious offenses and I I think
we found that there there were
issues potentially redirecting
resources because of the DOJ
coming in and
And stepping in with with
had to be taken off his his
patrol for two to three hours
basically to to fill out
paperwork to have a review done
and that two to three hours you
know there isn't and wasn't
slide here to keep in mind is
that the the criminal justice
system and and Bernalillo county
has undergone significant
reform.
there likely factors and
conviction trends you'll hear
the second DA's office talk
about the CMO and bail reform
potentially in impacting
No bail reform came into play
and we talk a lot about it but
of you may be asking why bill
reform.
conviction contingent on wealth
and bonds.
and empirical research shows a
jail in criminal defense prior
to trial is often unnecessary to
pollute protect public safety
risk so in twenty sixteen New
Mexico voters approved a
constitutional amendment largely
eliminating cash bail and
changing the conditions under
which defendants could be
detained pending trial.
So next slide please.
The thing to keep in mind here
is that all pre trial systems
are risk management systems they
have to balance public safety
instead the legal system and
society at large accept some
level of risk at the cost of
liberty and presumption of
innocence but not everyone is is
we have some bullet points here
that I think the the thing to
really point out here is the
prosecutor must prove by clear
and convincing evidence that
defendant is dangerous and no
conditions of release can ensure
to terminate her parental rights
for example.
the implementation of the public
safety assessment or the call
the PSA which is an empirical
risk assessment to pool judges
use
to help inform their decisions
judicial discretion a discretion
or judicial decision making
it's it's basically a tool that
they can use to inform that
decision.
three high level important
outcomes right of arrest for a
new violence charge and for new
charges of all types.
and range of court appearance so
I just are looked at about
we're not re arrested for
violent charge eighty two
percent not rearrested on any
new charge and nearly eighty
percent made all court
appearances and and this
accordingly I sorry is about in
pre trial defendants arrested on
the most common new charges were
for property crimes followed by
drug crimes and assault and
battery
serious violent charges
that occurred during that pre
trial period defendants in the
population and the former house
bill I would likely targeted two
a subsequent analysis showing
that it's possible that a third
may have been pulled into their
to.
Of but you may be asking
yourself it.
Are these outcomes acceptable
I can't answer that question for
you we can just provide data on
potential impacts of
some of the some of the reforms
that that you all have been
increased detention likely
involves trade offs.
For detention will likely you'll
at least some temporary crime
reduction benefit.
you're taking at a set of people
off the street and.
though you are only likely
delaying that
And to realize that benefit you
would probably have to detain a
lot of people that wouldn't have
reductions in overall crime
rates and long term that benefit
maybe more marginal or even flip
due to the criminal genic the
facts of.
Mr chair and members I I think I
think that's a good place to
stop the remainder of the of the
presentation is a kind of
members have a hard copy of and
you can also find online miss
raven did.
An analysis in their that
recommendation the really served
as the framework for for that
are the building blocks for I
believe what you'll be talking
about today in the substitute
you Mr chair would you prefer I
go over the specific budget
recommendations or go over the
provisions of Senate bill two
thirty one and how they relate
to the budget over Senate bill
two through one as they relate
to the budget and those
Of I'll be presenting on the
substitute a proposed substitute
for the substitute for a Senate
This bill does a lot of things
related to law enforcement
criminal justice and the due to
sherry I'll go over them as
briefly as I can but it is a
establishes to new programs to
distribute funds for this the
first is within the department
of finance and administration it
will distribute funds to local
million dollars to be expended
over five years for this purpose
and those funds are contingent
on passage of Senate bill two
thirty one.
sorry five percent of their
annual salary and those are
given out on five year intervals
these are identical to the
provisions in house bill eighty
house bill eighty six or similar
legislation which SB fifty two
thirty one is similar
legislation all
these payments from the law
enforcement protection fund
that's new and was not part of
house bill eighty six.
The bill also deals with law
Standards of training and
standards of conduct and
certification and it splits into
two functions one is in charge
of training and that's the New
Mexico law enforcement standards
These entities are both made all
of our I both administratively
attached to the Department
public safety the bill
can see a list of the membership
of each of those entities.
The bill also creates a new
section of the law enforcement
training act that states that
mental health issues methods of
de escalation peer to peer
intervention stress management
stress management racial
sensitivity reality based
situational training and use of
rules related to certification
and training the bill also
creates a law enforcement
officer database that will
coordinate the sharing of
information among state local
agencies are required to report
relevant information to this
database and they're also
required to consult the database
when they're making employment
decisions regarding officers.
currently a one million dollar
budget for the entity primarily
in in in terms of certification
in house bill two so that that
board is funded this separate
significant budget increase in
of the GAA for this for FY
twenty three so these costs will
probably be able to be absorbed
by its existing operating
budget.
benefits it increases
distributions from the law
enforcement protection fund to
all its beneficiaries it also
increases distributions for the
are accounted for in house bill
two.
And it also redirects all
remaining balances in the law
enforcement protection from from
the general fund to the newly
that the the funds are diverted
to law enforcement retention
funded some of the peace
officers survivors fund.
This diversion the increasing
distributions and the diversion
It would reduce revenue in FY
twenty four by about forty
million dollars fifteen point
five million dollars in FY
twenty twenty five and seventeen
point two million dollars in FY
twenty six.
twenty four there's also a
provision for a new judgeship in
the second judicial district
that was not in that bill House
Bill to include six hundred and
six thousand dollars to fund
have a small fiscal impact of
about three hundred and three
thousand dollars per year
starting in FY twenty three.
As B. two thirty one also
directs the administrative
directs them to explore the use
of GPS monitoring as it affects
these issues.
House Bill to includes four
million dollars to be expended
over three years for the purpose
for which grants may be awarded
especially to include some more
options related to coordination
with law enforcement and other
entities these provisions are
identical to those in house bill
appropriation for these requests
that is contingent on the
passage of HB eighty four or
similar legislation like SB two
thirty one.
entities local governments
counties municipalities other
state agencies that the agent of
the department health funds are
disproportionately impacted by
violent crime that includes
issues into preventing goals
crimes there is these provisions
identical tools and house bill
ninety six there is one point
seven million dollars in
recurring funding for the
dollars a year for this program
those funds are not contingent
on the passage of house bill
ninety six or somewhere
legislation so that
substitute Mr chair is there
anything else you'd like me to
discuss I know well and I think
that kind of goes over the
substitute bill and and all
handed over to the chairman
Judiciary.
best what works and what doesn't
work before we do that though
I'd like to recognize the Chief
Justice New Mexico Supreme Court
who I want to thank because he's
been sitting in on some of our
hearings I know that he's been
court and so I just like to
recognize the Chief Justice be
he'll give him a moment or two
please Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman chairman.
Plural
yes the the judiciary has been
treated very well the session so
To
Enhancing the way cases are
processed both civil and
criminal cases in the courts
throughout the state of New
timely manner and and and and
expedited timely manner and we
have two justices that are
working in a similar way on
expediting resolution of civil
we we are committed to looking
at our existing criminal rules
to consolidate certain functions
for example I think you will see
conduct a probable cause hearing
I want to determine whether or
not there's going to be a
detention both hearings will be
held at the same time so that
session ends to help.
expedite these cases not
notwithstanding of the COVID
situation that we're in on the
civil side we're going to be
position on the docket of on the
trial docket so that their cases
move our advanced quicker
through and get a quicker trial
for the super six person jury
trial so Mister chairman those
are the kinds of things we would
like to be doing.
we I say stay tuned.
hope will expedite quick
resolution of cases not only is
the basis of the individuals
that are in jail
Justice to all the people the
state of New Mexico our power
project in Bernalillo county.
provided by this body and we we
expect that that will be rolled
out in a in a formal fashion in
a very up deliberate fashion
that will happen statewide one
of the things we hope that will
happen with that is that.
If if a bracelet is cut off or
notified of that breach and we
hope to do other things as well
statewide so these will provide
incentives to of people that are
on the table monitoring and the
be under this of surveillance a
twenty four seven and that
violations will be promptly
reported to the police and bench
warrants.
Request.
house for a presentation of
legislation
You know this we can the
Albuquerque journal reported on
the story the shooting of a
state police officer whose on
unfortunately the the.
Incident also provoked a
statement from the secretary the
I spent some time over the
weekend looking at that case for
more detail on that our staff
look into the case with more
detail and and it's a
fascinating story when you
individual by the name of Caleb
Eldred Elvidge I shot a state
police officer in the net.
In these mountains area.
this individual Mr L. elige is
that in two thousand nineteen he
was charged with shooting at UNM
police officers from a vehicle
He he was arraigned and detained
as a result of that incident in
in June of twenty twenty he pled
guilty to that charge of
solution to our problems is
let's add years to the crime and
so we did that in twenty twenty
we added a firearms enhancement
of of I think we went from one
years to three years.
wasn't too concerned about the
difference between serving the
original sentence or enhance
sentences were evidently we're
not things that crossed his
mind.
original UNM charge the shooting
at police officers he was
sentenced to one year.
Now the crime itself would allow
for a penalty up to a year and a
half and for an additional year
on a parole and then
appropriations.
We were not very shortly after
that violated his probation
within two months he was in
violation.
In January of last year of of
Orton sorry of January last year
twenty twenty one he was
released on the ankle bracelet
to a third party and no surprise
time his ankle one is ankle
bracelet monitor was cut in
April of twenty one
there I want was promptly issue
looks like the warrant was
issued the same day affirms
warrant to finest religion to do
anything with an individual who
had pled guilty to shooting at a
police officer from the stolen
SUV of the year before.
mind at the time he was shooting
at a state police officer this
weekend.
But we can take this case and we
can take any one of the thirty
four cases we looked at last
pre trial detention of an
individual work where and of the
prosecutor actually ask for pre
trial detention and we're that
didn't occur.
Where an individual would have
to do something bad those are
not the solutions and when you
look at these on a case by case
basis in the case of Mr L. elige
is just one of anyone that we
detention he was he was detained
he did plead guilty he was
sentenced to a Centers for
substantially less than the
judge could have sentenced them
really accomplishing other than
making yourself feel better by
adding more used to these crimes
so thank you Mr chairman
appreciate that opportunity to
do a little bit of a case study
something we've been doing a lot
Thank you very much Mister chair
Mister chair and Mr chair and
thank you so much for the
presentation and for the
legislation and it's good to
hear from LFC and I do have a
looks like you've you've put
together some good work from the
governor and other legislators
as well into this so
question number one.
And as I look at one of the
charts from the LFC they had a
chart that said thirty eight
percent of the crimes were
property crimes.
some.
for substance abuse connection
then I guess when you look at
domestic violence a lot of that
I think a lot of that is
substance abuse.
If we have any money for that is
that recurring money some hoping
someone can answer that and it
seems specifically to go to the
crime reduction requests.
etcetera thank you thank you Sir
Senator Steinborn in house bill
two and as we move along the
behavioral health issue are the
in substance abuse there is
money in there in the social
work program to do that as we do
that move forward but let me
tell you the you may be exactly
problem that now is a killer.
And so how do you do you do how
do you get those you got to get
him captive and then you got to
give me a treatment program but
am I correct in that Alan.
Mr chair yes you are you are
correct in that the current GA
and training among other
appropriations that relate to
behavioral health and overall
support a significant goal of
prioritizing treatment.
Steinborn question regarding the
crime reduction requests yes so
Mr chair at a and Mister chair
and senator the.
include recurring increase of a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars starting FY twenty three
and it also includes a
nonrecurring two million dollars
appropriation that was
want to be clear I I asked the
head of our behavioral health
division when they testified
when he testified Dr Neal Bowen
before the Senate finance
services it's inpatient
treatment centers and this is
something I mean as we dig into
this issue and we've taken a
treating substance abuse and
shortage of services maybe
opiates in another part of the
state
there's a severe lack of
inpatient treatment center so I
just want to say that you know
one thing I have I proposed was
excise tax for cannabis.
To go towards substance use
treatment and a crate of
frontier in Human Services
Department assembly work out
cannabis like I want to say to
The Washington Oregon have
dedicated most of their funds
from cannabis for treatment
services the numbers he sided
with all due respect hundred
see if we can and create a more
substantial funding streams to
deal with treatment and then
work with the judiciary on
really expanding residential
mandated treatment really try to
turn around these these problems
which are which are often
behavioral health in nature and
dual diagnosis kind of stuff.
needle on our a lot of our crime
and that finally I just want to
ask one other question right now
Mr chair switches the law
enforcement certification board.
in place now that the governor
gets to appoint members to the
academy board perhaps which
provokes licenses and does
things like that are we
replacing the academy board with
the the law enforcement
enforcement academy board is the
names to the law enforcement
standards and training council
is created and it is the entity
that will
actually certify officers for
employment and it will also be
Civil judgments.
Criminal convictions of law
enforcement officers for on on
enforcement agencies to check in
and see whether this
You know an applicant for a job
might have a judgments for
excessive force or something in
Thank you Mr that's all I have
right now thank you and Mr chair
Senator Steinborn you know of
I'm really glad that she was
here because this is a common
session we need to make much
greater efforts.
But let's keep in mind to the
that well with your concern I
thank all of our concerns are
the individuals who need
substance abuse help we also
the chairman when it was made
earlier is and part of our
hearings with law enforcement
officer may be the we learned an
important detail very simple
statistic which is APD has Levin
detectives so that helps put
things in perspective the got
twice as many detectives looking
at a be a use of force as they
do looking at narcotics
investigations and I'll tell you
arrests that have been made.
Center someone's always
intrigued me I point this out in
our committee a lot at the same
time Albuquerque had a hundred
seventeen murders granted there
five times the population of
those cases Albuquerque has a of
a hundred seventeen murders
cleared or had arrests and
thirty nine.
so resources may be an
those I'm sorry of those fifteen
of those were drug related.
Drug related buys transactions
or individuals who were clearly
under the influence of the time
had we had eight of those that
we categorizes domestic violence
this is a relationships for
inter family murders but that
gives you some additional
perspective to your concern a
and the Mr Chairman and the
presenters thank you very much
Mr Chief Justice thank you for
being here I think that we have
a lot going on in the state as
we all know and you know it's
just horrible that it almost
proactive the legislation I
bring is around being proactive
you know and things like what's
causing this I think it's hunger
I think it's poverty I think
it's housing issues I think it
chairman serve on this also both
business business folk here in
the state so if you had to tell
me I mean one of the big three.
One of the big three things that
are so significantly that we
talk about this every year I
different here that are going to
make such a gigantic as my son
say join Norma's impact what is
it.
I don't know that I'm actually
seeing it I think I we're we're
we're we're looking at things
with a three legged stool in in
in Judiciary and you got to have
the dust you gonna have the
judges right and you got to have
the police force in order to do
Then we're short on judges the
courts impact their building is
completely full.
And so they're not prosecuting
maybe only thirty percent those
get prosecute.
So the dust are prosecuting for
whatever reason I have to ask
the Albuquerque DA why he's not
care services we leave Gallup
veterans the Gallup every
morning at seven or eight to go
for their but in the hospital
and hospital there for their
services.
arm that went into the hospital
because you K. because they're
just by over the night and it
was gone.
And they lived in Magdalena and
so how do we get them dust to
whole networking and imagery of
were targeting more crime is
going to be and we got zero
results and we got hindered
prosecution.
And so now we got a look at what
story that centers of this whole
old this morning about the cop
that was shot in Albuquerque.
An ankle monitor meant nothing
to him you just cut it off and
did whatever he did.
you and so how do we do that but
Albuquerque is completely
different than the rest of state
yesterday senator want to send
Center Steinberg engage about
in our testimony and and talking
to police officers what drives
it.
What's the issue.
And how do we detainees.
Once you have anything to.
shouldn't we're here for a
thirty day session we are
limited to matters the governor
puts on the calls and agenda for
us or appropriations and so the
bill you have in front of you is
back in the sixty day session
with the benefit of the interim
the LFC report what we've
learned by talking to law
enforcement prosecutors public
defenders everyone this session
years and years to sentences and
again to capture the headlines
and it's great in election year
but some of us have been here
been in twenty years I've seen
it twenty years every time
because the media excited gets
the internet excited but it's
not a real solution center so I
I appreciate what you're saying
that this is not
important one of the addition of
additional resources into the
judiciary and grant programs for
violence prevention are all
important as well as
In the last few weeks and I've
been I've been it for last year
very demoralized.
Of their
their feeling is that whether
it's the phone the police
they're under assault as well
and so there's a there's a
disconnect between law
enforcement officers the
judiciary the prosecutors and we
There's very little that that's
been my experience is everybody
wants to talk to me privately
everyone's talking mean there's
silo but nobody wants to speak
publicly about the the
responses I again this isn't a
business but if I flash in my
business or to a client or
whatever the graphs that we
looked at earlier I think that
was fantastic it's really good
data there.
to go down it's going to be
great what we what should we
really expect in terms of
numbers and and and and timeline
and I mean almost want to ask
doing the right things because
this is a huge problem it's
turning businesses away from
from New Mexico that's how bad
it is jobs into me a job as one
But what should we expect in
terms of those graphs if you
will of what direction I I think
that I'm assuming you wouldn't
introduce this unless you
thought they were going to
improve so I appreciate that I'd
gonna happen Mister chairman
Senator Padilla that's a that's
an excellent question and and
it's how we think about these
things and and our research unit
and our valuation unit.
that tool can in some instances
tell us very certainly what we
should expect to get in terms of
return on investment reduction
in crime
flow and it's not perfect
anytime you're trying to trying
to predict predict what's going
to happen you're going to be
wrong but the point is to to you
The plane one additional police
officer with statewide average
practices.
around a five to one return on
investment
led the the research project
we're talking about over the
summer you know really dug into
the violence intervention
program in Albuquerque and
looked at some of the data that
are certain elements that you
can expect of positive our
allies from I think there are
others that you know we will
that have good evidence in that
direction but we should
you know their programs and
strategies that affect crime all
the way from from early
childhood nurse family
participants have less reliance
on the criminal justice system
when when they grow up so it's
so I'd I'd say we have data on
on some of that but also say
that
you know miss cars will hear one
sixty day he can on a go forward
here's what we know about
programs and what they should
provide in terms of return on
investment
that will we're one programs
going to fix it all I would say
that.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mister
chair Mister Courtney suggested
I have one other or maybe two
staff rank every client we have
and we say well these are the I
just no matter what we do we're
gonna have to say goodbye to
these guys in the next cut
contractual negotiation period
we're gonna take those dollars
kind of spinning our wheels is
either one you want to comment
on anything like that.
That's a great point etcetera
but it's an amazing thing and
and really this is a question
for those of you on the finance
committee because in all the
working knowledge because there
I've never seen it happen and
that's for you guys of the
finance committee let us some of
the Judiciary Committee but I
just don't so you all ever doing
that I don't see LFC ever doing
on a question to your or your
question will that.
What do you expect to see so
there are things that we know
that we're going to short term
and and just as a businessman
you're looking for the things
that are going to make a
have to be patient for the long
term data statistics to come in
but I'll just give you a good
example of the challenge we have
this last year the governor I
think to her good credit sent
the state police in Albuquerque
crime dropped in those areas
where they were at to near zero.
An incredible effort by the
governor credible response by
state police in a credible
result but but we won't talk
and so those are the challenges
that I confront in my position
is is there are some things that
clearly work but we have to be
careful of whose toes you're
you'll just give me a personal
moment you talk about a business
owner people that don't come to
Albuquerque because of concern
with crime.
You heard me tell the story
there are products of public
schools.
Of one of them went through the
VA and the program which meant
that the state of New Mexico
provided for medical school
undergraduate and and medical
my daughter who's a lawyer who
you all educated with me won't
want to start a family in
Albuquerque.
And that none of the three who
led New Mexico who have all the
you have done a lot to try to
make have a great state great
opportunity here but crime alone
is reason enough for them to not
take advantage of those
with you senator or chairman
services I'm I've I've two sons
you know they're both master
degree and I'm doing everything
I can to get them back to New
Mexico it's near me it just
feels like a monumental task to
get them back here so this but
far today and I know there's a
lot more to talk about are we
looking at those outside
secondary and tertiary things
that actually cause the crime to
begin with you have got
know so and I'll Senator
Rodriguez on housing and I know
that Senator Campos on on early
education for for the most part
and and and others in this very
room are we tying any of that
peace legislation like this.
John.
Mr chair and senator there are a
few things in here that that I
punishment meaning.
You know how quickly the
punishment might follow the
offense and and severity and so
there are a number of things in
Reduce barriers to put pre
prosecution diversion or
specialty court programs from
house bill eighty four.
as well as
basically to to implement best
practices on a statewide
Uniform level and specifically
with minimal impact on
correctional institute
institutions and so those are a
couple of the things that the
Manser question and that Mr
read it I would highly recommend
reading Ellen ravens analysis in
volume one that that does just
exactly what what you're saying
mentioned earlier we're talking.
Likely needs from on on the
entire spectrum of the system
even before the system starts
for some folks from early
it as I mentioned there's
there's likely going to be
additional work that will need
to be done there is additional
work and investments being made
throughout throughout the rest
of the budget I I would point
for Allen is taken efforts to
identify all the public safety
increases that we're seeing
expansions across house bill two
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I really appreciate
this conversation thank you both
for bringing us together this
where I learned a lot today I
just want to close my comments
with and I hope I don't sound
us and they were looking at this
from a proactive standpoint
because I I it's just a
commonsensical on mine from my
perspective thank you thanks for
having this conversation.
when when we're getting the
chart at the beginning.
And the question was asked after
we saw the recidivism.
to look at.
What were the numbers of the
cash bail system.
Some of the cash bail system we
didn't really help people for
their interests us we help
people for lack of having money.
system because of the cash bail
system we have people who are
well connected with other folks
a lot of money to get them out.
About what the impact as of the
of the current system that we
have right now under the
constitution amendment.
So
There's an old system and a new
system and how do they compare.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto will
Rodriguez Senator Hemphill
Senator Gonzales centers here in
center with.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll make
this very short you know seeing
this Senate bill two thirty one
Senator serve on dozens Center
for many of us for collectively
gathering the best bills that we
have out there and bringing this
together you know it identifying
only crime bill that I've had an
opportunity to vote on with
Senate bill forty three which
passes the Senate chambers
reducing job juvenile census
it's was honestly anything but
disappointment that that bill
even pass this this chamber I
have a couple questions and it's
actually probably from my
finance chair.
the crime reduction requests and
confused when it says this
nonrecurring appropriation
constitutes a one time expense.
But could create an expectation
who and why don't we just color
recurring speaks Spence instead
of identifying it as a one time
expense there diamond millet
Thank you Mr chair and Mr chair
and senator uh exit exactly as
you stated Mr chair many of
these appropriations in this in
house bill two that are related
require performance reporting
that sort of thing to be able to
evaluate whether or not there be
effective with regard to how we
grant programs to say that if it
creates an expectation then it
is considered by the FIR as a
recurring fiscal impact however
the appropriation in house bill
okay thank you Mr chairman I
just wanted to confirm that the
that considers whether it's
recurring or nonrecurring
remains to be the legislator not
LFC through this
I also had another question
are we going to are we good at
reinvest that money have we do
have we determined for the
funding for that and why were
those appropriation struck and
how do we fully funded that
it includes a one point seven
million dollar recurring
appropriation as well as nine
million dollar nonrecurring
appropriation so in the net so I
in in FY twenty through the
specified to be distributed over
three years.
Thank you Mr chairman just
confirming that we're putting
our money where our mouth is one
thing I really like about that
and I understand through the
spreadsheets that you went out
is is that although a majority
of that funding is is going to
be specific to probably
forward the last four days I
hope we can finally get
something done some bipartisan
support on this and so I
wholeheartedly support your
efforts thank you both thank you
efforts to bring together if you
will not only ideas in terms of
how we're going to curtail
some of these issues that
definitely affect all factors of
implement these things as
quickly as possible as we've
talked before there definitely
is an urgency in order for us to
get things done and I want to
I'm very grateful to LFC to DFA
into others who have brought
forth if you will research that
has helped us to make informed
decisions but along with that
all of us to really work
together and so as a
practitioner if you will an
individual who has served as a
police chief as a more working
we have the information we talk
about how we're gonna work
together but in reality they're
still the silos with law
enforcement and so within that
we going to really get people in
law enforcement to utilize that
database and then secondly to
ensure that
indicate that this problem that
we have here in New Mexico is
much larger than what we're
actually talking about thank you
Mr chairman thanks center and
studies what information they
gather so us as the money
portion of that saying we needed
dedicated revenue stream and how
compass with respect to the
specific question regarding
ensuring that
Agencies checked the database
some statutory reporting
requirements and to those
provisions so they would stand
to lose funding if they failed
to check the database and
provide reports to the database.
call accreditation and yet if
one of the schools is on
probation or would possibly lose
the the consequence for not
complying with the information
that would be required in this
particular piece of legislation.
somewhat pretty significant I I
can't tell you exactly how much
for each agency but the
provisions of this bill
increases distributions in FY
twenty four to ninety five
requirements so thank you very
much Mr chairman that does bring
up the at the point that if if
departments in our state and so
within that is there some level
of corrective action so that we
make sure that all of our
functionally operate into the
future.
Mr chair and then Senator Campos
with regard to the database
specifically and other reporting
other law enforcement agencies
in coming into compliance most
agencies are in compliance with
some of these requirements
already but this would give the
the then then that there are a
usually small component of the
agency's overall budget so if
the hope I believe is for it to
be a.
operation if they fail to.
Thank you very much and so my
point again with what we're
talking about there is that we
do need and it's essential for
forward particularly with not
only the reserves but I'm sure
our chair will work to this with
the LFC through the intranet
course of the members to ensure
about and I again thank my
colleagues for the on going
discussion but when we talk
about recovery centers when we
talk about rehabilitation when
within that if it's going to be
have hardly done or not with the
entire resources that we
definitely need in essence than
resources that may be available
and they're gonna be available
over a period let's say five
years in all reality is that
quickly even though we say will
you know come July first
law goes into effect resources
become available are are we
of the law lack of resources the
lack of those individual.
As with the expertise if you can
just tell me Mr Chairman
understand how this model will
be implemented in an effective
didn't dwell on when summarizing
the bill but it's it's important
to clarify so thank you for
asking that question most of the
provisions related to giving out
changes don't take effect until
FY twenty four and the database
specifically needs to be created
by the end of FY twenty three
but it will start operating at
regard to training DPS will
receive an additional two
hundred thousand dollars from
the law enforcement protection
fund specifically for these new
types of.
Training requirements
appropriation for aid job task
analysis for law enforcement
officers statewide that the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
is doing so those two provisions
together as well as the academy
academy boys up at at this time
the academy boards
operating budget did receive a
seven hundred thousand dollar
increase in the budget those
resources should be sufficient
to sort of stand up create that
requested on in memorials are
identified by task forces as
important to include in the by
the basic or in service law
was to find the funding to get
things started again a lot of
those grant programs start FY
twenty three so and agencies can
start you know applying for them
themselves they have time to
take to get up to speed with
them.
Thank you very much more co
chairs as we move forward I
would be remiss in this is where
replacement and of course with
our programs if you really want
to help to make a change in a
positive way was re
rehabilitation you definitely
point three billion dollar
amount held in abeyance there's
resources available in order for
us to become much stronger and
what we do but it's very
effectuate the change from our
courts all the way through our
communities all the way to our
facilities so with that Mister
chairs as we move forward I just
really want to thank you and the
work together it's going to be a
a tough road ahead but as we
move forward collectively we can
make positive change thank you.
evident that we do need to
revisit our crime statutes and
we all know that it's never easy
to do that there seem to be
replications no matter what we
sustainable is the key as we now
some of our changes to our crime
statutes many times add US the
judiciary they Adam funded
mandates to our judicial system
reviewing the the statutes and
talking about it to get Senator
minds in the process
I'm looking Mr chairman maybe
or has it been amended out and
all referred to it as this under
the retention under law
enforcement recruitment and
retention I just have a quick
that they deserve and and
finally bring them up to a
salary that that gives them an
incentive in the impetus to
remain as law enforcement
officers and also to establish a
Vision here and please tell me
maybe Senator Vontaze can help
me here is is still in the in
this whole discussion or has it
been amended out were it's just
that.
provide one time retention
payments which is a good idea to
law enforcement officers
equivalent to five percent of
their annual salary on five year
for one additional year is that
still in there are Senator
Vontaze and if it is then we may
want to revisit it because I'm
one before requiring them to
remain employed for one
additional year after the first
increment second third or or
flooded this explained if you
can't to that Mr Chairman thank
you.
to house bill eighty six and
included in Senate bill two
thirty one is because it was
suggested by the attorney
general's office to avoid
services already rendered so
that the language was
developed between the attorney
general's office and one of the
sponsors of house bill eighty
six in order to make sure that
constitutional so that provision
was included.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
for that response it Mr chairman
this would be no different
though than we do when we give
every so often you know a bonus
by calling a bonus to keep him
employed at but I just don't
think there are funded their
service there for services not
that that's all I'm asking I
just don't feel comfortable
requiring them to do something
for a whole year to keep on
there if they decide they can't
what happens if they just can't
comfortable with that Mr
chairman thank you can you
respond to that senator Senator
Senator Rodriguez when going
performance bonuses in
Albuquerque just a fourteen
five years and so when you offer
those you're all you're
attempting to get longevity to
the police force and so if
Gallup could apply for the
Albuquerque that's making thirty
four to sixty dollars an hour
and house try to compete with
officers and keep them there at
the same time and so when you
Sure and Mr chairman ceremony
also and I know this is taking a
balance and working something
out that may finally bring
something like this to fruition
long overdue.
don't have an intended
consequences from this if we can
perfected a little more and if
it needs to be this way and it
works I'm forgiven our police
officers these increases.
leave imagine the department and
the agency when they do this
rulemaking will allow servers
flexibility in case of
situations that allows them to
leave.
remain employed it doesn't say
exception is and you know
circumstances of you know
whatever it may be that may be
and then for the bodies
information center Gonzales
Senator sure and Senator Woods
on the last.
Thank you Mr Chairman and Mr
sharing this is really one of my
passions is addressing violent
crime and substance abuse in New
Mexico one of the reasons I
wanted to run for office and
for decades now and what I came
across is that definitely
evidence based research does
show that when we have a strong
that with more support for root
causes of violent crime in our
communities it's kind of a
fragile peace so we definitely
need to invest in and our
really strong communities that's
key to long term crime reduction
especially violent crime
reduction and so what we saw the
no predictability and we saw an
increase of violent crime at the
beginning of the pandemic people
didn't we weren't trusting that
people buy ammunition and there
was an increase of sales and
firearms and ammunition because.
People wanted to protect
ourselves so when we can trust
in our our judicial system when
but also things like investing
in after school programs
mentorship making sure that
people have their basic needs
And when we can really feel like
we're part of a strong community
where we're supporting each
other in our needs are are Matt
and in terms of substance abuse
I think that it's really
important for us to to ask not
why people are abusing
substances but why the pain
trying to deal with the pain and
we have that in New Mexico we've
had generations of poverty and
the cycle of poverty and so we
causes of pain and so my
question is I see that there's
some money being invested and
violence intervention programs
what exactly those things go to
to.
Provide support for in the
communities.
Owner John wanted to.
I'm sorry the programs are not
specified in the language of the
provides for the grants but the
requests it does provide the
bill provides criteria for
of.
Criteria some
Third to be evidence based for
you for instance but that the
Senator Hemphill I do I would
just add to that
That you know that might my
understanding of of the the two
requests are that they're
they're built with flexibility
for.
The local communities just as
you said to to identify the
solutions that are going to work
Los crucis as possible that that
that community might want to
address it another way with
another evidence based program
but I I think you're you're
believe the the idea here is
for.
For the legislature to provide
resources for those local
communities and put some
but not be so prescriptive that
we're that the legislature is is
saying we'll do you know that
this is what will fix the
service speak if that if that
makes sense.
only strategy is a punitive
consequence for not really
addressing the root cause and
that can just exasperated the
problems that we're facing in
non profits and making sure that
we're building strong
communities so thank you for the
opportunity to ask thank you
both chairman sent to our guests
that are here today and to our
LFC staff from.
I guess first of all you know
the most important thing is
we're talking about it.
about it.
No Mr chairman both chairmen see
you know my comments might be a
little bit you know like like
they're all over the place but
not pick on Albuquerque I have a
lot of family in Albuquerque and
but any more you know all of
this fits you know within our
project home north of Espanol.
Then he was telling me that he
really really has had a lot of
problems with that.
You know from a big equipment
And you know and you know so
well to call his tools and the
you know and then I went to and
don't want to get involved or I
do see anything.
And of.
Where I'm going with this is
that all.
But
The newly levy was probably one
And culture is established.
The only thing that breaks
culture is the culture itself to
have and we don't know you know
just bring in and I think
there's been some very eloquent
and very all very powerful
statement said today.
Is you know.
make change.
It has to be through education.
And we really have to give a
value to education and what I'm
has to be a scope and sequence
you know you have so much in
your curriculum you know from
kindergarten and then he goes to
the next level to the next level
and at least you have that
sensitivity is not there and
I'll give you another example
this morning I was traveling
from Albuquerque to Santa Fe.
And traveling north on the San
His belongings and he is
basically spent right on the on
the edge of the sidewalk you
know off the ramp.
And the and I thought to myself
I wonder how many police
And then the state continue
driving I said well I'm part of
the problem if I don't do
anything about it so I did call
it in and I just said you know
there still so many things that
just you know at least the help
them relocate to a safer place
than being right right on the
main the main freeway.
to education building a scope
and sequence program you know
that definitely you know that is
another part the we can goal you
know to work with this and then
much is so Dave church a former
secretary for deal team.
He says no.
When star box by a cop a paper
Cup.
The individual tosses that out
the window then we all pay.
You know and and this is very
true you know this is where
we're at you know and the same
just removing and picking up
litter was at three million this
year it's up nine million.
This is dollars that definitely
believer you know that you know
when you want to have a paradigm
shift in the thinking of the
paradigm shift on the culture
that has been accepted you know
education no.
When the seatbelt law came into
place that came into when a lot
of us were adults.
Then you take your young
look at you know into the
paradigm shift that we're
looking at into you know some of
these for a just.
Making our state safe you know
Thank you Mr chair and chair.
This you know I'm not an
attorney I'm not a police
And so if we go back and just
look for over the last century
what we found is that crime was
pretty low until prohibition and
a lot but then it started to go
back up in the sixties and
seventies started flatten out a
little bit in the eighties but
there were some bumps and there
came down again in the nineties
organized crime of than heroin.
Came in and drove it up then
cocaine came in and then opioids
came in and now it's math.
In a and and there's a direct
And so if we're looking at why I
know all of these are are really
on a macro scale much larger
than New Mexico but what can we
do.
We're actually encouraging it.
We encourage it.
So we discourage smoking but now
we're going to encourage
brownies.
And.
that's coming through there is
is pushing this mass migration
so that the border patrol is
overwhelmed over here in the
drugs can come in over here.
alcohol.
With alcohol lot of that whole
was coming in from Canada in
they would overwhelm the border
patrol in one place so that the
I'm just not sure how much that
will cost New Mexico can get to
so then what we do.
I do think the show of force is
is very important the show force
And things calm down.
When you put police officers on
the street things calm down I
think the show of force is
something we can do and should
qualified immunity did we tell
the police officers you better
not do too much.
Because you're right.
Have more investigators
our part the policies are part
certainly didn't help because
well you have a show of force if
the force isn't even willing to
take any action.
is so who are the police chief
for the lieutenant for the
sergeants if you work down are
they trained.
It's one thing to train the
private in the army it's a whole
But it so that gets me to the.
To the training which is in here
on page two I think it is.
what what the new proposal as
how do we train and certify
today versus what this bill is
going to do.
Ellen you one and that.
proposed law enforcement
standards and training council
would also oversee that training
the primary difference
enforcement academy so those new
officers but also for in service
training that's required every
two years of current officers
and so those requirements
include.
racial sensitivity reality based
situational training and use of
force that eliminates
chokeholds.
The bill also addresses the
completing their in service
training and so we don't
actually know necessarily if
officers are completing this
required training even though
now in the County Board can't
know that so the provisions of
this bill that make law
enforcement protection fund
distributions contingent on
compliance with the statutory
reporting requirements will help
requirements are being met and
so I think that makes it more
likely that any training
requirements that are added by
the legislature anyone will
and even adding that whatever it
is a
somebody that specializes in
adult education.
That doesn't enforce the rules
that we have today what I would
just tell them.
reporting of the other agencies
is going to change of I mean so
use of force can be trained
today how you do that can be
trained we don't need another
board to do that we don't even
But I don't see the value of
changing that because we've had
the same system for a while.
So a it what my agency
internist.
enforcement protection fund
distributions to agencies
contingent on them doing that
reporting you are in fact
correct that this can be done
anticipated to have an
additional fiscal impact on GPS
because it takes the functions
and budget of the existing the
exist currently within the law
enforcement academy board that
it has its own budget and that
would remain there so it's
really that one board currently
has two functions and have
budgets for each of those
functions and this bill would
would also add that this
certification board is required
to provide a report annually to
the governor and the legislature
enforcement officers and then
report that information so that
may increase if you know if if
there's a a boards tasked with
tracking things that may
would also be reported annually
to both the governor and the
legislature which also may find
a bit more accountability is in
that regard so Mister chair it
seems to me that what we're
trying to create a bureaucracy
to collect data in in in do
other stuff in in I see this is
one of the problems with our
schools.
Without really helping.
The officers on the ground
without helping the citizens.
On the ground.
that change there's there's you
know the changing vehicles the
changing weapons the changing in
the drugs that used whatever it
is so we have to have continual
training I'm just not sure that
the community I think is
important Senator Hemphill
pointed out the community is
very important so as the family
and so when we go back and look
at the history again.
And I think a lot of that has to
do with with how the community
envision family.
And so that's one of the things
that I think we ought to we
we intentionally do any of that
tearing down families.
But do our policies that we have
right here in the room to that.
Because we have a long history a
senator.
Or organized crime.
Through substance abuse.
Probably way beyond what New
Senator share.
Let me just touch on the topic
of the two boards so so one
board would completely do
so you need to keep those two
separations so that one board
has an authority and the other
board is saying here's what's
happening here's what you need
million dollars inside this bill
and so that board could also say
okay here's an appropriation for
the death benefit and if there
is no survivors ago their
Judiciary we're having a joint
hearing so we can kind of get a
grasp of everything that needs
to happen and and move forward
and.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you so.
Mourinho's Mr chairman.
Madam president I Mr president
you know that confuses me really
easily.
Okay
In the bill.
And it talks about the
establishing not talks about
And take into account any
pertinent information found in
that database.
Mr chair and senator if you turn
to page ten that's where the
description is of what
convictions civil judgments and.
Separation and written
agreements between agencies and
officers which would include the
sort of separation agreements
drop their their issues put that
into an agreement so this is the
information that would go into
the database
and.
or were they terminated from the
neighboring jurisdiction first
for because and that sort of
thing.
The civil judgments like if you
know an officer uses excessive
force and
Interment what page that's on
again is it in this bill.
Yes Mr chair Senator it is in
There was always looking for
that do you have another
question.
Is the question also have is
this.
Is this exempt from public
information deprivations.
there is this bill does not
contain any changes to the
inspection public records act
but as far as more particular
And I just wondered if that was.
Available for the public.
Because.
It looks like that might be you
this information is already
public such as criminal
convictions or civil judgments
as far as the.
the.
can't can't be confidential
under other law and so if there
is any information in here that
is not publicly available
I've got another problem Mr
chair.
I've got a crack analyst.
No change and he was not able to
analyze it because of that.
And so I'm gonna ask a question
or two that may or may not be in
remind you that this bill is in
Senate Judiciary currently.
We did have an a new updated F.
I. R. and if you're analyst
hasn't had time to look at that.
time to really look at questions
and and if there's changes that
need to be made or questions
that need to be answered just to
save you and your and some
stress and.
the the chief justice came up
here and told us about
detention hearings and Senator
Cervantes talked about think of
whole case.
for the tension here.
So.
You know in in the Chief Justice
It's amazing you know no I am
turning.
But just one question I might
have.
Is is there a punishment for
cutting off a ankle bracelet.
believe that would be a
violation of the terms of
probation or or for roll
In center would just go back to
the to the case it Senator on
conversation and so that warrant
be issued it's a violation of
his probation or our role and so
then the warnings issued whether
over the last few weeks so first
of all the the consequence right
now for cutting off of an ankle
bracelet is that your than
subject to the other terms of
sophistication of these devices
just so you know is is
consistent with what some folks
are working on the wrist in the
chambers which is with the ankle
bracelets can be used to monitor
of the consequences of the
consequences they're they're
back subject to as senator no
said warrant for arrest and then
the other conditions of release
being revoked by the by the
What we learned is that for
years well we've been using
these ankle bracelets to that
will allow people to keep their
jobs to stay at home to stay
with their families to reduce
the costs of incarceration and
after five o'clock and on
weekends the information that
was being communicating
communicated electronically was
not really being processed until
conditions after five o'clock on
a Friday or on the weekends
which is probably not hard to
envision happened so that she
found out about this Chief
Justice fun about this and
devices so that they're now
being monitored twenty four
hours in the second district in
Bernalillo county they're being
watched twenty four hours in a
have the same reporting of
violations using electronic
monitoring right away.
Thank you for that Mr chair
And
The gentleman the DA out of the
eight came to me and asked me
for special request to fund
the eight.
Sir what what what we're talking
about what seems to make the
most sense to me is rather than
trying to have a monitoring or
pre trial services system set up
give you hypothetically is is
Albuquerque's already now set up
to be doing this for the second
district that we expand that
resource making it available
statewide and so it didn't make
and then twenty four hours in
thirteen districts and have a
procedure process for reporting
that in each of the thirteen
districts so the the goal in the
in this legislation and the
to courts judges as a resource
and all thirteen districts
including the most rural parts
of the state.
The interesting to see how that
works
your your tone did not express
encouragement.
Well.
I don't know where the new where
you do.
Thanks for the Santa Fe not that
far out of a very populated
area.
So.
That's more critical part.
bracelet so we won't put him in
jail.
And if they're in jail and break
out of jail it's a pretty big
going to issue a warrant and
they may have to serve the
regular jail time so.
I don't understand that so much
as being a.
The the other thing that a a
still you know have a problem.
With the detention hearings
haven't come so quickly.
You know not only that problem
but we have a conviction rate of
about thirty percent on felonies
About what laws do we need to
make this criminal system
work or are what new laws do we
need to add.
And act in and do what the law
says today.
Allows for their.
That will take care of this if
we will just do it what we have
Thank you Senator Woods so are
members of the Senate finance
we're we're wrapped up we can
there I know what Senator the
chairman's going to do but you
can stay you can go.
And
We'll go from there we'll let
you know if we're gonna go to
committee here just a little bit
Announcer on the speaker we're
gonna finance thank you.
The Senate finance recesses I'm
gonna ask Judiciary Committee
members to stay present for just
a bit more believe there's a
motion that's forthcoming and
recognize Senator Stewart for a
motion.
Some Mr chairman I move a.
president members the Senate
Judiciary further discussion
debate.
help you with right he's right
behind you.
forward not for the original
substantive very good lawyers of
the motions in order for the
discussion is there any
objection to the do pass motion
on the committee says to look
The chair this I will announce
committee been recess we're
going to convene back upstairs
in the committee room at noon so
you have about fifteen minutes
for a little bit of a break and
Once the for the funding.
