is go
And make sure you a little bit.
So on our agenda today, and then
Sanchez on the other two,
probably a senator Stefanis is
present, but
will start with.
And let me just uh.
I move the amendment here.
Yeah
So
Well, it's uh also to create an
opt in for our tribes, nations
and pueblos if they would like
to um take part in this. So the
have the amendment coming around
to you.
And um
Like to.
Madam Rogers,
who's head of law in a rescue
teams
to the lead for the state and
just want to introduce him so he
can say a few words at the right
moment, but what the amendment
does is we have an act here that
basically.
Create some protocols that
basically adds federally.
Indian nations, tribes, and it
does, man.
Objections are the.
Sponsor if this is a friendly
amendment or.
Senator Sheer, Senator Sosinto?
Yes.
Um, so thank you, Senator
amended bill.
Do you like to talk about the
bill now.
I would madam chair and I'd also
rescue. We have a search and
rescue. We have search and
rescue to find that basically is
the incident itself, a search
and rescue incident itself and
what this bill says dispatchers
when they get a call at a rescue
event that they actually call.
Have search and rescue
dispatched.
And that they call as our law
requires is the public safety
department.
Uh, because what happens is
jurisdiction will try to
respond.
And they don't quite realize
necessarily that they need the
technical support that a our
team can offer as the organs
like in one day, and the search
and rescue teams were rappelling
down that very, very few local
jurisdictions have and so when
it comes to search and rescue,
time is life. And so it's
essential that when it all, they
recognize it as such and they
get it in the search per our
law. There's also a lot of
collaboration it requires the
state search and rescue officers
to develop those protocols and
trainings who have all been
involved and how to.
OK, in writing the bill
and speed up deployment of
search.
I'm sure members of the
committee. My name is Bob
Rogers. I'm the search and
rescue resource officer for the
Department of Public Safety. My
job is to coordinate resources
to save lives in the state of
New Mexico.
My primary job that is my
primary job. That's what my
volunteers take care of as well.
This amendment that I fully
support actually does help me do
my job by getting the
information that I do not
currently receive from the other
agencies I could only track
incidents or incidents that are
given to the state police.
All the numbers I get, I get no
information from the fire
departments, from the sheriff's
office, other, other agencies as
well of what they're doing out
there in the woods until they
get behind the power curve and
then then they call for us. So
that's one of the things about
this act that I do like it helps
me report the proper numbers up
to the governor's office if I'm
required to do so.
The second portion of this bill
which actually calls for the
deployment of our personnel. I
have about uh.
938 volunteers to under my belt.
These guys are highly these guys
and gals are highly dedicated.
Do this job. They do it with no
pay.
None. They train every day to do
this job called search and
rescue.
They are highly dedicated they
chase after funds to finances uh
fundraisers and things like that
donations.
To the equipment because I
provide 0 department my
department price, no equipment
to these individuals.
Everything they have
From the radios all the way down
to the technical rescue gear,
the letters, the titanium
litters, they purchased
themselves and they bring that
with them when they respond.
Um, so the organizations, um,
followed through by the
volunteer organizations
understand they are private
organizations they offer me
resources when requested to do
so.
Thank you. So we'll go out into.
Yeah
Yeah
Good morning madam chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Major Lorenz Air. I work
with the state police, and we
are fully in support of the
amendments made for Senate Bill
353.
Thank you.
po s ition in the room here.
And if you position
to the bill.
I mean
senators Senator Both of us are
initial BS but.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I guess
I'm trying to understand why
this is.
Yeah, with the definition that
the new material starting on
page 314, it says state officer
in consultation with.
Shall establish standardized
criteria. Is there anything that
keeps you from doing? Do we need
a lot to say that they shall
establish?
Yes, we do, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, they are not required
to report this notification now
and as a constituent of the
Navajo Nation, search and rescue
wasn't called for hours. So what
this is is it does two things.
It requires that notification.
Uh, and it also, um,
Then creates training process to
just say that the criteria and
the training, the surgeon wanted
to be trained, they wanted to
have some requirements in there.
To provide for and senator, I'm
looking specifically on a, on
page 3.
The state ar resource officer, I
presume that's you, sir? OK,
thank you. In consultation with
local, state, and federal
emergency shall establish
standardized criteria. Are you
not allowed to establish?
I'm sure members the committee.
Yes, I actually do. We actually
have those standards and
criteria are pretty much
established. We've been living
with those since the mid 70s,
what the experience of what
needs to be passed out to the
other uh dispatchers who don't
understand what constitutes a
sorry mission, and that's what
the reason for that, so, you
know, there's new material
Section A is already being done.
You don't need a lot to do that.
It's already happening, it
sounds like he's allowed to
establish criteria for doing
this.
Oh sorry,
I apologize the language of a
emergency agency.
Uh
Yeah, this, this is not the most
essential.
OK, Madam Chair, you know, and
then Section B, again the state
our resource officers shall
provide training to personnel.
Madam Chair, Senator, this was
important to the first
responders that they be trained
reading a new requirement on
them, I would think that they
will be trained by that and that
that is a requirement on him. I
mean, that's right now.
OK, well, and then she talks
more about.
An emergency dispatcher.
Or public receives a request for
aid shall promptly notify the
state tsar.
At what level of a Madam Chair,
Senator, what level of
Uh, there's still somebody makes
a determination whether
I don't see where somebody has
to make a decision when they do,
they call sorry and then sorry
immediately.
Calls out to others, that's not
happening now, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, no, it is not, and it's
not required now. It is not
happening that they would do
that. And yeah, they would and
that's again why you want the
training, why is the SAR
emergency, um, when they should
make that call, how it will be
responded, and not just them at
all parties and and then
actually not only they make that
the last thing you talked about
section 3 seems like, you know,
that that really is more the
meat of what the either
happening could be happening. It
is.
fully under the jurisdiction of
the notify the entity agency and
just kind of notification that
it went back around.
So, OK, I,
you know, the, the majority of
the
agent now to set up criteria to
to do all of that, uh, the piece
about whether they're getting
notified or not, that still is
an individual that has to decide
whether this is a sorry. Those
are my questions then.
So my ass. Thank you.
I want to learn a little bit
about it, if I may, and be
comfortable with the vote. So,
so I call up and I want to know
what's the relationship between
the sar and the just a good old
fashioned telecommunicator in
the local community. So I
jumping in the hammer says GPS.
Turns off, I'm freaked out. It's
the 911 dispatcher would get
this call. They would say,
because we're
Maybe provide for that
accounting.
Right
search and rescue emergency.
Then they get to make that
assessment right away. I that
search and rescue.
They actually
They actually get search and
rescue the same thing. They
could get in trouble if they go
out.
So Madam Chair, Senator, so I
can call the local.
Burnell County
911 person, they're like, uh,
that what county is Chama
Flubber and, and not know the
protocol.
Madam,
and that's why you want to do
the training
in those terms and make that
phone call. So on page 6.
You have an uh new material
added to the search and rescue
Act.
You, you know the where the
search and rescue act is in that
chapter 24 because in in the
beginning, in the definition
section.
We're in 24-15-3 that's a
section.
OK, so then my.
The $64,000 question is.
We're using an acronym in a
definition is that.
If I were to have the entire
statue in front of me, it would,
it was because the definition
doesn't say search and rescue.
It says SAR and that's written
in the law,
And so, yeah, here, if you want
to see that. So for the record
I'm an acronym,
I'll, I'll struggle with it.
Thank you.
Questions by committee members.
Is that you train um so this is
gonna record.
That the dispatchers have to
have this training in order to
be a dispatcher.
I'm Chairman members of the
committee, yes, um, they
actually are already currently
trained through a academy type
program. This a training that I
would provide with which is
basically the criteria on what
constitutes a sor type incident.
Um
Would actually provide to that
additional training that they're
already taking now that goes
dispatcher wide all dispatchers
to get trained by the state of
New Mexico and this will be just
an additional to that. There are
from what I understand there are
the main.
Academy at the LEA there are
satellite academies that they
all can get trained at and that
would be the correct the uh
curriculum that I would uh help
I actually helped write that to
begin with to be this would be
additional to that training as
well.
That will also include the
missing.
The
Make that through
Yes ma'am, ma'am, members of
committee the.
Criteria established like a
missing person.
Um, is fairly simple there a lot
of misconception about we gotta
wait 72 hours or whatever like
that doesn't exist in the state
in New Mexico.
If I can report of a missing
person who I know did I have a
starting point and I when they
walked away from or whatever
whatever type of incident it is,
that is enough criteria for me
to go. Now, in this state, if
you're above the age of 18, you
can disappear when you want to.
I have to have that need of
assistance uh application.
Yes sir.
it's not,
you know, you're in a search and
rescue, you're in a search and
rescue.
so it's not
the response to this in terms of
search and rescue is not.
You know, it's, that's not to
say the state police doesn't
have.
And
Senator and Mr. Rogers and.
Dishheartening to hear that this
morning that there immediately
knowing and if the criteria was
met. So thank you, Senator for
bringing this sport well
entertained emotion.
move a pass.
As amended.
Please call the roll.
The vote for.
Senate Bill 353
Senators.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheer,
Senator souls, OK.
Senator Pinto.
I think you need it.
our senator.
Sam Steinburn, you have a DuP
pass mandate. Thank you. You
have the hot seat and in place
for a minute or a couple of
seconds here.
Um, Madam Chair, we'll go with
uh 3:30 OK
Um, Madam Chair, we'll go with
uh 3:30
committee members and our staff.
We will move on to Senate Bill
332 Middle Rio Grande Wildfire
Prevention like may proceed,
Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
bill I bring forward today is uh
Senate Bill 332.
With all the fires we're seeing
in New Mexico.
A program down the Rio Grande
Valley with the Middle Grand
Conservancy District that has
fire prevention.
But they haven't had any funds
in the last few years, and every
year for some livestock or
houses or or um.
Um.
Different structures up and down
the Rio Grande Valley. So this
bill today brings a
Appropriation of $5 million over
the next 5 years and why I like
and why I decided to go with the
middle ground. I already have
the program implemented. They
just don't have the funds, so
this would give them.
5 years to clean up also once we
get it cleaned up in the grazing
to keep it down whether it's
goats or cattle or whatever, but
this all they have 5 years and
keep the fires
in the room?
Madam
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Good morning, John Thompson
District. I want to thank
Senator Sanchez for bringing
this bill, uh, a lot of times
it's overlooked when we think
about fire danger. We forget
about the Bos Bossy from Cochiti
to Bosque Dell Apache, and we
have overgrowth, we have
invasive species, we also have a
lot of urbanization. We have a
lot of agriculture within that
area, uh, and, and we really
think the sponsor, as he
mentioned, we are shovel ready
to put this.
To work as soon as we can get
the funds, um, and, and I also
want to appreciate the addition
of Pueblo partners. A lot of
times Gray's in the Bosky, so
that's a fantastic way to keep
this down and particularly as we
start looking at recreation and
all these other things we have
to start taking care of our
bossy. We've had catastrophic
fires, particularly in there has
been loss of life, there has
been loss of property, and quite
frankly, it's detrimental to to
the environment and, and also in
times to our water delivery. So,
um, and also quite frankly to
our staff, um, it is a danger,
so we
appreciate this. We appreciate
the flexibility. It'll go
implement this and uh that's.
Thank you, thank you. Do you
have anybody else that would
speak in?
I'm Doctor Martin Morse, city
manager, City of Rio Communities
in 2022.
The big hole fire happened which
uh which was literally happened
right next to our community.
We did have to evacuate.
A school, or elementary school,
Lammer said in addition, um,
we're taking a look at the fuels
as they're going this year, and
they are continuing not only to
be thick, but we're seeing some
infestations, for example, in
the salt cedar their beetles
coming in, a salt cedar is
starting to dri die.
And dry out and we have already
had a fire. We were very
fortunate. It was approximately
4.5 miles south, and it was
right around New Year's.
And that's before the fire
season should be even be
starting. It was that dry and
it's that dry right now. So in
order to be able to come in,
take out this dying and drying
out fuel. Take out the dead and
down fuel that's in there. We
have a number of issues
addressing people who recreate.
There are people who come in
there who are homeless for
temporary shelters and those
kinds of things, the
opportunities for, for injury or
loss of life are very
significant, so.
We would highly support.
This piece of legislation.
You, you can support.
in the room.
Yes, Mr. Rohorst.
Uh, good morning, uh, Madam
Chairwoman and members of the
committee, um, I'm Sherro Hose,
uh, lobbyist for P&M, and we
stand in support of this, the
senator's bill, and we
appreciate his work on this.
Uh, questions from the my.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Sanchez, very much.
I uh.
The, the middle.
Uh, is unique, uh, uh, entity of
government. It was actually
court created 20, I think 1924,
as a result of a lawsuit in the
North Valley Albuquerque where
essentially back in the day, you
wonder why the why the San
Felipe Church is so far from the
Rio Grande because it flooded.
Uh, and so the church was miles
from the Rio Grande, where it is
now. So, uh, done by the Army
Corps of Engineers and, and, and
this local government entity
which the legislature created
the the the year after the
court.
Court case anyway to make a long
story short, the Amiro Grande
Conservancy District is charged.
Essentially owns a few.
Uh, you know, to more so levees
in the North Valley. Anyway, to
make a long story short, it's a,
it's a fire hazard. It's a fire
hazard. They kind of the the
inclination is, you know, we've
done so much bad for nature,
let's don't touch it, but if you
don't touch the, you're
literally killing the bull skin.
And so this money uh.
It's relatively inexpensive to
hire a.
hire companies to go in and
clear out the hazardous fuel,
uh, the firefighters.
Have a heck of a time last
spring that just literally
jumped to like.
Um, so anyway, um, because it's
also a quality of life issue.
Like
You people don't enjoy kids have
a picnic, it's much about it,
it's it's and uh.
Difficult. Someone could
literally like jump out at you
and stuff
but not that I've ever done, but
um.
So, so anyway, folks don't enjoy
jogging, they need to make a
long story short, I love the
bosque. We need to restore it.
We need to, uh, enhance its
beauty, not only for for
Albuquerque but up and down the
Rio Grande, uh, not just for
environmental purposes but for
quality of life. So, anyway,
thank you.
Senator.
Telling me that.
The chair will entertain
emotion.
Or do that seconded by the.
For Senate bill
306.
Senator,
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scherer.
Senators Senator Pinto.
The vote is 52 they do pass for
a Senate bill, which bill would
you like to move on to, Senator?
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm gonna go
ahead and uh I just was texting
with the senator Stefaniks. I
think she's tied up, but I'm
gonna go ahead and move to Bill
um.
306.
306 the Valencia County Police
Department. Yes, I have some
people here in the in the.
Audience waiting, so we'll go on
and move with that one.
OK, you may begin senator.
Um
Madam Chair, we're doing with
this bill, uh, I'm putting on
for Senator Stefaniks. I'm a
co-sponsor with her. We both
represent uh real communities
area in Valencia County.
And uh Real Communities is a
growing community we've helped
tremendously with their fire
department, which is a great
service to us in that area and
now we need to help with their
police department. I have today
with me the chief of police from
real Communities and uh what
we're gonna do with this bill
here is we're gonna do a one
time appropriation of a million
dollars for the police
department and real communities
and I believe if they don't
spend it, it gets reverted back
so we gotta make them spend it.
This is a good one.
Goes back to the general fund
and we get it back, so, um, I'm
gonna turn it over to the, uh,
chief of police right here for
real communities. Let him speak
a little bit and then we'll move
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, committee, thank
you for giving me the
opportunity to speak in front of
you today and uh reference to
this bill, um.
17 months ago the city real
communities jumped in,
I apologize. I'm cheap.
Madam Chair, I'm Chief Felix
Nunez with the City Ro
committees.
Madam Chair, um,
17 months ago, the city real
communities jumped into the pool
to have a police department with
that in mind, with the police
department, um, this is a brand
new police department. This is
currently the newest police
department in the state of New
Mexico. Um, the last newer
police department would have
been Edgewood Police Department
and they're going on quite a, I
think almost 5, 10, close to 8
years now.
And it's not a easy task to
build a police department in
this day and time. And as we
move forward in doing this.
Um
We've had assistance from our
local sheriff's department,
Valencia County Sheriff's
Department has assisted us in
helping with call volumes to
give you a type of idea, our
call volumes, uh, ranges in the
month, the winter months are
probably about 280 calls.
And the population is a little
below 5000.
But 280 calls, a lot of calls
for that area, um, during the
summer months, we average
probably over close to 375 to
400 calls a month.
Currently right now I have 2
officers and myself. um what we
consider in the Chiefs
Association a working chief. I'm
somebody who can go in and work
in the office and run out and
pull somebody over and write
them a ticket, or so forth, so
it's it's always a venture, um,
but as we move forward at the
city of Real communities has an
economic plan in effect to
actually stabilize in the
future, uh, a full running
police department with the size
of the volume and as the growth,
real communities is a growing
city. It's a constant.
growing city, um, and we look
forward to this growth but
become growth you need your
first responders, and that's
what they have installed in me
to build their police department
today. So with that in mind as
we look forward.
As they look forward for
economic changes and trying to
move forward to support their
police and first responders,
fire and police. Um, it's gonna
take a while.
And this bill particularly will
give us that boost and the boost
we need is to make that happen,
um, we, we, like I said, if you
look at the whole crime side of
criminals, they have no
boundaries. We have boundaries
and they cross that over
consistently, uh, just the other
day we had uh Albuquerque Police
department in a pursuit with one
of the stolen vehicles coming
right through our city, um, so,
and that's not one we've seen
plenty of that um the prior
bill.
With the fire issues, uh we have
uh on house individuals that are
building up camps within those
areas that are starting problems
and having the police officers
on the field to be able to deal
with not just with the incident
occurs like that like a fire,
but helping the fire department
by blocking roads and so forth.
If you don't have the manpower,
it becomes very difficult and
right now having 2 or 3 of us
running out there we were
probably about 80% of the call
volume right now that my
officers are answering. We're
probably in a range of about 12
hour days and a 5.
are weak.
5 day week, so.
Madam Chariot's uh members.
That's why I'm here today. I'm
asking for the help.
Real communities help us boost
our police department and
stabilize in the future, we will
be stabilized and continue our
forecast out in the next by 28,
we should be at a 15-man police
department.
So that's something that we
continue trying to strive for
just to keep up with the call
volumes and keep up with the
community safety needs.
Man members, thank you for your
time.
Uh, Beijing.
OK.
Do we have any?
Uh, those in opposition do we
have uh we'll go to questions
Madam Chair, Senator, um, yes,
it's funny, it's funny you
integrate, but this is the kind
of its own standing money to
help us move forward. We are
receiving some funding called
LAPF law enforcement protective
funds.
For for that, but this money is
more to help us for employment
purposes to get officers on
board, um, as you know, it's,
and you're gonna hear this from
all your chiefs and we talked to
your chiefs and your sheriffs
trying to find officers nowadays
is very difficult. Um, nobody
wants to be a police officer
anymore.
Um, so it's trying to keep up
with the ongoing demand for
police officers trying to keep
up with a major other
departments like, you know, I'm
part of the metro area, so you
look at Albuquerque police smart
me. I can't compete with their
salaries.
But you know, we can still try
to find that good officer that
fits into our communities. And
I, and I think that this is
something that mostly with this
bills we're looking for senator
is to move forward in that
center so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, Senator Soul.
Thank you Madam Chair. Then look
at money is for cost of new
police departments.
But then it says the funds are
to be used for officers'
salaries, training, and
equipment. Is that for new
police departments or to beef up
we'll sounds like we're doing
both. What?
being used for.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
think it's, it's just for the
salaries and the ones they
already have maybe some
renovation for what they already
have, we're not.
Go to build a new police station
or nothing like that and also I
want to add on to what he said
so these they can stand alone
right now. Valencia County is
growing with rural communities.
Valencia Sheriff's Department's
not able to go out there and
help him, but Len's not able to
go out there because Belen's
growing Boski Farms is too far
away, um, so this money would be
able to help them stand on their
own for officer salaries,
training equipment.
Uh, other equipment and
Madam are those new police
departments or is this expansion
of the current one.
It would be an expansion of the
existing one for the for the
town of real communities. OK,
because that's kind of not what
it police departments.
You understand my this would
only be for real communities.
This would be for their.
But I, I think it, we're not
building a new police
department.
OK, well, madam chair, you know
that we might want to, and I
don't know if appropriate, I
don't know whether finance would
pick up on that amendment here
and take out new police
departments because it doesn't
sound like we're establishing
new police departments were
establishing expanded police
presence.
Does that make sense? I don't
wanna
know that makes sense and we
can,
yeah, that makes sense. And
before I go to the next
committee, I can have it, I can
get an amendment drafted for. We
go to finance next.
Well, and if there are any other
questions, but quickly here with
kind of a quick.
Strike and change, so.
If that would be a friendly
amendment.
If it's friendly to you.
Yeah. Next, if you wanna.
OK, and Madam Chair, that also
is a problem in the title then,
cause it's not new police
senators departments within
Valencia County to.
Serve new communities and Madam
Chair, Senator, before I speak,
this is Senator Stefanik's bill.
I'm presenting it for her, so I
it's jump on me too hard, but I
just remember that. I mean, when
I read the title of the, I, I,
I'm presented it for senators to
fight it better be better if,
you know, I don't start messing
with it here, but you might
check with her because the whole
presentation wasn't about new
police departments. It was about
expanding police presence to
new, to other
communities within Valencia
County and therefore I don't
think the title or some of the
wording matches with what I
think the actual intent is, if
that makes sense. Senator, yes,
and I will as soon as I get done
with this. I will check with her
and see if we can change it up.
Yeah.
Senator Maestas, thank you,
Senator Souls.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
I'm the only one who didn't
catch this, but the river
communities so I uh so I looked
on the map paradise says you can
get um it's uh it's uh east of
the Rio Grande, uh, Berle kind
of hugs the interstate.
I go to if I'm driving from
Albuquerque, you go to Berle,
make a left and go over the
river bridge, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, and you are in real
communities and it it's divided
by Highway 47.
Rural communities
And to the east of that
community, Madam Chair Center is
um.
The Monzano Mountains.
Yes, Madam Cha sent directly
east is the Monzano Mountains,
yes.
On Monzano Express where you can
get, there's some trails back
that way. And Madam Chair,
Senator, right off of Highway
47, there's some Terra Grande
area, so they senator, if you're
looking at the map, they service
all the way out to almost
Highway 60 to the railroad
tracks out there. It's huge
rule. You have the town of real
communities and then you have
there's like a potential
heights.
Because it goes for all but, you
know, but anyway, Madam Chair,
um, no, that's great. I'm, I'm
looking, I'm just thinking a
response time. I mean, from Los
Lunas, from Los Chavez, even
from Berle response time would
be.
Would be, would be tough, so I
just appreciate the leadership
of real Communities.
Incorporate it will grow.
I think the folks in Berlin
don't want Berlin to grow. I
just want to also thank um.
Peep Nunez for taking the
leaders in the state and it's
been in big people of that town
is served very well. But yeah, I
don't know if we need to do it
now.
To, uh, to get the language
correct and how there's no uh.
There's no confusion.
Thank you.
Senator Sheer,
he's gonna make sure you get it
done.
Um, the chair will entertain a
motion.
do.
Yeah
and.
vote for Senate Bill 306.
Yes
Senator Sanchez? Senator.
Yes.
Senator Soz, Senator Pinto.
5 and 0.
In a Sanchez Senate Bill 306,
you have a due pass.
Yeah,
now you got yours, thank you
very much.
And
so that is what the real
intention is.
No, he'll take care of it. We
don't have to do on it.
Both of your building and they
think the
Senate Bill 315 state bread is
uh there's a requirement in
there for a demonstration, I
believe
and we're gonna bring and uh
Madam Chair, the flower that you
guys got for Valencia County
Day, a little pack of flour,
that's the best flour and we're
gonna make some uh tortillas, so
papillas, whatever you want,
Madam Chair.
Senator Sanchez, whenever you're
ready.
I think there's also
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee today I bring you
Bill, uh, Senate Bill 315 and
um.
Um, I was brought this idea to
uh uh.
A little boy, uh, Mr. McIntosh
came to me and we and I happened
to run into uh his mom and his
sister Adeline McIntosh in the
hallway the other day and she
started talking with me and
asking me, so she brought me
this idea, and I thought it was
a great idea. We have the state.
B, the state flowers, the state,
you know, all the stuff we have
and uh this idea was brought to
me as having the steak bread and
so we bring you today Senate
Bill 315 is the tortilla.
So
With that, Madam Chair, I will
go to questions.
And
just kidding.
Um, those in the committee room.
Anybody in opposition.
Yeah.
Aileen McIntosh. Go ahead.
OK go ahead.
Hello, this is Adeline
Macintosh.
Can you hear me?
So, how I came up with this idea
was I was having breakfast with
my family and I was just
Sitting there and we went over
the state symbols for our New
Mexico history study that we're
doing in school and I was like,
is there a state bread?
And my mom was like, well,
surely there has to be, and so
she looked it up and there
wasn't, and I just thought,
well, the state bread should be
a tortilla.
And so when we went up to
The Roundhouse, I talked to
Senator Sanchez about it and he
liked it.
So here we are.
Thank you very much.
OK, we will go to committee
members. Any questions, Senator
Soz. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
actually like ones like this,
uh, I think they are an
important part of our elementary
education when the kids learn,
they learn and are proud of
things about their state, um, a
couple of years ago, you all
remember the state aroma and it
brought international attention
to the state of New Mexico. Uh,
I was on several late night
shows our host uh laughed about
it, made.
them testifying, I think they,
but what a great educational
experience, you know, and so I
appreciate things and certainly
if you ask anyone about the
state bread for New Mexico.
It's gonna be the tortilla. I
mean, it's almost so obvious,
why haven't we done it before?
My only uh fried.
Well, the same thing when we
were madam chair, when we were
doing the aroma bill, some
people, you know, thought it
ought to be the smell of cow
manure in the dairies, I think
it came up at one point.
Yeah, flashback senator, uh.
But I think these are great
opera come and have them be your
expert witnesses, sit with you
on the floor and, and learn all
about them because I think this
is a one about our state and
interesting things with it, and
it provides some freedom, which
is always good for the state of
New Mexico, so I fully support.
committee members.
Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Sanchez, and thank
you.
Ms. Macintosh, thank you, Ms.
Macintosh, for, for bringing
this forward. You have a great
champion in Senator Sanchez.
Like
When I read, and this is a
wonderful bill because it that
it's section of law is all the
the the official things of New
Mexico.
And I look, you know, the, I
look at a biscochito I look, I
look at green chili roasting.
And look at, uh, you know, the,
the Roadrunner, and these are
things that are distinct you,
you don't find them outside of
the city of New Mexico.
That much, um.
But the tortilla is like
international claim it.
Um
But it's like, there's.
I
And I think uh
You know, they gotta go flower.
But in Southern this depends,
um, and I think even uh even the
Bible has unleavened bread, but
um, but I think um I think
what's truly unique.
Quintessential New Mexico bread
is a sopala.
Because it's Spanish flour and
native.
Ovens
Um
But anyway, the fact that there
may be a debate as to the bread
kind of leave kinda like there
shouldn't be a debate with the
state symbols, so.
So I may have to go south. I
don't wanna be a, a Grinch, um,
tortilla and think about it, uh.
debate on the floor.
Um
Because when we, when we make
bread, you got to define it. You
think they're ready to um.
So uh.
But he might uh
you might have to.
Madam Chair, I'm willing to
amendments or works move
forward.
And I understand I love all the
breads. I probably shouldn't be,
I shouldn't be eating tortillas
anymore but uh every once in a
while, you know, when your mom
makes them, Madam Chair of the
family, it's like, uh, 123,
well, I better stop. So.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, the chair will entertain
emotion.
Yeah, but do pass from Senator
souls and a second by Senator
Sherro.
Broke off for Senate Bill 315
state breed.
Sent it to me.
Senator Sanchez
Yes
Senator Scherer.
Senators, Senator Pinto.
5 years in 0 now. Senator
Maestus.
The fun of it, no.
OK, correction then.
4 years and 1 no.
bread and I look forward to the
debate on the floor or where,
where do you go next?
Judiciary
I think so. I don't know.
Good question.
And we will.
Standing recess until 2 next
