Senator Campos.
Senator von yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator do heck.
Senator Hamblen here Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna now I.
Senator Morris.
Senator then yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pulp.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator also.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You do not have a quorum Mister
president.
Senator is we're lacking a
quorum all senators to the
chamber.
We're needing a quorum.
everyone please rise for the
indication to me that today by
Reverend canon corny let Eaton
fiscal church of Navajo land.
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be that
Mr.
Che ha she initially host wished
Could they hugged so that the
losing.
Let us pray.
Let us talk to god.
Let us reflect and pray.
Let the UT and harmony be
present.
Let us think in the blessing
way.
I just within us and all around
us.
To guide us in the way that is
just true and right.
directions we are of wind water
earth and light.
And when in the day and week
ahead when differences arise and
To remember to be still.
And when wearing this is too
much god grant us strength and
sacred to listen for
understanding listen for hope
listen for justice listen for
the good of the whole and all of
for all of god's holy creation
house the question honestly
question honestly and piece it
is finish and beauty it is
finished and.
The.
Will deliver to you and justice
for all.
The state of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr president good
morning to you good morning to
everyone a unanimous consent we
go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Hearing no objection it is so
are in the home stretch I I just
thinking about pausing in the
midst of challenges it's very
easy to get going on high speed
and I will tell you that is
take that time out and just work
our way through the issue so
really appreciate you being here
this morning a couple things
members we are having lunch
today are former Senate Majority
give you an announcements about
that and we certainly appreciate
him doing that for us realizing
where we are all those years he
cool phone Chargers on your
desks you each have one of these
there from Invenergy and
Invenergy is is working on a
corners about four hundred miles
and four thousand megawatts of
of wind energy from that north
eastern New Mexico region enough
Mr president we is that I think
I see Senator Kernan might have
some gas I don't know if they're
here yet not here.
president the nest consent to
allow cameras in the Senate
chamber.
Hearing objections terms are to
be allowed only the Senate
chamber today Senator Padilla
thank you that's all Mr
president for the moment Senator
is wrong that order business
Senator Brandt.
Can.
Senator Representative.
Morning Mr president.
Center Mike with them thank you
very much Mr president just
consent to excuse Senators
seventh isn't early returns the
chamber.
Seeing no objection.
It is so ordered.
have to two sessions today
plan in the morning session is
we're gonna do Senate bills one
through nine and then see how
we're doing time wise we'll take
so Mr president your Senator
Padilla thank you Mr president
Mr leader you know just consent
to see you Senator when you know
simply returns the chamber
hearing no objection it is so
consent we go to or business
messages from the governor we're
in that order business message
from the governor the reader to
read.
The honorable Mimi Stewart
bill one as amended enacted by
the fifty six legislature first
session twenty twenty three
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham.
Senate Majority Leader bill one
thing is the next order of
business thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from the
house we're in that order
business messages from the house
reader to read this president
with respectfully submitted Lisa
and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk the journal show the
message from the house has been
received.
in full by the officers of the
house in open session and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk.
amendments to house bill four as
amended by the house and further
as amended by the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk.
I thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
order of business committee
reports.
And that order of business
committee reports the reader to
read.
Mr president your Judiciary
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chairman.
Senator.
Madam two thousand moved off to
the committee reports.
motion in the the journal
reflect their actions on
individually hearing no
objection the reader to read.
House rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
substitute for House consumer
public affairs committee
substitute for House Bill three
oh six do pass.
House bill one eighty to pass
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted in the journal show that
they were acted upon
individually.
The reader to read.
reports into the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Senator
participate in a.
no objection the reader to read.
House Bill three ninety five as
amended to pass.
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House government
president I move the adoption of
the committee report centers we
have a motion to adopt committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
reflect.
Right Mr president your
Judiciary Committee to whom has
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen Senator
cliff R. Pirtle co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
the members of the body that the
officers the Senate has signed
an open session Senate bill
sixty eight as amended.
The reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
grows preparatory to signing by
the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
those in opposition may the eyes
have it and I'd like to announce
to the members of the body at
the offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
Joint Memorial eleven.
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president so just again we're
going to work on the Senate
bills one through nine and with
she left off on Senate bill four
thirty two we're in that order
business.
They're doing a legislation
center handler will go ahead and
we will go to the script once
forced placing central for
thirty two as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objections center
Hamblen thank you Mr president
body I really appreciate the
to help reduce the costs of
solar systems by half for
project developers and landlords
who oversee affordable housing
this would because of the the
electricity for tenants and for
building owners and for that Mr
president I'm grateful for that
and open it up for a discussion
from this body.
And I yield to Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president
Good morning senator good
yielding on this bill and I'm I
remember from committee and and
so for my understanding it would
it would allow like animal use
and the tenants then would get
the benefit of having a lower
electric bills that is that kind
worked and and I appreciate your
answer in question thank you
Senator Brandt Senator Gallegos.
Is present with the sponsor
yield seven Hallandale
absolutely Mr president I yield.
Mr presents posture I I think I
may have gotten some of the same
the each individual would have
the similar or same electric
bill in your if your bill were
to pass is that what I
understand this presents under.
of the the language in the
inflation reduction act the cost
has to be divided equally so if
we are using the example of a
four plex the costs would be
discussion about one maybe user
more of electricity than another
that is out of our control
because of the federal bill
however should this bill pass
Senator goes Mr president said I
appreciate that and and I can
see that of the renters would
resident level who'd fill out
that document to be able to for
that discretion center.
Etcetera have a Mister president
center very good question that
is actually the the agreement
Senator Wirth Mr presence in
that is what I needed is the
distinction between the project
owner and the tenants because
got a a cut right in there
energy is that what I understand
this presents center.
Senator Hamblen Mr present
center absolutely right.
This presents center I thank you
and I yield thank you senator I
goes any further debate
senators.
Senator Williams.
Thank you Mr president will
sponsor you absolutely Mr
president.
bills a thousand of next ones
two thousand next ones five
thousand how do we create equity
when we divide that because the
person that the lowest.
appreciate the question because
this was able we were able to
clarify quite a bit the equity
element of this bill is
dependent on the inflation
already sets those guidelines
that it's twenty five percent
twenty five percent twenty five
percent twenty five percent I
understand the question about if
somebody is using a little bit
reduction in their utility costs
even though if it maybe twenty
five percent recognize that
there's there's there might seem
to be a little bit of user
costs although according to the
federal guidelines we don't have
any wiggle room on that it has
to be twenty five percent all
the way across in this
particular example and so Mr
president center it's a federal
Any further debate.
I see no further debate center
Hamden to close thank you Mr
president Senate body I really
appreciate the conversations
that have come not only out of
need help reducing your utility
costs have that opportunity so
on that Mr president I move the
Senate bill four thirty two was
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
Senate is where voting all
senators to your seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand Senator Ingle
Senator Gallegos voting no
Senator Neville voting no
Senator Burt voting no Senator
Pirtle voting no.
By a vote of twenty five the
affirmative eleven the negative.
Senate bill four thirty two as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Hamblen thank you
Mr president thank you Senate
Up.
On final passage has been taken
there is no subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objections etcetera
etcetera explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president of the
in schools which authorizes PED
to enter into a compact with the
Indian nations tribes or
pueblos.
To be able to create these a
committee look into our current
framework that we have our
public schools are charter
schools and the.
And with.
I felt that the best way to
two percent of a forty two and I
yield to center Stewart then
Senator Ivey Soto Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
LFC we looked at the session
issue thoroughly in this last
interim including visiting the
Hey miss language schools were
our native American communities
who want to remain.
Of viable want their language to
ability for elders to be there
language teachers without having
a background but this plan
employee they do asked to be
outside of the normal state
rules regarding curriculum
assessment evaluation and that's
because these schools will
Thank you Senator Stewart
Senator Ivey Soto all of my
Senator Brandt thank you very
much Mr president.
I miss president colleagues I
fully support the goals.
Tribes have sovereign immunity.
They should have sovereign
immunity.
They were separate sovereigns.
Is that the ability to have
accountability.
Is diminished almost to the
point of being non existent.
That has been perpetrated.
On the first nations of this
country.
It is the least we can do to
support the schools.
What the model that is being
used right now.
Because the tribes don't make
themselves available to the
courts of the state of New
Mexico.
If something goes awry one of
the schools.
better approach to be able to
get to the screen.
Because the goal is a goal that
we should all be celebrating
thank you.
support of this bill you know
the the tribes have some very
unique issues that they need to
be able to address their culture
their language and just things
believe that this is past due
and that the tribes need to be
allowed to to to hold on to
those languages to hold on to
their tribe thank you senator
for bringing this I know your
tribe thank you for bringing
this but I think you also I
think it's very important for
your people and makes you tell
finish into the field Mr
president yes are you.
Thank you Mr president of the
Senator how long is the have
just tried been working on
setting up this model.
been working and concerned about
preserving language and is
looked at I know groups in
Hawaii in Washington in Alaska
in various other places and
summer of our then secretary of
of education or PED courts of
Kurdistan house of talked about
The Washington model which was a
need to anymore yielding I would
just like to comment that what
the heck Miss tribe is doing in
setting up this model for the
compacts is going to be a model
than any of those which has more
safeguards built into it but has
a stronger educational base that
what the others have been doing
also and very much applaud the
follow both in New Mexico and
across the country on how to
work through education to
preserve those languages we know
that the earliest grades are not
possible to transition to
English as languages of learning
while preserving the native
languages and I think that's
exactly the model that have Mrs
using and I strongly supported
Mr president with the sponsor
yield for a few questions
etcetera etcetera the up is
present SO you.
Misprint center I was going to
ask about the amount of time
that you took into preparing for
this and I understood Center
Senator Shendo missed Mr
president of we've had
discussions as was mentioned was
part of the legislative
education study committee we
have participation and support
Revitalize language in it and
for us the pueblo payments we've
had experience with our our
charter schools with experience
last ten years we've had that
model but how what happened so
Mister president is when the
students come from head start I
move into other public schools
that don't have the same
My resolution authorize a pilot
to establish a K. two six so
that the students are coming out
ahead store will have a seamless
and then after that they can go
so yes of we've had support from
the other tribes as well
Senator.
Mr president center I appreciate
that and I love the dialogue
that was there in him as well as
public monies from PED or will
that be still out Mr president
center Mr president this allows
a the schools to be part of the
now stand full support thank you
are you thank you senator
because we do have further
debate center participate now.
Senator Shendo I've had not seen
this before so I'm just trying
to play catch up here.
And and see if I understand
fully of does the does the
Mr president this will be a
paradigm shift of I think when
we think about what are our
strongest **** when we look at
culture and language into our
existing curriculum what we've
done is shift the paradigm how
do we build upon the strength of
our language to teach our
students the science and
mathematics and things that are
on on the you know and and
that's really what our model is.
So Mister president and and
senator these schools would
potentially replace as a student
have a local B. I. B. I. E.
school we have the public school
then this will be created as
well so the choice and and Mr
president to Senator Shendo
And then Mr president the state
would be funding all for.
Of the three the other one is
funded by the bureau of Indian
affairs.
description number Mister
president senator that was the
way it was written initially but
in the the substitute we took
that out the only ones that can
instruction on in the FIR talked
about that because we have about
I'm not sure how many B. I. E.
schools we have in in the state
but there's quite a few thousand
kids going to be a you schools
but they're not a part of this
And and and Mr president of and
Senator Shendo of one other
aspect of the funding I'm
unclear about last year we we
we we took that away from the
SCG and they could get the local
districts get to keep that will
that continue even if there are.
the Gallup McKinley schools if
the tribe develop their own
schools would that impact Aid
continue to go to the public
schools.
Senator Shendo even if that that
some point the number of
students attending the Gallup
McKinley public schools dwindled
significantly they would
Mr president I don't see the
schools overtaking the size of
BA because he's a very targeted
and schools and
It's hard to determine.
year or two but others have a
long way to go.
Okay the so so essentially the
the the the the legislation is
Mr president Senator Shendo the
Shendo for for clarifying things
for me thank you senator to
subpoena.
Si no further debate.
do now pass and pass in objects
into the Senate the directors so
that all action.
Russell rural rural as Bacall
and and all those present voting
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative one in a in a Senate
Judiciary Committee substance
substitute for Senate bill fifty
one and I yield to senator.
Stefanics thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
substitution hearing no
objection Senator fenics
explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate as Senate bill
fifty one is a consumer
of the New Mexico.
Comprehensive cancer center.
The task force studied the
increasing cost of prescription
drugs during the interim.
drug formularies and surrounding
policies and reimburse
pharmacies for patient
prescriptions.
March first twenty twenty three
and increasing costs for
consumers.
Three PBMs control eighty
percent of the market CVS
access and affordability of
prescription drugs.
The Kaiser family foundation
reports that nearly thirty
percent of all adults report not
increased twenty six point three
percent between twenty fifteen
and twenty nineteen while the
annual income for New Mexico
residents only increased seven
point eight percent.
we've seen the demise of
independent pharmacies New
Mexico stands to lose nine
hundred and three million
dollars in revenue that will go
same contract that they pay the
pharmacies on by the PBMs the
pharmacy benefit managers it
requires insurers to apply
prescription drug rebates
If the rebate amount is more
than the insurance out of pocket
costs the remaining rebate
amount is credited to the
insurer.
managers to be transparent about
the prices paid to the pharmacy
for the drugs and the price they
quoted insurance company and the
employer paying the premiums.
of superintendent of insurance.
Cost sharing provisions do not
apply to pass limited benefit
Medicaid or Medicare.
Insurance premiums have been
shown to not be affected by PBM
legislation through research by
The FIR reflects losses but the
losses are to the pharmacy
benefit managers.
IBM seven crease profits of a
prices with manufacturers for
floppy until they figure that if
they charge a percentage of the
cost of drugs they could force
drug prices to rise and make
prescribed for cancer chronic
conditions it's cetera and Mr
president I would stand for
debate or amendment or
Senator many us followed by
Senator committee.
Thank you Mr president I don't
think I need to debate but I I
heard an inaccuracy in our
vendors wrote the F. I. R. for
the agency.
I've never heard of that before
I did request similar to the
tourney general office verifies
influencing the agency's outcome
of agencies cost I think there's
a problem with the contract
amended ballots were level maaf
that we have contract people
that we contract with writing F.
hours we're checking to see if
are in play for what they say in
trying to influence the
legislature I don't think that's
right so thank you Mr president
thanks sentiment us we do have
thank you very much of.
Is present Senator Woods are
military veterans on tri care be
able to use these
discounts.
the body that this is illegal
for tricare for its illegal.
The federal government has
outlawed this in their anti
kickback
veterans that are on these
tricare plans at Setra.
These are not allowed these are
only allowed for private
insurance which is where the
everyone to understand that that
if the federal law applied to
to these other plans that we're
talking about we wouldn't have
take on PBMs PBMs make money by
diverting patients away from
generic drugs to brand name
drugs which is exactly what this
bill is designed to do.
cost of prescription drugs in
these private drugs that we're
trying to channel these people
to with this bill make up the
vast majority of the cost of
pharmaceuticals in America.
again PBMs benefit from.
Channeling in any way they
channel patients toward these
brand name expensive drugs they
can do with coupons they do with
about this but in New England
New England journal of medicine
a Yale study was published in
the New England journal of
medicine just just two years ago
said that.
coupons go to they actually have
lower cost alternatives where to
the PBMs when well they're
winning.
didn't even use this coupon
scheme that they're that they're
claiming is helping people get
access to drugs all it's doing
rid of these rebates that nobody
knows about.
We to publish all the prices for
the patients.
They want to take on the
insurance companies that.
the patient let them make the
final the the the financial
decisions by empowering them
with transparency.
There's no transparency here
drugs and they have a terrible
terrible track record Mr
president which I'm not going to
get into.
Because it's kind of tangential
this bill they have a terrible
So miss present in more of the
body I I'd please consider that
this is not going to help it's
not going to help.
our tri care folks is not going
to help Medicare folks because
continue to profit that's going
to help big pharma and by the
way these pharmaceutical
companies what what they've done
and it was embedded into our
state budget I I didn't talk
performance measures for people
with depression.
Did it say anything about
alleviating depression.
Hearing depression looking at
four or exercising.
What did the state budget state
was the performance parameter it
said the percent of people that
you taking your medicine not are
you better.
Not has your doctor address the
root causes in Q. four year
condition that could be cured.
your lifelong medication that
the pharmaceutical industry
never want you to come off of
and the the coupons that are
directing the patients to these
drugs.
Are you just hearing are you
just are are you given that
monthly payment to that
pharmaceutical company.
Now don't get me wrong I do want
to clarify my position.
relationship the way that we are
in my mind helping PBMs more
this bill.
And helping big pharma with this
bill.
Mr president so as you can tell
I'm opposed to this bill I
encourage members to see where
who who is profiting from this
bill.
What we're not going on lower
care bill that I've seen not
every single one there's been
well one that I can think of.
That in my opinion we actually
lower costs.
Every other one is increasing
up and up and up and up and a
lot of it is because well
intentioned health care bills
like this keep getting passed.
In virtually every single state
across America both parties are
The detriment of the doctor
patient relationship and to the
benefit of PBMs to the benefit
insurance companies to the
benefit of pharmaceutical
companies those are the folks
it a lot of brand name expensive
meds.
It's all about the money Mr
president thank you.
Thanks committee we do have a
floor amendment.
substitute for Senate bill fifty
one amendment sponsored by
senator Munoz share.
Senator moving explain amendment
Mr president senator Mr
president the amendment I have
has Mark Moores name on.
Is that the one more on Senator
six.
Two three six point one.
Thank you senator for the
question Senator share to move
in there to explain the
president so I decided that I
would go ahead and sign the
amendment bring it into the to
the committee so Mister
president if we look at this
it's pretty simple.
has is playing by the same thing
so if you look at the amendment
itself in the middle of the page
and a manufacturer that offers a
whatever coupons or discounts or
whatever else the PBMs are are.
Are using can be used by
I believe this ammendment here
clears it up everybody gets the
the discount and so that's what
it does Mr president.
Thank you senator the panics
Center Margie still wish to
debate on a friendly amendment
no I do not.
is accepted this is a from the
minute but it does raise a
question in my mind I wonder of
Senator share would yield.
Senator kneeled a yes Mr
president of many of these
expensive cancer drugs for
example can go to get if if they
can demonstrate the hardship the
financial hardship they can get
Okay Mister present absolutely
not what this does is in fact it
extended because now it make
sure that whatever discount
anybody can get everybody can
get.
know the the the owner of the
used car lot and they let me get
it for a discounted price.
They can't offer that same
discounted price to everybody
to give the same discount to
everybody even people who don't
have our chip.
Then.
What that means that they'll
start giving discounts to
anybody.
I think all of us want to try to
figure out how to make this make
sense.
My concern with this bill as we
came to us.
But this seem to this seem to
put mandates in place that did
what you're talking about making
some things well it mandated
everything to change it didn't
but this one would actually I
believe make all of the drugs
cheaper for everybody and it's
because of the words right here
if you offered to anybody have
Today they are trying to focus
and we've just taken the focus
off of.
just a segment of the population
intent okay focus on New
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Mr
president to I I understand
Senator shares intentions of the
best I I just worry about the
unintended consequences for that
yes I did our committee this
summer the CCI has people who do
nothing but try to pursue these
discounts for patients because
medications thank you.
Thank you senator Ortiz panel.
To have further debate on the
amendment.
channel patients to specific
drugs in a single class so if it
if it was going to require a
coupon to be distributed to the
entire class of drugs to all the
class I recommend this one for
you well if those coupons were
distributed equitably among the
entire class of drugs I'd say
brand name drugs in a class and
so therefore I can't support
thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Munoz.
things that we hope everything
goes with that Mr president I
now move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty one and ask for a
voice vote.
voice vote.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
The eyes have it senator ma'am
number one has been added to
Si no further debate on the bill
Senator Stefanics to close on
the bill.
Mr president I I move that
Senate tax this is
record show that the roll then
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands Senator Stewart
voting tier seats please.
fifty one as amended has duly
passed the Senate centers of
annex the president members of
the body thank you very much
going on to the next item on the
calendar that's going to be item
number five and that's going to
to as for my ask with my expert
to my chair Senator go ahead and
first put the bill in motion and
then we'll go ahead and bring
your expert witness into the
Do now pass our be placed on
final passage of.
That I do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
The script right at the
beginning at.
The subject to debate thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the bill mentioned
be placed on final passage and
that is now subject to debate
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill nineteen into fifty two as
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection.
Thank.
Thank you Mr center my sister
explained about explained the
with regards to training and an
increase in the law enforcement
up profession here in New Mexico
as you as you recall the law
enforcement academy was divided
into two boards the
happen between now and July
first modifies the two boards
and includes tele communicators
and brings tele communicators to
the table of these law
enforcement committee boards to
misconduct allegations they'll
be consequences Mr president for
non reporting of the council can
now have the authority to
withhold funds from the law
enforcement protection fund it
until these two boards come come
online and with that I yield to
my co sponsor Senator pope.
of the co sponsors senators pope
thank you Mr president
so what's incorporating this
committee substitute from Senate
bill two fifty two as we have a
establishment of unlawful use
standards you so for standards
as well as a duty to intervene
with that Mr president we are
ready for debate any questions.
You're not hearing objection so
ordered thank you very much Mr
president so I just want to
stand in full support of the
legislation I know that there's
been some team work done here
to the work of law enforcement I
think this is incredibly
important I I do believe that
the the money is up in the
budget and I just said so Mister
president one of if center my S.
are dollars available for the
for the the the purpose of the
legislation as president.
S. S. I and I apologize you had
requested expert witnesses to be
allowed in the chamber at any
point that you wish to have a
witnesses are thank you very
much the gentleman Baker Hughes
the deputy secretary of the
department of public safety and
he's also the acting director of
Mr president a center but if you
could repeat the question center
for them thank you very much Mr
president want to stand and say
I fully support the efforts
telecommunications equipment
software applications etcetera
is very expensive want to ensure
that we have as I'm fully
supportive I wanna make sure we
have the dollars to make this
go into effect till July first
so may not have gotten the the
attention up in the interim that
it deserves but I think from
here on out it will be
adequately funded even more.
these items together can only
help all of us in every part of
the state so I think the
legislation really moves in our
our the crime and public safety
forward thank you Mr and that's
for the debate Senator Ivey Soto
I actually this president before
we rush to vote I believe there
is a typo in the title.
Thank yeah.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto are
you gonna be offering up an
amendment I will be offering up
an amendment yes so what we're
what we're waiting for that
is for.
Any further debate senators on
the bill.
In our fight that at the front
table real quick we're back on
the bill Senators.
Senator said that if you wish to
debate on the bill this
this done this is this really
takes to Mexico to a step
forward on policing thank you
thank you Senator Ivy Soto any
further debate on the bill.
counties the municipal league
and its director as well as the
chiefs association of that
organization and of course the
leadership at at DPS of.
Senate Judiciary Committee.
substitute for Senate bill
nineteen and two fifty two as
amended do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
Also this year seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty in the
Fuhrman of two in the negative
members thank you we're gonna go
on to the next item on the
counter that's item number five
Senate bill three fifteen
interstate compacts in child
placement and are you able to
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution say no
objections center to subpoena to
explain the bill.
job of the interstate compact on
the placement of children it's
not like other compacts that
have come before this body it's
very much an agreement among the
states.
one state is placed for adoption
in another state or is place for
foster care in another state
this freeze the receiving state
or the sending state from having
making those placements and then
of following up on those
placements once they're made
over the years that initial
utilization across all the
states for the most up to date
practices and that's what we
have before you is a renewal of
the interstate compact that we
have had in place for sixty
And with that I'll you know at
that that would thank you go
into a lot more detail the the
first thirty five states to
ratify it are able to be part of
the commission that that sets
for questions thank you senator
participate ascent as we're
debating Senate bill three
fifteen anyone wishing to
debate.
bill three fifteen do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate the record show the
rules been cold and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
A very.
If you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
passed the Senate center does if
you know thank you very much
members of the Senate and Mr
president thank you were gonna
go on to the next item on the
calendar that's going to be item
number six Senate bill four
debate amendment or substitution
see no objections center Brandt
explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president will give
you a little bit of a background
Didn't want to work together
anymore and so we put the bill
together put it through the
first committee unanimously
situation that we have the eight
hundred license which is
currently used to licensed
vocational teachers which we now
call career technical
instructors.
it was never approved by us as a
legislature it was done only
through rural and they didn't
have the authority to do it in a
row.
So we need to fix the situation.
pad yesterday we got this put
together and I think it actually
makes everything fit really well
it will make it work well and it
bipartisan solution that we can
actually take all the way up and
so that's what we're going to be
doing here just a minute you
ready for me to move the for
substance thank you center right
creating a vocational education
licensure track for teachers
Senate floor substitute for
Senate bill for seventeen
And move for substitute for
Senate bill four seventeen be
put on final passage now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution Senator Brandt to
system at all.
And so what we've done is is
with PED's working with me we
actually put it back in the
three tier licensure system so
get a license to be instructors
and one of the big difference
between your certified
instructors in your CTE
instructors is a CTE instructors
don't necessarily have a
honest are are certified welders
are certified auto technicians
are are certified trades men are
not going to go back to school
that's why they went into those
for them to get a level two
license and then the level three
license and so that's what the
sub does and I will yield for
any questions.
this just because of the CTE
instructors that we were meeting
across the state and I've you
see tech as an example before
and I remember the day that we
were there the welding
and just the knowledge that this
gentleman had
I don't know what his
educational background was but
I'm just I was so amazed and so
impressed with the fact that
be available and I appreciate
this opportunity to recognize
those professionals that may not
have a college degree but have
incredible work experience and
life experience they can bring
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this forward and to recognize
the value and experience that
our teachers especially in CTE
bring to the classroom for
people who want to learn a very
you'll please senator rand deal
yes.
Sentinels Mr president and and
sponsor we heard this bill and
education a couple of days ago
lot different with why we ended
up having to bring force up the
bill that we saw in education
didn't have it within the three
tier licensure system at all it
was a separate system completely
here as they were in there
but
after that Greg and I have a
conversation from head and we
got together yesterday and
understand that I just don't
think it's the best way but you
know we get to compromise
sometimes appear and so that's
the big difference is that this
see this I see this now for the
first time as the chair Senate
education whether been fairly
substantial changes to what we
thought had passed out of the
Education Committee that always
like I'm kind of playing catch
up a little bit on page five
Mister president senator on page
five
in line twelve this is where it
that there are not required to
have a minimum salary of sixty
thousand.
Mr president that's correct the
they're not sometimes and vote
potentially a lot of times those
but also these are not certified
teachers and so they do need to
be able to be treated a little
bit differently we're giving
them a license to teach in our
schools because we need to have
them fifty thousand dollars a
year Mr president center I think
it district could try but they
probably would not get them to
come and work for them using
trial they want but when you get
little bit when we're we have
these tears that minimum
salaries when we put in
exceptions for particular groups
that we don't really mean for
that level of licensing that you
a higher level salary that we
were the others and couldn't
find that and wondered whether
this allows a district to pay
And again I guess that's also on
page seven where somebody can be
a level three teacher but not
get level three salary why are
we calling them a level three
teacher than.
needed to be in the tier system
at all because of how unique of
a type of teacher this was I
think actually the sim Education
Committee agreed with me on that
that we not putting in law
worth they have to be paid so
that could be left more to local
control because this fluctuates
way more of these type of jobs
are kind of non traditional
teachers and so they need to
have that flexibility in the
local community to deal with
those situations differently
that will be done through
negotiations when they're hired
section C. line fifteen
says the department shall grant
a level three license to an
applicant seeking level three
vocational who does not meet the
requirements of subsection B.
looking for a level three
compared to what's normally
required for a level three.
Brandt Mr president Senator
again they they wouldn't be
that master's degree or or you
have to go through the national
board certification these
instructors would not be
required to do that the the
requirements are there they have
higher education institution of
the applicant's ability
eligibility to teach dual credit
courses so this would mean that
or that they complete a
department approved career
technical education training
certificate course of study the
settlement of sixteen hours
accredited higher education
institution.
level two.
currently three and that would
be it stay the same with us
Senator souls Mr president and
thank you and I I apologize for
all the questions but this was a
for the level three either
documentation from a credit
higher education for them
eligible to teach dual credit
level of education in order to
do that any pedagogy other types
of things what is currently
required to to teach.
In higher education institute
competency they have to be able
to to have those licenses those
upper level licenses I I don't
know a lot on the welding side
in a little bit more on the.
depending on what they're
teaching they probably wouldn't
need eight which is the diesel
mechanic and so there's there's
lots of certifications through
their that they would need to
have and the colleges would
what if types of of situations
but again we're work we've got a
fairly major change since what
was hurting Committee.
Does that show that they are
eligible to teach.
Auto mechanic said a.
At a higher education
institution and therefore would
qualify for level three.
our state that is certified by
us to be a college would do that
and so I I think we have to have
a little faith in our higher ups
your first day of auto mechanics
if you if you wish I can get you
in on that class if you'd like
me to I have a very good friend
that actually teaches auto
Their level one license is going
to be at least a couple years
before they moved level to up to
five.
Plus three years at level two.
appreciated and we that long
conversations you know I'm very
supportive of CTE it's more just
yeah this has major changes from
what we saw on committee and so
I've just trying what to to go
through to make sure I
debate.
Senator Brandt to close on this
floor substitute.
What.
Senate bill for seventeen do now
pass as soon as consent of the
Senate the record show the rules
been called all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands.
hearing no objection if you wish
to vote no.
Please raise your hand just for
informational purposes for the
body if the center for substance
Thank you members of the body
and just for Center souls most
of those things that were change
we're just move from one format
to the other the the basics of
how to get the license didn't
change thank you senator rental
going on to the next item on the
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions for placing Senate bill
one seventy on final passage has
been taken that's now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the judiciary and people trying
get out of jury duty because
they are paid minimum wage this
is just attempting to fix some
of that for the state of New
the pay for jurors to a hundred
fifty percent of the least of
the minimum wage between federal
and New Mexico wages thus
ensuring that people are trying
Senate bill one seventy.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Say no debate centers sold to
close on the bill thank you Mr
in the negative by show of
hands.
Serve as a voting tier seats
before we take a vote to yield
to Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president consent to skew
Senator.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative two in the nation a
Senate bill one seventy has duly
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
She not in the chamber we're
gonna go on to the next item on
the counter that's gonna be item
number nine Senate Judiciary
item numbers number eight Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill three ninety nine and I
yield to Senator Lopez thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
say no objections Senator Lopez
to explain the bill.
I thank you very much Mr
equity community grant fund it
does expand the use of the fund
it as additional provisions to
make juvenile justice continuous
Services equitable and Mr
their processes changed what
there's just a added to what
their organization does is added
the word equity.
juvenile justice system that we
are able to cover and work with
many different juveniles within
our communities and this is just
again trying to address the
Say no debate Senator Lopez to
close on the bill thank you
thank you very much Mr president
bill three three nine do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
members of the Senate we're
gonna go on to item number nine
Senate Judiciary Committee
substance percent of bill one
seventy two and I yield to
senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president I ask
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution and I would
yield to my.
A co sponsor to say a few words
bill one seventy two of
prohibits local governments from
entering into any contracts for
the purpose of detaining
immigrants.
This bill would would say that
you cannot contract with ice to
detain immigrants who are
seeking asylum we're not talking
talking here about those
immigrants have come into the
country in accordance with our
laws and applied for asylum we
have found that many of them
that are far from adequate of
people who visited them and and
talk to them have found them
seriously lacking in nutritional
and health care there's been
they're fleeing violence in
their home countries of ice
decides which ones get detained
and which ones are allowed to
proceed to their to their
not detained they're going to be
running amok they if they're not
detained they would be sent to
live with family or Sanchez
while they await their hearing
seventy two and I'll to Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr president with the
Sanchez deal center is our
discipline of the field Mr
president I'd be glad to but I
also would like to ask unanimous
a silky Ruiz and Paul Hagel if
Paul is arrived madam chair
Paula's got here yet no he
hasn't arrived yet so it's just
a house mean it a silky Reese is
Senator Griggs when she settled
and then proceed with your
question.
a few these facilities round one
of them is in the the community
of chaparral in southern New
Mexico a community that is a.
Live in around that colonia are
employed at the at the prison
facility in chaparral.
That the Otero county I
especially close.
In two thousand and next year I
believe two thousand maybe to
issue.
have jobs ones that occur.
The facility was funded
Otero County the bond the bond
pays off in twenty twenty eight.
Otero would be would be faced
with a substantial financial
burden and bondholders would be
Collection about place property
tax which counties.
Rely on property tax almost
solely for revenue they get just
Where they're allowed to tax.
SO terror county is a poor
County this facility.
Mr president and and Sanchez and
citizens of the county and their
plan is.
Once that bondage play paid off
their revenue stream is enhanced
The immediacy of this issue.
And the fact that the the
sponsors want to do that
Sossion.
I.
This bill and oppose this bill
because that's what happened.
I believe I believe we're you
prisoners in chaparral are
treated.
Or and prisoners probably
improper word the individuals
held by the by I should
officially been treated
inhumanely.
have been treated quite well for
the situation that they're in.
Processing the following is a
battered people were there about
a month.
Is controlled by the federal
government and their their
their situation won't change
whether they're held at the
I don't I don't Y. eight I
believe I understand the the
push coming from.
attack on facilities in some of
our poor for rural areas
educational it's hard for me.
Senators district.
So Mister president I think I
don't know that I really need
the.
hope I uh at least indicated the
the detriment that are part of
the world will face if that
something that that occurs also
Mister president there's some
and we will face legal action
structures the the state of
California has currently so much
pressure with that with that are
yield I'll show my comments but
only Otero County and chaparral
but maligned Cibola County
Torrance County I mean this is
this is detrimental to our to
Thank you Mr president and I
just like to follow up in my
College comments and I don't
necessarily need to ask for
the senators to yield
that passage one seventy two
will likely result in litigation
against the state by multiple
parties multiple parties.
one seventy two implicates both
provisions in the U. S.
constitution and New Mexico
constitution against the
impairment of contracts.
If one seventy two is passed.
NMSA four dash six two dash six
prohibits any law that appears
any outstanding revenue bonds
Not only will it affect.
Hundreds of employees and Otero
County.
Not only would it affect a
we see periodic emails from the
folks down there who work there
with reguards and and people are
always doing community events
And so that people are my very
much aware that this is not just
a jail.
It is a holding facility.
the state New Mexico is going to
have multiple legal problems if
this bill passes from multiple
Any further debate senators.
Senator.
into law what are the if the
sponsor would yield one of the
sponsors.
Centered in a detailed.
I would be glad to yield for a
question Senator Senator last
So if they've broken no law why
why are they in detention to
begin with.
Senator you know that's an
excellent question Mr president
and I have no idea of why some
facility like an in the Los
crucis Sir or el Paso or even an
Albuquerque we've had church
facilities hold them until they
can be put in touch with their
or if they're not asking for
asylum they were attempting to
to do something criminal then
they they're not considered to
be these detainees they're
considered to be a to the
across and as our law requires
presented themselves to the
immigration and naturalization
the eyes and said to them.
of legal back up on this because
of the he is an attorney and I'm
not.
Center my SSD of.
Yes Mr president state senator
but just want to reiterate this
is not a ban on private prisons.
The California law that was
struck down tried to ban private
prisons
agreements this would ban on I
need a state with ice for the
purpose of of detaining
immigrants and so that portion
close up shop for whatever sat
leave empty jails have a Margo
there's a market for M. two
jails so these counties are
welcome to contract with the
bureau of prisons with the
department of corrections with
Anybody can come in and it is
soon as soon as they here are
confronted state I seek asylum
so that doesn't.
That in itself I don't think is
We're now seeing immigrants
coming from almost every nation.
And and what I see on television
the thing that scares
infantrymen sharer.
They're coming not from Mexico
or Guatemala but a lot of other
places in the world.
If they're bringing their family
But they're not the people are
showing up.
So.
It would seem to me that ice
would have some kind of reason
Let's sort this out we're gonna
hang on to you for awhile until
we sorted out.
And I think that's what these
the centers really are they're
they're kind of sorting out
Senators.
Or to seek asylum they're doing
business.
Business that most of us would
consider illegal on every level.
okay is this a cartel business.
Operator the tier.
It's not going to get him
killed.
But it also could be that.
He's a cartel operative.
all of them but a big chunk of
our drugs are coming from these
cartels.
And they're not here to be
peaceful they're not seeking
and and you're hungry and you're
fleeing for your life from
somewhere.
That's different in in in the
ice can to do that and say well
this this looks legitimate go
And again it doesn't mean
they're guilty it means they're
questionable.
They came here the use of the
words that somebody told them to
ask for asylum.
Because well ice is overwhelmed
right now.
Absolutely overwhelmed.
And for us to say no we don't
want the federal government in
don't want to detain the
families and and and there's
plenty of people actually seek
asylum.
But the numbers that are coming
across today and the thing that
bothers me the most.
sworn infantrymen potentially in
the United States then all of
the people that served in the
infantry in the last twenty
years that are Americans it
would include me.
That.
Yes right now just just to our
bones.
There in these detention
centers.
For.
Thirty forty five days about.
While we sort that out.
And today since our current.
New Mexico workforce is only
fifty four percent of.
Only fifty four percent of our
would sort it out.
And that's what we're doing when
we contract with ice today
that's all we're doing.
But I have another concern if we
But all of the federal matching
funds or Medicaid budget by
itself is as large as our state
To all that federal money.
I think that's a risk that it's.
It is beyond the pale there I
We can't funded the state of New
Mexico can't fund all that by
itself even with oil and gas we
can't do that even with booming
oil and gas we can't do that the
Thank you.
To.
So.
There's a couple things here.
A.
reason to be here or if it's
something nefarious.
B. we need to have our concern
about our compacts and
agreements and and all the other
things we have with the federal
ordered to close but if all of a
sudden you lose of.
A portion of your your business
that affects you.
With you what you think it does
or not.
community needs don't know.
So Mister president I I am truly
worried about where this is
going not because I want to lock
people up because I'd like to
Senate committee.
Thank you Mr president
I have some questions for center
my SS if he would yield.
Senator just a state of Mr
some of these folks to to
terminate their contract.
In the New Mexicans hushen as
with the that constitutional
language in this bill.
Center mass thank you Mr
president's Senator no that's a
that's a great point I'm glad
we're able to flush it out and
principles general area is just
a reminder to face a chair thank
you Mr president so
so this would not this would not
because this is not mandating a
people the state and it would
essentially require that that
government the local government
to
to terminate the contract under
the current terms of that
contract I believe it's section
that contract in this would
require that termination but it
would be done via the
intergovernmental a services
agreement not it would just go
from one day to the next as a
to allow the state to come in
and say look you entered into
this agreement you to
governmental agencies.
Entered into agreement he played
played by the rules but now the
state is coming in and we're
changing the rules of the game
retroactively.
We're gonna force you to
terminate that contract against
legitimate argument if if a
court were to find that a it's a
safety interest would somehow
get involved in existing
contract I don't I don't claim
rules of the game at the time
the contract was signed.
So but I I do have one other
question.
Mr president and that is on the
G. O. K..
understand the need law was
banning private prisons but
let's listen to the north court
circuit.
Why the private prison ban.
but I think we can all agree
right I mean we would agree that
ice is a federal function no
one's going to stand up here and
say oh ice is not a federal
function on ice is a federal
function the federal government
They said the supremacy clause
prohibits states from
interfering with the operations
of the federal government.
just stop there you know these
decisions are usually.
Pretty long.
They said that this bill would
override the federal
would override the federal
government's decision to use
private contractors to run its
immigration detention facilities
it would give California a
You can Sir California there on
this law you can insert New
Mexico only if we approve.
We don't get to do that we don't
get to tell the government the
explicit in the north court
decision.
and I would be able to my my
chairman I I think would like to
respond that Mr etcetera
etcetera to subpoena thank you
Was decided as you described.
But it did not have any in
impact at all on an existing
California law and I need a
Was not.
It was not did not impact that
existing band that we're trying
to pass here that ban remains
valid in California.
about the the tension of
detainees that we're aware of
the California law that
prohibits that in in in state
facilities still is in effect
and that's what we're trying to
and and we can never predict and
we should never spend too much
time predicting I'm not
suggesting we should predicting
what a court is going to say
about this one you know we're in
appropriations and so we we we
can disagree and I I've I
respect I respect your position
on that and I'm not trying to
say with any authority that I
I don't think this bill is gonna
pass.
I think this bill is going to be
signed by the governor and I
think it's going to reach the
governor's desk.
That could be wrong kind of
For playing and misleading the
American public on the issue of
immigration.
I don't see any interest from
the Republican Party or the
Democrat party.
In DC on fixing this issue no
interest whatsoever.
flat out on constitutional once
again in my opinion and I think
we're doing the same thing to
the supporters of this bill to
the advocates that the people in
detriment of everyone that walks
across that border.
Either heading north and south.
And and if I'm wrong if this
take a look this bill I think I
know it's unconstitutional so
that they have a choice do do we
do we push the bill forward for
messaging purposes to support
the people that are behind the
Nobody wants chaos across the
border nobody wants people
sitting in federal detention
facilities waiting for their
this massive immigration and
nobody wants that.
not not and I I I I compliment
both Sanchez because I know they
are so I just I have a hollow hi
hi to grieve respect for them
both and and I have been
could do something different and
I think we should run some joint
memorials to send Congress a
clear message that they need to
stop messing around you know as
name behind to say the only to
stop messing around.
Both sides.
And I think we could send a
strong message to the country
but I I I don't think this bill
does that because I just it's
just not gonna work.
in going to pose a bill I just I
just don't think it's gonna
gonna hold up.
but I I do think I do think both
Sanchez for bringing it because
it does address a really
Si no further debate for a
second time we have Senator
Griggs followed by Senator Burt
for a second time.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president I think
the body that when the governor
Lujan Grisham was first elected.
The the Senate Republican caucus
to a mansion her sent her a
thank you she was an excellent
choice to do that having just
come from Congress and
potentially find solutions to
the immigration challenges that
got but we've we've got a
situation at continues and has
not yet been been rectified but
Mr president and and members I
could no longer be used as an
Irish facility but could be used
for another purpose
Otero County has told me that
in our eyes processing center
reporter saying the building
would take millions of dollars
that Otero County does not have
now potentially if the sponsors
of the bill wanted to find.
The entirety of their capital
outlay to revamp the the
facility will maybe that might
Issues very very difficult for
us down there and I believe that
as you've heard from others it
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this because I know that all of
us are always concerned about
human rights and the the the
flood across our borders is.
take care of these things but
but I would like to to just
mention a couple of other facts
The reason folks are here is not
families or anything like that
Why so on was sometimes a little
bit more sometimes a little bit
less ice has the ability to have
on there for three days and cut
them loose once they do some due
concerned with when they were
first brought to the facility.
So the average stay is thirty
three days all of their their
it's it's not like a resort by
any stretch of the imagination
but it's not like a prison or
jail either.
And I I I just want people to
body in the state of New Mexico
before we go down this path
really needs to understand that
there's going to be legal action
taken the bond holders.
of Otero county and the other
counties that are in there sure
you gonna cost me cannot make
damage to each of these areas
you gonna put people out of work
People here in the Senate I
would really appreciate the to
Sanchez.
Maybe holding off on a
presenting this bill.
than just creating legal issues
for the state legal issues for
individuals putting people out
of work and also putting these
They're there for a reason.
Give them time to vet each one
of these people they will be
released they will set up a date
Mexico wants to work so I'm
asking for little consideration
from the sponsors of this bill
and certainly the body of the
Senate to reconsider this and
maybe taking a little breath
life for these folks to come
across the border who who who
ask for asylum regardless of
their background.
Have an opportunity to be
Si no further debate Senator
Ortiz a panel to close on the
bill and.
And madam present Mr president I
change immigration policy this
is not change any interactions
at the border this does not
change any of policies and
procedures with regard to the
up held on point by the seventh
circuit under the police powers
of the state we can determine
what happens with the
governmental facilities other
to become law we convene next
year and will and I'm sure we'll
all amenable to offsetting some
of the some of the the economic
effects of this bill of the
same counties and the fees that
the counties charge the the the
federal detainees of has that's
not been raise we've tried to
raise them but folks from those
contract thank you Mr president
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and and
thank you Mr president and I
appreciate the debate some great
is not anywhere near as rosy as
this is been depicted
the Otero.
County processing facility is
The immigration law center the
it was the inspector general in
they the home and the department
of homeland security when they
inspected the facility they
found evidence of rat
on there that we're not very
good the other point that that
that was raised as well maybe we
should use this as a kind of a
of a
the facility where we decide who
asylum seekers but for whatever
reason ice which has a hundred
percent discretion on this
instead of sending them to their
family members were to their
sponsors or to church facility
stream in mind and they had
assurances from the federal
government to that this contract
would be very lucrative one so
they took a gamble this is a
revenue bond index investors who
all these reasons Mr president I
I think it's it's really
incumbent on the state to take
some action and to say this kind
of mistreatment of people who
are in the country legally
the record show the role is been
called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands Senator is where
voting.
oven Center Brandt center for
the thank you Mr president yes
consent to skew Senator Sedillo
Lopez until she.
Return to the chamber during no
objection.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Ingle voting no.
Senator month this voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Center right voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Cinnamon US voting no.
And senator could Hemphill
voting no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
two has failed to pass the
Senate center to subpoena thank
you very much Mr president
members of the Senate many of to
Senate floor with Senate floor
miscellaneous.
Senator by the I thank you Mr
president for the information of
the body we are going to come
back and continue third reading
it we're gonna go first to item
come back to
Item number twenty five three
twenty eight.
And item twenty five Senator
Hemphill I am twenty sixes or
All right and then we're gonna
and for the day there so Mister
president yes consent we go back
to that order business third
reading of legislation and we'll
go to Senator Steinborn whenever
colleagues I move that senator
Morrell thirty A. B. put on
final passage of the debate
amendment substitution.
no objection.
Grande do a feasibility study to
consider making it a state park
and this is required in state
law in order to create a park
they must do a feasibility study
Thank you senator debate and
St more thirty eight anyone
wishing to debate.
I see no debate Senator
Steinborn close on the moral
except as voting in the negative
slide show hands.
Senator Stewart voting all
senators to your seats.
Senator just your seats please.
Five out of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is here on the data
center more thirty eight.
Has duly passed the Senate
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president when I go to Senate
majority whip Michael but they
currents Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate concur with
house amendments to Senate Bill.
Twenty six twice amended.
Mr president members so what the
amendments to Senate bill twenty
six this twice amended is
insert in lieu there if by and
that that's all it does it's a
technical error that was done on
drafting and I do concur.
With this.
Mr president with that I make a
motion that we we concur with
the house amendments to the
Senate bill twenty six this
Senator that would you wish to
have a voice vote on that.
President of voice voice before
thank you there's been a motion
to concur with house amendment
the house amendments to Senate
bill twenty six is twice amended
thank you centers on this thank
you Mr president thank you
members center by the I thank
you very much Mr president will
now go back to third reading and
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the action for
placing House Bill one ninety
one twice amended on final
passage has been taken and that
Mr president house bill one
eighty one twice amended as an
LFC endorsed bill it increases
the distribution from sixty
eight million two hundred and
more investment in early
childhood policies the annual
distribution is determined by a
three year average and the
amount this year is artificially
distribution these funds will be
allowed will allow us to
increase investment and child
care assistant tribal services
Senator debating house bill one
ninety one is twice amended.
You can see me so that's all
right with the sponsor the bill
you'll.
Senator the health Mr president
anti health.
Thank you Mr president center I
department had spends it however
they want.
Senator Hemphill so Mister
president what the fund what the
maintenance infant mental health
home visiting marketing campaign
family success lab early
childhood system coalitions
childhood and school based
health centers and CYFD safe
care unit and child care
funds will be spent Mr president
and senator Senator Brandt Mr
president center so is that
listed in the bill the ways
those funds are going to be
senator I
the information is in the fiscal
Thank you.
Representative the the F. I. R..
Mike say what the plan is.
But there's no legal nothing
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate to bring
and my expert witness Kelly.
Kind client.
from LFC.
question Mr president yes I
would like Senator Brandt to
restate the question in a rent
agency present center I was
asking if it's spelled out in
the bill how the money's going
thank you for the question yes
it is in the bill.
And Mister president and senator
Eighty two.
And page eighty four.
a while so but thank you for a
for that I just want to make
sure it's something that we're
telling how it's going to be
spent what that we're telling
ones can be spent on and we're
going into this department and
so my guess is and and maybe you
can confirm for me the L. LFC is
kind of keeping an eye on things
and looking at you know whether
and we're over six hundred
million today so and when I'm
talking to some of the child
care providers and some of the
facilities they don't have a
when we don't need to continue
that because we've actually
gotten there and I think we're
getting pretty close that point
this bill so thank you very much
I appreciate it we do have
appropriate and and appreciate
that I'll vote for the bill but
I I just M. I guess I just
continue to be a little bit
cautious about the the rapid
growth of the department and and
our public pre K. programs when
when we started that many many
years ago the public schools
actually had total authority
really careful as the department
begins to expanded to different
areas and I know they need to
work with CYFD they need to work
where different agencies need to
be responsible for their
particular area and we have to
be careful about too much
those that are in charge I think
we've we've got very
professional people that are are
doing that and and I know we're
really proud of what we've done
with early childhood but that on
sensitive that I think we did a
really good job many years ago
when I want to make sure that
our public schools still have
somewhat authority over the pre
K. programs that are cited in
those public schools thank you.
the return to the chamber.
Hearing no objection Senator
disciplina.
centers and then a Senator
perhaps your your expert witness
can do all those tallying up for
us but if we take into account
the federal block grant for day
care for child care.
block grant.
Of I'm not sure how many million
into childcare.
And now the recent addition of
five million from the opioid
Mr president and Center dared
Jareth or DC Pino thank you for
the question so the total is
three hundred and twenty three
million.
years ago on childcare.
Senator Graham wholesaler Mr
president and senator two years
million however we had federal
funds the arpa funds and Krista
funds and so will no longer be
Senator anticipate a okay so so
what we're doing basically is
replacing those federal funds
that was last.
Thank you that's that that was
my question thank you.
Thank you Mr president.
I am moves that house bill one
ninety one that's twice amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
Senator seats where voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Mr president center for the I
hope you'll permit me miss
consent issue senator Wirth
until he returns the chamber I
haven't asked for the vote yet
Senate center when Yasin
Centerville texting their vote
center among us thank you Mr
president this is kind of a
housekeeping bill and I don't
have any objection to the bill
that I want to remind the body
increase the of general fund
appropriation by something like
sixty percent or something this
year big number we're creating a
monster Mr president and we got
to make sure that we watch this
because we're gonna be looking
at nine ten billion dollars in
the relatively near future I'm
just caution in the body we've
got to watch what we're doing
here we're gonna have something
but this is one of those funds
that the good senator that I
replaced and Senate finance and
a good representative from the
house created.
happens when you take now money
and invest in the future or make
transfer for investing in our
future so as a member in the
body we talk about money for New
corner about the spending that
agency had a hundred fifty
million dollar increase or a
hundred percent increase I don't
know if that agency can handle
transfers for New Mexico's
future.
Could you imagine if if we had
put a billion dollars in this
account and hit the stock market
and had ten million dollars in
forward and investing the money
to make now money reoccurring
money thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Hemphill thank
you Mr president and thank you
president to I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
show all action for placing
House Bill two oh nine on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
oh nine is one way we can start
tackling the the health care
professional workforce shortage
in our state by investing in
young health professionals and
eligible for these loans so it
opens it up to OBGYN some
colleges and surgeons.
Second it increases the years of
commitment to receive an award
And finally the bill codifies it
AGD consult with the department
of health when determining which
actually are the underserved
rural areas.
our surrounding states and
increases the total amount award
amount and the number of doctors
who are eligible for the award
no stand for questions.
To close on the bill thank you
Mr president I move that house
bill two oh nine do now pass and
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show the rules
house bill two or nine has duly
passed the Senate Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate I just
have to commend all the senators
who did a good job coming and
One side of the counter.
That's number twenty seven house
bill one ninety nine as amended
all you'll to center Stuart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
amendment or substitution
hearing no objections Senator
Stewart to explain.
Thank you Mr president this bill
came out of both L. E. S. C. and
three things it increases are at
risk factor from point three two
point three three sport high
needs in schools all over our
fully and it increases the
principal responsibility factor
five point no I to reflect the
critical need for good school
administrators to deal with
before I close Mr president that
this is being sponsored in the
house by our great new
Representative Alcon Elia State
Senator is ready made in house
bill one and the line is
amended.
Saying no debate Senator to
close Mr president I move that
by show of hands and it is we're
voting tier seats.
We wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
By a vote of forty in the
Fuhrman is in the negative house
bill one ninety nine as amended
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all actions for
placing House Bill thirty one as
the one cemented on final
passage is be taken that and
of domestic and sexual violence
current law requires an outdated
practice of publishing a name
change in a local newspaper that
trying to escape violence of an
abusive family member are going
to be beneficial benefiting from
this bill what the bill does
Mister president is removed the
requirement to publish a name
change records for themselves
and their children under the age
of fourteen with that Mr
president I stand for questions
it is very debating house bill
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate but the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
I to thirty five in the
affirmative.
I am the negative house bill one
house bill thirty one as amended
that are aged fifteen sixteen
and seventeen.
This bill drives a wedge between
parents and their children and I
Senator huh.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body.
Thank you all you'll to Senate
majority whip Mike about the
editing is the next order of
business thank you very much Mr
inadvertently mentioned earlier
we are having an evening session
starting at seven thirty PM here
in the chamber thank you Mr
president that I'll take is now
too that order business messages
representatives I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three eighty eight and
request the concurrence of the
that the house has passed Senate
bill ninety four as amended by
the Senate and further amended
by the house Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as amended by
submitted Lisa Marty's McCutchen
chief clerk journal show the
message from the house has been
received the reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the
dually enrolled in a gross
with respectfully submitted Lisa
and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk that'll show the message
from the house has been received
the reader to read Mr president
I'm directed to inform the
bill two oh six Senate bill two
twenty four Senate bill one
await as amended by the Senate.
Senate bill three thirty five
with emergency clause Senate
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
and also the message from the
house has been received reader
to read this present I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the duly enrolled in a
signatures of the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Senator Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
Turtle shell the message from
the house has been received.
Senate majority whip my
committee to take us to the next
order of business I thank you Mr
president units consent that we
go to that next order of
business committee reports in
that order of business committee
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman of addicts Mr
president I ask unanimous
seeing no objection the reader
to read House agricultural
sectors in water resources
committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty five do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
As opposed name the eyes have it
the committee for is been
adopted the journal reflect
their acted upon individually.
Senate majority whip.
The reader to read.
communities communities in
Northern Taos County and
supporting the development of an
action plan enabling the
divestment of important request
of mine water rights for the
Senate conservation committee
that Center memorial sixty nine.
House Bill three eighty one
introduced by Representative
Trujillo and others an act
Advisory Council to receive per
diem and mileage for their
services making an appropriation
house bill three eighty one
House Bill three eighty one
having been read twice by title
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty one and Act
related children requiring the
children youth and families
department to obtain
identification cards for
for house bill two thirty one.
House taxation revenue Committee
substitute for house bill two
thirty one having been read
House government elections and
and in Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill three
eighty eight an act relating to
cybersecurity creating the cyber
House government elections and
in Affairs Committee substitute
for House Bill three eighty
eight having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
finance committee that's house
president I'll take as of that
next next order of business
announcements miscellaneous and
that order business center
Michael Padilla.
Thank you Mr president is now
being eleven fifty nine AM I
objection it is so ordered Mr
president us Ms consent the
rules be suspended the record
show the journal's been read the
full approved subject to
revision and approval of the
We're on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president I do have a unanimous
consent request for an emergency
bill this is Senate bill five
twenty three which I was the
the bill will be senator Wirth
Senator Baca speaker Martinez
and Representative lane the
title of the proposed substitute
is related to the public peace
reporting requirements the
proposed committee substitutes
two oh two number is two two six
one four three point two and I'd
ask unanimous consent we make
Seeing no objection so ordered
senator Peter Wirth and Mr
president given the timing on
this bill It is being
immediately posted on the
website and I think Senator
senator Wirth any further
announcements.
Center Mike by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
units consists.
We'll take as they were in that
Senator Shendo than Senators
souls.
Thank you Mr president Senate
finance supply going for maybe
about twenty thirty minutes just
to people in my district and and
what happens is Navajo people
are being picked up by an
alcohol treatment center in
Phoenix.
other people and it's a horrible
thing that happens my wife
happened to capture them in the
department of motor vehicles we
sent the license plate in the
pictures of the people to the
this is is a very important bill
for people disappearing if
they're intoxicated if they're
they're in need rated have
mental health issues they're
go and it's just on a manageable
this day and age that that we
have to do this but but this is
very important to me and it's
very important to the people the
maybe too intoxicated it may not
able able to consent because
their talks can but I think this
is a very important issue in the
state and I know etcetera
etcetera the good center
nothing and then they're put in
a treatment facility in the
release maybe when they're sober
just a want to be there and then
they're released with no
connection to anybody and no
resources to give anybody it's
president thank you senator
Senator Shendo.
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty three and we're gonna
give folks is going to be posted
so what we took three thirty so
folks can have a chance to look
first happy pi day everybody
today is three point one four
that amazing.
The what.
never repeat there it is as a
constant in nature that is used
all through mathematics that
just has amazing properties with
that and so on March fourteenth
pi day where we celebrate this
amazing constant of nature that
is so ubiquitous in geometry and
math and in lots of other areas
people would not normally know
Thank you for indulging me of
Senate education will meet
tomorrow morning we will start
at nine o'clock I understand the
floor session maybe starting at
place three eleven at nine
o'clock in the morning please be
on time so we get through our
work thank you for your Center
souls I just I'm a little
disappointed Center for the last
three days we've had cake but on
pieces though pies typically are
round about take our square.
Just say no Senators souls that
whether it's pumpkin pie apple
pie or cherry pie or Frito pie
that last point their souls
Sir social center souls yield to
a question so Senator all the.
Yes Representative I will miss
presence there so you and I
agree.
Senator yes and as you all know
a practice architecture for
number here so when you're
trying to determine certain
properties of a circle the pie
area of a circle high times
radius squared.
let me ask the question again
professor Senator teacher the
area of a circle.
that districts so but but
there's a easy way to remember
what the formula is would you
agree Senator it isn't a popular
way to describe that instead of
the way you describe it in
squared because of course we
have a trouble with the idea
that pi R. square.
Mister president senator I
already use that joke that pie
the circumference of a circle is
using pi Center cells by times
the diameter.
Miss president of the answers
quick and I just want everyone
to recognize that this is the
intense debate was going to be
around hi Senator cels Mr
president and Senator Shendo
remind me sometime when I decide
to filibuster I'll just are
center how to mail.
Mr president I always say you
can't hide my Espanola valley
pride and tomorrow is as for the
holiday right here in the round
house dinner will be provided
for everyone in the Senate at
four thirty so be a boxed at
Senate can help me welcome
Hershey help to testify for one
my bills thank you Mr president.
is just annoying I can't believe
whoever did that needs to be
banished for at least an hour.
Thank you senator sure I fully
Wednesday and Fridays but given
the lateness of the session in
the work still ahead of us we're
gonna meet this afternoon I'm
going to call at three thirty
that gives our bit about forty
five minutes and we'll try to my
about three thirty to five
thirty and so members please
plan to be on time so we get to
work quickly and get out of the
three thirty five thirty for
Judiciary things thank you
will on Thursday morning at nine
AM and we had a delicious
breakfast burritos this morning
and we have another provider
coming in with breakfast
burritos on Thursday at nine AM
Padilla take is that next order
of business thank you Mr
president if centers about this
we deal just one more time.
Senator won the state of.
are that's multi tasking I'm
asking the question is you're
getting the answer there
Senators.
Three link you Mr president and
you just consent to just the
sergeant arms just leave
