Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
are going to read in the message
from the house on house bill one
and introduce house bill one and
that will be the extent of our
very short afternoon session
we go about our business
messages from the house just
seeing no objection were on
messages from house the reader
will read.
Message from the house of
emergency clause and requests
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous that we go that our
House bill one will be referred
Right here has introduced by
Representative Chasey.
branch of government making
appropriations for the expense
of the fifty six legislature
first session twenty twenty
three and four other legislative
office the Senate chief clerks
office and other expenses of the
legislature declaring an
emergency house bill one.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection were on
Senate financial going tomorrow
morning at nine o'clock we'll do
the feed bill and and we got
some capitol hearings and then
we're coming to the floor it.
Ten thirty in the and then we'll
have the female on the floor and
I do over but everybody of me
happy to get over the weekend
and and Senate finance will not
meet tomorrow at one thirty we
cancel that afternoon revenue
Senator Wirth thank you madam
presidents ask unanimous consent
the Senate Senate recess until
ten thirty tomorrow morning
seeing no objection the Senate
