Senate Bill five and then go to
S. J. R nine and then SGR one.
Um And so, Senator Worth
Go ahead and take it away.
Thank you, Madam Chair and just
to be clear 20 minutes for the
presentation, and then I'll
yield whatever time is left
Anyone in the audience testify
and support if that's okay,
Thank you. Yes. I appreciate you
bringing that up, Senator worth
so? Yes, we're following the
Senate Rules Procedures website.
So you have 20 minutes to use as
you like with
Public comment and support. We
do have folks who signed up for
organized opposition, so it's
four people so they will have 15
minutes total that they can
split up between themselves.
However, they like
And we will get to that after
your your initial presentation.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members. Good morning. We're
here to present Senate Bill
five, which prohibits firearms
in polling places with me this
morning is Lindsey Bachmann,
director of legislative and
executive affairs with the
secretary of state.
Reps. Opinsky is the co primary
sponsor of this, She is
presenting a bill or working on
a bill in the House Health
Committee. So one Senate Bill
five is intended to ensure
The safety and fairness of
elections for New Mexico
citizens who are exercising
their fundamental right to vote.
It works towards eliminating
threats of fear and
intimidation, well voting and
levels. The playing field. Uh,
currently if a polling places in
a school in New Mexico firearms
are banned, this bill would
extend that to other locations
outside of a school.
I thought it would be
appropriate to quote from the
Department of Public Safety's,
uh, analysis of this bill, quote
with more guns and more
political polarization and
violence. States need strong
laws to limit the risk and
intimidation that firearms pose
for voters.
And GPS went on to say they
believe this bill will ensure a
safe environment for all
citizens to carry out their
constitutionally protected right
to vote.
Uh, I know we're gonna have a
lot of discussion about the
Constitution and election bills.
I do want to say up front that
Senate Bill five clearly falls
within the U. S. Supreme Court's
sensitive places definition
recently reiterated by Justice
Thomas in the Bruin decision.
And I'll just read two sentences
from that decision quote,
Although the historical record
yields relatively few 18th and
19th century quote unquote
sensitive places where weapons
were altogether prohibited
examples being legislative
assemblies. Polling places in
courthouses were also aware of
no disputes regarding the
lawfulness of such prohibitions.
He goes on to state. We
therefore can assume it is
settled that these locations
were sensitive places where arms
carrying could be prohibited,
consistent with the Second
Amendment, so I think it's
important to kind of set aside
that argument that I'm sure will
come. Perhaps on this bill. It
will certainly on other bills.
Um
This bill is a
Bill that continues on the work
done last session with Senate
Bill 44.
But it's a better bill. And I'm
sorry, Senator
So again. This is a balance here
and again. There's I let me just
say, Take off my hat on this
bill. It's also we've got to be
able to have a conversation in
the rooms, and these microphones
are frustrating to all of us,
Because by screaming in the
room, it makes it really hard
for all of us in the room to do
this, and yet, so, so just so,
folks understand the balance
we're trying to do here. I will
try and speak.
Uh, closer to the mic without
screaming into it. Uh, basically
Senate Bill 44 Last session
passed the Senate, Uh, 28 to 9
with bipartisan support in the
Senate. It just ran out of time
on the house floor.
Uh, this bill was presented to
the Courts Corrections Committee
and the 0.1 version. We're
presenting 0.2 today. The 0.1
version, um, was endorsed by the
Courts Corrections Committee and
the governor has given this bill
a message that the reason we're
here with a 0.2 version is to
address
Uh, issues which I think were
very legitimate. Brought up. Um,
with how you deal with the
situation when you have polling
places that are not in schools
that are on private property in
a mall, For example, in Eldorado
voters vote at the Eldorado
Mall, and there are businesses
located right next door.
And so on Page two.
Of this bill. There's a very
important section line 11 and
I'll just read it. A person
conducting lawful non election
related business nearer than 100
ft from the door through which
voters may enter to vote or
nearer than 50 ft from a postal
collection box or monitored
secured container is not guilty
of unlawful possession of a
firearm. So basically if someone
is walking past the door
To go next door to the post
office. Um, they can do that,
Under this exception. We just
don't create 100 ft zone around
every private property. The
hypothetical was also presented
about a polling place next door
to a gun shop.
Perfect example. I think this
addresses that so that's an
important exception. That's
here.
Uh, Madam chair as we head into
another.
Turbulent election cycle. I
think having consistency when it
comes to banning guns and
polling places is important.
This bill came to me.
From constituents working as
poll workers here in Santa Fe,
who
Several of whom stopped working
as poll workers based on guns
being in polling places, so
certainly happy to answer
questions, and I would yield to
miss Bachmann for any comments
from the secretary.
Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee. I'll
just reiterate kind of where the
senator landed and that we feel
this helps create a bright line
for, um, and to ensure uniform
compliance with physical
physical security require
Thank you and Senator worth. You
still have one in the audience
that you want to go to for your
organized support. So, Madam
chair, I'd be happy to yield
whoever's here. I see some folks
raising their hands. They're
welcome to use up the rest of my
time. I think it's good to hear
from
Folks in the eyes.
But yeah, come on up to the
mikes are able to hear you.
Chair.
Thank you, And I think there's
three pieces right that there's
three people in the audience.
who you are you each have about
about four minutes, or for about
three or three minutes each.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
members of the committee. I'm
MEREDITH Matron from the legal
women voters of New Mexico and
this is a very, very important
bill to us. We, of course, are
trying to get people to work in
the polls.
But we want to also talk about
how voters feel intimidated.
It's chilling when you know that
guns could be there. Um, we need
turn out to be representative of
the people. And anytime you have
any kind of, um, suppression of
the vote.
Did, uh, does not reflect well
on democracy. I wanted to
introduce also Olivia Tanner.
who is, um uh, student at Santa
Fe Preparatory School, and she'd
like to say a few words to
Oh, hi, I'm
Okay. Okay. Um, Hi. I'm Olivia
Tanner. And I also support this
bill on behalf of the women's
legal voted
Good morning, Madam Chair. Oh,
this is a weird my name is Ellen
beaten first on behalf of new
Mexicans against violence, gun
violence, and we strongly
support this bill as being
important and also personally as
someone who's been a poll worker
for many years, Um, one of the
most chilling parts of my
training as a poll worker was
when I had to watch that film
run.
Run, Hide! Hide! Run fight!
It was a chilling experience,
And, um this bill, although, of
course someone crazy can do
anything, but it will send an
extremely strong message to poll
workers and voters at polling
places are sacred place that, um
people can practice their
democracy and I encourage you
strongly to perhaps this
morning.
Good morning. Good morning. I'm
Deputy Chief Dale Wagner. Thank
you, Deputy Treff.
All right, And so is that the
end of year presentation,
Senator Warren
Okay, so we have organized
before we get organized
opposition. Is there anyone in
the audience?
Uh, so we have already people
here in person and to via zoom,
I'm gonna leave it to you all to
divide up the 15 minutes. How
you like?
Okay. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Committee members. Good morning,
Tara Mitchell with the National
Rifle Association. We
respectfully opposed Senate Bill
five. We do appreciate some of
the changes that the other has
made since the 0.1 version, but
we still have concerns with the
0.2 version.
Generally we opposed the
creation of any new gun free
zones, which criminals will
ignore and law abiding citizens
will only be disarmed by in the
case of Senate Bill five that
includes concealed handgun
licenses, who have been approved
by the state.
By the state to, uh carry
currently in and around poll
locations.
Specifically with the language
in Senate Bill five. The wording
in subsections 12 and three on
Page two seems to be confusing.
It's unclear if the prohibition
applies all the time locations
that are used as polling places.
Even when voting is not going
on, so I hope you'll take a
close. Look at that. Wording. Um
I don't believe that's the
intent of the author. But the
language to us is unclear. Also,
the lawful business exception.
Language in the bill is curious.
Um, that term is not defined and
raises the question of whether
that exception only applies to
Commercial activities again the
exceptions for lawful business
activities.
Um there's no notice or signage
requirement to notify people
that they're entering into one
of these newly created gun free
zones. I think we can all
recognize what a polling place
looks like, but postal
collection boxes and ballot drop
boxes are a little little less
noticeable to gun carriers.
Um, as far as the brewing
decision that the author
mentioned this bill is
inconsistent with that, as it
sweeps in not only the actual
building where polling an
election nearing and and voting
is going on, but also other
places that fall within 100 ft
radius.
Of a polling location. This
would include streets, highways,
parking lots, private residences
and private businesses, none of
which are actual polling places
for perspective that 100 Ft zone
is greater than any standard
basketball court.
Um, thank you. Those are the
points I have to make on Sanibel
five and I'll yield the rest of
my time to the other organized
opposers.
Thank you very much. Next. We
have Bill
Myerson. I apologize about Mr
President. You all have about 12
minutes left just
Uh, good morning, madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Dr William Fire. Eisen,
one of Senator I'm here,
representing only myself.
I stand to oppose this bill. I'm
one of the 45. I vote in every
election and C note carrying my
firearm concealed into a polling
place.
I understand the issue of
intimidation, but I'm not a
threat.
Nor are my 45,000 colleagues.
I asked you to vote do not very
much Next. We have on zoom Zack
Ford 11 minutes left.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to present to you
today. My name is Zak Fort and
the legislative affairs officer
from New Mexico Shooting Sports
Association. Collectively, we
represent thousands of gun
owners. Gun ranges firearm
industry members across the
state of New Mexico, where you
stand in opposition to Senate
Bill five.
I would like to remind everyone
that is already a crime to
brandish firearms or threaten
someone with a firearm. If so,
if someone is engaging in
behavior, such as that it is
already a crime to do so, and
they can be arrested for it
under the brewing decision that
from the United States Supreme
Court, the court found that we
broadly have a right to carry a
firearm. The limited exception
is what is known as a quote
unquote sensitive place, which
the author of the bill had
mentioned earlier, however, the
question of what is a sensitive
places one that's being actively
litigated right now, including
here.
In New Mexico.
Um, And what's the one thing? I
do want to point out just
because something was a
sensitive place in the past
doesn't mean I mean it may
necessarily be a sensitive place
going forward. We just saw a
federal judge strike down the
prohibition on caring a firearm
and post offices based on the
Bruin decision so that consider
that decision is obviously being
contested right now, But it goes
to show that even longstanding
prohibitions on where you may
not carry a firearm are being
struck down and being challenged
under the brewing decision. I
would
Strongly agree with the author
of the bill. That voting is a
very important right that we
have as as Americans and we need
to protect that right. But it
also say that in the words of
Justice Thomas in the broom
decision, the Second Amendment
is not a second class, right.
These there are right to carry a
firearm and our right to vote
are not inconsistent with one
another. And I would also say
that this bill could be seen as
an attempt to disenfranchise
people who wish to carry who
wish to carry firearms while
they exercise their right to
vote as both of them are
constitutionally protected
Rights. Thank you for your time.
Thank you Next, and last. We
have Nate Esky, who's also on
Zoom, Mr Lasky, you have nine
minutes.
Thank you and good morning,
madam Chair, members of the
committee and Niedowski here on
behalf of over 1700. Members of
Zero Rifle and Pistol Club in
the Albuquerque area.
We also appreciate the changes
made to minimize the impact on
the non voting life of law
abiding persons over the bill
still has three major issues.
The first is the bill is about
intimidation is duplicative with
existing law.
And M s a 1-20 dash 14 already
deals with any intimidation of
anyone involved in the voting
process, let alone armed
intimidation. Second, proving an
offense under this bill should
require active intent to violate
the law and the public Defender
department specifically
addresses this in the IR, noting
that quote there should be
advertisement and education of
the bill, if enacted to prevent
innocence from inadvertently
becoming criminals.
By continuing behavior They've
legally done all their lives.
Finally and most importantly,
this bill will make our polling
places more vulnerable to mass
shooters all share some data and
supported this conclusion before
moving to Albuquerque. I worked
professionally and active
shooter prevention response.
All the phrase stop. The killing
stopped. The dying entered
public consciousness. Relatively
recently. It's been best
practice in that professional
space for years.
Over 95% of mass shootings occur
in areas where firearms are
prohibited. The average mass
shooter kills or injures one
person every 10 seconds until
they run out of victims are
stopped or choose to de
escalate.
54% of the time when confronted
by police, a mass shooter will
surrender or commit suicide
immediately. That number is over
90% when they're confronted by
an armed citizen interviews with
mass shooters or attempted mass
shooters have consistently
revealed that they chose areas
where firearms are prohibited
specifically because they felt
they would have free reign to
murder during that police
response cycle.
When they were confronted by an
intended victim turned out to be
armed. It was a shock that
caused them to deescalate more
rapidly.
When the mass shooter stops due
to police intervention, the
average time involved is over
eight minutes when they stopped
because of an armed citizen that
averages under to simply because
they're usually there at the
start of things, an anecdote in
support of this data and the
shooter and a Buffalo New York
grocery store a few years ago,
chose that location because he
knew his victims would be
unarmed, he says as much in his
manifesto where he details his
targeting process specifically.
He stopped killing because he
ran out of victims and then
waited for police to arrive so
he could surrender over 10
minutes later.
DOJ report on the You've all the
shooting response released
recently, reemphasizes the need
for soonest possible
confrontation with force of an
active shooter as such, either
expert extreme caution in any
expansion of areas where the law
abiding public is disarmed as
evil or deranged. Would be mass
murderers. Take that into
account when planning their
horrific crimes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right. We will go. And does
anyone in the audience want to
raise their hand to indicate
opposition?
We will go to thank you. Senator
were thank you Questions or
Senator worth about some of
where you want to ban firearms,
specifically.
The question I had dealt with
painter
Where is documents? What a
definition of that defined
anywhere in statute elsewhere.
Madam chair. Let me yield to
Miss Bachmann, Madam chair
members of the committee. I'm
not aware of it. What about the
secured monitored secured
container?
Madam chair. Members of the
And managers. Senator, I assume
that you're talking about the
Madam chair. Members of the
committee. Um, monitors is to
represent, um place so the
colloquial terms
However, we don't this statute
me when how defining that before
you get and and and I apologize
for interrupting, Senator Morris
Folks online are having trouble
hearing you. So what else to do?
I know you haven't You haven't
quite close
so
This year too loud or too soft
progress here who changed? Which
who's idea was this etcetera? Um
So I think we're gonna have to
take a choice of that issue, but
I definitely have a concern
about collection boxes.
To me that since it's not
defined, that can be anything
from the boxes we have in our
offices so you wouldn't be able
to go up and down so ma'am share
and center Moore's I absolutely
think we can work on this
language again. What we've you
know, this is this is broader
than last year's version of this
bill with this issue, but we
need to get it right. I
completely agree and and the
Citation to you know, the
monitors secure containers is
something and I do. This is this
bill is going to judiciary and I
assure you, you know, I want to
make sure when we show up in
judiciary, things like this is
why we're here is to get flagged
and will will work on that. I
don't trust those guys that
judiciary
So, Madam chair, I think at this
point because we don't have a
definition for postal collection
box in the election code. Uh,
I'm not gonna pose that
amendment here in this
committee, I do think continued
to
Look at and basically well when
we come to judiciary, to the
extent that we can tweak this
language again to get it exactly
right, so that it's not
The ambiguity that you're
highlighting will look at that.
But again at this point, because
there's not a definition of that
in the election code, I'm okay
with that amendment on that
point,
Clauses.
Make sure Committee Secretary We
have a new committee secretary.
This is the first time she's
doing amendments in
In committees.
Alright. Ah, Is there discussion
on the motion?
Second, missing the work from
So if we take out
April postal collection box or
is that the amendment? So then
it reads 50 ft of a monitor and
Senator Stewart If you look at
the bottom of page one is
talking about it within
Further discussion on the
amendment.
And senator GDP. No, You
seconded. Just so, folks. No, I
don't require second for
emotions when I'm sharing, um,
but as there any, uh, rules,
right? Right. Exactly. I thought
you'd ask her.
No, no. I asked for any
discussion discussion. Yeah,
Sorry. Um, Is there any
objection to adopting that
amendment? Yes, Senator Stewart.
No, I prefer to have this prefer
doing it before And since I
think when we have opposition,
it's good to do roll call votes
things, so go ahead and do a
roll call vote on the amount.
Yes.
Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Morris? Yes, Senator
Morris Supposed yes.
Senator neighbor.
Senator. Neighbor votes? Yes.
Senator or cheesy Pinot? Yes or
TCP? No votes. Yes, I used
Senators. Stefan Stefan, expose.
Yes, Senator Stewart Rhodes
know Senator Senator Harm Eo
Romeo votes? No, Senator do hig.
No, Senator, Do you hate votes?
No Vote of six. Yes. Three. No,
That Senator Morris you saw
Thank you, Madam. Chair and
Senator work before we get to
the
Center were thinking.
Thank you, Senator Nibert.
Share, Um, share and Senator
As I read this bill, I
Becomes law.
By the mirror.
Possession your intention with
respect with this bill.
So, Madam Sharon Center, Nyberg.
Currently if you bring a gun
into a pulling part
You basically are violating
Uh, an existing ban that we've
had in place and what this does.
it does established.
A band out in polling places,
and I think that it's trying to
Make sure that the same rules
apply.
In a school that apply.
To these other locations where
we currently do vote outside of
school, so
You're correct. I mean, this
would mean that
You could not bring a gun into a
polling place.
Even if you had a concealed
carry permit, and we spent a lot
of time last session permit
issue, but it's prohibition that
already exists with guns in
schools with guns in
courthouses. Another think you
know, I appreciate, uh
That's me. Because discussion
about brewing and the scope of
Bruin but clearly pull pull.
Polling places are within
The common places.
Um
Historically, I think the
question will discuss and
certainly raised the breath of
that.
And I appreciate you know the
argument that this is going
100 FT.
Out, and whether that's in that
we're doing here is consistent
with what we already
Madam Chair Center, Nyberg. My
understanding is because we we
prohibit guns in schools and so
again, this is extending it to
make it very clear that when
Constituents here in Santa Fe
are voting in the Santa Fe.
County building.
Ah, that same band would apply.
I guess I'm having this same
issue. Um
With volume with respect to, uh
Guns in schools.
Is that law?
Have any exceptions with respect
to other regular statues.
So mount chair and I don't have
that off the top of my head. I
would note something important
about this bill that I didn't
mention is that there is a
certified option here where the
officer is in their official
duties or there Well,
If I recall correctly, there may
be some other. Uh if there are
those exceptions, you may say
that it falls under the B,
potentially brought before the
court as to whether or not
The the learned that I have one
concern that I have set back is
there are many Pope my county.
um, probably somewhat rural in
nature parking lot is within 100
ft of the door.
Your Honor Highway yet.
They're going to the polling
place to vote. So, babe.
And and real.
And they go to vote.
And they parked their car and
they are in violation of this
bill becomes law and I'm
concerned parking lot. There's
not going to be a player.
And and so when I know we have
the intimidations
But I was trying to think what
is
Concerns.
The polling place. We don't want
to scare
Any voter.
Away from a polling place.
We don't want to really trying
to accomplish. Just be with
respect to that until Madam
Sharon's our neighborhood. I
think you've hit the nail on the
head.
Guns and elections just dome in
the point here is to
Again create the same rules.
Across the board.
Our four year schools and other
polling places and there are
hypotheticals and I certainly
respect that We have put in
here. Action related exception,
I think, after hearing some of
the purpose of this is to
As you say. So What's Madam
Sharon? Senator? Let's focus on
Out of the polling.
But let's not go further than
what I think you're desiring
these issues.
And we go beyond this. So madam
Chair and senator number 100. Ft
is a is consistent with the
election codes. Prohibition on
election nearing in front of a
polling place, it would seem
somewhat
Ironic if we ban someone from
standby, Bert in front of a
pulling a demonstration with
open rifles right outside the
door of a polling place. I think
this was done to make that
consistent. And I would note
with respect to
You know, the 100 ft issue fits
into that.
Existing prohibition, and I
think I will tell you I have
some folks say why? Why don't
only 100 Ft. Why not? 500 Ft and
again, we used 100 ft to be
consistent.
Well, I understand the 100 ft.
Again, it gets back to the
intimidation factor.
I would think that if, uh
A demonstration were occurring
with fire on the Dacian.
At that pretend that's already
prohibited.
Just in many places.
Virtually anywhere ability to
Givens in their pickup trucks,
Livestock.
Yeah. And, uh, look at that 100
County clerk and find another
place or I think people
Like to go to their volunteer
fire department and and so I
have a
I had a whole lot of
On page. Let's look at
Paragraphs or
Lines and this gets to the issue
of
I suppose, conducting election
if they're just walking by a
person driving their feet away
from it.
Technically committed.
The technically guilty of the
because they're going to the
place.
Yeah, and so and
What about the person who has a
Home or a business that may be
in, uh, Roz across from that
polling place. What do we do
with respect to
Goes.
Buy some ammunition polling
place there within the the gun
into the polling place doesn't
Doesn't seem to me that those
are the people that
It. Talks about news, Madam
Chair and Senator
What about
Activities that one main gauge
in
Uh, while they're possessing a
Weapons are are those folks
guilty Chair, Senator Robert No,
I think that the term business
here quote unquote, a business
going through walking past If
you're walking you
You're walking past on your
average job, so you're not
actually going to another
network creating here?
So, so, basically, it could be
business personal activities.
That's certainly the intent. We
don't We don't want to have an
exception there. So you're we
might want to look at at work
business jumped off and look at
that because I think I looking
down on
So we don't firearm.
In the polling place.
But you've also included some
other things that the floor or
firearm silencer.
Madam Chair and Senator, Would
you agree with me that these two
items in and of anything
They come. So amount share. You
know, I'm not gonna give you a
yes or no issue of
Firearm, muffler, firearms
science or my understanding was
this was an existing
Doesn't go too far. But my
understanding was that this was
well, um, Madame Cheron
subscribe These things. Uh, we
oftentimes lump a lot of other
worried about the threat.
Other things.
Madam Chair and Senator.
I know that with respect to
Issues concerning Bill of Rights
that courts very concerned about
what we express and bills and we
have citizens, constitutional
rights and
Our Constitution. Uh,
Acknowledges that we have an
inherent rights.
It's not a right granted from
government inherent right.
Of protecting ourselves.
And so question. Am I
How does
How does one precarious firearm
for tuft any bill that we
consider
The right to protect oneself and
I guess. Are you satisfied that
that
There are sufficient
Provision trying to
Limit. So, madam chair. This is
a
Good question, and I think it's
the intersection of the 1st and
2nd Amendment rights that we
have.
And finding that balance and I
think
Attempting to do kind of
Draw that line between
The important rights that you
recommend the right to protect
someone Selves but also the
fundamental in our democratic
process that exists in our first
Amendment, right? And so you and
I may disagree on the weight
that we give to those, and I
think you're pointing out the
You know the 100 ft participate.
In our democratic and elevated
To the same extent as the right
To carry a weapon, and it's
finding that balance in that
zone and carving out as we've
done in this
In this bill, which we didn't do
last year and
Some of your former colleagues
on the other side about some of
the hypotheticals which I think
are valid, and I do think you
know we can get it right to find
that that balance but
acknowledging with fundamental
rights here and
Voting is a fundamental part of
on
You know who worked as a poll
worker, and this bill came to me
from constituents, so it's not
an agenda driven.
And I and I and I just point
that out because I do you know,
it's important that we all kind
of
Carry carry through on attempts
to addressing the
Fact that we already have
figured out how to deal with
No guns in schools, No guns in
the school parking lots. That's
school property as well. And
Those
That type of existing
prohibition carried over to an
across the board. Prohibition, I
think makes a lot of sense for
everyone to understand.
So you don't get a situation to
a polling place in the mall?
And
Then.
Next year goes to the polling
places in a school and there's
two different sets of rules. I'm
trying to Madam chair and
Senator, Uh
Frame court cases. Uh
I guess highlights.
And and how
Sensitive We as public policy
makers have
Heard.
The intent.
Except back. And then it was,
uh, guns are prohibited for very
important courthouses. Every
courthouse in this state
sheriff's deputies station at
the courthouse.
So you haven't We're which which
may be different permit to be
like that.
Carries forth your enter
Really works and
Very
Right, acting not only
themselves, but their property
because they
I I hear what you're saying.
I'd certainly look at that issue
and then, uh,
Our arm pose any threat to
anyone, or thank you, Senator,
Senator McConnell closer. Okay,
How about this?
Okay. Thank you. Thank you,
madam. Sure. Uh, thank you,
Senator. Am a long time. One of
the big reasons why I became a
Mitch.
Is because
One of our big tenants is
Preparing educating voters and
to vote.
And so the earlier from the
audience member
About supporting
And encouraging our fellow
citizens who are eligible to
vote to do so are voting
participation is fair to poor.
In most elections.
Um, And if anything,
We need to ensure that a polling
place welcomes
Eligible voters.
A firearm certainly does now
those that oppose of what I just
said.
Might say, Oh,
Those that feel intimidated.
Maybe they should just use an
absentee ballot. A no.
Voters have the right to vote in
person carrying a firearm is
intimidating.
It intimidates me.
I had gone to
Express my first
And those who have proposed me
or brandishing weapons.
They're brandishing a weapon is
meant to
I find the 100 ft setback to be
consistent for all of us to
remember.
I'm a strong supporter of this
bill. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Baca. All of us. Thank
you, Madam chair. So, um, uh,
you know, in reading this bill
Um
I guess what? What? I would ask
the sponsor. What is your main
point in this bill? What are
what are you trying to achieve
with this bill? What do you
What? What problem That youth
you believe exist. So, Madam,
share it center Baca level
playing field the same set of
war polling places in schools.
That
Currently ban guns.
And polling places in malls,
other places.
And so I think.
Nine. Heard it is a band this
here in the capital, and we had
a lot of discussion about that.
Articulated.
Polling places are one of those
Kind of fundamental exercises.
Right? And this is the balance
that exists and I fully respect
you know, we differ on where
that balance ends up.
But I think the idea here is to
create a zone similar to the
zone spokes from
Campaigning within 100 Ft. Also
just great the similar guns, so
it's it's a prohibition.
So, Madam Chair and Senator,
would I hear you saying when you
initially started answering my
head, uh, to create with among
polling places. So is this a
geographic
Um, goal that we're trying to
achieve with this bill, Or are
we trying to because I heard
that towards as as you answered
the question, you kind of went
that way with it.
So. So what? Which is it? Film
ensure I think it's I think it's
both
I think basically it doesn't
rules and a different set of
roof. This bill came to me
specifically from constituents
working and polling places not
located in schools.
Expressing concern place.
So it does create a uniform
rule.
And it takes the rest of the
polling places and elephant
already exists for pulling. So
madam chair and senator then if
if that protection exists
between other polling places and
the polling places in schools
Doesn't it stand to reason that
these same constituents
And people without certain
belief would extend that
prohibition to every single
place.
Because really, they're they're
supposing that it adds
protection.
Um, yeah, we're talking about
wing.
Um to another geographic place
in a mall. Um, for the purpose,
So with that looks like to me is
this is just a general
expansion. It's a general
expansion on gun free zones with
the ultimate goal in making the
entire country a gun free zone.
I I don't know where that
Bright line would stop with that
sort of reason. And it would be
my thought that you could make
this expansive law into every
place. Madam Chair and Senator
Baca. I think we are working
within some very narrow post
Bruin U. S. Supreme Court
guardrails.
About where we can regulate, but
the brewing decision
Justice Thomas citing hell are
clearly
What's polling places?
Courthouses. Legislative
assemblies can regulate and so I
don't think again and I'm not
suggesting beyond this very
narrow focus.
On polling places, which I think
clearly is an area we can
regulate, and it's an area where
we should have the discussion
We're having about the scope of
that regulation. And I just
think the bill that I've
presented here today.
As
In my opinion improved based on
during the process last year,
and in the interim, of course,
corrections. I'm not sure tions
where we endorse bills. Some of
the hypotheticals that so we
have created
The language of paragraph line
11.
The deal with business.
To address some of those
concerns, which I think are
valid, and I think we're not
trying to
What people in? It's just that
if if you are going to vote
I think that the same rules
should apply them all.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator night. I hear what
you're saying, and we're
covering the geographic portion
and
Essentially
This. This bill that we're
presenting here, though, has
been done this 100 ft Zone I can
think of many, many areas where
I live and
Without being within 100 Ft. You
know, in response to, um
It increasing voter
participation I could think of
Scenarios where this would
actually suppress.
ADA requires walk distances, and
you're that sort of thing for
their own safety and
accessibility.
And making these 100 ft zones
around there to use
There.
To get into a place to vote.
That that to me would would
show. Uh, suppression of voter
activity, not
Increased. Uh, I guess, uh,
motivation for some roadblock in
their way. And so that
You know the the other concerns
I for one, and I think there are
They're astounding to show when
a crime has been averted by
someone who was carrying. Hence
our police force. We arm them
for just such such a horse mint.
And they served with preparing
crime simply by their presence
That that to me is is very
important. So
The geographic
Article E. Um the AP article
came out reporting about the
district judge. Uh, in, uh
In the district court that ruled
against the governor just
recently.
Um, in there, it says that this
judge concluded that the
governor has not demonstrated a
historical tradition of banning
firearms in public parks or
similar areas in the past. In
response to a lawsuit by
Torrance County resident
And so
This seems like a very similar
order because we're expanding.
and it seems to me that
geographically, um, that expanse
You could even get you could
even reason to, uh, I'll say
Assertive county clerk could
I mean, make polling places all
over the county.
And you have these spots,
especially with how expelled
that exist.
Halfway throughout the year in
different places all throughout
a county. Um and so, so those
are some of my concerns I have
with this. Um, we're we're not
just in a polling place. Um it
expands to areas surrounding the
polling place. It detracts from
some people that might otherwise
vote and maybe even make they
have
Firearm in their cars. So so
those are some of my and and ask
you what sort of behavior are
you just touched on it. When on
my initial question, What sort
of behavior Bill?
So again. I think this goes to
the
Balance of Amendment right to
expression right
to bear arms and
Um
Where those rights intersect.
There are places court has said
a ban is appropriate.
I miss courthouses.
This building is a place agree
to disagree on on how we've done
it. But the reality guns
shouldn't be part of this
problem. I do think that this is
a similar
Constitutionally protected area.
Which are polling places.
And it's a policy decision and I
respect that. And I very much
respect about how we find that
That balance and whether 100 ft
goes too far. Perhaps you're
correct someone
Good challenge that for sure.
Um, I think though the 100 Ft is
consistent with
What already exists.
With all the school polling
places in your district.
You can't drive into the parking
lot.
You know, with a gun?
And the school in your district
and what's the remedy? And
again, I realized
Um, I just think that's already
the existing chair and and
senator, and I do appreciate the
discussion we're having. Um,
however, and I and this comes up
more through different topics,
But that situation to me, Madam
Chair and senator is quite
different in Santa Fe and the
and the Metro area versus Catron
County.
We're Socorro County where
people are traveling.
Large distances to get to
polling stations at times.
And asking them to be disarmed
along their entire clearly
clearly violates their second
Amendment right and the next
topic I want to bring up you
describe an intersection and and
even a conflict, a balance if
you will, between elect and, um
what I would say to that
senator Madam Chairman, Senator
is that
I completely that I think those
two things, um in Section six,
right to bear arms, No law shall
a bridge and defense with lawful
hunting or other lawful
purposes, And that's a relevant
part of that. Um, a lawful
purpose is an election.
We have down in Section eight.
All of them and no power, your
civil or militarily.
Shot at any time interval of the
right of suffrage. So we're
already guaranteed that and so I
don't understand why
We would view that as a conflict
that needs to be resolved when
right here in our very own New
Mexico Constitution.
It appears that they did resolve
it in harmony with balance.
But what this seems to do is
going a step further.
Pushing and I would say it's not
just it's not just about the
election. Um I feel like you
know, the reasoning just doesn't
support this topic.
This same argument could be used
for
Virtually any using using off,
say the reasoning that in
courthouses and polling stations
and you know we can expand that
to to a lot of places. If we you
could act violent or
intimidating with a gun from a
great distance, So we win the
and I'm not going to go back
into the 100 FT.
Debate again, but one of the
other things that I that I saw
in here is that we have statutes
already in place. Um, you're
well aware of 1 2014, which is
the intimidation. Why? Why in
your believing intimidation that
that's what we've heard from one
of our fellow colleagues here,
um, that has been expressed as
squelch here. So so why? Why, in
your estimation, would 1 2014
not cap that you're talking
about?
So I think this proposal
basically would apply to all
guns.
Basically having a subjective
determination by a prosecutor as
to whether the conduct of us
specific you know this balance
here and I respect your
sighting.
The same arguments you're
making. Maybe this isn't a good
idea. It could be made for
courthouses as well. All those
same arguments you just cited.
We have realized our U. S.
Supreme Court has realized that
there are places
That are are different. This is
your correct. This is a sealed
carry gun would violate this
law. If we pass it, you've got
to, uh, statute there that
Does involve
Intent.
On intimidating
You know, this is one of those
situations we need both. Quite
frankly, You want to keep the
guns out and again if someone
comes in with a gun to
intimidate
Prosecutor could charge under
that.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
senator and you know several
times Now we've talked about
skiing at the Gun Free Zones Act
said. You just said it would
make it a crumb. But the gun
freeze licenses, But this goes
further than that. So you're
you're through this bill from
the language I read. At least
it's an expansion, not not just
an expansion geographically that
you're describing
But also an expansion based on
who can carry and the right for
them to carry.
Just due to that exemption. So
is there some reason that that
through this bill Senator Madam
Chairman, Senator that that you
depart and decided to
Put language in here that
actually experienced
individuals. So ma'am chair and
senator vodka.
There's no question amendments
and every committee last year
and on the floor to have a
concealed carry except go that
direction. That's a bill have
but this certainly would
Making an outright schools and
in other locations again. I
appreciate you pointing that
out, get guns out of polling
place.
That relations and, you know,
looking and just listening to
you. Um and and I appreciate
your explanation there, but it's
hard for me, I guess to cross
that bridge and and balance out.
It's strange to me to think that
someone can be intimidated.
If they're concealed, carry and
you can't even see the weapon.
So I don't move on to another
another topic in here that that,
um that really kind of troubled
me, And that was the exception
for police officers, and I'll be
honest with you really surprised
me to hear the state police are
supporting Bill because just due
to the exemption, I mean that
that's provided in here.
It says, uh, unlawful possession
of fire amount of polling place
consistent with possession of a
loaded or unloaded firearm by
any person.
Other than a certified law
enforcement officer in the
performance of the officers,
official duties and so I'll stop
there and I'll break out that
out into two things. So one it's
got to be a certified law
enforcement officer.
And second and performance of
the officers. Official duties.
For me as a citizen.
I don't care if they're they're
in uniform patrolling the
parking lot, or if they are
happened to be there voting
they're certified law
enforcement officer. They've
earned the right to bear that
arm and to be and and and we
entrust them daily, whether
they're wearing a uniform or
not, or driving a cop car
doesn't seem to make one bit.
Um, that they should be able to
carry it at any time. It makes
we've entrusted him with the
public Trust to enforce law to
provide protection for citizens
And yet at the same time we go.
Unless
You're not in your uniform, Not
in your car, not on duty at the
time, so that that would be, uh,
something that I would have
issue with. And and I don't know
if you would take this as a
friendly amendment or not, but,
um, I will offer it to you and
I'd love to hear some discussion
on it from others. But
I would move to strike on Page
one line 22, starting from the
word in through line toward
duties.
And that would just say if
you're certified law enforcement
officer you can carry whether
you're on duty or not, as long
as you're certified law
enforcement, um so I would just
offer that up. Is that friendly
or unfriendly, Madam chair? I'm
certainly willing to narrow for
a purpose, but I think I'm I'm
hearing what you're saying. And
I'm willing to
I'd like to visit with folks in
law enforcement and discuss that
issue is this bill assuming it
moves forward?
I'm willing to have that
discussion because I think that
the way we have it drafted now
Does limit
But it does duty and I think I'm
just format now, but willing,
certainly.
So we have a motion. Is there
discussion on the motion?
Senator Morris? Thank you, ma'am
Charity, And I think Senator
Bach. You bring up a good point.
I always want to point out
Can we just not have these
microphones? They're terrible. I
apologize for interrupting you
and making everyone deaf. Um, I
think there's some confusion
about what the motion is. So
okay, I believe and trust me if
I'm wrong, Senator Baka that
your motion is on Page one.
Line. 22 strike the word in at
the end of the line through line
23 the word duties. Is that your
motion?
Yes, that's correct. Intimidated
by the microphone.
These should be. Go ahead,
Senator Morris. Um, I think
that's important and I'll do
respect We heard from didn't
hear from the rank and file,
Please. We don't have the
sheriff's here. We don't have
any. It's not just a cops here
here. We got another discussion
on the proposal of rock called
Vote on
Yes. Lopez votes. No.
Senator McKenna. No. Senator
McKenna votes No, Senator
Moore's Senator Morris votes
Yeah.
Yes, Yes, Senator Nibert,
Senator Nyberg.
Votes. Yes, Senator or cheesy,
Pino know, Senator or TCP? No
votes? No, Senator. Senator.
Puerto votes. Yes, Senator
Stefan X votes. No, Senator
Stewart.
No. Senator Stewart votes. No,
Senator. How? How do I mean? You
know Senator Harry Meo votes? No
Senator. Do hick. No, Senator.
Do hig votes. No.
So where the voto seven to you.
So moving on here. Um, I I was
looking at, uh, if
We're doing an all all out band
here on on guns were targeting
lick on, but I wanted to point
out that there are other statues
directly. Um, address this
issue. Uh, this we could have
made we could have 11
alternative in exploring these
less restricted, he dash 16,
which is the election urine. We
could have even
Put something in there if we
weren't satisfied with our
intimidation statute, which in
my opinion, uh, already
addresses the issue of the
firearm and somebody being
intimidated In addition to that
we have our standard criminal
charge of assault. Um, the
assault statute and in our
state, at least is is pretty
clear.
Uh, as to what it addresses and,
um for the for the purposes of
public consumption. I'll tell
you what that says it. Assault
consists of either an attempt to
commit a battery upon a person
of another.
Any unlawful act threat or
menacing conduct, which causes
another person to reasonably
reasonably believed that he is
in the date or the use of
insulting language toward
another imputing, his honor,
delicacy reputation, and so I
would, I would just and that and
that that statute is the same
player.
And it seems to me that's even
broad and could be used as a
tool in prosecution of this
offense, so I would I would ask
you, Madam Chairman Senator Has
there been a battery or some
harm caused somebody by somebody
carrying a gun and I can't not
that I know of speaking for
myself.
Um I just for fairness, and I
appreciate the answer. Thank you
for your candidness. Um, uh,
just just to be fairly aware of
a threat.
That has been made to somebody
by somebody.
So again, Madam Chair and
Senator Baca. I think the
The definition of threat has a
specific statutory meaning. Uh,
I certainly as I stated, this
bill was brought to me by pull
workers who were certain dated
by having got gun. I can't give
you a specific me, um, whether
what they experienced rose
threat sufficient to be
chargeable.
And I use Madam chair and
senator the word threat because
that's what's used in the which
to me, is a little higher level
than insulting language, which
was the other a phrase and so so
you know, I would just point
out, Madam. With bills like
these. We I don't know of any
either, and I haven't heard of
Anybody who has been harmed it
needs remedy.
Because they have been, uh,
battered or injured in some way
by person with a firearm at a
polling station.
Um, I am not aware of anybody
that has been even threatened.
By a person with a firearm at a
polling station and therefore in
need of some remedy.
But what we're going to do here
Should this bill passed is we
are going to
Take the broad approach.
Uh of, uh, punishing and
criminalizing any new Mexican
who dares to vote.
That has a firearm and under
this bill has a firearm in their
car within 50 ft. Of a well I
guess we moved the mailbox. But
the month the monitored
monitored and and I didn't get
into that the monitor secure
container actually think the
dropbox at my law practice would
probably qualify for that, based
on the definition, so
Um, on a petty misdemeanor, but
those are some of my, uh, my
concerns. I really hope going
forward. We have a slew of these
bills coming up from what I
understand, Um, this one, I'll
say is
It's a harm and it's a big harm.
Um, but the ones that are
coming, you know.
You Mexican New Mexicans better
hold onto their hats. Because
thank you, Senator. We have
Senator and sorry, Senator
Pirtle just before you start. We
have a hard stop today at 1030.
So I think we are not going to
be getting if anyone is here for
SJ R two or five or SJM one.
We're definitely not going to
get into those today. We're
still going to see if we can
get more or which one
So the ones we are definitely
not doing today Are S J R to S
J. R five and SJM one. We are
definitely not doing that and
and Senator worth. I appreciate
you bringing this forward. I do.
I do find the argument Quite
For myself, and I think most are
very interested in this because
there is that we hold near and
dear, whether it's the freedom
of speech, the right of the
press or the right.
Rulings on all of those things
Very, very careful, Careful.
When they start getting very
close to a line of slander and
libel. Um and then with with, um
in place, and I think that's
throughout history, and so I
really
You know if if the fear is
concealed carry license holders
are
More responsible, allowing those
or entering concealed carry
permit would be compromised that
I know I could agree with
Because, you know, walk and if
you can't see it, then you're
not afraid of it will that makes
Everyone that doesn't want to be
in that situation now also
I really think that if we wanted
to work on something that that
was a compromise that did
achieve both themselves on
private property, because I
think we need to, um because
there there's some issues with
regard to who can approval from
The appropriate municipal or
county election officials.
polling location, working
security and caught up in this
if they walked by to go to the
bathroom and and and and again,
it's it's It's a lot of
hypotheticals, but I do I do
fear.
Take take one step too far, but
I will
Um anything.
Um, that maybe we could. We do
have a few others.
Door through which voters made.
So Is this gonna be a
specifically labeled door? Is
there all the door in which if
there's like a small store that
they've converted to a voting is
going to be that door, which
door timeshare Senator Purtell?
This is going to the currently
exists in the election
electioneering because it's the
same 100 ft.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Polling location has,
um set composite of that polling
location, and she was
responsible for monitoring for
election nearing at the polling
location and and two similar
language of 100 FT. From the
door through which voters
meeting so, um if a voter is
entering to vote through a door,
um, the presiding does without
polling location would would
monitor that and and
It was location. Um, that madam
chair remembers that which
location? No. So the vote the
doors through which voters enter
to vote. That's what the
statutory obligation is, and
that would be the response. I'm
still confused. So madam chair
members of the committee, the
statute says the door through
which voters may enter to vote.
Um and it's up to the presiding
judge to be responsible on
whether or not
So in some polling locations,
it'll be the front door of the
building right. They enter the
voting room and vote immediately
through this front doors at
other locations. It may be a
different door, but it's up to
the presiding judge. In order
to, um, make sure that that's in
compliance that is
Madam chair, members of the
committee counting and required
training they conducted for
election officials and wants to
their polling locations. Um, the
100 ft barrier I know in many
places is marked by a cone or
they measure it and make sure
that the public think paid. This
is tried to throw it and I think
it should be a friendly
competition. Any such weapon or
anything.
Firearm.
Um, separate of
Putting those in is just
unnecessary way. Well, then the
fear monger the other way. Let's
middle and try to find spirit of
compromise if we could work on
the actual
Fire bullet into the chamber.
And
Go a long way.
So, Senator, Um Madam Chair,
sing predicting the score on the
Madam chair. I'm happy to have
that discussion. I know we have
a certain colleague on Senate
judiciary who is very interested
in this definition Who's on our
side, So I want to
Let's get him in the mix and
let's let's I'll certainly visit
with him before we get to
judiciary and appreciate you
flag in this, along with the
other.
Law enforcement. I'm wondering
here, um
Aside from that I just
You said some of these things.
Farm store polling place stop
criminals from committing crime.
It's going to stop people like
her. I know the intent. I
appreciate the intent, but where
I know it doesn't seem like
we're going to
Thank you, madam Chair.
I just want to point out of a
few things from this Just great
analysis that we have from our
new staff. Thank you all very
much. They have accepted, uh 13
polling places and other states.
Uh, laws and other states are
polling places. All of them do
what sooner Worth is suggested.
Um, there's some interesting
differences. Uh and Texas. They
have this prohibition on
bringing guns even while early
voting, the anyone doesn't let's
let's get that out. No, no, I
In Georgia, Uh, they require 150
ft.
From polling places.
Virginia only requires 40, but
it's from any part of the
building any part of the
building not just one door.
New Jersey at the parking areas
as part of their prohibition,
one other state
Um, so talking Florida sounds
very none of them.
Well, the one many of them, uh,
call out
Can concealed firearms, also as
prohibited.
Uh, So California you're fined
$10,000, and that includes a
uniform.
Please officer that is not
authorized to be at that polling
place.
So
This. This language is very
clear, and it's doing exactly
what we're presented with today.
Uh, so we're talking Arizona,
Texas, California, Delaware, DC,
Florida, Georgia, Hawaii,
Louisiana, Maryland, New Jersey
assistant out of the question. I
don't think
With all of these issues this we
should be able to. If you don't
have the sooner we're mating. So
thank you.
And Senator Morris. I know you
want to talk for a second time.
Um
So senator were worth Thank you
for bringing this bill. Uh, I
agree that with you that it is
constitutional under Bruin
Bruins specific
There was some discussion about
what doesn't the intimidation
14. Why it isn't that
sufficient.
With that requires is the use of
or threatened use of force
violence, infliction, etcetera,
so there has to be a threat.
I read that so it would not
apply simply to folks who are
carrying.
Guns up at the pole. Um
The use of the word
intimidation, plenty of people
who might be intimidated by
seeing firearms when they're
trying to, uh
Uh, do their democratic duty.
Um, just the fact that is
colloquial intimidation, Civic.
And so that's why this is the
situations that that you're
looking to deal with.
Um, there was also a concern
rays that well, now a single
county clerk everywhere.
Ah, so that's not how
designating the polls worst.
It's the county commission.
Actually that designates polling
locations and so there would
never be a single person who
could suddenly
You know, make an entire city
anyone would have a lot of
trouble convincing an entire
board of Cat.
Um
There was some discussion
regarding the use of this
language about mufflers or
silencers, So we actually do
that, in lots of other statutes.
that is like a very standard
part of the definition of
firearms. But it's in 30-28 dash
to $30. This is a standard that
we are used to, as in that.
Um
I would like to offer an
amendment. You're the version of
clearly stated that this applied
to both earlier this one is
limited only to election day.
Well, I understand there might
be some implication the early
voting could be covered.
I think it makes a lot more
sense for us to be clear and our
laws. Um so on line three
After the word located.
I would insert while early
voting is in progress.
And the way that that would then
read is that
Ah 100 ft of the door through
which voters may enter to vote
at a school building, which is
in which in which a polling
place is located, while early
voting is in progress.
And on Election Day amendment
would be made to line set while
early voting is in progress, and
So that we're sure that this is
anytime someone's voting. This
should apply.
Not just on Friendly amendment
armchair. We did discuss this
before, and certainly the intent
is to cover both. Um so again,
it's it would be a friendly
amendment.
Uh, Senator, Senator Moore's
Are there any instances where
he's madam chair and members of
the committee? I'm not familiar
with this data specific to early
voting. Um, I am familiar with
the data.
Madam chair.
Senator with respect to schools.
I know that there has been
A concerted effort to limit
The use of of
And and
Uh, Senator, I think that this
language, uh, means that all
those folks who are going to
church during early voting
This would not apply to them. I
think that that is exactly the
kind of
Roll call vote on the amount of
Senator Baca.
Senator, but Flacco votes no
Senator Lopez votes. Yes, Editor
McKenna. Yes, yes, Senator
Moore's
Senator Morris votes No Senator
Nyberg votes No Senator or TZ
Pino? Yes, Senator. RTZ Pinot
votes? Yes.
Senators. Senators Stepanek's
votes No Senator Stewart Yes,
Senator Stewart's votes. Yes.
Senator. Her meal? Yes, Senator
Her Romeo votes. Yes, Senator.
Do Hick. Yes, Senator. Do Hig
boats? Yes. Four with one.
Excuse that, um
Um
Well, Is there any requirements
of that?
Madam chair members of the
committee. I don't believe
there's a signage requirement in
the bill, You're
Madam chair and members of the
committee. I just want to
clarify the conversation about
the 100 ft boundary occurs with
in coordination with the
presiding judge in the county
clerk.
So when polling places are
established, they're reviewed,
um and guidance exists between
those
Six months in jail for violence.
Madam chair and senator more as
you will note that this is not a
felony.
It is a petty misdemeanor, which
is up to six months in county
jail. $500 or both.
Um, I do think as was mentioned
earlier. There's people
Uh, and again, obviously how
that by a judge who's in
interpreting this. There's
flexibility in that, depending
on the specific circumstances,
So again, we're not
No, no felon izing he petty
misdemeanor.
Mrs. Data from other states
Six months.
So Madam Chair and Senator
Moore's, uh,
They're certainly not going to
have all the collateral
consequences in this particular
case. It's important that there
is a path again. This is a petty
misdemeanor, and we can go
through the traffic code and
texting and driving. Bill. I
think that was a civil fine. We
didn't go to a petty man. I'm
sure unless you come to Santa Fe
and then it's $100 so we can
discuss about how different
different
Locations have different
criminal
Senator Stewart
I'm trying to move it Do pass on
Senate Bill five as amended.
Senator Baca. No.
Senator Baca votes. No. Senator
Lopez. Yes, Senator Lopez votes.
Yes, Senator McKenna. Yes,
Senator McCain. That was the
motion.
Senator Morris. Hold on. Did
Senator Morriston Okay, clarify
your vote was saying yesterday
was amended to senator. Okay,
I appreciate you looking out for
my rating.
Senator Morris votes. No.
Senator Nyberg. Senator Nyberg
was no senator. RTZ Pino Yes,
Senator RGC Peanut.
Senator. Puerto votes. No,
Senator Stefan IX, Senator
Stefan X votes. Yes, Senator
Stewart? Yes, Senator Stewart's
boats. Yes. Editor Army. Oh,
yes. Ha Romeo votes. Yes,
Senator. Do Hig. Yes, Senator.
Do big boats. Yes. Vote of 7 to
4. You have to do pass very
much. Thank you, madam chair and
members.
Mm hmm. And we will have 15
million get. Australia are nine.
Done.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you, Senator. Usually, you
would have 20 minutes for your
presentation. But given that we
have a hard stop in 15. Thank
you, Madam Chair. We've We've
discussed this at length last
year, so we probably all we need
to do is do password. This is
exactly as the part one that set
on the floor of the house the
last two or three days and
Did never get a vote passed. I
don't think it was unanimous but
passed well in the Senate has
to, uh, well in the house went
through the committees in the
house and then never got a vote
speaker wouldn't put it on.
If you want me to explain it
real quick, madam chair
You know, I think if we have a
motion pending, uh is it Is
there any discussion?
Yeah. No. Oh, sorry, Senator and
Ivor School to select somebody
to step in their shoes. No, it
does not.
This is this is a setting up a
new state school board,
eliminating, uh, the secretary
of education as we currently
know what we've had. I believe
five or six In the last four
years we had two or three in the
previous administration since
Governor Richardson, who set up
the current situation, we've had
eight or 10 secretaries of
education. We have
Continued turmoil in education.
And if the only way we're gonna
improve education and stability,
and this would hope to return us
to the situation where we had
something like two
superintendent or
superintendents in like, 40 some
years and, uh
Whether we were better or not
back in that period of time. I
can honestly tell you we didn't
keep the same kind of numbers
and statistics, but this would
establish a state school board
that would deal with things like
we currently are. The four day
week is currently a, uh, debate.
This would allow least in
elected, uh, arrangement and
partially appointed to make the
decision so forth.
But this bill passed without
much difficulty. Last year,
Madam Chair and center, right. I
understand. Um, my my question.
We only switched once we had a
state school board, Uh and state
superintendent for 4050 years
prior to Governor Richard Madam
Chair and center or nothing, at
least twice. Yes.
And and so
Madam chair having the state
school board that has actual
power.
The school board.
Directly subject to troll of the
governor. That's correct. It
would be a would minimize. It's
not gonna eliminate, but it
would minimize the political
situation to a great deal. These
are six year terms staggered,
Uh, the governor appointees are
also six years.
The governor appointees can only
be removed for cause much like
our border regions. We don't
have the turmoil in our
university. We do have it. I
grant you but this would help.
Stabilize the situation. We went
back and forth on how the
structure we spent a lot of
time. I think we're in front of
this committee two or three
times trying to iron out exactly
how we wanted to do it, and then
we passed it fairly handily on
the floor.
So, Madam Chairman, Senator does
the existence mental elected and
that's what do they call that
the states?
Advocate your commission that
would go away. Go away, those
districts would be utilized
because we don't want to have to
read you.
Any other discussion.
Senator Senator Baca.
Senator Baca votes. Yes, Senator
Lopez? Yes, Senator Lopez votes?
Yes, Senator McKenna.
Yes, Senator McKenna votes Yes.
Senator Moore's Yes, Senator
Morris was yes, Senator Nyberg.
That's yes, Senator or TCP? No.
Yes. And I'd like to explain my
book.
Yeah. Sorry. Um, Senator, Poodle
Senator Stefan IX.
Senator Stefan exposed. Yes,
Senator Stewart? Yes, Senator
Stewart votes. Yes, Senator
Armenia Senator Harvard? Mia?
Yes, Senator. Do Hick Senator Do
you hate votes? Yes. A unanimous
Yes, but
we are going to do one more to
do S Jr like to explain. Sorry,
Senator. Madam Chairman
remembers the reason I voted for
this is precisely
The same reason that I'm
supporting the S. J R six
Children, Youth and Families
Department. The continuity
Able to be preserved across
administrations or more years
that we had under the elected
school board is what I'm trying
to get at with my S. J r six. So
keep that in mind when we
eventually have a hearing on SCR
six, which I hope will have some
day soon. Thank you.
I'm going to take over as chair
as our chairwoman goes up to
present we're going to hear SGR
one appellate Judge Nomination
Commission Senator do Hig
Thank you, Mr Chair. You should
all be getting the committee
substitute.
For this, which was emailed out
to everyone yesterday.
Excuse me with that committee
substitute. All this bill does
is it allows the law school dean
to use a designee? Ah, so the
dean chairs the judicial
nominating commission.
And the deans. Uh, just let us
know that it takes a lot of time
She is driving all over the
state going to these meetings so
she would like a designee who
she could appoint to go in her
stead when appropriate. Um, the
original bill had had the chief
justice of the Nominee
commission instead. Frankly, if
the law school Dean is too busy
to be driving all over the state
and the chief justice of the
Supreme Court is really too
busy.
To be driving all over the state
doing this.
So that this this committee
substitute has been okayed by
both the dean of the law school
And and so with that
Questions from the committee or
Mr Chair. That's all I have.
Thank you were looking for the
committee substitute as we do
that Senator Lopez. Mr. Terror's
just asking to see I don't have
the committee substitute believe
it's been passed out right now.
Thank you.
Miss Charles on the side of the
aisle, Sure, but there wasn't
out to all the analysts and and
and all members yesterday about
noon
Senator Stewart
Chairman. I move a do not
solution. One
And a do pass for purposes of
discussion on Senate Rules
Committee substitute
Senate joint Resolution one.
There's been a motion to adopt
the substitute Anyone in
opposition if we can do
discussion on the substitute.
Chief chief. So so how it is
right now. The dean of the law
school is is the chair. Uh, so
we are not changed. We're
keeping that the same. She can
just appoint a designee to chair
on her behalf.
When appropriate, and that
designee is is limited.
So instead of changing it from
the dean of the law school, too.
We're just saying it stays the
dean, but she can use to
designate
You know why?
We're saying that the dean can
use a designee.
As to fill her role as chair.
She would not be appointing a
new chair. Sorry, Mr Mr Chair,
Senator, Um
So no and and this would be
When it was originally changing
it to the chief justice of the
Supreme Court. She was going to
have the ability to appoint a
designee as well.
And Mr Mr Chair, senator the
point according to the dean of
law school is that this is
taking away from the time that
she needs. She's having to drive
all over the state constantly.
There's a ton of these
commissions all over the state.
It just takes a lot of time away
from her serving the
So So, Mr. Chair one. We don't
have a say in Who is that chair
now we we don't have a say in
who is the dean of the law
school? Um, so, so that's that's
a hold on hold on senator so
that that's not something. We
have a saying, uh, at the
moment, but also it's not just
anyone. If you look at the
community, and can I get a, um
Specific guardrails on who could
be that designate, So it is a
former dean and associate Dean
faculty member of the Law
school, retired faculty member
or former dean of the law
school.
So it's not the janitor.
It's not a cousin or a buddy. Um
It is. It is someone who is
With the Dean knows and can make
an assessment of their judgment.
And the thing is the chair of
this commission only votes in
the event of a tie.
So they are the chair of this
commission rarely actually
weighs in.
They just
Convene the meetings and then in
the event of a tie, they would
No judges, so Senator because of
Let me look at this. There's
like there are different
statutes that interact with each
other. So if you look at your
committee analysis on the back
page, um it will also apply to
District Court and Metro Court
nominating commissions because
of sections 36 and 37 of Article
six of our Constitution
incorporates by reference.
Uh, each and every provision of
section 35 Article six So
But no, this would apply to all
the the judicial nominating
commissions.
Yes. Thank you. Before we go on
to any further discussion, I
failed and I apologize to ask.
Is there anybody in the
committee room in favor of this
bill? If you can just show your
hands I won't be taking comment.
Take note that there's one is
there anyone in the room and
opposition of the bill.
Saying no, no, I'll ask the same
online anyone in favor of the
bill Online.
Anyone in opposition online for
this bill?
Saying none will continue with
discussion any further questions
or comments, Senator sniper
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam
Chair. The
We just talked about this chair.
Was to
And Mr Chair, Senator. I think I
disagree with you that that is
one of the roles that the dean
serves it in this situation when
this commission they are, it is
not the chair who is selecting
the folks who are going to be
considered and judging their how
qualified there that literally
the job of the chair is to
convene the commission. And then
if there is a tie vote to be a
tiebreaker
But that's it. They are not
providing the kind of continuity
that I think we're talking
about. For example, on on the
last bill
Um, they don't. They don't have
that much power.
The matter is
You know Roswell.
Particular issue.
And Mr Chair, Senator, I'm
trying to think of how many
deans of the law school there
have been since I was in law
school, Um, 15 years ago, and I
bet there's been like seven.
Like there. We have pretty high
turnover of our Dean's already
so
I I don't think I am not. I am
unconcerned with the company.
Right? Right. Express that
concern. Thank you, Senator. Any
further discussion?
Senator Morris. I'm gonna
practice thing. Open the next
committee, Mr Chair Center. I
look forward to that discussion.
Thank you. What's the will of
the committee
do pass by senator or TCP know
if I can have a roll call vote.
Senator bus? Yes, Senator will
open a votes. Yes, Senator
Moore's
Senator Morris votes. No.
Senator Nyberg. Yes. Neighbor
votes. Yes, Senator or TCP? No
Senator or cheesy. Pino votes
Yes, and considers to phonics
votes. Yes, Senator Stewart,
Senator Hawrami. Oh, yes.
Um, Senator Harmony of votes?
Yes, Senator. Do, huh? Yes.
Votes? Yeah, just to clarify its
or senator RTZ Pino year motion
was a do pass on the committee
substitutes and the Senate Rules
Committee subsidy one.
Duly noted.
And the vote count. It's 7 to 1.
And the vote count. It's 7 to
1721 with three Excuse you get a
new path senator. And before I
passed the gavel back to you
when you take us to the next
order of business, I want to
welcome back Senator Arthur
Rodarte Capital. He's drinking
the back row. He sat in my
Senate seat in the nineties, and
I served as his intern during
that time, and he said During
that time he looked forward to
the day he could vote for me.
And so I'm excited to have the
senator join us today.
Madam chairwoman. Welcome
senator. And with that it's just
over the Senate Rules Committee.
We will meet again. What's
today? Wednesday on Friday, Ah
