Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna here Senator
Moores.
Senator monos.
Senator by the year.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pro.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you recognize
the members to all please rise
for the indication to be led to
the buyer Senate chaplain pastor
Senator so the Lopez and the
salute to New Mexico flight to
be that today by Senator Ortiz
if you know.
It is good to see all of you
again especially without masks
that shines over juniper trees
and arroyos over children
playing and animals running over
the many residents in this
beautiful state and as we pray
actions that are beyond their
control and we all feel
overwhelmed tired we feel
powerless so what this moment we
remember the people of Ukraine.
them may we not forget those
with similar needs around us
those who seek housing those who
are victims of the many forms of
state as well and as we go about
the tasks at hand may we never
forget the words of St Francis
lord make us instruments of your
sadness joy for it is in giving
that we receive and it's in
pardoning that we are pardoned
it is in dying that we are born
to eternal life amen.
United States of America.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
Mr lands that eleven data the
Los estados Unidos that medica
eligible because Representative
the women as soon I'm Dave Yost
Good morning Senator so good to
be here with each one of you to
start off today all yield to
his words which are as always
very appropriate in this moment
and again we appreciate.
Your willingness to serve in
this capacity Mr president
unanimous consent we go that
The reader to read.
Senator executive message number
one.
Dear president pro temperature
legislature of the state of New
Mexico and the special session
at nine o'clock A. M. Tuesday
April fifth twenty twenty two at
the state capitol building in
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
proclamation of the governor
calling a third special session
of the fifty fifth legislature
be read before the Senate and
entered into the journal there's
Russian invasion and war against
Ukraine has contributed to
violent till to be in the global
oral market whereas the price of
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight as amended commonly
commonly known as a junior bill
enacted by the fifty fifth
legislature second session
Senate bill forty eight also
appeared to violate article nine
section fourteen of the New
Mexico constitution commonly
known as the anti donation
projects and compliance with the
anti donation clause will assure
that these expenditures ari
Weiss and lawful investment that
assessment of their merit end
were as it is necessary for the
New Mexico state legislature to
convene at the state capitol
building to reassess the
expenditures and Senate bill
article four section six of the
New Mexico constitution do
hereby issue this proclamation
and called the fifty fifty
legislature of the state of New
The April fifth at the state
capitol building in Santa Fe in
accordance with article four
section six of the New Mexico
constitution this special
session is called for the
purpose of considering and
enacting legislation concerning
to rising cost to reassess in
the expenditures listed in
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight as amended enacted by the
fifty fifth legislature second
article nine section fourteen of
the New Mexico constitution and
three appropriating provided
cash balances for the expenses
of the fifty fifty legislature
Where does my hand Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor at yes
Maggie Toulouse Oliver.
Secretary of state.
Thanks to our chief clerk
third special session there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr president chair recognizes
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
Mr president Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent the Senate
proceed subdivision of the rules
adopted by the second session of
the fifty fifth legislature.
the official time piece of the
Senate.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered Mr president Senator
Wirth this present unanimous
consent we go to that or
members I want to announce that
for this third special session
of the fifty fifth legislature I
have appointed Senator Duhigg to
be the Senate parliamentarian
thank you very much good morning
Mr Montana governor a unanimous
consent to allow cameras on the
Ivey Soto and Senator Pinto.
I see no objections so ordered.
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president I ask
that started last fall she will
be graduating in may as I think
the top student at Los crucis
high school all during the
legislative session she was over
in the house she worked for the
Adelaide to the Senate chambers.
Senator president thank you.
there was an appointment for the
Senate parliamentarian the the
first question I have if the
floor lead would yield is where
where in our rules do we even
have a parliamentarian.
Majority Leader in twenty
seventeen
in talking to members it was
something that we we've not had
a parliamentarian in the
thing for the whole body and I
think over the last six years it
has been a position that is of
Mister president so we we don't
really have a the rule for the
parliamentarian I wonder for
parliamentarian can answer why
we have a parliamentarian.
Senator shares they're asking is
Senator do Hager planetary and
will yield Mister president I
actually think Senator Pirtle
ought to be the parliamentarian
but for the purposes of this are
this so I might I might be
fumbling along here that but my
understanding is that each of
the caucuses do have their own
parliamentarian and and that
special session one the R.
Cox's parliamentarian otherwise
it is not available.
Senator so Mister president does
that mean that
You know.
Archery how would we Absolver
disagreement.
So Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so just just to
settle any of our disputes any
sitting up in the presiding
officers chair and so again I
think ultimately what we've done
and I think we've done it pretty
space and ultimately though it's
the presiding officer who's
going to make that that ruling
but rather than go straight to
A debate I think it's important
a helpful tool that's worked
well in this chamber and so
certainly think it should
continue and I'm happy that
Senator doing is willing to step
in during the special session.
of of the simply because members
are partisan and I believe when
I when I first got here the
the rule says and it leased at
the time of I think the entire
body consider her nonpartisan.
all are on some level
We ought to go out of our way to
provide a nonpartisan
parliamentarian and I would
suggest somebody that is not a
I'm not I just I it is a concern
I I've had I've had it for a
while primarily because I heard
that there was a new rule
discovered.
and that's why I I do have real
problems with partisan
parliamentarians because that
rule has not existed for a
hundred years and now we've
found it.
Thank you Mr president to arise
I've very concerned a lot of
concerns about the department
Terry an issue the first
parliamentarian was appointed
about and about all of our
concerns and if we were able to
make sure that it was somewhat
non par some are quite frankly a
moving forward because we were
not consulted on the side as was
mentioned before the
in Congress they were
nonpartisan parliamentarian
influence of their own caucus is
concerning who doesn't provide
any faith from the minority that
the rulings are are are are
about.
are and has taken positions has
not been willing to work with
the minority caucus and a number
major pieces of legislation of a
high profile and I'll blame or
punish as the votes you can do
will not have a lot of weight
from the minority caucus so
really encourages body if we
want to have a parliamentarian
to help us caught some of the
who makes rules and even you.
Our our or outside of political
pressure of course that's the
way it is I survive been in this
partisan issues been awaits.
To avoid actually following the
rules a lot of cases and try to
provide political cover and this
appointments I do believe will
encourage the majority to think
about this you can have someone
in name only as parliamentarians
if you really want to
parliamentarian let's get
serious hire someone do what
they do in Congress and have
appointment that's not going to
carry any weight with the side
of the Irish president thank you
Senator Moores any further
announcements Senators.
there's an attempt to try to
blame a lot of the gas prices on
on the war that we're seeing in
Europe but the reality is gas
prices were were really high
before that really due to failed
Senator Pirtle Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president I just
stand in rise and I wanted to
recognize the volcano Vista high
school boys and girls basketball
Thank you for that recognition
Center pope Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr miss present well
overtime I mean it was bit of a
thriller but but unfortunately
wasn't their day so but want to
give them a shout out as well
Los crucis high school men's
team coming in second place
Mr president I'd like to make
note that Clayton high school
girls won the state championship
also and I'd like to recognize
him today.
Si no further announcements
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation or
on that order business
introduction legislation.
Senator Monero's and
Representative laws Lundstrom
and a lot of senators and act
making appropriations and
authorizing expenditures
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to Senate
finance committee that Senate
bill one.
Yes.
Wirth.
The of the center Lopez Senator
Lopez Mr president just an
announcement for members our
sergeant at arms did mention
that those who may want some
Thank you Mr president in a in
recognition and and supreme
gratitude I have a little
that we hope never to see again
this presents.
majority floor leader to know
that there's a yellow sticky
note on it.
And then the.
Yeah the session comes to an end
because Senator sure is a
marvelous storyteller.
Just say no further
announcements senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so just
an announcement
Senate bill one is going to be
heard up and Senate finance
that's I think Senator McKenna
will have announcements the this
can post things up on the board
but again I think the once once
Senate bill one estimate comes
out of Senate finance will bring
that back down on the floor and
going about ten fifteen half an
hour from now and to the bill
that we are all here to do and
and should be up there not too
long then we'll come back to the
floor right afterwards and and
into finance so finance members
kind of be on your toes and will
be up and down the elevator all
day thank you Mr president seven
yes seven give us what room
number of that Senate finance
Senate finance will take place
in three twenty two.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr president good
morning to you Senate Democrats
Any further announcements si no
further announcements.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president with that unanimous
