Senate bill eighty six in
central twenty seven will be
rolled over to the next.
What information.
The.
Madam president every madam
chair.
Much thank you to the members of
the committee before I start
with me today is Daniel I do
lots of New Mexico State
University the stock by expert
witness today he's like shadow
as part of the cap program and
with the cap program is it's
looking at farmers and
transitioning farm workers into
university settings probably the
son of Southern New Mexico a
graduate of Debin  high school
and a freshman at New Mexico
State University where he's
earning a degree in civil
engineering with a minor in math
so we might be able to help out
that are with us figure out some
of our our our budget.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair for
listening to our laptop waste
removal and for members of the
committee committee the madam
chairman of I. are members of
the fact that interim committee
along with that conscious and
with the interim committee we
get to visit land grants
throughout New Mexico and figure
out what the issues are Senator.
As a land grants were granted by
the king of Spain to families in
New Mexico to homestead and when
Spain part of Mexico Mexico kept
the land grants and the
families that were with them of
the agreements they had with the
crown of.
With the treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo whether the United
States came in the lab rats are
still honored and respected by
the US government and today they
serve as political subdivisions
of the state of New Mexico and
so as we were out visiting land
grants more specifically in Rio
Arriba county were taken on a
tour of the Abbey Q. Land Rover
we saw that there was a major
issue but it came to legal
topic.
Rio Arriba county within the
last several months has had a
disruption and trash Services
adults because residents and
taking their trash to the local
level which is and it's actually
a transfer station Rio Arriba
county doesn't have a left field
it's a transfer station that the
trash is driven up to Rio Rancho
four down to to
some of these at Seattle some of
our older residents didn't have
the needs to drive their trash
from areas like Abbey Q. into
how the area which is miles away
and so we started to see if they
were hiring people to get their
trash taken for these people
started to dump the trash in our
land grants and so our troops
are returning from the
mattresses.
All reservations so broken tile
pieces and twenty eight two
every day household trash that
was from there and the madam
chairwoman actually served as a
detective finding a casino all
players carded thought the name
on it and ask the land grant
trapped in person.
The wrong place my predecessor
Senator Martinez have brought
this bill up before to try to
get money to our land grants for
cleanup and the is the king of
we need some help right now I re
introduced a bill that would get
a million dollars to progress to
system with any type of people
dumping and clean up and with
that Madam chairwoman I'll stand
for any question thank you of
those in the audience we have
anybody in support.
A anybody in opposition.
Posted support if you would like
to make public comment the rise
up and stating.
And I'm sure but I think that
they just wanted to show support
and working to speak okay.
Okay you can if you would like
to speak.
from Maryland all northern rural
county.
I support this bill I'm also
that Graham member and that is
definitely a problem in northern
New Mexico I could really use
some resistance thank.
Thank you thank you for
gentleman back would you like me
Madam thank you madam chair will
not the guy was
talking also stand in support of
this bill also member of the
line up in order.
Thank you in.
The expenditures and Miller
owner of two decades of course
I'm not sure if you.
On the I thank you for.
Good morning madam chair
committee members key lever
Merrill with the New Mexico
State Land Office Land Office
supports efforts to clean up
illegal waste dumped on land
throughout New Mexico and
strongly supports this bill
aimed to do so on community land
grants thank you.
It was.
Twenty seconds.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is our
did archer that the I am with
the New Mexico land grant
council the issue of illegal
dumping on land grants has been
something that we've been
working with land grants on for
for many years to try to address
they've had instances where
we've even been
Find or have been cited by the
New Mexico environment
department of these illegal
dumps you know this was prior to
land grants are really starting
to be understood as political
subdivisions and sort of their
status so we have had several
land grants have actually worked
with the department of in the
vitamin department to get grants
under and help clean up some of
these illegal dumpsites
it's really challenging for many
of the land grants on to sort of
have the funds to to do this now
the land grants on those are
eligible to receive from the
land of our citizens funds will
help and then be able to sort of
process these abuses matching
funds for some of these are all
opportunities so any any
resources that the state can put
towards having these land grants
help clean up these illegal
dumpsites that includes hazards
we suggest tires of variety of
things I will go a long way to
help adjust the land got
themselves but the the overall
environment for New Mexicans
thank you madam chair.
It added.
Thank you madam chair are two
door to let the will serve as an
expert witness if there's any
questions I can answer he's part
of the New Mexico land grant
council's consent or willing to
answer the question that's a
major STO in northern Rio Arriba
county for the majority of the
people are going to come and
speak on behalf of this bill
because of that storm we were
unable to drive the more made it
by leaving at five AM it took
him three and a half hours to
get and so we didn't want to
risk of those who would have to
drive in inclement weather
conditions so that's why they're
not here and the weather's bad
weather internet service goes
down in northern Rio Arriba
County it would be able to join
us online but another hearing.
Thank you senator you I have
some people on the reservation
right it makes me a nation that
are stranded to.
Trying to get some of their to
them today
I think I understand if you if
you give center how to meal the
address he will be their
personal.
General child.
The lady you know the challenges
of the relax and that's what the
issue is is actually can I what
is that
sure yeah.
Dire situation.
madam chair but if there's
anything we can did revert
health leads yeah I fiscal cost
estimate thank you senator and
we will go to committee members
are there any questions
committee members Senator Griggs
thank you madam chair and and
Senator you know illegal dumping
is a problem statewide
when you when you go to various
County continue to see that and
I'm showing no I.
Rio revenge land grants are all
of you so do we have ordered I
guess there is here
Representative.
To stop or reduce illegal
dumping.
So madam chairman Senator good
question so there's a group of
students out of mess this to
high school who are part of the
television production class and
what they've taken out of the
responsibilities of PSA that
would remind tenuous of their
peers and also the at Seattle's
about illegal dumping in the
effects it has not on the
grants but in our environment
and how illegal dumping will
help will heard of seconds
during the spring time and run
off and so that's been the the
only thing that we're doing the
land grants have been working
with their errors on talking
about illegal dumping it seems
that a lot of that illegal
dumping is coming from people
who aren't there's a lot of that
understand the open space to
throw that's a great point
because I can work with the new
review but county commission to
see if there's any type of way
they can help in getting the
word out talking about finds
that happened with the legal
dumping the consequences of
something that are left out in
the and madam chair and ensure.
I guess if you wish if they were
dumping illegally in the county
but not all of the land grants.
There would be additional me
there would be a recall is
dumping on the land grant is
that is that a problem as for as
care on the floor no not in this
case they're still part of the
county but if you think about
Rio Arriba county a majority of
our land just check reported by
either pueblos which is federal
land land grants which have also
been there for a long time and
then the small pieces of them
become private land so the
county does go into the system
land grants and anyway they
can't and it's a true
partnership of the political
subdivisions the county for the
county could step in and assist
here's the one issue when it
comes to the county stepping in
to help us in cleaning up the
best is the county works on a
flat budget this in a flat
budget for years the majority of
the money of the county comes
from property tax there used to
be a big boom and oil and gas in
the northwest region of the
county which isn't the case
anymore and so we're seeing that
our budget is flat so anybody
that they do have is just
keeping the county point without
additional funds to help
increase of land grants and
illegal dumping throughout.
Madam chair the center of you
know certainly understand that
the Otero County hasn't had a
real close for their budget like
much either
The the the thing that concerns
me is we claim that we take this
morning we clean it up clean up
work after.
We keep it clean indicators if
we can be more aggressive in it
for.
And that's got to come from the
county chair of.
In the
other fifty four agencies you're
gonna continue to see the same
problem in this world there's
this page your email that you'll
see it right now which you'll
she actually she action until we
can stop and you know I madam
chairman this is a.
It is not necessarily gestion
Neil there is.
One of the one of the things my
wife brings up to me
consultation with Dr New Mexico.
Here you see the.
The automobile salvage three C.
thank you years and years ago
President Johnson's wife lady
bird was really active in trying
to keep some of that.
We do a show in we do probably
the different push from the.
From us and from the
administration on beautify in
New Mexico there are Partch you
know to the where you drive
across New Mexico and.
is
better tribal reservations that
they've done a remarkable job
keep.
The few share.
Attract.
A it's just an after show I
think we got a here we are one
of the most stations in the
nation.
As we do specialize.
What we do.
And so the job of school to bill
Schneider but I I think we we've
got to get this issue this is
the one of those things which
fiction something the chances.
But it's not going to change the
behavior correct great point
Senator you know the madam
chairwoman of I have this talk
during the interim is when we
were younger there was the toss
No mas campaign that we still
remember the campaign slogan of
the messaging and you're right
we need to be a bit more
aggressive on but in New
Mexicans no illegal dumping is
not acceptable and should be
happening in our state I agree
with the senator thank you for
those funds thank you.
Senator Griggs are you to judge
senator Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair that's a
good point center thank you for
bringing this bill that's a
great point and you see when you
drive through Mexico you see
some of the signs of says
littering hundred dollar fine
you drive through Texas as
littering three thousand dollar
fine.
And you don't see littering in
Texas Oklahoma I mean like it's
you know and I think the biggest
sentencing here New Mexico eight
five hundred dollars for
literacy so it's not you know
four hundred dollars people
don't pay attention I was trying
to my County just this last week
to
what the county manager and we
went down this two mile road
where they got some project to
go to put in it was two miles
bridges.
For which I I can believe about
it was and the Tosca mas camping
that you bring a great thing we
all remember but we haven't seen
it in how many years I haven't
had any kind of question so
sports really think it's a major
issue that we needed to call a
specially the land grants that
have any money to.
Madam chairwoman Senator am I
hearing you say we should team
up on a bill that would increase
fines for illegal dumping as a
deterrent for New Mexicans who
think it's okay top yes you and
I should think about that during
the interim and I'd be happy to
join you Madam chairwoman
Senator on a bill like that
launcher Representative would
love to the team about some like
that and get that push because
this is something that just
happened all of our counties
anywhere on the rural areas the
use of force side.
And you know I live on the ruler
in that city you know it's not
this is ballot for everyone for
all of us they take the trash
out of the the rural areas and
they and they dump and ours were
really can't stress on property
has been developed or used and
in the years and all that sort
of thing that so
have one.
Question Civico members.
So madam chair of Senator this
is just a one time non recurring
correct Madam chairman.
On reoccurring anybody left
would go back into the general
fund I would like to look at
this first year as a pilot
program to see how it works and
then to take into account
Senator Griggs is might just be
a bad day that isn't a quick fix
that that we have to think about
pivoting and how our messaging
happens on illegal dumping and
what the next step would be.
Thank you senator and madam
chair
So how would so it's going to be
appropriated to the department
of environmental the
environmental Department and
then madam chair Senator.
The.
They will contract out somebody
to clean up these areas or
they'll is a state employees are
located up or these are the all
subcontracted out to contractors
and you know madam chairman
Senator good question the
environmental Department would
be the agency that would lead
this and so what's happened in
the past with cleanup that have
happened in Rio Arriba county is
the agency with that bring the
large dumpsters the large bins
with the on Seattle's are the
errors that led friends have
done is they lead a community
cleanup they dump everything
into these bands if there's any
type of liquid waste they don't
feel comfortable dealing with
that so the environmental
Department would come in with
this if you truly grassroots
with just these bins would be
certified and then picked up and
property this for for last.
Madam chair center thank you
that's all the questions thank
you.
Senator Shendo thank you madam
chair and thank you center for
bring this as questions this is
a this is a claim of of of.
You know of dump sites right now
what.
Since you're talking about is
bringing dumpsters at ongoing
the no is that for the cleanup.
Madam chairman and senator that
would just be for the claim
because being no way that after
that is a million dollars but
quick if we keep the dumpsters
there if we keep the dumpsters
in our ancestral lands that
people think that's the dump
site and start using it so and
so the dumpsters what state
would be for the cleanup project
that I agree with what Senator
Griggs said that there have to
be some aggression from the
county of the last grants to
ensure that those were dumping
or find to service the deterrent
to stop the dumping it out.
I appreciate that it's it's it's
is.
Who started this back in in this
book of.
Fifty years ago one or one the
whole movie to have our transfer
stations that were put in we
would still see.
Folks there on driving often.
You know of go back to Trachsel
were and then you know now was
the time to go over and over
because you know I would seize
some from a distance a group of
impact check the mail.
Think about court and then we
will find him inside.
So we started doing that and
people got the message you know
and slowly I think we've come a
long way now I don't think we.
Illegal dumping going on once a
very well but for the most part
the the places vote potentially
for us in the middle seven days
a week our transfer station so
people are now getting used to
but it you know takes a long
time because people are
so that so roll up in there.
In those we see that in the area
so the only question I have was
of the.
This is current program and I
guess one of the issues that's
happening right now is that
because of the requirements that
applicants have a chief
financial officers this grant
program of folks don't apply to
it I know that there's another
bill there's another bill to
help of land grants or rural
communities or.
It this is not just communities
I think there's a lot of folks
in in the small of communities
that sometimes can afford it you
financial officer or somebody to
do the books as of these
opportunities just don't happen
so the committee speak to the
madam chairman Senator you're
right land grants are elected
board and so members of the
community elects the board like
us were volunteers but the
difference is they don't get per
diem and so they don't serve in
the capacity of like a CFO and
in some cases it's the
bookkeeper who's just taking in
any type of small donations but
I'm not sure would have the
background to really look at
funding I mean that tracking to
granted assisting.
At secured in the proper manner
now there's anybody in the lab
run who could I that could take
the messaging back Madam
chairwoman to lab rats if they
have any accountant or finance a
person with a finance financial
background of the the interested
in taking that role now I what I
do know about the grant and if
it does move past this committee
chairwoman I'd like to meet with
the environmental department to
see if we them could funnel the
money if it makes it all the way
through the governor's desk to
them for this grant with the
understanding that will be
looking for land grant heirs
would be able to apply for the
grant to ensure that it's done
in the proper way.
So what questions thank you
thank you Senator Shendo any
other questions from committee
members.
Just the other that.
because we know that Senator
thank you for because I think
the discussion needs to be had
statewide.
Because I don't think just enemy
the is on the Department that
would be involved I mean we're
talking about PPS with.
You know we're counties and even
the tribes nations of public
because if we clean up in one
area those that he legally down
we'll just displace it in
another and for your area thank
you talking about the problems
are all around ending
checkerboard basically
and I think we all want the
state to be clean stated there
has to be some kind of statewide
basic plan because we also know
that some of these landfills
don't change everything and
that's part of the deal with the
dumpster and some of the remote
locations that we have out there
and then.
The stuff that they will take
ends up out dumped out somewhere
else in a lot of you to order to
with construction material
was remodeling in that sense
roofing material Dr all right
right.
Shows really rules always a a
the the calm the calm
decomposing material easily so
we have to
It.
In the fall upon us to kind of
tax area so I think this is just
a little bit of a little bit of
the piece of the pie
Because when we talk about all
these entities we don't want to
want to be left out and I know
there's gonna be several places
that you know we don't want it
track which or we don't want to
take and that's part of the some
of the issues to.
this in my area it's that
financial responsibility of
paying paid someone to commit to
that so the not a capable we
just got to make sure that it is
something that's just not going
to happen just what type cleanup
on Earth Day.
That's going to happen it has to
go to perpetuity as we see it
even with the new technology and
materials that are out there
that we're not to ten eighty
there was a teacher or not
Putting it in areas the agency
just like with the base.
Madam chair great points in
thinking about watersheds and
the run off that goes into the
second place not madam chairman
if I could just say maybe what
we could to the interim is in
the interim Land Grant Committee
going to meet with counties of
lab grants to see if maybe land
grants to be willing to give a
portion of the property where
they would be in the in the from
the county that would be managed
and then they can jump into that
band with an agreement that the
county would pick up that trash
maybe that's something we could
think about as an ongoing way
that would still have a location
on the land grants the
partnership with the county to
pick up that that waste in a bin
rather than have to do community
cleanup it would be a.
So maybe we might think about
that and in about sure thank you
senator Hermio because what
we're talking about two is the
and but at the forefront about
recycling and the for the
longest amount of waste that we
have because I know there's a
plastic bags builders some other
environmental issues but on the
front and to reduce the place
and have some kind of other plan
that communities could opted to
to have
This.
Having this big giant pile to
deal with in the end but that we
we do staff I and that's where
and that's what I'm saying with
the whole plan to make it from
the conception to the but
they're done with whatever
products okay and madam chair I
might test that record when
you're doing all that in your
you're looking into it to
understand for the most part
police officers don't one of the
trash Water during the office
and you should have to have to
find out in the county your
comment for which.
What but overall police officers
or one.
That would be sure that the.
Sure could be madam chair sure
we talk about is have you done.
Rauch the County Down streamers
In leverage that in lots of
places
to where that becomes available
place for people to take
correction state of finding the
nearest thank you log in that
parking.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair
thank you senator Sanchez thank
you madam chair is working I
think of code enforcement and
open space really surprised ones
are the best.
I think that's what they were
Senator Hermio as well well did
you fix it and they just sent
out this space for sort of.
the general initial space force.
Senator sure thank you already
experience.
But you had for.
I believe.
The terrible indicated will
serve for the purpose of this
thank you bye.
Please go Senator.
Yes.
I.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator yes
yes serve in the.
you Senator you up by admin
support Representative them yes
that that bill eighty seven to
to do past rams and indeed will
cost okay you madam chair thank
members keep you posted on what
happened.
Representative Joe for
fourteenth thank you thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senate bill four
fourteen is another step towards
the issue of missing and
murdered indigenous people it
just immense crime victims
reparation Act to include those
and then murdered indigenous
people at.
That particularly if you're not
familiar with act it allows us
some economic relief for those.
Sexual abuse sexual assault
issue that this get fat all the
way through and it might P. I
did junior money towards it to
help with the increased
in costs for victims.
If there.
Any questions from committee
members.
I stand.
Thank you madam chair and to the
audience we go is there anyone
here who would like to support
this bill.
Is there anyone here opposed.
Do we have anybody on zoom at.
Mr chair.
Okay.
So okay and so with that.
Members.
So.
This is working with Frank Zubia
yes folks yes okay great and so
why.
Why are.
Why is this position food
already.
It just was it whenever it was
created in to include them so
that was one that did some of
the bills last session right is
it this came to our attention at
the human trafficking conference
over the summer that includes.
Make sure that we and then with
this bill.
Finance.
Okay.
Yes Senator Griggs thank you Mr
chair.
and madam chair Fund on page
three line a.
Talk about the questions courted
Beijing within.
Renewable.
It is this this bill go to
Judiciary
Mr chair Senator yes this and I
do want to say in the crafting
of it we did try to make sure
that if I the AG's office and
even by the crime victims
reparation commission.
That's why it Mr chair that
that's the one part in their.
That I don't know whether
they'll be able often times the
carriers which out of the I
talked.
There are questions.
Show.
For sure madam chair thank you
something to.
for aware of and be ready.
Because.
Those.
We're all in this the statewide
more specific okay but you may
not be able to give shows Jewish
you're ready to explain the
reason why is.
And our thank you again we shop.
Mr chair Senator.
One of the other issues that
came up was the triggers are the
mechanisms that will allow them
to access these funds and one of
them was the police reports and
we know that well but some of
the act hearing the issues with
missing and murdered indigenous
persons in our particular area
it was almost getting get what.
and that was one of the other
issues that they kind of brought
up was the cost or in F. B. I.
report was ready from sixty to
six hundred dollars too much
it's what was conveyed to me.
So that was
We know how to tackle it maybe
they'll be some other way to
come across it.
If we get to the committee.
Was there share madam chair I
you're gonna have some pretty
good lawyers and yeah this right
here right now.
Good those show are.
Standard issue is called and
they were.
The trap.
I hope that maybe through your
bills here that will will help
staff.
We should go for special cases
there's things that we can all
work together and and if we can
great.
Your state job usually that
should should should.
All cash but not leading to this
but he still wields were.
She sings.
But you know for sure.
Some of the we support this
bill.
You know fish four GB we're.
Be ready to.
Sure thank you Mr thank you Sir.
Senator Shendo the gentleman I
just have a question relating to
Of the the things with the with
the senator o'neill had passed.
So so it's a native person of.
Your your kids are or in
Albuquerque they're covered
under this reparation Act right
because they're under the
jurisdiction of.
The state since it happened on
state.
But what we're talking about is
those individuals that some of
the kids were missing from.
The reservations the tribal.
Is that what we're trying to get
it with this.
Mr chair Senator eighty one and
that is still one of the things
we're still working on because
we do need the consent of the
tribes nations or pueblos what
together and collaborative the
on that we because we know
jurisdiction is eighteen
enormous hurdle that has not
really been tackled with this
because we have some people that
have tried to do police reports
in their local law enforcement
for example the nation and
nothing is generated.
It's just so they go on to the
next to the county and it seems
like the state budget of seeing
that and to do that but usually
does a report.
All right now I was just trying
to discourage because this.
In order for native person
