Center coast.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator my Estes.
Senator McKenna.
Senator to the Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You do not have a quorum Mister
invocation I'd ask all those in
the gallery to rise and join us
as well.
For the indication to me that
today by community leader elder
US army veteran military
instructor Christmas thing calls
Senator Sedillo Lopez and the
salute to New Mexico flag to be
led today by Senator could I
have health.
Sutton
And we have of of value we like
to share.
before the before the prayer we
we're all here under one roof
under one banner under one
humanity and this great honor to
be in this great chamber or so
much important work for the
All environments of nature and
all of our humanity.
You have chosen and called us to
leadership within our personal
Our entire society depends upon
the good results of our work.
Please inspire us and guide us
correct us and protect us.
Spirit prosperity community
family and personal
spirituality.
This is all by the great
More grant within each of us the
courage and initiative to
collaborate and contribute our
efforts to implement the best of
all the higher angels of our
overwhelming times of
difficulty.
May we realize and accomplish
our best in serving the needs of
all our human and earthly
families.
exemplary of your divine grace.
Thank you lord.
All our fulfillment comes from
you order now.
one on videos in TV Sivik go
live I it was the C. about
those.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
you're welcome Senators back to
the chamber and I yield to our
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business.
You Mr president good morning
of start off and like the yield
the center Padilla for a couple
of unanimous consent.
No objections center for the
thank you very much Mr president
good morning to you in the body
you very much Mr president Jens
consent to allow cameras in the
Senate chamber.
It's been request allow cameras
only the Senate chambers seeing
no objection so ordered Senator
Padilla I thank you very much Mr
Senator Padilla for those
unanimous consent I always like
to start by just acknowledging
our invocation and our elder
Krishna Singh Khalsa we
we're all under one roof and I
think that was very appropriate
as we head into the month of
March so think it's eighteen
some guests to announce once I
get through will pull for center
diamond we'll do that and then
Senator Kernan and center guy a
goes following Senator Diamond
today's higher education day at
recognition that senator Ortiz
the Pino a present when he's
back down Senator T. V. we're
not going to read that
certificate but will go to you
read on this morning we'll have
three confirmations this morning
and I think the rules committee
it sounds like is just winding
up so I see some of them down
we'll get to those in a
box lunches for us at noon
tomorrow so we'll have lunch at
noon.
Tomorrow with that Mr president
I yield first to Senator Diamond
members of the Senate I am
pleased to introduce and welcome
some guests that we have from
our work today please stand
Maranda Morrow Joshua good
president it is a five hour
drive for the students to come
all the way from the middle of
the low the lowest corner of the
southwest of New Mexico to join
us here in Santa Fe thank you
chamber.
Thank you senator Senator Davis.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
represent really all of Lee
County and we're so delighted to
have them come when I call your
name if you will please stand
and then I'll yield to senator
Right Kelly in burnt Boerner
halo grades Isabella believe
Senator Curtis this present
thank you all continued Kinsey
ables.
Laney Corley.
Madison Gibson.
sent also have Maggie cargo
whose teacher in the gallery we
have parents and chaperones in
on for next may I have built
Thank you senator goes any
further announcements Senators.
Senator Peter Wirth is the next
certainly can explain what it
does and who's here for that
we're in that order business
third reading legislation will
be able to for the certificate
excuse me one announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Ortiz Y.
about that the certificates and
then introduce your guests of
there's others would like to
introduce guests on this again
they can do so as well right and
Mr president members of the
Senate around the state there
programs that are funded through
the now through the higher
education department and this
certificate of that we're not
going to read and in detail
as the Albuquerque literacy
program the Albuquerque adult
learning program they say they
tell me that is very rewarding
participate as volunteers.
Sometimes the programs are run
through the branch colleges and
with us today we have examples
of that and of the Albuquerque
the description of of what's
going on from eastern New Mexico
university we have the.
The in Roswell the Roswell
branch of eastern New Mexico
Monique in line this morning
because an amazing woman wife
mother of two children and
teacher.
Monica came to rose will ten
months ago when her husband was
employed by the Roswell
Monica is a wonderful asset to
the eastern New Mexico
university Russell adult
education department and to the
city of Russell.
the UFO festival and the Roswell
Public Library although money
because only been a resident of
Russell for a short amount of
time she's already made
significant strides strides in
catalyst to change their lives
and your own family
circumstances for the better and
also with us today we have to
Madeleine brown who's not with
us today but she is she's here
representing them Vanik comes
from a small town in the Navajo
Nation your Gallup she moved to
Albuquerque at a young age and
she learned in life as she made
a mistake by not finishing her
high school education her
passion for helping others
remains driven she's well
busy with their academics she
enjoys cooking gardening and
spending time with their family
with the members of the Senate
join me in honoring all adult
Thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ingle and Senator Woods
are back in the chamber will do
the certificate of condolence
It'll be read by Senator Ingle
and that will be out read this
confirmations there three
confirmations Senator Campos
Tolomeo and how to me twice
we'll do confirmations when
those come down in terms of
third reading and so just a
heads up Senator Cervantes is
number one Ivey Soto is number
two RTZ Pinos third center
Stewart and if members are in
any other announcements at this
point unanimous consent we go
about our business messages from
the house hearing no objection
we're on that order business
House Bill two oh one as amended
by the house House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill to
twenty eight.
House Bill to twenty six.
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk journal so the message
from the house has been
received.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
The reader to read.
Mr president Education Committee
to whom has been referred house
souls chairman Senator cells
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read both of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion in the the
journal reflect they were active
on individually hearing no
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator William P. sold chairman
Senator souls I move adoption
the committee report in here is
we have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
individually the retreat.
Mr president your Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
to whom has been referred Senate
bill thirty three has had it
under consideration and report
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Shannon D. Pinto
chairwoman.
Senate Bill thank you Mr
chairman I just Mr president I
no objections the retreat Senate
bill three ninety two to pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Shannon D. Pinto chairwoman
it the committee report has been
adopted as general reflect their
acted upon individually the
reader to read.
Mr president your tax business
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman Senator Shendo I
ask unanimous in the Senate
agree to be allowed to re all
the committee reports and that
and thence referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two seventy six do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three oh I do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three twenty seven
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
internet port has been adopted
in the journal reflect their
acted upon individually.
The reader to read.
gross preparatory to signing by
the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
those in favor signify by saying
aye those opposed may the eyes
have it the committee port has
been adopted and I'd like to
announce of the members of the
body that the officers of the
Senate have signed an open
president unanimous that we go
about our business announcements
and miscellaneous around that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous and I yield to
senator Greg Baca.
Thank you Mr president in the I
friend of Jon Runyan who is a
sophomore in New Mexico tech
this year computer science
please join me in welcoming my
guess.
the table done for now we're
gonna go ahead and jump into
third reading and as we wait for
the committee reports to come
down from Senate rules once they
come down we'll take a break and
do the confirmations so with
commission.
Senator is aware that order of
business thirty legislation
Senate bill three await as
amended with emergency clause
and I'll to senators about this
debate amendment or substitution
no objections Senator wants to
explain figures prisms present
we are all familiar with however
election we ended with
hundred years old and every
session everyone of the years
that I've been here we talk
about changing the way we do
things of modernizing the
legislature changing our
sessions paying the legislature
well after that and so what this
legislation does this proposal
proposes to reestablish what is
been done in the past which is
constitute a constitution
revision commission that would
meet we have appointments from
process by which we would amend
our constitution.
What do so on the ballot all
still subject to legislation the
voters but do so as opposed to
the piecemeal way we've been
doing it has we all every every
Commission provides an
appropriation for them to do so
and asks them to look at our
state constitution in total and
also compare other states and
Senate that is what this
legislation would do.
Thank you Senator want to
centers we're debate is Senate
bill three await as amended with
emergency clause.
Senator.
any specifics in this little
book that you think need to be
added or subtracted or modified.
Mr president I think there are
usually looking at a change to
our constitution that's an
affirmative a change to our
constitution but but really
there things are because we
should we should be eliminating
the best examples I can give you
appropriate or proper role the
the those six articulated our
state constitution we we never
get around to changing that
because there's really no
incentive or motivation to do so
but doesn't mean that we
some words out of law that are.
That we're certainly acceptable
in part of the regular speech
once upon a time but aren't
we did that because it now has a
different connotation that it
had a hundred years ago
it that time it really was more
more of a medical term.
well let's see freedom of
religion.
Because certainly there's now
this gigantic push.
For freedom from religion.
and I both know the freedom that
you're referring to and freedom
from government establishment of
religion is very well ingrained
I cannot proceed any
circumstance with the commission
transformational changes in New
Mexico let me give you a better
example center for example we
have been piece Mealing away the
N. I. donation clause in this
and yet we maintain the fiction
of having an and I donation
clause in the constitution that
that is probably one topic one
subject or maybe we ought to
really think about how do we
relationship perhaps to get some
of the things our state may need
to get done and the best example
I give used when we talk about
all the time and it doesn't
really make sense for us to
budget I issue that that made
made sense hundred years ago
does make sense to me now and I
don't think I should make sense
to us at all how difficult is it
and how frequently they call
themselves into special session
in response to a given need.
I think all those things are a
recognition that our society is
So Mister president and and
Senator.
So I I believe the anti donation
clause certainly had the value
of if you look at our tax code
from law late bruh manufacturers
chair of B. of processing plants
these were just exempted from
all right are very beginning in
Processing here now or maybe
even a broom and manufacture I
don't know.
But we but where we got to this
was because.
which is why we have to have all
these other reforms right.
but that's was that was the
purpose of that you know it's
real purpose in in the anti
donation clause is so that as
away for rail or whatever those
the the but those.
Those risks is still exist.
Some people in state government
Early get a check with more than
two zeros on.
so that's why my vote yes.
I'm free vote over a one right
different tax reform different
things like that.
I am interested to see that
you're a supporter of what Texas
does.
But Texas is very high property
Mexico I think would would be
very detrimental and so as I do
is I just look through the
constitution.
I do see some things that that
Who's going to be on it.
And what kind of.
Things are they going to
recommend that.
That doesn't have a political
agenda and I don't believe such
a thing can exist in humanity.
And scary.
To put everything in this.
In this little book.
At risk.
Beneficial use of water.
Okay.
That scare should be scary to
farmer.
gets all the water.
Because they have all the
people.
And so now there's no farmers
anywhere else because
Albuquerque gets all what we
could put that in the
constitution if we re wrote it.
want to do in the constitution.
So I'm just.
Of our constitution because I
think there's a lot of rights in
there that are seriously at
risk.
And I know that this is just a
become laws.
And this is just the camel's
nose under the tent if I may use
that phrase.
I fear.
Restrictions other than this is
just the first step down down
the road to completely take away
everybody's Water Rights and
raise their property taxes
considerably.
me for many years you know my
My efforts to protect water
rights of senior water rights
holders in New Mexico but argue
that it's a good example we have
language in the constitution
that talks about prior
but let me address a few things
you do really raise the right
word I think.
You said fear.
And let's accept something
And we remain fiftieth.
We're afraid of change in New
Mexico let's accept that we're
afraid of change.
looking at what Texas does.
How we should be looking with
Arizona Colorado our neighboring
states do in the way they run
their government perhaps the way
their constitution works and
we have no mechanism at all by
which we self reflect.
By which we look ourselves in
the mirror and say is this
really the best we can do is
this the best form of government
should meet longer or
differently.
Those are good questions.
I can't tell you how many years
I've introduced legislation to
we should make I'm able to pass
that bill.
I realize that I am able to pass
that bill through the
legislature that we would take
more authority and
recommendations to us will help
push us along that road and and
realize alternately Senator this
commission's Authority is only
to make recommendations
ultimately any change the
let's not use the word fear.
Plus learn to confront our fear
of change in New Mexico and
realize we're long overdue for
that.
Senator so.
The rights of the individual
citizen of New Mexico.
What we have a forty five day
session or sixty day session.
Those are debatable.
with water rights or religious
rights or whatever other writer
in here in those are the things
that they belong in our
constitution our constitution's
lot bigger than the United
change we have an opportunity to
do.
Big big tax reform changes this
year we have an opportunity as a
let it out of a committee.
Because
We're afraid I agree with that
we have a chance right now this
reform well yeah we piddle
around the edges both with taxes
and education.
But we don't get in and do it so
today in committee we heard a
bill to change the graduation
And and we'll pass that one
because it didn't really do
anything.
Look at the number of bills that
are going to come through here
that we're gonna pass
unanimously most don't do
afraid of taking away people's
rights.
I'm afraid that that what we do
is change our form of government
into something that's different
It's not the it's not that I
fear change it's that I've fear
what we're changing.
And if we really wanted to
change we can do it we need to
education change right now we
can do tax reform right now.
In this session today we stuff
time went to both of them.
to take anybody's rights away.
And I think Water Rights big is
a big one and if we're going it
So but I do know your committee
you've looked at constitutional
issues today both both state and
federal in the last couple of
In those things that we perceive
as rights today could go away.
And so I'm just looking for how
we how we have some some guard
rails to make sure that we.
Senator because remember again
this is a revision commission to
make recommendations the
ultimate guardrail is the motor
no no constitutional change
could take place without
line by line which we're doing
now with the piecemeal in any
centers you must realize as I
certainly do it seems like every
time I go to the ballot of these
days there's pages after pages
of constitutional amendments and
or will selectively use the
words in the enactment and so
we'll get the almost uniform
support for constitutional
amendments on the ballot because
Modern way of governing.
That that moment of of savings
to the public so to your
guardrail Center there's a guard
And the the story in today's
press the suggests the governor
is going to cost into special
session on on gun issues was the
And ethnologist and recognizes
the U. S. supreme court's recent
rulings on gun legislation.
So we can get called into
special session and it shouldn't
last more than a minute or two
because you can't pass a law
that's unconstitutional.
federal court and take it to
federal District Court in taken
up to the tenth circuit and take
it to the US Supreme Court and
will spend those hours and days
and months and years and
address what really ails New
Mexico.
And some of that's crime and
some of those public safety of
some of that is guns but
certainly we can do so in a way
that meets those constitutional
this legislature cannot do it.
Ultimately the public will have
the final say.
Cynosure Mr president I don't
think we've had a constitutional
the last one we did was to take
extra money out of the out of
the land grant permanent fund
the schools permanent fund.
And we did that to to fund early
childhood.
with a funding mechanism which
now dramatically over funds
early childhood but it's still
past this constitutional
amendment.
dollars of that we would have in
our general fund budget if we
hadn't done that.
That it doesn't matter what goes
into this.
It will be sold as good and
proper and beautiful.
bear arms for security defense
for lawful hunting and
recreation use and for other
lawful purposes.
But interestingly it says but
there is because in in nineteen
nineteen twelve.
You were callously if you hit
the gun.
a coward.
No.
We passed a law.
That said you know what now in
That makes sense in modern times
we did that without a
constitutional change.
It says there's nothing in here.
advisement here instead okay
this is what we want to do.
And frankly today.
I don't know in Farmington there
like come but other people still
want them I think Santa Fe and
want them they just don't want
people to know they have.
But that's okay but the concern
And I think if you sell that
right like we're trying to do
today we're just trying to you
know we're trying to protect
children.
the fear is that if you take
that out that comes out.
Water Rights come out.
Property rights come out.
We have a better way to do it.
And we nor the better way it
what we we we did both.
So now we have more money than
But we can't put it to the use
that was said to be.
So I think we need to be more
careful with what we do to our
constitution.
of stuff in this little book
that is just.
Weird okay.
But maybe we ought to have a
versus what we are we going to
take out if you can assure me
that weird is coming out.
I'm with you.
But right now I don't think you
All potentially on the chopping
block.
Do we want any of that.
So.
Anyway.
Thing is present with the bill
sponsor con the yield.
Yes how you thank you very much
Mr president senator.
me if I miss this
In your presentation.
but there's there's been.
past all the way through this
body through House Judiciary and
I believe was on the floor.
And appointed the Legislative
the bill we have all fifteen.
Appointed by the governor.
Mr president center could you
explain why.
gonna go here is to have
ultimately this commission
constituted and that that's
going to require ultimately the
support of of the governor just
give you an example one one
of our recent sessions requiring
a message from the governor when
there's a veto override other
states for example might do
something like a veto override
session and that's something
veto veto this and to
specifically address those those
vetoes that's an example of
something that we should at
least be exploring what other
not a is not a constitutional
amendment and ultimately the
governor has to sign on to this
legislation.
Senator Schmedes thank you Mr
president and senator I really
however you know I wasn't at the
table in those discussions but I
think that if we send a strong
message of bipartisan
public thinks about that.
Let's think about when this body
has the maturity of
bipartisanship.
Let's show the public to the
governor may not be in the
spirit of bipartisanship in
version was very good I voted in
favor of it.
as it's written now and I'm
gonna look just fair warning
Senator I I just based on some
introduced one right now.
But I think that we should we
should really look at this and
I'll I'll lastly say this Mister
president I'll go back to my.
My writing here.
state and I regressive society
what do I mean by that.
we are consolidating and
centralizing power over and over
again.
which we as a country disavowed
and broke away from and the more
and more the the the each step
we take to centralize and
the monarchy judges the
monarchy.
Legislates the monarchy
appropriates.
executive right now wants to
appropriate funding.
And that the executive branch of
government is not the
appropriate we are.
Agence centralizing and
consolidating power I I truly
believe that to get along and
learn how to get along with each
other we will not be able to co
exist and be neighbors.
If we centralize and consolidate
and.
To to see this bill.
Regress from twenty twenty one.
she can't just pick fifteen
Democrats understand that but
she still gets to a point all
fifteen every single one.
So this is just another example
with all due respect to the
But I'm afraid that if we just
bow down to the executive.
This commission is gonna tell
us.
Not really what the people of
The reader to read the floor
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill three await
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill three oh eight is
amended with the emergency
clause Senator Pirtle feel
explain which amendment as thank
you Mr president in in light of
this idea essentially what this
does one of the few things
fifteen members sounds like a
too many cooks in the in the
kitchen and in my opinion and
then we're giving and
appointment and so I think it's
strange that we would put this
much power into a governor
that's not going to be around
but just for a temporary time
by the pro tem for members are
appointed by the speaker of the
house and then two from each
minority leader from each
chamber and so I think this is
the balance needed you know I
that are in charge of putting in
front of voters constitutional
amendment is not up to the
governor the separation of power
issue and if the governor wants
to do and in right legislation
the way it should be and not do
the policies as we should just
because we're afraid of a veto
or or we're we're concerned that
there might be a veto and I
So we're debating Senate floor
member number one and I yield to
senator Montez.
Mr president preserve appreciate
remarks in thinking behind this
I have to consider this an
unfriendly amendment because
may be term limited of course
this rigorous support to
recognize this legislation
constitutes is commission only
for two years the goal is to
empanel them have them appointed
with Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president with the sponsor the
amendment yield Senator Pirtle
detailed this present I yield.
Mr president Senator how does it
you have Senator that that
happens through a joint
resolution it could be
introduced in either chamber and
in fact if you look through the
constitution there's many things
governor Martinez to put
cannabis legalization of
cannabis into the constitution
just to by pass the governor's
veto so that that's one of the
the only difference I believe is
things dealing with education
require a little bit of a higher
threshold otherwise it's just a
simple majority of New Mexico
voters Senator Brandt thank you
amendment is actually the right
thing because.
The governor's not involvement
in constitution now why should
we give her role in amending the
constitution or any governor
Rowland amending the
constitution if we're gonna do
so it seems like that's the
right way to go.
You know I I've heard the
sponsor of the bill many times
stand up and talk about giving
away our power.
as a body that get to amend the
constitution not the governor so
I think it's a very reasoned the
amendment and it make sure that
the power stays where the power
amendment center part of the
clothes we're close in on the
amendment and thank you Mr
president and I just have to
point out to the body we've
we've seen in the newspaper
beating down my door trying to
get on to.
How how are we going to put the
power of the governor to put
fifteen people on a commission
Andrew she's failed to fill
the proven track record of the
governor it would be very
reckless and careless of this
body to put any type of
responsibility with regard to
a voice vote.
Senator is where voting a
senator or member number one.
The nays have it.
Senator member one has failed to
be adopted.
We do have another floor
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill three await
as amended with emergency clause
amended with the mercy Clause no
objections Senator Ivy Soto
explain what the amendment as
the very much Mr president up
what this what this does is it
simply insurers that of the
communities when appointing the
fifteen members to this to this
Commission
three await as amended with
emergency clause and I yield to
the sponsor of the bill Senator
about this.
The figures present as president
had a chance going for and I I
think this isn't a good
amendment to this because we're
I think that if we're going to
evaluate the way our state
government functions.
That it's imperative we have the
the representation of sovereign
nations in that dialogue and so
I support them.
and I stand in strong support of
the amendment thank you Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator is we're still debating
senator member number one and I
Committee and former member of
the Indian Affairs Committee.
And and thank you Mr president
center for bringing this was
there any consideration for
members from an acequia.
we decided to ask the governor
to give due consideration for
the state's historical income
and cultural communities while
also recognizing specifically
the sovereign nations that also
amendment to add in our state
give communities thank you.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Si no further debate on the
senators we are taking a vote.
To adopt senator member one all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may.
thank you very much Mr president
and agency president
Will the sponsor of the bill
yield Senator Ivey Soto we we
already passed amendments were
not back on the bill at this
number two to Senate bill three
oh eight as amended with
emergency clause amendment
sponsored by Senator Schmedes.
Senate committee to move and
I see no objections centers
reserve explain what a moment as
thank you Mr president and then
you know with with this first
amendment on now we may have to
is deemed to be unfriendly
because I think I may need to be
rewritten I would then pull the
amendment if it is deemed to be
friendly or or a version of it
to then I would work on a
brings it back to that closer to
the twenty twenty one version
the governor gets three and
Legislative Council it's twelve.
the amendment does.
Senator Steinborn mistras I I
don't have a question
thank you I was waiting to see
if this is a friendly or
the amendment again I appreciate
the the effort in the thinking
behind this.
The Senators right though
however I think if we were to do
this we have to substantially
right the last amendment and
probably due to other changes
bills has representation not on
behalf of the legislature but by
legislators in other words if
you look at the appointment
there are two members of the
house two members of the Senate
legislators themselves to serve
on the commission that's an
learn ID group taking a look at
our state constitution and and
doing so hopefully in a
scholarly studious way the the.
football for Las Cruces high
school.
We were terrible we lost just
about every game there was and
and the worst part of the trauma
is watching the game film every
that we don't do that we never
spent any time looking back at
the game what do we just pass
what are the consequences of the
laws we passed.
know etcetera the goal here is
to have a commission that is not
partisan.
I appreciate some of my
colleagues are thinking that's
impossible you can't convene a
And look at our constitution
save how maybe we don't need a
continuing constitutional
provision that says it's okay
for women to have certain jobs
because that's what our
constitution says as we it's
to reject the amount of
appreciate appreciate very much
the debate in the thinking thank
you Senator what is we do have
further debate any further
debate on the floor amendment.
given the first amendment I I am
going to withdraw the amendment
just a second
I wanted to first see what the
sponsor thought of that because
he had such a good bill in
Overwhelmingly approving that
bill in twenty twenty one.
This is not me saying it it's
also all the senators of right
bill that we're not that we're
it's gonna be more partisan it's
gonna be a weaker.
Commission.
In the proof will be in the
took a couple years ago.
And and what we're doing once
again I'm gonna beat the drum
again.
When we're looking at studies
it's greatly possible to form
non partisan commissions I'll
tell you how you do it you have
have you know roughly half one
side half the other and you
That is how to establish a
nonpartisan commission that's
the general concept of how we
should be.
Commissioner scientific bodies
it secretary Seneal is present I
to form an actual bipartisan
commission thank you Mr
president senator member number
two has been withdrawn we're
back on the bill Senator Ivey
Soto on the bill thanks very
So I'm looking at some of the
provisions in the compact.
With the United States would
these be up for renegotiation if
referring to section article
twenty one of the state
constitution which is Intel
Compaq with United States.
I miss president that's correct.
There's a there's an inching
Soto is referring to in our
state constitution says
polygamists or plural marriages
and polygamous Mexico
habitations are forever
prohibited
perhaps United States required
New Mexico as a condition of
statehood to expressly reject
plural and polygamous marriages
constitution that really should
reflect the modern state of New
Mexico.
Senator Ivey Soto thanks very
much up as president and this
president the.
But our constitution actually
sets the size of a school board.
In a school district having
that does that is that something
that that makes sense
constitutionally.
Senator Hernandez.
I'm sorry Mr that with this with
we say the school boards are
five members but our
constitution says.
Uniquely that if the school
disproportionate two hundred
thousand.
advice on I I'm not.
The first one to specialize in
the education I know many of you
all of this chamber have far
better experience and knowledge
on the subject and I do I'm I'm
not going to be the one to a
I'm using the opportunity the
debate here to point out some of
the the absurdities in our state
constitution we we take great
pride in our state about English
of the public schools says that
all public schools in Mexico's
essential schools shall always
be conducted in English.
Is it about time we change the
Senator Ivey Soto thanks very
much Mr president Thomas present
our our constitution.
Says that
We subject to retention
rejection on a non partisan
ballot at the general election.
Agency president it I think I
think the sponsor for for
engaging me in a in a couple of
these questions because just
seems to me that that are our
And the and that is not an
attack on anybody's basic rights
that is an attack on the fact
that our constitution is this
And the and so it does seem to
me that it is.
It is high time that we that we
have folks take a look at it
bring back back a proposal.
Would that go straight to the
people or would that come
through the legislature after
it's been considered by the
Where the convention itself
would propose constitutional
amendments and perhaps a topic
on social moments we're not
proposing that the second is the
way we've been doing it which is
piecemeal at each election is
way to evaluate our constitution
and I'm supporting that we've
done it previously this is not
this not be the first time we
would convene a commission of
the of of this type that's been
would whatever whatever happens
this commission will come back
to this legislature for debate
on the floor and I think you
we do need to have people take a
look at our constitution.
And so thank you Mr president
and thank you sponsor for
building this.
Say no further debate.
really because what we're doing
here you know is no we're not
giving up to forty in and my
good Senator from Albuquerque is
is right we're not giving up
with forty but we're giving up
legislators legislature on a
regular basis now we're gonna
find her influence through this
commission with authority
because the commission will
provide the legitimacy and the
point and I thought Center
pearls amendment was great
appoint a commission that has
some voting authority out of
this body.
So.
In the end all we are is we're
up that influence to this
commission to come in impress
itself upon this body and push
legislation and and let's face
it we we do have that that
We're now to through this
commission.
By the executive through this
body to allow us to write more
statutes the issue authority to
to if Senator portals amendment
do go through why would she not
veto that.
I mean it it just reinforces
Authority.
To centralize power on the
fourth floor.
The opposite of what our
constitution seeks to do.
statute to a shape the laws in
the state.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Baca.
If I may disabuse anyone of any
concerns let me say that I've
never spoken about this
legislation with the governor or
the executive branch this is not
coordinated.
My last colleague who spoke
Senator Baca of expressed some
concerns I hope that we'll think
about this little more broadly
his concern is that we would be
There is no method no procedures
no process no committee no
commission.
We have absolutely no procedure
process by which we look
ourselves in the mirror.
be we have no methodology no
process no procedure we're
giving away nothing by proposing
to adopt for two years.
And insight.
Perhaps.
We don't look at what we do here
and what we pass here than
really look back and say did it
work.
Think centre Ivey Soto brought
up the judicial selection
well.
But we don't have any method or
process by which we look back
and say we did this we try to
for twenty plus years did it
We're giving up nothing.
We're holding everything a good
example would be those who
expressed concern about creating
a congressional redistricting
commission in the thinking that
to do we maintain all of our
authority power but we did so
with greater clarity and with
the resources and efforts of
that commission in that process.
Have fought.
Across party lines for the role
of the legislature.
For the authority of the
honest wasn't easy.
And and I know there still some
perhaps some hard feelings about
that but to suggest that you or
I would ever be part of anything
As I hope colleagues that that
we can talk about how we do
business here in a thoughtful
meaningful way with some studies
some reflection and some
resources some money for two
years.
three oh eight as amended with
the.
Emergency clause and ask
unanimous consent the Senate
records show the rules been
called in all those present
Senator is tier seats before I
take the vote I want to make
sure Senator Brandt centre for
the.
Senator seats if you wish to
vote no please raise your hand.
Senator Neville voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator brand building known.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
Senator Ingle voting no Senator
Woods voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative fourteen the
Just.
We're gonna have the
calculations to make sure we
could emergency clause within a
certain number.
amended without emergency
clause.
Has passed the Senate Senator
about this resident colleagues
thank you for the debate.
report read in and we'll do the
confirmations just before doing
that Center souls has a gas such
as that the Center cells where
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
was here in the building and so
I asked if she would come and be
my my guest for a little while
she has to leave in about half
an hour but wanted to introduce
her to the rest of the New
Thank you Senators.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports etcetera so before going
to committee point I just want
to make sure Senator goes to
president and body and asked.
The floor earlier if we would
look at Senate bill three
seventy three is rules and I'm
asking unanimous consent of the
would allow the Senators again
this was a title that bill.
It is.
A relating families a connecting
can't figure this out first is
doing it on the fly Senator
Gallegos Mister chair Mister
president I have she is not
moving to because it's got a
duplicate in the other chamber
ready for confirmation if we can
come back with every something
you'd be open to I will to for
the moment thank thank you
Senator Gallegos senator think
it's a next order of business
thank you Mr president UNM's
under consideration
consideration Senate executive
message number two dated
February second twenty twenty
three in which the governor
makes the following up re
the Senate confirmed this re
appointment respectfully
submitted Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
upon individually hearing no
objection the reader to raise.
Amended the Senate executive
letter number twenty three dated
August tenth twenty twenty two
in which the governor makes the
following appointment David
Christian di as secretary of the
department of homeland security
confirm this appointment Senate
executive letter number sixteen
dated July twenty eight twenty
twenty two and what's the
governor makes the following
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirmed this of
this appointment respectfully
submitted Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator.
their acted upon individually.
Senator Pete were to take this
the next order of business thank
David C. di the presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
secretary of the department of
homeland security and energy
management and I know you'll to
twenty twenty two I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of David Christian
di as a secretary for the
department of homeland security
individuals who are in the rules
committee meeting this morning
I'm sure were fully impressed in
terms of the commitment the
ability to articulate and of
background that gets him to this
position and to those
individuals that where there and
of course those that to have not
had an opportunity to listen to
wild fires and the floods in
northeastern northern New Mexico
Mr di a was there continuing to
go ahead and work if you will
including this region were
addressed long with is
credentials there's some
thoughts that really stuck out
in my mind and again I'll go
ahead and Ollie lewd to these
move forward and to have the
communication he talked about
honor and courage and commitment
some of the traits that he lives
by and my experiences in dealing
beyond reproach he's an
experienced planner he's always
prepared and he really loves his
job the things that I observed
the analytics and most X. most
especially what he does is he
prepares in order to go ahead
and address issues that might be
we're going to find in the long
run that he understands the
threats to our cyber system to
our environment and to our
population and he is going to
he indicated he's not done
serving so that Mr president
members of the Senate I'm
available for questions or if
others wish to go and speak on
The confirmation of David
Christian die for homeland
security.
Anyone wishing right Senator
Stewart.
morning it's it's rare that we
get someone with his background
who wants to serve in New Mexico
he looked his whole service has
chose New Mexico to come up as
his state so he's really worked
with others will he he just
rolled up the sleeves and work
Thank you Senator Stewart any
further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
Campos a close a confirmation
Senator Stewart voting steer
seeds.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote.
Thirty eight in the affirmative
zero on the negative the
appointment of David Christian
diet secretary of the department
of homeland security and
president members of the Senate
at this time I would like to
present to you David Christian
di a nice round of applause for
this gentleman thank you.
Plymouth but I got to meet
secretary dying now I called
secretary and just really
impressed I was it was a little
bit hard for me to vote yes
and thank you for your service
to our country into your service
to our state.
Thank you Senator Brandt centre
you Mr president I asked that
Senator Lopez school Senator
Lopez I thank you very much Mr
president.
Pursuant to Senate executive
message number two dated
objections Senator Lopez to
explain thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
secretary is that is here in
front of our chamber once again
had a very thorough hearing and
I appreciate the patience of
course of of secretary for a
she gave us a simple of story of
you know how she and her husband
had moved back to Santa Fe I'm
looking for employment of course
and that Mr president things
don't just happen by chance
by the department of
corrections.
Mr president members of the
Senate as cabinet secretary she
has under her leadership there's
been a reduction in New Mexico's
developed independent budget
streams to print chair dedicated
funding for re entry initiatives
and Mr president she shared so
system and there's so much more
the plans in which to continue
addressing that issue for
reduction purposes.
Mr president she has also
with regards to I called
recognizing those correctional
officers and other employees for
longevity pay
Mr president with many of the
looser we are in very good hands
and I will stand for questions
thank you senator Senator as
we're debating.
Christ rise in strong support of
this nomination you know those
of us involve a criminal justice
reform myself included I I feel
like corrections is is a partner
do feel the secretary is really
committed to for example re
integration fighting current
recidivism when somebody's
released from prison and it's
Senator manuals followed by
Senator the Lopez thank you Mr
president house running support
you know this is when the
cabinet secretaries if you don't
go to prisons we don't know how
and for all a young lady to work
herself from the bottom to the
top and then lead us in prison
been should be proud of you hope
you had funny father's birthday
this weekend I did see over the
weekend and you had a birthday
party for your father I won't
say when but I hope you you want
to and I didn't so thank you Mr
this nomination I it is a very
hard job as senator senator
when you said and what I've
really appreciated with
policy changes happening she
I've gotten a a response in an
explanation and it's always very
well thought out
this nomination great job thank
you Senator Lopez center how to
meal followed by Senator Kernan
and center of the subpoena Mr
president I stand in strong
support of this nomination that
she's not only a northern New
love hearing this morning Mr
president as when she talked
about bringing in yoga and art
the inmates on how to help de
escalate stress and learn
something you've heard me say
before that we're stronger
only think of resident cabinet
secretariat think of her as my
friend and ally and as a
freshman who came in to this
during the pandemic she was
always a phone call away to help
me and and the help that I
Thank you Mr president our price
in support of this
Nomination secretary was Cerro
She is very fair in her dealings
with all the prisons and
certainly I represent an area
ability to reach out and contact
her if I need to that it's it's
always good to have someone who
does support all the people that
responsibility that I think we
have to know exactly what's
going on and and I've done that
a number of times and would
encourage people to do that and
Thank you Mr president and and I
stand in strong support of the
secretaries reconfirmation as
well when she was first
confirmed last year or four
important to bring in somebody
from the outside somebody with a
different view maybe from
experience some some other state
of the I've been proven wrong
demonstrated is from within
she's she she knows the
department and the department
personnel trust her and I think
that's a crucial thing the the
way she's gone about slowly.
Moving this organization turning
the battleship around degree by
degree is very impressive and I
really think I look forward to
support of this nomination you
know the how we perform under
stress says a lot about each and
everyone of us that's for the
competent you know that
unfortunately be in females we
have hurdles to overcome that's
no secret to anyone.
exemplary fashion I am so proud
of her and she continues to
serve as an example we should
all follow yes we can do it in
your doing it well secretary
My good friend she has done so
much for more community of
Clayton she came in she took
over prison there and and there
was some stumbling blocks in.
thank you Mr president thanks
center was any further debate
senators.
Senators tier seats where
voting.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative on the negative the
reappointment of lease at the
very much Mr president secretary
would you please stand acutely
please congratulate secretary to
the set of.
Center how to meal.
Mr president I just that the
credentials of Ricky Serna the
presented to the full Senate for
The president pursuant to Senate
executive message number sixteen
dated July twenty eighth twenty
twenty two I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
Thank you Mr president you know
we heard from.
Ricky Serna this morning and we
called him the closer he comes
in when it New Mexicans need
them the most and he'll step
department of transportation and
no job is too big or too small
for him he's a proud native son
of the Espanola valley and a
proud alumnus of New Mexico
we're bridging between no party
but bridges between urban and
rural New Mexicans and projects
that he focus on which are in
the average of billions of
department says petition and
I'll begin with Senator Woods
followed by Senator quite a
Hemphill Senator Woods.
keep shoving more on you Sir and
it's just amazing to me that
that you're willing to take that
studies going in and you've got
more to do and I just thank you
for taking it on it's not an
easy job and I know you have a
lot of people under you that
You're doing the yeoman's job
also so thank you Sir for the
work you do.
Thank you Senator Woods redress
Center could have health thank
you Mr president tonight to
stand in strong support of this
responsiveness of the department
of transportation when we
in toward some flooding in off
bridge re opened additionally
for the flooding response in my
district your department's
provided equipment to assist
responsiveness and just ask that
you honor the the wishes of
the late senator Benny on to
after his untimely death and
then the appointment of our
lieutenant governor to fill his
seat so I look forward to
with that Mr president thank you
again for stepping up to the
plate I appreciate it thank you
senator credit Hemphill senator
wrote a since that would be
picking a certain selection or
not selection in in the house
bill two as we move forward very
interesting way to promote a
a big learning curve and you
listen to your staff can be
helpful to your staffing in
learning that process.
And so I think that needs to
happen we also need to figure
sense roundabouts in Gallup and
thirty in.
In the.
I'll have to call you back I got
some holes in the password but I
That that's that's right a road
to nowhere but we need to make
sure that we correct those
things as we move forward that
we put contractors work that we
fill potholes in the state in
Campos Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Shendo center for the
thank you very much Mr president
I to rise and support of of this
personnel office I I worked a
little bit within their in
detail on the workforce
solutions
At the time what I would call it
to the transportation area
because when you think about
people like this in state
government that have grown up in
in the in the state government
and done so many different
gum wrapper a paper clip and and
floppy disk or something you
know so I just want to thank him
for agreeing to continue down
this path and
bringing in new in a breath of
fresh air to his new assignment
and there's a few live stories
that we can share regarding Mr
Ricky Serna part of it deals
directly with education the
other part with human resources
As he continues he the work some
things with the highest level of
administration with the highest
level of motivation and most
importantly with a commitment to
ensure that New Mexicans are
truly going to be the
resources available to continue
to improve not only are roads
but if you will everything that
ties in to public safety home we
talk about our automobiles and
state but he has the ability to
work when it comes to fairness
working very closely with the
commission the commission itself
capacity the technology in the
vision but he also has the
lifetime commitment to ensure
that his marathon is going to be
very successful and for that
reason Mr president members of
support of this nomination I had
the opportunity to work with him
closely while he was acting
director of CPO and we I was
just so impressed everything we
people really like to work for
him because he's he's just a
wonderful manager a wonderful
supervisor a wonderful leader
and I'm very very happy that
I'm honored to stand support
thank you Senator Lopez we have
further debate we have session
though.
Thank you Mr president I to rise
and support of of secretary
years I mean the the months
leading up to the confirmation
confirmation I've had the chance
to work with him and his staff
and responsiveness and and his
quick study and knowledge of
that he's a is a is a his staff
as well as the a local
government of person is so
responsive and and I think we
had an issue and trauma and and
it's a big state with a lot of
roads of law to take care of and
hopefully we can continue to
provide the resources so that
appointment of Ricky Serna.
Senators tier seats please we're
voting.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative there on the
negative the appointment of
Ricky Serna as secretary of the
by the state Senate Senator
Hotmail Mr president has the
cabinet secretary to stand up
I'd like to also welcome his
wife Monique who's on the roster
with them his aunt Lydia
brother and so congratulations
if everybody can stand up and
help me in congratulating the
cabinet secretaries.
now we yield to senator Majority
Leader Peter Wirth to take us to
the next order of business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
we're on that order of Business
where we are unanimous consent
we go that our business third
reading of legislation I yield
the center Ivey Soto for Senate
bill two forty eight probate
subject to debate amendment or
substitution I see no objections
Senator Ivey Soto to explain the
very much Mr president as
president of this bill updates a
eighteen sixty five.
And while they have served us
well for a while at some point
we'd like to revisit them and
and so these up this allows for
records retention rules in
Representative and technologist
the fact that the Supreme Court
has passed a rule set regarding
Supreme Court and would that be
happy to stand for questions.
Senator debated Senate bill two
forty eight IST twice amended
anyone wishing to debate we do
Senator Ivey Soto to moving
explained eminent the service
was president of the Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill two forty eight IST
by amended.
email from him where he realize
that on page six of the bill we
referred to the probated court
as opposed to the probate court
I want to assure you that the
The Senators where debating
senator member number one.
Anyone wishing to debate the
amendment.
See no debate.
and ask for voice what.
Senator is more voting to adopt
senator member number one all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it.
Thank you Mr president the
sponsor yield center so the deal
is present to.
Nothing was presents under could
you go over a few of the major
Senator Brandt so this doesn't
actually so this is not a change
to the probate code itself so
the substantive laws of probate
it it's simply updates on number
the laws for example first of
all it aligns with the election
of all the probate judges three
of them are off cycle they would
like to be on the same cycle for
that when they hold court that
they hold court in the county
seat unless the.
unless the county commissioners
by ordinance designates another
probate court as it is a county
court pursuing our constitution
that the.
We we clarify that there is the
disqualification refusal and
capacity and an ability to serve
and the ability to be able to
we to the public court and the
District Court.
Is that if somebody files in the
probate court and then it gets
removed to the District Court.
There was the need to pay a new
District Court there is no
additional filing fee that is
paid
and so you know and then we do
by ordinance to provide for
separate clerk of the probate
court if they desire to do so
there are a few counties
the probate court from the
clerk's office but it's still
within the county so that's with
the control of of the board of
county commissioners they can by
judge to to to be in their
office and do the work certainly
this president so a probate
During the times of the probate
court is open as necessary for
the proper discharge of their
duties and they may set regular
hours but because it's a part
of when they're available and
how often they need to be
available Mister president
senator.
Is every counties probate judge
paid the same.
constitution the legislature
sets the salary of
County officers based on the
classification of the counties
what the legislature has a
think article forty four if I
remember correctly and so
so the maximum amount that each
probate judge can be paid is is
to a county ordinance in each
county and I will say that the
probate judge and a classe
counties paid no more than
thirty thousand dollars three
thousand one hundred fourteen
fifteen thousand and ninety
eight dollars.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator I want to get back a
little bit to the hours
open.
without it being considered that
they've abandoned their their
job.
ten I think it's article six
that talks about minimum hours
to do a two month at least
monthly be present but in
addition to that it probably
judges
frankly abandoned their duties
So much present Sir thank you
very you kind of went to my next
question
and covering what what happens
then because you've got in here
proper discharge of duties and
may set may set regular hours
so if if.
If someone's trying to get a
to what file a complaint with
the US of the office of the
courts.
Mr president and Senator Brandt
so probably it is a unique
court.
only deals with
with probate matters where where
there is a controversy on the
administration of the estate in
when the probate clerk is open
as opposed to the probate judge
and when they can file in each
county and so what we do find
here is that the probate court
county is able to know when they
can go file things with the
probate court that's really the
most important thing for the
public.
System and so I just think it
maybe an area we need to look at
a little bit more
we're paying someone classe
County thirty eight thousand
dollars that never comes into
the office.
So maybe I ran for the wrong
office and maybe that's what I
need to go back and reconsider
what office I'm serving in
thousand dollars to preside over
almost no one and so the seems
like some really good jobs
some things but we definitely
need to make sure that these
things are being done.
I think most people now use
probate when a loved one passes
all that
but.
That's really difficult on the
family who's lost a loved one
and then you can't get a hold of
the court and so I think there
Any further debate centers.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president a
excuse senator Sanchez until he
returns no objection si no
further debate Senator Ivey Soto
to close on the bill.
community as the his state
representative but in addition
to that his spouse is the
probate judge and silica and us
county with that Mr president
has has got you know just
because of the Senate that the
record reflect
that the role has been called
and that apparently back up I
shopping centers we're voting
all senators to your seats.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
I.
I have thirty six in the
affirmative.
thank you colleagues we'll go on
to item number three that's
going to be Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill ninety two pharmacists
scope of practice and you'll to
substitute for Senate bill
ninety two on final passage is
no evidence is been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution thing
two the pharmacists scope of
practice of expense I would say
a slightly what we already give
pharmacists the authority to do
like of medications of of for
for for minor ailments and so on
this.
Adds to the list of things that
for pharmacists to be able to
provide and then the mid to the
the equipment and the materials
that are needed to administer
but then they can also prescribe
the of the needles and the
syringes that are needed to
inject the the medication the
makes it possible for people to
have their insurance cover the
cost of those materials without
which they might not be able to
without the prescription and in
the case of people with low
incomes this could become a
barrier to they're actually
using the medication that they
have prescribed the real import
them and it was amended in
Judiciary Committee down to five
enumerated conditions they can
infections and HIV which is
limited to prep and pep
All of those have to be done
the pharmacists may be far more
easily access to the in a
primary care doctor or at a time
when a primary care doctor is
not available it's a way of
bill ninety two and we do have
debate was Senators meetings
followed by Senator Hickey.
Thing is present with the bill
sponsor you center to subpoena
detailed.
Mr president center I'm looking
at the amendments in context I
do remember this bill in
committee where we were talking
those put those constraints on
HIV.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
have the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute well I
guess you have it in context
it's on page ten line for human
immunodeficiency virus limited
Right Mr president center thank
you I think a things just the
way we're we're logging these so
I'm good on that.
I'm gonna keep scrolling here I
I I trust you and I know it's in
there I just didn't see it when
really I just want to bring to
the attention the body just the
fact that we continue to in my
opinion just lower the bar we're
not addressing the root cause of
you look at their latest
evaluation of this issue.
Of clear testing and clear
their waves websites and that
the two main themes that they
found once again this is on the
city's website this is not not
me speaking this the CDC's
information this of the two
now in New Mexico crazy crazy
and so it's having the hospitals
have in the clinics it's
happening everywhere and so we
have a situation where notes a
in the bill I absolutely support
that the top that says you know
they can give these other
supplies like lancets and other
these other you know like an
uncomplicated you TI some of
these other things that
commend the sponsor on number
six.
other emerging public health
threats identified by the board
access point in a time of
emergency but that access point
should not be open and kind of
just regular times Mister
president we we should create
contributing to our antibiotic
resistance problem and the way
that consumers in the way that
Americans act with health care
is they want to go and when we
you're going to get you know
you're gonna get some kind of
antibiotic or whatever and we
had a lot of we have a lot of
urologist stand up in committee
and we're all on zoom in and
you know or not to pick on one
more but some of these other big
box stores whose no look at that
problem in our American consumer
driven society you're you're
gonna go take a test you just
than I would be happy to support
things present.
You have further debate with
Senator Hickey followed by
Senator Stefanics Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr president with the
observations initially when this
bill was in committee I was
concerned before it was fixed
and I think that there are
number of really important fixes
including putting it under the
can tree to a number of things
but I think it needs to be
examined very closely and so I
did to put two hundred thousand
dollars of junior money to the
a set of what in the business we
call standing orders specific
conditions how real clear signs
and symptoms and and treatments
and so forth and I think we can
ability in our pharmaceutical
companies to keep up with new
medications to fight bacteria
is starting to be a losing
antibiotic and starts to spread
and that antibiotic isn't any
good anymore so again I the
university gladly accepted to
can do as well and I've asked
him to look at that not just
clinical pharmacy so I just want
to go on record as a.
you Senator for bring the bill
for in thank you Mr president
thank you senator thank you we
do have further debate with
Senator fenics and followed by
centering on.
discipline I'm sorry I just I'm
sure I've you so do the good
deals as well but I would Mr
president Bonser yield.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator TCP not since I don't
Bill would cover
illnesses such as asthma and
diabetes.
ask for my ex for witness to
come in because I don't want to
give misleading information so
if if the the I would like to
ask unanimous consent to bring
Dale Tinker my expert witness
pharmacy is the association
thank you.
Say no objection if this
sergeant arms connects escort
the expert witness into the
chamber and then Center sentence
once the expert witnesses
but my question Senator to see
Pino was whether of common and
chronic illnesses such as asthma
and diabetes are already covered
medications for either as man or
diabetes but this bill would
permit them to prescribe the the
the tools that would be needed
nebulizer and other things like
that the stuff that would make
the medicines effective.
Thank you Mr president thank you
when the center yield control to
shipping Energy subpoena that Mr
president Senator Ingle I be
glad to.
Senator and when you spoke of
their in the latter part of your
testimony about the I guess it
would do on their own or does it
for farmers is it a pharmacist
and individual pharmacist us
something or is it a blanket
The pharmacist would would
The pharmacy association would
bring a protocol to the board
Present centers the the
pharmacist okayed in this now is
a pharmacist assistant okay in
this.
with with the testing so they
could do some things like swabs
and and
Thank you Mr shots there is
there is there's a limited
Centers this.
How many other states have
passed something like this.
Trying to decide whether to do
this or not.
All right thank you.
Any further debate senators.
Senator Brandt.
Mr president Senator Brandt
even if they may be located in
that community yet at the same
time there are these highly
trained pharmacists who were
working in that community who
is that.
are you just mainly in.
Those rural areas.
shortages we have of physical
therapists and every every every
health related profession we
need more of in the state and
and and one of the ways we
do it.
By letting them do those things
that are within their abilities
we can reduce the gap between
the availability of physicians
your temperature take your blood
pressure you know all those
things before they prescribe
something to you Mr president
Senator they already have that
if they already have that
Mr Mr president Senator Brandt
you're not even the pharmacist
yet but if you became a
pharmacist you might be able to
Will they need to carry medical
malpractice insurance.
Mr president Senator Brandt yes
they do they already do.
Mr president senator Brent takes
they don't carry medical
malpractice insurance they carry
liability insurance so that in
case they are sued their
pensions would cover whatever
and revisit that medical
malpractice bill and make sure
we had a man because now we're
gonna have to do and the things
that doctors do so they should
probably fall under the same
like doctors
and I have some concerns with
that I'm not sure that the
training is that the level it
needs to be to do that I'm not
sure that they should be
diagnosing illnesses although I
so I appreciate what they do but
I'm not sure making them doctors
even in a rural setting is the
right solution thank you.
Senator Brandt.
Si no further debate.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino to close
on the bill.
Thank you Mr president and
And public affairs committee and
modify the bill amended the bill
to take into account the issues
that were raised there and but I
availability of a of the
pharmacists were not us to
replace doctors we're asking to
supplement and complement them
and with that I would move that
Senate Judiciary Committee
voting in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands Senators tier
seats where voting on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill ninety two.
committee voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Semenya's voting no.
Senator sure voting no.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative ten in the making a
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
number four Senate bill three oh
two and you'll to Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action replacing Senate bill
president Senate bill three oh
two would amend our state ethics
commission act to repeal a house
commission beyond the scope
allowed in the New Mexico
constitution so that expansion
conflicts with the constitution
which limits the authority of
back into compliance with the
constitution stand for
questions.
Senator debating Senate bill
we need to to probably look at
bringing in constitutional
moment to build expand the
jurisdiction of the judicial
standards commission so that we
point
but but since we since we got
the law amended before we got
the constitution amended.
you know I appreciate that
Any further debate centers.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent excuse senator Lopez and
Stewart to close on the bill
thank you Mr president I move
that Senate bill three oh to do
now pass us and I'm just kind of
the Senate consent of the Senate
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Five thirty for the permanent
amended all you'll to Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
twenty as amended on final
president this bill amends the
education retirement act to
allow employees of southeast New
Mexico college to participate in
the alternative retirement plan
anymore distribution with the H.
specify and federal laws SO two
things that it allows the new
southeast New Mexico college to
distributions so with that I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you senator Kernan centers
we're debating Senate bill
twenty as amended anyone wishing
to debate.
bill twenty as amended do now
pass to ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the role has
been to show that the record
show that the roast been called
and all those present voted in
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty for the firm
is here the negative Senate bill
twenty as amended has passed the
Senate Senator Kernan do you
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended at the record
show that all actions for
placing Senate bill two seventy
one as amended.
On final passage has been taken
provides a clear definition of
equine revising the procedures
were in a band in the collected
or cruelly treated animal can be
placed with an agency or
organization where there will be
Senate body I do want to clarify
that this bill focuses on
domestic courses that are
already categorized as livestock
in state law the reason why this
bill is so important to me Mr
president bodies that twenty
riding as I took care of our
name Shiloh who is ignored by
their owners.
Shallow is a very sweet our I
learned a lot I learned how to
muck stalls I learned how to
feed carrots I learned how to
able to exist twenty years ago
we have eleven state registered
equine rescues run by dedicated
hardworking people involuntary
Mr president this bill would
allow that every one of those
discussion that will come from
this body.
Thank you Senator Hamblen we're
debating Senate bill two seventy
one as amended anyone wishing to
debate.
coming from this office the
nasal our nays
Then the donkeys and the and the
hippies I think is where we're
going on that one the passages
not being able to see them
before they go to auction so
Mister president I move the
Senate bill two seventy one as
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
rule has been called and all
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator share voting no.
I have a lot of thirty one the
affirmative three in the
negative Senate bill two seventy
one as amended has passed the
you Mr president thank you
Senator Hamblen.
May want to reconsider that vote
Senator.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill three eighty
one on final passage has been
taken and that it is now subject
passed last year providing two
and a half percent of the
severance tax bonding capacity
earmarked strictly for
affordable housing in New Mexico
this year to start building
affordable housing that's what
it does just changes the date Mr
president thank you Senator
Rodriguez.
Senate the records show that the
world has been called and all
those present mode in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
senators to your seats.
By a vote.
you Mr president members of the
Senate we're going on to item
number eight on the calendar
that Senate bill three.
Thirty five with emergency
Senate bill three thirty five of
the emergency clause on final
passage is been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection Senator
election act as it applies to
Conservancy district because
despite their best efforts.
They have not been able to
They were working on it and they
would they think that is it that
the simple delay rather than a
the internet right to exception
would solve the problem and with
hit hit the high points this is
just a two year delay on
Conservancy districts going to
the local election.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and Mr
See no debate Senator Ortiz the
panel to close on the bill.
Mr president I move the Senate
bill three thirty five with the
centers where voting tier seats
please.
By a vote of thirty five the
Fuhrman is here on the data
thank you Mr president I voted
for this because it appeared
that we're gonna be purging
voter rolls and make sure we
only had legitimate voters and I
love that idea think centre
I yield now to our Senate floor
Majority Leader Peter Wirth to
take us to the next order of
business thank you Mr president
so we're still going to do a
couple more you Senator
Stefanics for item number nine
Senate finance committee
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill seven of be put on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
that would create a rural health
care delivery fund.
Twenty eight of the thirty three
counties that have health care
within no more than the first
five years of operation the
grants are for operating losses
of new or expanding services it
verifiable claims and cost data
and for that Mr president I
would stand for debate questions
and substitute thank you centers
we are debating Senate finance
committees of supercenter bill
Mister president I yield thanks
Mr president center so we had
several questions in the Senate
finance committee about the bill
to new practices that expanded
on the other ones
I thought there was a
willingness to look at
clarifying the language at this
funding would be eligible for
school based health centers.
as Senator Steinborn as I
mentioned in the Senate finance
committee in the first hearing
is that school based health
clinics can either be under
large health plans such as
Senator Steinborn.
Okay Mister president well
appreciate that senator and.
Anyway I think as you said it
based health centers so the
other question I wanted to ask
about.
Mr president was about the
communities I think the bill
specifies it's only for
counties.
about communities like Sunland
park hatch.
Rural areas even with in
counties that are bigger than
that because under this bill
people or less and it is the
executive's desire to assist
those twenty eight counties out
desperate need in the rural
counties of our state for some
assistance madam president
Senator you're telling me that
sometimes
smaller counties can be
existing facilities in some
counties at all we don't have
enough specialist we don't have
primary care we don't have
we do know Mister president
senator that we don't have
enough behavioral health
services in our state we do know
that some communities could
really benefit from physical
expanding services thank you Mr
Mr present center and I
appreciate that of course I just
I'm disappointed that rural
commit rural communities within
Similar in some other areas
perhaps in the Bernalillo county
and maybe Santa Fe County so
with that I'll leave it at thank
you Mr president thank you so
this time but we do have further
debate with sentiment also
followed by Senator Hickey.
if you talk about rural health
care New Mexico and you just
look at Gallup in the collapse
of our hospital and what
happened there with no doctors
create a new service a new
clinic new services in the
community you talk about
Silvercity your hometown where
they just change a critical lack
that works in your area and he
wants to expand his family
practitioner ship to another
doctor maybe you're all just
maybe OBGYN to come in and see
rates not high enough they can
apply with losses to this fund
and and say we're losing money
and we need to expand or we need
to help us stay open that's what
hospitals are this is for rural
New Mexico one role bill that
really hits the mark that gets
health care done in rural New
Mexico so thank you Mr president
Thank you Mr president to I
agree that I would be brief to
the sponsor and so I want to say
absolute did a Senator moon you
know sit on they had we do have
opportunities to start practices
thank you senator Ortiz panel.
Thank you Mr president I was
gonna senator Munoz chairman of
finance committee to yield but I
but thank you for using Senator
my question has to do with the
current status of house bill two
does it have.
Does it increase the
reimbursement rates for
Medicaid.
but there's dollar amounts that
were increasing the Medicaid
reimbursement throughout the
state throughout every area.
department request the the
increase in the reimbursement
rate appropriation to finance
the reimbursement rate increase
Mr president center yes that
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Morris.
Thank you Mr president I you
know there's an old saying that
says some nothing wrong Reagan
stated that if something moves
New Mexico that our taxes are
ridiculously high we were over
regulate we drive doctors out of
the state and we end up with
nothing and so then we have to
take tax more compare money and
taxing without the Medicaid
Representative ridiculous
reimbursement rates with forty
four percent of the state on
Medicaid without the medical
malpractice maybe doctors could
debate with senator thank us.
Is present with the chairman of
the Senate conservation yield
for few questions Senator
a key to me I live in rural New
Mexico and we do have on the
server and in the discussion
you're talking about underserved
and special support
it in this way in committee but
during the committee hearing Mr
chairman Senator you talked
about I'd ask if they need this
money would be directed towards
give me that comfort that it
would not be used for other
measures it it states new and
expanding services Mr president
etcetera etcetera Stefanics Mr
indicated that abortion services
would not be covered under the
new and expanded services that
it would be our facilities who
are expanding into the needs of
would identify the needs of the
community the viability and the
sustainability of the service
because the grant would be for
I understand this presents
center.
Mr president Senator thanks for
the question the secretary of
they would set up standards to
identify whether any
applications for funds could
meet those standards of
viability and sustainability and
need in the community.
wait and see thank you Mr
president you thank you senator
guiding us we do have for the
debate centers the all of us.
Thank you Mr president to stand
in strong support of this bill I
rural community and this is just
so needed in our rural
communities and I'm very very
grateful to the sponsors for
bringing this act and stand in
strong support.
Thank you Mr president I move
the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill seven
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
Senator seats if you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator share voting no Senator
Diamond.
Voting no Senator Gallegos
Marino Senator Baca voting no.
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president thank you members of
the Senate are you all now to
our Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president well we're still on
Centerville and Senator Stewart
you'll to Centerville.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate rules committee
Thank you Mr president but
during the interim
lot of discussion about our
education issues in the Martinez
Yazzie and all of the things
that affect in education one of
restricted to the current
administration it was in the
past administration it's and
it's been going on for a long
time and we had made a change in
current situation of it is
pretty well determined by those
of us who were talking that one
way to achieve stability would
be to go back to a situation
that existed prior to that when
we had something like three
lot of
change as far as getting our
education system back on track
with Martinez Yazzie and some of
the things we know about
they're in the middle of of heap
now they've come from fiftieth
in the nation way up the heat
the the the scale substantially
because of stability that had
one person running the show for
working this over it was roled
over time or two I worked
extensively with Senator Stewart
Senator souls Senator Kernan
we've talked about education
my co sponsor Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart thank you Mr
president and senator Neville.
So folks that haven't been in
our education system for a long
Gosh I always forget the first
one Mike Davis is the last one
L. market letter delay Alan
Morgan Mike Davis and they
The the education community it
and Sir Neville said this it
doesn't have anything to do with
any particular administration
what is has to do with is either
secretary that did not happen
when we had a an elected part
partly elected partly appointed
state school board that rent the
to go to the voters and twenty
four.
If this was adopted we would not
change until twenty twenty seven
because the new state school
and so this wouldn't happen
until nineteen twenty.
Twenty twenty seven.
A hundred years later so this is
a conversation.
education system sets the
superintendents the
administrators the school board
members at cetera so I I've I
answer any questions.
Senator Stewart Senators we're
debating are I'll go back to
senator Neville
that's all I think we need to
bring out right now just what
quick couple points these are
the political balance in those
kind of things are in this bill
kind of typical what we normally
do for appointed boards I think
that pretty well covers it the
details if anybody has any
concern about those we talked a
helpful he might have comments
but I'll turn it over to the to
the body now Mr president thank
you senator debate in Senate
rules committee subsidy for
Senate joint resolution one as
Centerville detailed I guess the
I'm the neighbor back here.
Yes Sir thank you Mr presence
and thank you center and will
just question when was this
changed to our current system
thousand three two thousand and
three is constitutional
amendment is a special election
it was held on September the
twenty third of that year it
improve education that has not
been proven to be the case and
stability is a big factor in
trying to make sure this works.
Senator across Mr president
president center nothing they
stay in place there operating
function just like they do now
they would be working with the
state superintendent as opposed
way too much and I understand so
all stands for your bill thank
you thank you senator thank you
senator because we do have
further debate center cels thank
you Mr president I'm fully in
idea it politicized as education
way more than education should
be politicized there's a wide
range of different kinds of
models across the state but I
have appointees so there is some
influence for the governor in
this but this particular changes
widely supported by the
superintendents association it's
education whether it's in an
individual classroom whether
it's in a school whether it's in
a district or statewide
stability for the students
the state the state department
of education as it is or AFP
public education department as
it is now and go back to a state
department of education that is
think it adds to stability and
allows us to get back to
focusing on children instead of
the politics around education
thank you.
will thank you so you know I I
remember in two thousand three
when we did these constitutional
amendments and it was of course
under democratic governor and
idea to leave this system that
we're proposing now to go to the
system.
From an educator standpoint
Well Mister president and
senator I think this passed by
under two hundred votes
it was we were all we were all
wanted us to do this
what he said was it if I have a
cabinet level secretary
educational get more money
time what we've seen is that the
lack of stability in the
difference between the
secretaries and the difference
between the administration just
three lawsuits against it and
now you know I can barely tell
you what what we do with teacher
evaluation so at there's really
bedrock things an education that
think this is just a way to get
back to that stability remember
it wouldn't happen until twenty
twenty seven.
Well thank you for that Madam
with me as a career professional
a leader in this field you know
I I I remember at the time it
was sold as well we'll have
someone accountable have someone
works for governor as opposed to
just kind of a board that's out
inherit maybe that appointees
maybe I just have a lot of PTSD
over bad and bad appointees out
there so I'm not a fan of six
year terms but at the same time
administration comes in.
I'll just add this I worry a
little bit well maybe the value
of stability overrides
improvement but I think
helpful to me today thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Senator Kernan.
did not agree with it it took a
few a changes I think in working
with Senator Stewart and and
coming to this more balanced
approach where you have elected
and so this way we've got really
I think a really good balance in
is I believe Senator sells
mention there many many ways to
establish your chief school need
done in many many ways but I do
think this is a really balanced
way to do it and of course it'll
it'll go to the voters and we'll
see what they say that but I
think going forward it's a
one thing that they've done so
we need to be careful that we
don't think this is going to
change everything this is a
beginning and then there are
other policy issues that we as a
so I appreciate senators for
bringing the bill and I
certainly supported and hope
that the body will thank you.
Any further debate senators.
Senator the.
like this I tend to this twice
before in the eleven years that
I've been here and I I think
this this team got it correct
and I love the way it's been
designed
and alike in it to Rio Grande
High School in my district
Senator Lopez and I actually
have for the kids to go there
are in my district and have for
in her district and we have gone
up to entrust she's an
outstanding leader I think
that's what we're gonna wind up
with in a situation like this if
a person is not doing a good job
they could be out of there
tomorrow we're not gonna have to
and they will continue to be
able to do long range planning
and and make real things happen
for for our public education
system here in New Mexico so I
just can't stand in strong
support I see the value of it
Mr president Senate unanimous
consent to see you Senator I was
so excited about that Mr
president units consent to
excuse in our Oneonta returns
the chambers of the purposes of
the call.
Seeing no objection.
Say no further debate.
again is a great opportunity to
to revamp our system with that
Mr president I move the Senate
rules committee substitute
Senate joint resolution one as
amended do now pass and I just
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Explain my vote Senate Senator
it had said you request that
before the vote was taken.
a little dumb struck by this a
buy this photo ID it just to me
it underscores all the work
we've done and the importance of
this I want to thank the Senate
very much.
business messages from the house
or in that order business
message in the house the reader
to read Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed house
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk journal so
that the message from the house
has been received.
Senate majority floor leader
and vice chairs that please have
your scripts available the
reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two has had
it under consideration reports
committee reports us that can
answer the Senate that the re
real outdoor I'll read all the
committee reports and we vote on
them with one motion and they
reflect their acted upon
That it do pass as amended.
Senate bill one twenty six as
amended do packs.
Senate bill two seventy five
that it do not pass but that
Senate finance committee
Mr president move adoption the
committee report says we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
next order of business I thank
you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
introduction of legislation on
that order business.
The reader to read.
introduction and use by the
children youth and families
department of a structured
decision making pelos feet and
structured decision making tools
Senate rules committee that
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate memorial sixty three.
The house commerce and economic
title of podiatrists to
podiatric physician conforming
sections of the podiatry Act
providing for the New Mexico
Medical Board fund to receive
defining duties changing
reciprocity requirements
requiring licensure renewal
after two years removing the
taxation registration number
requirement as a condition of
development committee substitute
for house bill eighty three.
bill eight House kommer commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill eighty three.
House bill one eighty six
veterans property tax exemption
house bill one eighty six house
bill one eighty six having been
read twice by title is.
Referred to the Senate tax
article and and Castellano.
For the legislative finance
committee and act relating to
professional licensure boards
extending the termination date
of the licensure boards for
termination date of the
licensure boards for optometry
podiatry pharmacy and
acupuncture and oriental
medicine amending and repealing
Senate finance committee that's
house bill two one.
House Bill to twenty six
introduced by Representative
Lara.
through the state purchasing
agent House Bill to twenty six
House Bill to twenty six having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate tax
House commerce and economic
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill to
twenty eight an act relating to
local government annexing the
the solar energy improvements
special assessment act House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill to twenty eight.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill to twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee and Senate Judiciary
Introduced by representatives
Harry Garcia and Jason C. Harper
an act related to driver's
licenses requiring the motor
downgrading and transferring
commercial driver's licenses or
commercial learner's permits
providing content to be included
on commercial commercial
Senate tax business
transportation committee house
bill two six nine.
House Bill the two seventy one
introduced by Representative
eight being lost nineteen
seventy eight chapter thirty
five section three ninety six as
amended raising the apparent
damage amount for a vehicle
accident that requires a written
seventy one also fell to seventy
one having been read twice by
title is.
Referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee that's house bill two
seventy one.
wrote Roybal Caballero Ferrari
dupont and siding on on an act
relating to geothermal resources
adding a center of excellence
for geothermal resources at the
New Mexico institute of mining
development fund authorizing
grants creating the geothermal
project revolving loan fund
authorizing loans making
committee that's house bill
three sixty five.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
ask unanimous consent and all
give a two oh two number and
read the title the first is
Senate bill five oh three this
is center when you all just this
to the residential behavioral
health facility and prescribing
penalties it currently is and
Senate finance we Center manuals
the sponsored ask unanimous
So ordered senator Wirth thank
you Mr president the second is a
bill by Senator Stewart Senate
bill five twenty it establishes
climate equity principles the
policy in rural development it
currently is in the Senate
Education Committee I ask
unanimous consent that would
transportation committee and the
two oh two numbers two two five
four five seven point two.
As many unanimous consent
To conservation than to tax.
And not to finance.
Mr president to conservation and
then to tax that's what I
of present will that they have
to read the name and title of
the ability to Mr president will
you read the name title of the
bill again Senator Wirth if you
have that title please read that
oil and gas act to establish
certain gas capture requirements
providing that certain state
entities apply climate equity
principles to policy and rural
development.
I mean on the state's revenue
Senator many us Mr president I
do think it'll have an economic
impact it'll have a cost to the
agencies as they do that and
what the cost to the agencies is
leader for friendly at a third
referral to it no finance
Senator Wirth Mr presidents
The floor leader won't add a
sponsor and she'd be okay with
this bill I'm not going to
Senate taxes the second referral
but instead going to Senate
finance committee so I would
amend my unanimous consent to
make the ranking member finance
happy but what it makes is chair
of finance happy as well.
Senate president makes anybody
the actual cost of this and and
see where it goes so I think
will look at art and finance.
Senate president David I guess
the deal is done thank.
Seeing no objection.
So ordered.
Senator Peter Wirth.
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president I just want to make a
comment before we wrap up today
we did have several UNM college
Democrats over here shadowing
things and race across the
building and coordinate this and
that so we want to thank all of
them if we can please give them
a hand they've all done a great
job with you all will stand if
you've been a shadow this week.
miscellaneous Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Mr president the Senate health
and public affairs committee
will go into session at four
we'll get into
the very controversial bill from
the house house bill seven.
We'll get into another house
Birch this and Lopez Steinborn
and that's it.
So if you could make it to I I
will do your right away and and
try to get through those in a
hurry so you could get out by
four thirty or something thank
you Mr propos to other things
party not too far away we're in
the Rio Chama and does so
members could come to the dinner
then get over to the other bill
party.
or people to go to the hundred
bill party and try to see if
there's any dessert left when
with of the a bill a a a an
agenda comprised largely of
Senator savant is built up so we
can be present there will be a
further announcements are center
Maestas.
Thank you Mr president as
mentioned a friendly reminder
Friday March third hundred bill
party hundred real parties so
ticket to your to your neighbor
it's a six thirty to eleven six
thirty to eleven at the of a
wine bar thank you thank you
usual so please be on time so we
can make reasonable our cities
of four thirty Senate Judiciary
things things are just about the
sentiment us the agency present
Thank you Mr president Senator
my nose the up because of space
will have a this jockeys who is
world famous he's performed at
to the destruction of.
I think you're gonna have to ask
her for a dance.
Mr president that we throw Feder
will get us all dancing
there just in case.
Mr president center has all
permits have been approved and
and for properly filed.
get a the bill moved and I just
want to tell you I appreciate
your work the four years work in
Evans manager do his work I was
Ivey Soto bill his rule so what
I would like to ask in in and
don't know how to do this is I
think that we may be in from the
house I did not understand that
did not understand the process
of being in the rules committee
since our.
Senate bills that the house
bills would be heard but I had
really good discussion with the
three field I appreciate the
opportunity to vent and I look
forward to having my bills heard
the Senate bill four thirty nine
be removed from Senate
conservation committee and to
Senate finance committee Mr
Kirk uh president I've spoken
legislative approval for certain
land purchases.
Senator would like to make a
unanimous consent to move
unanimous consent Mister
president.
to make a few comments on what
did occur this morning in rules
and I'm I'm hopeful of there be
some conversations I'm sure
there will be moving forward
with regard to time I I know we
time that the committee takes is
more important than than perhaps
being here on the floor when
we're we're getting started but
essentially what happened is the
statewide elected treasure
forward as a body were more more
respectful to other elected
officials especially those in
the executive branch I know I'm
probably the hardest legislator
when it comes the executive as
separation of powers but I think
something very serious with
confirmations of cabinet level
individuals they turn over at a
rapid rate under this governor
has so it seems like we have
them over and over but that
doesn't mean we shouldn't take
duty and responsibility to take
the time necessary thank you Mr
president thank you for their
announcements we have cinnamon
Yasin Senator Duhigg center
among us thank you Mr president
there and and I understand we're
not going to special now
so I want to make sure we
clarify that because we have a
few more bills that we can still
set on food meals and other
There's a few more of that we
did have we had we just all over
the special session comes and
then we can just stay here well
well good old Senator want to
system
is my wife's the voice divorce
gonna hear specials and
supplementals today and then
we're gonna start going through
language over the next couple of
days I'm gonna wrap up house
coming over maybe by the middle
of next week first part of next
week so double check your
capital make sure projects are
double funded make sure that
happens so pay attention what
you're doing with your cap on
president I hope you enjoyed
your ice cream today.
I hope it didn't melt and all
its melting sea.
Everybody else enjoy their ice
icing Sanchez I've ever seen.
Mr president that's because when
I moved offices I had this big
giant ice cream freezer now I
We had a payment from avocado
green to white.
And so we did request that in
the budget and and maybe I'll
get a bigger freezers so we can
have bigger ice cream in there
announced a couple of times the
rules procedures are on the
what's happening page so anyone
going with the bill and with the
rules committee should take a
look at those procedures this
procedures are almost identical
much considered any of these
complaints about the use of
those exact same procedures in
the Senate and the Senate
Judiciary Committee I but I will
not Mr chair I'm sorry Mr
president
so we don't I to them for like
elected officials either we
don't give special preference to
elected officials to to not
follow the procedures that we
ask every other citizen to to
follow so Mister president if
them thank you any further
announcements Senators.
Say no further announcements
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members unanimous consent the
Senate and recess until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning see no
