To make sure that we we get to
that of a with athletes go head
Senators opponents on Senate
bill sixteen thank you madam
chair members of the committee
I'm here today presenting Senate
bill sixteen for the governor's
office is creating the health
care authority department it is
renaming the Human Services
Department to the health care
authority department what's the
purpose of establishing a single
unified department responsible
for health care purchasing and
regulation this bill madam chair
members of the committee would
actually create the framework of
all the different departments
that would come together to work
on the plan for what should be
and that the governor would work
with all of these different
agencies in creating or passing
on her vision of how we can save
money in the healthcare field
both pharmaceutical with
insurance departments with
physicians helping to keep
physicians and other health care
providers such as introduce PA's
specialist and also to open up
access to health care for those
who do not have it here in our
state so I believe that this
bill
you will not see pages and pages
of details but you will see the
framework for the purpose and
how we can get started with the
health care of forty with me
today I have to experts I have
Debbie Armstrong who is a policy
adviser to the governor on my
left into my far left is Kerry
are me ho the acting secretary
of the Human Services Department
and each of them might have a
few words to say.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
establishing a single unified
department responsible for
health care purchasing
regulation and policy provides a
foundation for more effective
management and oversight of
health care and by extension the
ability to leverage purchasing
power in coordination to better
achieve better health outcomes
for New Mexicans while reducing
fragmentation and eliminating
some of the silos that that
exist in our our goal in this
creating this Department is a
more organized health care
system that will deliver greater
integration better access to
care and improve performance on
health outcomes
the health care sorority can and
should be the convening HSD
forgetting the major parts of
the system to work together to
deliver something better for New
Mexico for New Mexicans and
this way of
starting to work on pulling up a
Department together reorganizing
I should say a number of
departments were created that
way I was secretary of aging
when that was created as a
department and we pulled
adult protective services from
CYFD and Medicaid waiver
programs from HSD in it and
legislatively it was done this
way setting the framework of
what the goal was.
and then by executive order
doing the work of planning what
that transition and
reorganization looks like coming
back to the legislature with all
the authorizing statute is this
will take a lot of of
legislation.
Officially moving stuff and
renaming stuff and consolidating
in in a
so that it's all put together
it'll take I'm I'm assume a
couple years to get done.
but we wanted to to start with
the framework of what this would
be and rather than creating a
new department since Medicaid
and a behavioral health which
are key components are already
at Human Services we decided
that renaming that department
and moving some things there and
some things may ultimately need
to move out of Human Services
somewhere else and there but
that's not that's not in here
we've taken the the basic from
the executive
branch
authorizing statute for each
department and just a lot of the
language in various existing
language just changing the name
of the divisions and saying
these things are moving
the employee
benefit purchasing from GST.
In the
The oversight
the duty waiver from G. O. H.
and the
licensing and certification
Division
from D. O. H. over to this new
fund newly forms Department to
try and
pull all the health care
together and.
let Kerry address more but.
As a legislator I was been
frustrated for many many years
about
I back not not using its
potential purchasing power and
the premiums of just gone up and
up and up more people are
dropping out and not even taking
it because it's too it's too
costly and there's no
coordination or
real.
Pulling together the purchasing
power and Medicaid is the
biggest purchasing power and and
also pulling this all together
I think it makes a lot of sense
to get us a better coordinated
and more effective health care
system thank you.
Mr.
Madam chair members of the
committee just a couple of
additional points that I wanted
to to make up this bill which is
really around Medicaid in the
power to control costs and
improve access through Medicaid
I consolidating health programs
it really does make sense
Medicaid in New Mexico has the
strongest cost control in New
Mexico market we actually since
two thousand at FY fifteen
Medicaid per member per month
costs have increased only by
eleven percent compared to
twenty percent inflation rate
anymore on the on the commercial
market at we at the same time
have no costsharing co insurance
or deductibles for any of our
members we can never pass costs
on to them so we are very
creative about how to control
costs in Medicaid we think we
have could do the same thing for
you know state employees
retirees and other members of
the healthcare market that are
receiving services Fiserv
leveraging that creativity and
purchasing power just so you
know what what a state employee
pays today there are lots of out
of pocket costs to see their
providers up to twelve thousand
in out of pocket costs per year
in deductibles on top of
premiums that for family trees
are about seven hundred fifty
dollars a month so over of over
a thousand dollars extra I
deductibles per month so just
wanted to make those points that
we really have the power to
control costs the other thing
that we can do better by
consolidating health programs
within the new health care
thirty department is to measure
outcomes we would have a more
data and be able to provide
better value to New Mexicans and
really move the needle in
improving health care so I just
wanted to make those additional
points and will stand for
questions thank you.
Care and senator I have I have
here that you have a couple
other
but secretaries who on your list
did you want them to yes chair I
know that there are people who
have signed up there are people
from the executive branch who
are here to support number one
then there are supporters who
signed up I don't know if there
are opponents so I would ask
that executive members first to
speak if they wish to.
Four of the first person we had
on as a secretary Laura
perasaan.
Come on up please use the
microphone and and so you're
you're in addition last name.
Introduce yourself good morning
madam chair members of the
committee that is the it's on
good to see all this morning
Billy Jimenez W. secretary of
the department of health in
general counsel and with me also
is a is a doctor doctor Laura
pada hone also W. secretary and
just want to stand up and
support Senate bill sixteen the
health care thirty we believe it
move some very important purpose
over to HSD will now be the
health authority to where they
can maybe be a little bit more
efficient both on the financial
side and on the operation side
both developmental disabilities
and and Health improvement have
substantial now there funding
already lives at HSD in the the
proposed Health authority so
moving them closer to where they
can maybe get better time
keeping more timely
reimbursements could be very
good for the state and also of
good number of contracts and
provider contracts already go
through that the proposed Health
authority so eight every we
really think it'll really help
everybody out and creasing all
the efficiency and providing
better outcomes for for people
both in do they do community and
also in hospital settings as
well so with that we stand
strong support of Senate bill
sixteen.
Thank you
and acting secretary of GST and
the self.
V..
Good morning my name is Robert
to set a the GST designees
secretary it's my fifth day.
So strongly support this for
several years I worked at the
part insurance I saw the power
of consolidating in the buying
power of the program like this
could work and I think it's very
beneficial that with the state
for twenty plus years and one of
the things that drew me to the
state instead of going to
private sector with the budget
and I think this will help the I
know we've talked a lot about
raises for employees and other
things but I think this is
another tenant that we could we
could improve in the expertise
that by moving over there so we
strongly supported thank you
very much.
Thank you and we have of from
a west side as W. superintendent
Jennifer yes.
And I just don't think I married
the Greek man Hey I'm Jennifer
it touches on the interim
superintendent insurance and I'm
here to support SB sixteen as
you all know in the regulatory
work much of the people that
would be covered or be in these
programs are not covered by OSI
regulation there outside those
those parameters this would
allow that consolidated buying
power purchasing power
negotiated power that these
people need I think it's a
positive wonderful first step to
move the state forward in these
areas.
Yes
and then that we also have
researchers a proponent
Mendini could queue yes.
I.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
members of the rules committee
my name is non that eighteen I'm
a retired health policy
consultant and I am here in
support of SB sixteen.
and my overall concern is that
we Contimporanul the state to
keep moving in it in basically a
data pre decision making about
billions of dollars of health
care I mean we covered the state
covers over a million people and
the costs do and end up going up
and they will threaten all of
the state programs if we don't
do the kinds of things that this
bill will help us to do.
Moreover the state is the
default go to entity when any
healthcare facility has a
problem whether it's financial
or clinical and basically the
decisions are made on a
piecemeal basis which without
any coordinated or on a logical
background or full cost of the
long term implications of
decisions that are made at the
time of prices.
we've heard a little bit or a
lot about how this entity can
control costs I agree with that
but I also think this entity can
focus on value are we getting
value for our dollar and I'll be
getting the outcomes that we
need for the money we spend on
the people who'd who can be
managed better.
I support as P. sixteen because
it leverages the the content on
the expertise that already
exists in HSD HSD is already
dealing with the most expensive
components of our healthcare
system so the expertise is there
but it needs to incorporate the
whole model off system oversight
which will take time and will
need to be done we we do need to
go beyond what they're doing now
and all of this needs to be
clearly spelled out New Mexico
is well on its way for on on
some others are essential tools
that will help us and help
Wallasey makers.
SS costs and a health care
system I'm referring to the all
payer claims database that's
being built as we speak which
needs to be looked at from a
systemic bases with proper
expertise the health care of
forty will help to do this so I
urge you to support SB sixteen
thank.
Thank you and we have on the
zoom Richard Mason from the
league of women voters.
Mr Mason.
Please go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that
determination and I am a member
of the health care committee for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the legal resident
Mexico supporting SB sixteens
and thanks to sponsors for
bringing it forward.
The state has a number of
positions a call for affected
management of health care
including cost management and
coordination of health care this
results in health care being
provided to more New Mexicans.
As the sixteen point the
infrastructure in place to
accomplish maybe the goals put
what we do not positions so we
stand in strong support of SB
sixteen and urge you to give it
to pass thank you.
Thank you very much and senator
you still have about five
minutes left I don't know if you
want to use that for for any any
other comments.
Well then you're when I was
approached in all honesty about
doing this this session I
thought well this is rather
quick to be talking about this
and thinking about this but in
looking at the bill in detail I
think it sets up a transition
action plan for us to move ahead
and so while this is not
accomplishing everything in one
year as was hoped it is starting
here want to do the planning to
bring together the players so
that I next year twenty twenty
four you will have something
substantive to have in front of
us and this offers the
opportunity for the executive to
put into an executive order her
plans and then the authority to
bring it together for us to
sideline and if my experts want
to say anything else
madam chair I would just add to
that that is not been a quick
topic to do this in your
analysis of notes that in twenty
seventeen LFC did a big study of
the I. back in its effectiveness
and there that conclusion was
the best way to address the
issue of rising health care
costs is to consolidation of the
individual agencies into a state
health care purchasing
organization with wider decision
making authority this is been
talked about for years and I was
around not as a legislator but
when the I. back was first
formed
it was really it was a
compromise when we were trying
to get a health care sorority
back down and that's been like
twenty years or something and I
backed.
Was supposed to have a
consolidate purchasing power and
they've never used.
The state operate independently
they are few together and then
do their own thing and
in nope and they go up every
year of the the premiums on that
it's it's
in the study if you pull that
study it's it's been ineffective
at what the intent was in in
pulling the the purchasing of
in play in retiree health care
has been and the answer the
recommendation back back that
far was a consolidated agency.
Thank you we don't have anyone
who registered in opposition on
this bill
I think I might have just and
and.
Senator I know that that you had
asked the if the if there's
extra time left on even if folks
are part of your kind of
coordinated presentation if they
were here had registered and
support that you wanted them to
go ahead and speak at madam
chair if there is time for them
to speak great if not you could
just for show hands as well we
have to then as I understand
Mister weeks here on we have a
hospitalization the stories if
you want to speak to the less
than two minutes please come up
to the north.
Thank you madam chair members my
name is Dan weeks are
represented New Mexico hospital
association
we feel that this legislation
has great promise of the devil
is going to be in the details
and the roll out on this so I'm
glad that the approach is been
to just sort of set the
framework for so that we can all
work together in the next year
to come up something very
comprehensive and useful are
major issues are access we have
problems some of our smaller
hospitals are very tenuous in
terms of their economic
viability and so we're hoping
that by consolidating is
purchasing and the of the
planning and policy making that
will be able to construct
something that will allow our
providers to stay in business
and provide better access and
quality to our nation's so with
that thank you very much.
Thank you
so it with anyone in the
audience who would like to raise
their hand to indicate support
please do so.
anyone online one investment for
one individual right.
as we had no one registered in
opposition if anyone would like
to raise their hand to indicate
opposition please do so.
Anyone online all right so we
will go ahead and go to
questions from the committee.
Center to Pena.
Thank you madam president and
that thank you madam chair all.
A little early this that.
The.
My reaction yesterday with her
about this was also what this is
doing a lot but the repeated use
thinking actually.
The manager of the the.
What we're setting in motion now
does a process a framework.
This is gonna be an enormous
Department.
It will have more.
Responsibility than any other
department or agency of the.
What's this organization that
has great potential for their
for.
Reducing the confusion was
responsible of but I I wonder
about.
Support is.
Which this is the the department
is in support was the department
they added Medicaid to the the
the.
That the representative of.
That is it all for that that is.
And the successes vision is of
responsibility.
Or this bill so that we have
this little tiny Senate program
the.
The this law is lost it.
This is the primary method was
supported.
I would just hope that is in
addition.
Part of.
Support is of the.
The status of the services the
notice.
Or maybe the idea of the issue
that you go through this page
that is.
Or.
A shovel cards etcetera I'm
hearing that folks can't hear
you online I see that you might
cause on but.
I wonder if maybe try turning
the other Mike on.
On the other side.
Maybe two will be better than
what.
That you get my point I just
worry about the the the
possibility that income support
image responsibilities might be
some of lost in the shuffle so
that that would be one issue
that
but I would hope gets addressed
during this this process the
waters by Senator so chair
Senator I think that's a great
point in the in this of the bill
it also talks about having some
reporting and oversight
Connection to the Legislative
Health and Human Services
interim committee which we had
discussed the other day here and
there are so many legislators
and committed to the needs of
people of our state and I
believe our executive to so I I
I I think that we can be their
conscience if it starts to slide
in actually support raising that
issue up.
And madam chair and senator we
talked about that in the
governor's office too and not
knowing whether it's the right
thing is to keep it there or to
put it somewhere else or a
standalone
and so it's not addressed in
here.
Because I think that's open for
conversation as we put this
together if something needs to
move out of Human Services and
be better placed somewhere else
or done something else and there
are a number of programs that
are not whole divisions in other
departments that probably need
to need to be identified and and
move so there's a lot of things
that aren't addressed in this
it's a starting place in a
framework for starting to plan
what all needs to move around.
Excellent and better chairman
and senator is.
Those what state representative
I'm sure that the this Armstrong
and.
The servi O. I.
Up to date myself but I was
around when I went up with like
a.
Reorganize state government.
And then that was a massive
undertaking because there's so
many little boxes in the chart
you can move more than any
number of ways that that might
make sense of.
For that may not make sense and
and there may be things that
CYFD that could believe that
Department of some of its.
I'd like to do of the domestic
violence programs in the sexual
assault of those might be
combined with because of what
you can do a lot of shuffling
I'll leave that up to you to do
that that reorganizing but that
makes sense.
One other issue that I did want
to service and that is.
When we moved.
Behavioral health from the
health department.
We lost some focus for that.
Because the the historically the
Human Services department
because it is Medicaid and I
understand why some of them
Representative but in the wanted
to do that you wanted to make it
We were spending so much money
on both through the Medicaid
program of behavioral health he
thought that a lot of the logo
the problem is that Medicaid is
an insurance program that
reimburses after the fact.
And it's not a proactive program
that goes up fighting gaps and
needs and responding to it in
the less that public health
focus.
Maybe this would be the way to
regain some of that so I would
hope that that that that in that
reorganization we restore some
of the.
The more proactive effect of
being part of the health
authority rather than insurance
David.
So I'm you know there's a lot of
as as Mr weeks said a lot of
details still to be worked out
but I think that the I'm
encouraged that we're talking
about doing something like this.
I I wonder what the potential
impact on the health security
act and and other attempts at
expanding coverage might might
at the all in all I I I think I
would support this of and and
and look forward to seeing it
worked out thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Moores.
Thank you for all of our
conversations on this bill FY
chairman someone can I talk
about is the wages the
government moves on our service
drive private practice medicine
out of the state.
Asians or farms is taxable.
All of it goes
you're more powerful diseases we
I remember there are.
Private practice doctors you are
still a lot of groups a lot of
the state.
Reuters or
Make sure which one I'm here
for.
Commissioners are private
practice or over this order
number Sir.
A lot of all
of our rural around fires and.
I tried a few more.
Our partners.
Of our state or.
There is a good idea San.
The bill.
The stuff out there so.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and.
So I was just gonna say it a
knowledge that's that's true and
by having it together.
When you change one thing in
health care it pops up somewhere
else and so we can we you know
we can look at it together and.
Hello yeah yeah yeah.
Okay
The one make much a question
before we before we make motion
Senator.
I'm looking at section sixteen
on page twenty.
It's just awfully for all.
I'm sorry what I'm twenty page
twenty section sixteen Senate
line twenty.
It's just very broad it kind of
gives blanket power.
To the governor to to add in
other other divisions and
departments can can you please
explain to me why.
So that
one question is why do we need.
Take care of things that have
such broad authority.
The section so roll of this my
second question is looking
because I know this is a
temporary provision.
When does this temporary
provision go away.
What I want to make sure is if
we are giving us incredibly
broad authority.
That would otherwise I think be
legislative to the executive and
we're saying it's temporary I
want to make sure it's actually
temporary
And so.
So madam chair if you I'm gonna
have this Armstrong answer some
of the questions but if you look
on page twenty one the first of
report publicly would be
November one twenty twenty three
and if elected state board to
twenty twenty four but on July
one twenty twenty three the
statutory references to the HSD
chief Human Services would be
changed over to health care
authority so I believe that Miss
Armstrong in some of the
comments earlier in on your fact
sheet from the governor's office
also indicated that these.
Thank you orders were created
from past administrations to
create other departments as well
so Mister.
yes thank you madam chair we
model that language on previous
departments that have been
created that way
And we come back.
To the legislature with because
of the many of the other things
that might move have statutory
authority attached to them and
we'll have to change those
statutes so.
And as soon as those things are
changed
the temporary provision goes
away.
Again I appreciate that that
answer I guess my.
Actually let me correct that I
think as soon as the transfer of
these things is done the temper
Division is gone.
And and this is just this is
ignorance on my part that I
don't I don't know if usually
when we have a separate
provisions we have had the
explicit language of the item
that says not.
The separate provision does away
has to date I just don't see
that here in the.
The language of the and so I
wonder I don't necessarily have
a recommendation.
To put that language in right
now and I think I should and it
might not even be necessary I
kind of want to see us said I
would just ask that I think this
I believe this goes to show back
next
Senator would you be be willing
if if that there is a need to
put that language and to add
that language and
inch back just making sure that
the the temporary provision that
we have here it is giving this.
The sub essentially legislative
authority to the executive at in
this situation I truly is has
had a heart stopped eight so
madam chair while I consider
that a family member and I will
consult with the executive to
ensure that they are on board
with that as we progress to the
next committee are that's that's
that's that's good enough for me
with that I believe.
Senator yes for more so.
This would change for when we
did everyone when we are on the
right at all.
A lot of
we did and aging and Indian
Affairs Veterans Affairs
cultural affairs were all
created this one.
One of the.
Now officers are.
Homeowners will have to come to
confirmation.
Yes and I believe.
Senator.
Our system of.
all right in a second.
Let's go ahead and do a roll
call vote that the past missions
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Ingle is Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle excuse.
Senator phonics yes Senator
Stewart
center off of harmony LCS
Senator Duhigg yes.
You have a due passi lines thank
you thank you very much care
which of the committee we're
gonna jump around a bit in our
agenda and Senator Stewart is
going to.
Go ahead with us on a memorial
twenty nine.
Somebody said somebody sent over
there hi this.
There is.
They're probably going.
Can keep.
So we can proceed with.
In the.
All right.
Senator.
Good morning madam chairs zoom
yes.
So happy to be joined today by
students from while friends we
have to from Emerson and one
from whack amount I'm gonna let
them tell you what they're
memorial is but first let me
tell you that the while friends
organization has been around now
for thirty years they started in
nineteen ninety one they're a
civics it expiry intial civics
and education group that are all
over the state of so they have
Paul many volunteers that helps
us work it's a done out of the
law offices at U. N. M. their
offices are out of the law
school at UNM I've been working
with them for many years all
year round those while friends
talk about issues around wild
wildlife and they come up with
the memorial themselves so
they've come up with this so I'd
like to turn it over to them for
very brief comments and first we
have Marlowe there's more
leverage.
Madam chair and members of the
committee hello my name is while
at Oregon and fifty eight nine
from I was in elementary school
Albuquerque we need to protect
our force because people across
New Mexico commonly use force
for recreation and spiritual
connection.
Such as.
Camping hunting fishing hiking
photo rumors right climbing bird
watching force are personally
important to me because I have
lived in the force for my entire
life and I want to keep it
healthy and safe I appreciate
additional funding as do many
others after recreation such as
hunting is helping our state's
economy and brings in at least
two point three billion of the
state's gross domestic product.
Parties also critical part of
proper forest management
wildlife in New Mexico depends
on our for such is not mine this
wildlife needs to force because
not much require large areas of
wilderness habitat to thrive not
minds are also a key part of the
forest ecosystem this memorial
encourages on Mexicans to help
protect your endorsed by
removing trash and fully
extinguishing campfires this is
our chance to make a difference
thank you.
Madam chair of already many miss
down here are supposed to go to
Mahdia Dane first and here she
is secretary.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is money keep
that eighteen and I am in the
seventh grade at working on
public schools where I can
Senate memorial twenty nine
thanks the state agencies to
help protect our forests such as
the forestry division encourages
more education about the
importance of our forest and
asked the government governor
for a forced appreciation day
this memorial is needed because
increasing wildfires disease and
drought are harming our forests
in we need to educate everyone
about how important they are.
Life at home was scary with the
wild fires so we would really
appreciate if you support this
memorial thank you.
Finally we have more low already
gone also from Emerson.
Thank he's.
The twenty is.
Okay I'm sorry.
Madam chair and the members of
the committee hello my name is
is a yes I'm I'm fifty and I'm
I'm I'm listenin went to school
and our Hickey we need to
protect our first because the
forces we have a set to many
animals in those animals
calendar for us to be safe home
from them and then the families
New Mexico is home to one
hundred and six and then was
received one hundred and ten
better species and five hundred
and forty two species of birds.
fours are presently input into
me because the force is in place
where you can get away from
everyone and the assessors Ms as
to go to the forced to take my
mind off of my show was in the
state of the city I'm amazed by
the beautiful wildlife you can
find in the forest the.
Great Pedrosa page you were and
then if you communicate to see
in some I think it's important
that we protect our forced to
other young adults Camille and
it's PED as I have I live in New
Mexico depends on the force such
as the oak the admins can weigh
as much as forty pounds to go
back quickly F. to an intraday
folks need the force because
they have attacked funds cover.
They provide cover the force is.
The force is beginning in danger
by wildfires droughts in roads
we need a C. space in the nation
for our animals so they are not
forced into the city please help
us save our forests are animals
homes thank you.
I apologize Cecilia okay madam
chair we are ready for questions
we have anyone signed up and
supporter opposition on this is
there anyone who in the audience
who wishes to raise their hand
indicate support.
Anyone who wishes to have anyone
online who.
This is indicated.
Anyone who wishes to raise our
hands and opposition.
Is nine any online.
They would have told called
parts of the to.
I
any discussion from the
committee Maria thank you madam
chair and thank you for bringing
this memorial forward it means a
lot to me I live in a rural area
where forests around the
opposing side of the crease
about and to have a spa and but
there is some of the points that
you made to your memorial let me
know.
Virtual connection in our native
American communities are tied to
our outdoor wilderness of our
forests and so happy that you
know about spiritual connection
and what that means to us we're
battling with trash in our area
with the legal debate and I'm
happy that you're memorial
addresses removing trash from
areas and most importantly
extinguishing campfires we
thought that huge of fire that
use that in your area which is
devastating and I'm happy to to
address that what I'm really
happy is when you said it takes
your mind off of trouble to get
to the.
Because of that I would be in
support of a Morial and I want
to thank you and the record for
bringing this forward you ladies
have my vote thank you so much
to you and to Senate sponsor
thank you madam chair thank you
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Stewart I'm so proud of
your three advocates with this
this morning I just want to
applaud you for your your civic
your expressing your civic duty
and being environmental stewards
and and I have to and I just
want to mention madam chair and
senator on page one of the
memorial why twenty four there's
a quote that really stands out
for me.
Forests are not just trees they
are live and vote and that
resonates with me madam chair
and senator because I'm reading
a book.
And the book discusses how trees
talk to each other quote unquote
talk to each other and and where
quote help each other out when
one is ailing they sent messages
I don't know the scientific word
for it to help the other out
when it's one as we can and so
that that quote is just really
resonates with me and so really
proud of your civic duty your
environmental stewardship and
you've got my vote thank you
thank you thank you senator
Ortiz Pena.
Thank you miss madam chairman
and and thank you all Senator
Stewart could for bringing your
expert witnesses here yesterday
a group of them were on the
floor the ones from wagon that
and I was really touched in
talking to them because.
Every everyone of that group of
students had been personally
affected by the wildfires last
year.
And many of them had seen what
can be such a catastrophe when
the forests are well cared for
and and when nature or humans
because those terrible fires so
I I I thought that was really
appropriate and I'm glad to see
one of the wagon known students
back here again today to to make
the presentation to the
committee of I I mentioned to
them that the another memorials
that that I'm involved with it
talks about the need for us to
figure out a way around the anti
donation clause as it affects a
private forest.
It turns out the majority of the
forests in New Mexico our own
private land not state or
federal.
and and and I hadn't realized
that until somebody brought that
memorial to me because of the
anti donation clause.
Prohibits the state from
spending money directly to clear
private land.
That land is often adjacent the
National Forest so we're we're
we're.
Prevented from really doing
something that would help the
forests of the belong to
everybody
so I thought that that that that
that the two initiatives tied
together very nicely and I want
to thank you for bringing this
forward and and I know you'll
have great success was it is it
goes out of this committee thank
you madam chair.
Thank you senator Senator
phonics fall by Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair Senator I
have a question for your
experts.
So thinking about your
classmates.
I'm interested in whether or not
using all of them are half of
them are interested in things of
course are important.
Somebody into that.
Madam chair members of the
committee
I feel like all of us for a lot
of work into these speeches and
I feel like we all care about
the forced.
just as much as each other
because just put the work into
it I feel like it's a lot of
commitment so I think that we
all care about the forced thank
you really appreciate that.
On the same thing.
Okay thank you that's all.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair of thank
you senator I will say Senator
Ortiz Pino a lot of the private
for so is not the the big
beautiful ponder it's more the
rolling hill cedars and things
in there is he quick money for
that through the USDA that a lot
of people can apply for first
things maintaining if if the so
maybe I do have just a few
comments of page three at the
very top it's talking about what
people can do to prevent
catastrophic wildfires and I see
you know putting out campfires
not from cigarette **** out of
cars but what I didn't see madam
chair and senator and and maybe
your experts that can address
this why we didn't put it
responsible management of which
we see other parts of the world
say Germany for example with the
black force they do a fantastic
job of ensuring that it's then
that plenty of moisture can get
to the ground that really hot
fires can burn cause the the
fuel load is low I'm I'm
wondering if if it was omitted
on purpose or
maybe just didn't reserves human
management and and think to
include that to help prevent
forest fires burning.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
This was
Like we should leave it up to
the experts is what I'm saying
this is all focused on
students perspectives for the
force but.
We can do some more research and
get back to you.
And madam chair expert sorry
what was your name again marlin
over guns my left hello.
Thank you for that answer you
know I think that's something
that's that gets lost it's
always easy to you know to do
the Smokey the bear only you can
prevent forest fires but you
know I feel like Smokey the bear
should be point in a mere right
back at the federal government
at this point
they they're the cause of the
last few and yes it was because
of the control brown but also
because of mismanagement and I
look at our state force they're
they're beautiful they're doing
a great job managing them
and I think at the end of the
day our biggest threat to our
forces is our own federal
government and hopefully we can
we can get that to our our
congressional delegation but I
do appreciate this because I too
love the force I love to go up I
I don't really high for fun but
if I have an L. per min I think
I could climb over the top of
any mountain looking for one and
I really enjoy it that's
something that my family stuff
for for many many years and
that's something that my
district and senator Hart meals
has in common hunting and that
type of culture and so I think
it's important to too many New
Mexicans and it's a huge
economic driver for my area to
Texans come in and pay big Bucks
to to enjoy our forest and so we
benefit greatly from that it's a
huge economic driver in that
aspect as well so I do
appreciate the memorial and
thank you for bringing this
forward thank you.
Thank you madam chair pro tem
thank you four one is on the
here
chair Senators or serve on this.
Or
Should be aware of that
More.
All federal government's views
to
rival you know loan about the
percentage of the where is the.
So terrible job.
Where we were going on our
national.
Manages answers.
Or uranium mine is of you'll
still Senator of stores.
A little bit of the welfare.
The majority of our structure
Mexico.
Through a lot of the year over
the years or older issues around
or early.
More a little bit about.
our server one point one.
all
as well as a lot of money more
funding for the wall.
And I noticed that
Of UNM was sponsored program but
I don't want to talk about the
future are on hold are you able
to tell us what is and what
their sponsorship goes and how
they're going to are you
Representative and one of the
more important questions.
We'll go to the director for
that question.
Sure the chair of the body is
the money yes.
Excuse.
Sir madam chair members of the
committee I'm sued George I'm an
attorney with the wild friends
program yes Exxon Mobil and sub
we have other sponsors noted on
the tee shirts they provide
gifts to the program that
unrestricted funding to support
the program for to pay for T.
shirts yes buses staffing and
materials but it's not directed
towards any particular project
or subject matter.
The school district.
Support our schools or where
we're greatly appreciative.
Thank you so and at.
And center I just want to say
and tier experts.
You all have been amazing ideas
you guys are better experts and
half the adults I see come on
here
and you're really good at all
the procedures to going through
the chair and everything I am
very very impressed on thank you
guys for coming up here thank
you for for advocating for what
you believe in every time we we
have youth and students up here
I always tell them you know you
guys have are occupying this
really unique space right now
where we really want to talk to
you we have people who want to
talk to us all day long people
who are paid to talk to us about
certain things all day long and
those conversations often aren't
that fun for us when did you
guys want to talk to us I know
that I and and I I believe all
of my colleagues to we drop
everything and talk to you guys
so please keep on advocating
keep on coming up here
and I thank you guys so much for
helping to educate us today
Senator moved to pass.
Right
are that we need a roll call
vote let's go ahead and do one
for.
For for folks who are watching
online Senator Baca yes Senator
Ingle excuse Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Pirtle yes Senator
phonics test Senator Stewart yes
Senator Hotmail yes Senator hit
yes with ten yes votes you have
to pass thank you guys so much
you very much.
And since I see that we have
Representative pants but.
Hi I should know how to
pronounce your name by now I
apologize Representative kanske
are here with us let's go ahead
and and go to thank you once.
of.
Zero zero
yes.
Madam chair.
Comments and support
and then.
We will we'll go from there so
please go ahead on house bill
one sixty nine.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
pleased to bring forward house
bill one sixty nine
the intention of this bill is to
restore first amendment rights
to the complainants that bring
forward complaints to the
interim legislative ethics
committee.
the existing law prohibits
complaints filed with the
interim legislative ethics
committee prohibits the
complainant the committee and
its staff from disclosing any
information until after finding
of probable cause however there
is no such prohibition on the
responded house bill one sixteen
I just simply deletes the word
complainant and ends that serve
on even requirement and also
brings the law into compliance
with the first amendment.
I I am bringing this bill
forward just to ensure that our
interim process is fair and
equitable as possible and also
to make sure that we're not
running afoul of our
constitutional rights to free
speech
madam chair members the state
it's been a long time focus of
money to make sure that this
bill this process is is
welcoming and a successful as
possible
and I I think that this
legislation is a small step
towards helping us do that
when I was a legislative staff
person as it was previously I
personally have to file it at
interim legislative ethics
committee complaint not due to
something that it occurred with
me but because I was a mandatory
reporter under policy and in
that process I too was also
prohibited from speaking to
anyone about that and it was a
very very difficult moment for
me to make this difficult
decision and sort of grapple
with what I what I had to bring
forward
so even in my own personal
experience I feel like I had to
change that in this legislation
would have assisted me and sort
of seeking some counsel or
advice on how to handle that
particular situation
Representative I'm sorry to
interrupt you I'm not sure of
our Mike is picking you up and
make sure that it's turned on
and do what should I hold this
one or I I yes that's better
Madam chair thank you
I think you and so I I just want
to
say that an additional a
positive aspect of this
legislation would be that as
legislative staff for others are
bringing forward complaints that
they would be able to seek
support seek counseling seek
advice
understood you know when they're
dealing with such a difficult
situation I'd like to introduce
my expert witnesses madam chair
if that's okay I have with me
money on a and I am ask Miss and
I had to make a statement now.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Maria
and I at I'm here today on
behalf of myself but as a full
disclosure I also am a
registered lobbyist for rain
which is the national sexual
assault hotline
there a couple of things that I
wanted to say and one is that I
really appreciate this body as a
whole both in the house and the
Senate for
being willing to listen to folks
have gone through this process
as we're thinking of changes and
ways that we can make this
process better for other folks
I also really appreciate this
committee process because there
are a lot of things that I
hadn't thought of that we are
able to speak to today because
folks have questioned what this
process looks like so one of the
things that I wanted to say is
that
You know there there was a
question about the ability to
speak not to speak when it comes
to a complaint and and one of
the things that actually came to
light that for me at least is
that you actually have more
freedom to speak up before you
go through a complaint process
you actually have your first
amendment rights before you go
through a complaint process and
it's actually the complaint
process as it currently stands
that limits your ability to
speak and so that is one of the
things that has come to light
because of this
and also more interestingly
there's actually an
accountability mechanism in this
process in that if you are you
know any any member of the
public who is going to at let's
say speak out against a member
of this legislature you can do
that free Lee
as a person in our community
however if you're going through
this process that there is
actually an accountability
mechanism because you need to
sign a sworn statement and so
there is the accountability
mechanism actually for perjury
which once again didn't didn't
even come to light before this
process and so I'm just really
appreciative of the the ability
to receive these questions for
us to think really deeply about
the ways in which we can move
this process forward going into
the future thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I also
have with me Mr Matthew back
who's in Albuquerque attorney
Peifer law firm.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for having me today.
for about the last ten years I
I've been a lawyer who practices
in first amendment
constitutional rights I've
cooperated with the ACLU other
than a a stent in there at the
U. S. attorney's office.
the statute now as it's
currently written where it
prohibits speaking by the
complainant about the filing
process is is plainly
unconstitutional it is a view
point and content based
restriction the Supreme Court
has made clear that regulations
like this that are content
content based are quote
presumptively invalid.
That would be true.
If it restricted both the
complainant and the respondent.
The way to save the
constitutionality of this bill
is to.
Passed this law and take away
the one sided restriction on the
complaint as it stands now again
it's it's plainly
unconstitutional be subject to
strict scrutiny and there is no
compelling interest that I I can
think of that I would see
advanced by this restriction on
speech on individuals.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative and I believe
that you have.
More organized support
Kayla herring from Planned
Parenthood and Julie on a coup
from New Mexico coalition for
sexual assault programs
to see all our where you're fine
on time here about seven
minutes.
Madam chair of the committee
thank you so much for hearing
this bill today Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky Mountain
stands in strong support because
we believe that our communities
deserve access to the resources
that will make them whole after
experiencing sexual violence or
harassment as someone who has
experienced sexual violence and
harassment there my life I know
how important access to
community to my family and to
mental health resources is and
has been in that journey and
regardless of who is involved in
that perpetration you should be
made.
Of those resources need to be
made available so that we can
all heal thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee Julie on a coop and
I'm here representing the
coalition of sexual assault
programs what we know about
sexual assault survivors is that
part of their healing process is
speaking or not speaking
deciding to go through this
process or not go through it
that autonomy is incredibly
important to healing this simply
levels the playing field it
provides the victim with the
same ability as the accused to
speak about this I will tell you
as a
individual that has experienced
sexual harassment in this
building sexual battery in this
building I chose not to speak
about it happen many years ago
and that was my decision but if
I had to sit needed to do that I
want that available to any
victim or survivor thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair without
I'll conclude at my presentation
and will stand for questions.
Do we have to prepare for more
organized support is there
anyone in the audience who
wishes to raise their hand to
indicate support.
Anyone online.
Anyone who wants to raise our
hands indicate opposition.
Your online and
Senator Moores this undertaking.
Roger Federer's on the wall
rules and and also where we
profit and backed myself and
some members of minorities
wanted albums was passed this is
on on.
And the majority still passed
and so I just leave is a lesson
would be when we are minority
try to approve bills.
They were steamrolled more point
out things that are clearly
wrong with bills and just
passing a bill just because New
York tax bills is not the way we
should be doing that selection
is one of the reasons
for this issue could be fixed if
you already have listening to us
when this was passed.
Early stated that this was on
prostitution in fact you know
it's it's so you have to do this
log because nothing would
prevented anyone from from four
to go to the drugs because what
what.
Representative managers
Representative and pointed.
Your doctor Ross what would.
No problems this.
Madam chair and senator Morris
that you are correct.
Also laughed at any kind of
powers is not no penalties in
those so as we say in Senate
Judiciary all law with our with
our priorities and suggestion
that I find the next person the
next group of people in this.
The committee shall not publicly
disclose the information is that
there is a penalty and as we
know that someone in the
committee the process disclose
this information to.
Is that ever them look into all
this information about on the
website is in nursing or one of
those members of the
legislature.
What happened in this particular
case because resolve all the
report on the internet and that
are going to.
Madam chair and senator Morris
I'm really not familiar with the
details of that of that specific
Act investigation that may have
occurred so I I don't have an
answer for you I'm afraid on
that.
Were.
Yes there is clearly
constitutional which in New
Mexico.
We
more on our our right to go
through your mind.
As well as where we are.
Our.
The legislative body.
Go for director or.
dollars for.
Well as a respected senator
Morris is saying however how do
we protect our madam chairman
how do we protect ourselves from
issues
without without any real basis
being tried in the press
accusations about members of the
legislature if there is no if
there's if.
Not like but if what I see here
is.
You have to have the same rule
apply to both responded and the
complainant could we make it
also that the respondent cat
disco discuss these things into
a final decision is made within
that achieve the same effect and
you wouldn't have the the the
kind of of of the current
because long before the decision
was reached the press was
talking freely about this
particular incident.
And madam chair and senator this
bill doesn't prevent anyone from
going to the process it that is
involved in a particular
situation that can happen
already we did look Senator at
the option that you just raised
regarding putting a prohibition
on both sides if I may I'd like
to defer to Mister back to
address that.
Yet.
Madam chair Senator Ortiz Pena
as I as I mentioned
if you put a.
A prior restraint on free speech
on any public citizen whether it
be the complainant the
respondent one or the other that
is a content based restriction
you're restricting their speech
based on the content of their
speech in this case the filing
of the complaint as soon as you
do that those laws are
presumptively invalid in less
that that they're tested under
the strict scrutiny test which
means that it must be narrowly
tailored to further a compelling
governmental interest.
in the last twenty years that
the United States Supreme Court
there have been two cases where
that happened one of which that
comes to mind and I don't know
the case name but it's providing
material support to terrorists
outside of that significant
context it would be
unconstitutional and here if you
look at the statute as it's
presented.
first of all there's a problem
with ambiguity meaning that
you know what is.
Information relating to the
filing or investigation of the
complaint that doesn't talk
about the substance of the
complaint however the next
provision including the identity
of the complainant or respondent
I don't know that that has
anything to do with the filing
or investigation and so it's
unclear.
What this protects when you're
not when you're not precluding
individual speech that is not a
concern any longer the
government can can always
protect its own speech meaning
it can say the commission for
the committee members cannot.
but restricting both the
complainant and the respondent
is still clearly
unconstitutional well I thought
you said madam chairman I
thought before you to it can't
be one sided it has to be both
side that now I I apologize for
saying that what I said is that.
You madam chair Senator Ortiz
Pena what I said is that
regardless whether you protect
one side both sides anyone you
cannot restrict independent of
free speech free speech by the
public so you cannot make this
both cited that would not result
in fixing the unconstitutional
problem with the statute.
Representative madam chairman.
Another constitutional lawyer I
certainly for today the experts
on this it just seems to me that
leaves a public official
extremely vulnerable to having a
case made against them and then
if the decision in the ethics
commission.
The or the ethics committee in
our case to do
those the other way.
They're still painted on the
public side as having committed
the the offense no matter what
and I do think that it is not.
I
mean it it it really does leave
us vulnerable and I'll just let
it go at that time.
Sure people don't make frivolous
complaints ever but that doesn't
mean there haven't been in the
past Phillis complaints maybe
and
Certainly maybe not in New
Mexico but we've had plenty of
of of of examples of complaints
made.
Ultimately history is shown well
that never really happened but
that person was label for after
as as that.
Type of criminal.
So even though the the official
proceedings may of may of clear
their name.
Then the public side they were
still found guilty.
The thank you madam chair.
Thank you additional discussion
from the committee.
Senator Baca.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward I've I'm I'm looking on
section II on page three and
sections one and three.
And they seem to be somewhat
contradictory on section one is
has a committee that staff will
not publicly disclose any
information relating to the
filing and all that you read the
rest of this until after filing
finding of probable cause has
been made and then on number
three it says no member of the
committee or its staff may
knowingly disclose any
confidential information except
as authorized by the committee
so it it seems to me that the
well maybe not contradictory but
they all say the same thing is
that.
I reading that wrong I'm madam
chair and senator Baca I think
when you read them together
they do address
there is a process so that we do
have a Legislative Council
policy number fifteen that
outlines the procedures for the
interim legislative ethics
committee and in that process
the interim legislative ethics
committee both hearing
subcommittee an investigative
subcommittee can indicate that
certain information or
proceedings be confidential and
so I think that that
section II three this is related
to the then the further
description and that interim
ethics policy.
Okay thank you for that answer I
just the the other thing is
we're we're tying essentially
the hands of the committee here
based on the argument
madam chair and and
representative of of counsel
with you what what prevents the
committee from I mean the first
amendment applies to all right
of freedom of speech essentially
so why can't the committee
discuss these things if I may
prevent support what argument is
distinct from from the
complainant and respondent yes
to the committee and madam chair
and senator Baca I might ask Mr
back to address that.
the free speech rights like all
the bill of rights the first ten
amendments to the constitution
apply to the individual and so
an individual person speaking
for his or herself excuse me
sorry I'm sure Senator Baca in
individual speaking for him or
herself always has the right
under the first amendment to
free speech the government does
not have the right of free
speech free speech rights did
not apply to the government
speaking as the government and
so when the committee is acting
as a committee it does not have
the right to free speech under
the first amendment the
government can always prohibited
self for speaking
subject to some certain
restrictions but this would not
be one of them so because the
government the committee is
acting as the government free
speech does not burden the
committee the the restriction on
the committee from speaking
about.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you I I I guess have trouble
with that
because we in in paragraph three
we actually distinguish a member
no members that's an individual
and then we go on to give
to create a bar or actually an
intent to knowingly disclose so
that and and that that we all
get to the knowing Lee in a
minute but what we're we're
picking out of members and why
are we talking about no we leave
how do why not knowingly
disclose something so fax a
drop a file on the floor that's
okay
I actually have to with the
staff to put in the envelope and
disclose it to somebody madam
chair I I don't understand the
purpose of the the knowingly and
us of distinguishing a member of
the committee we're not calling
it the committee as you stated
we're calling it a member of the
committee an individual madam
chair let's respond to that
madam chair and representative
and Senator Baca if I could
defer to Mister back.
Madam chair Senator Baca because
it is talking about a government
employee acting in their
government role the committee
member or a staff member in
individual on that committee is
still part of the government and
so that is government speech in
that role they do not have the
protection of the first
amendment free speech right on
like a complainant or respondent
knowingly is is it's a defined
term in the but I'm thinking of
criminal procedure and and the
criminal jury instructions and
means to do something well fully
with the intent so as you said
if you drop a file on the floor
and disclose it it probably
would would not be knowingly
unless of course you intended to
do so and knew who was around
you and you would see it and who
would pick it up
so I I think that that that is a
protection as as you referenced
Senator Baca of of the sort of
incidental disclosure that was
not intended that that the
committee or the staff person
should not be subject to any
kind of punishment for that
infertile disclosure.
Thank you madam chair and and
who who are the members of the
and and I don't mean names but
what will positions occupied the
interim the legislative ethics
committee.
Madam chair and senator there
are members appointed from both
the house and the Senate it is
it
just a selection of members from
both parties on the interim
legislative ethics committee
thank you madam chair so
essentially we have legislators
on their
madam chair and and so that
would of think another question
are are these employees as you
stated and therefore are the
subject to to the rules madam
chair the council just stated
I I don't I don't view myself I
don't know how the law is
exactly articulates legislators
I know we we some some rules and
laws are applicable to us within
within that but whether it
applies to us as government
employees I'm not really sure
that that this gets that done
anyway all all continue to to
listen to more debate if there's
any thank you.
Senator mechanical Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for.
Presenting this to us this
morning
I'm curious if someone could.
And for me ritually when this
statute was.
was to protect the abuse.
madam chair and senator McKenna
we looked a little bit into the
history of this law and it was
originally adopted in nineteen
ninety three so I am not sure of
the original intention or that
discussion at that time around
this law.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
and now I'm looking at
The analysis page two under
significant issues.
I am studying why it's
considered significant and
could.
Maybe Mr fact Madam chair
representative.
is it safe to conclude that.
The the analyzer included those
just simply say that the same
free speech conditions will be
three hundred sixty five days a
year.
madam chair that American I'll
defer to Mister back.
Madam chair Senator McKenna I I
I don't know why this is laid
out as a significant issue by
the person
who prepared this analysis but
it is my understanding that for
complaints filed during this
session they're filed under the
rules
outside of the statute this is
only in the interim and those
rules do not put any burden on
this on the speech of the
complainant for the record
responded and so yes you're
correct that this is saying that
it would make the same
restrictions apply or take away
the restrictions for the same
three hundred sixty five days
out of the year Senator and and
and I'm just going to jump in
here because that's actually not
correct for seven.
Our Senate rules we not only
still have in their a
prohibition on the complainant's
that being able to speak we also
have consequences they can be
reprimanded they can be fined
monetarily
So are Senate rules definitely
need need to catch up with our
constitutional rights that we
are
insuring in this bill but but no
right right now it would be
three hundred sixty five days a
year
that this would apply.
Start to jump in there you know
some of the for Senator.
That's all I have thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you set up for us.
Thank you madam chair of that I
I think I would like an answer
further on the fact that every
single members of US citizens
legislators so we're not an
employee of the state however we
found by any governmental
restrictions on free speech if I
don't receive a salary.
Not employed.
How's how's that.
Madam chair and senator Pirtle
psychic defer to Mister back.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle a a I
if I said that it's it's limited
to government employees but I I
misspoke staff members of our
government employees
Representative representatives
legislators citizen legislators
when you're when you're part of
the committee you're still
speaking as the government and
there are no there are no first
amendment rights for the
government there are no
constitutional rights for the
government the government can
restrict speech unfettered by
the constitution
you know if if someone comes in
and wants
a Billboard put up in the
legislature you know to put up a
Billboard that says we the
legislature state acts the
legislature doesn't have to
comply with that because it's
speaking as a body speaking as
the government you can't compel
the government to speak one way
or the other and so you so madam
chair Senator Pirtle when you're
when you're acting as a
committee member you're acting
as the government and there are
not free speech rights to that.
Thank you for the response I do
I think.
With some of the way this is
written I mean knowingly of.
Use the secretary actually see
someone in an email.
That we are delighted that.
So I mean I think there's the
work we're going to find ways to
do it if they want to do it
to disclose information and it
would be a shame if the
complainant didn't wanted out
and then that happened.
You we have here there is no
punishment so I hope that.
This goes to Judiciary maybe we
can clean up some of that
language that was pushed through
by the majority of those many
years ago
to help protect the complaining
even for if that's the case if
members of the staff are
down to secrecy.
Don't have first amendment
rights maybe we need to go
further that if the complainant
doesn't want public that there
is sometimes.
That because that it happened
over the last.
Somebody the.
Canadian or somehow got out
still in the last year that I
have is and that's the case we
need to have some type of.
The.
Our on that point as well make
sure I understand that because
of the new I'm sure the.
I kind of assumed that
everything was.
On
the line personally aware.
More.
I didn't realize of.
Number the that argument in the
world provided.
Frustrated and Ron.
They're they're not covered
under fers what I just heard you
say we're working the that
document and moving on.
madam chair and senator Morris
I don't feel like I can speak to
what it was a crime or not but
certainly an ethics complaint to
could have been filed on the
release of those documents.
Your reserve wrestle with.
S. R. what.
The person was a provided
release that doctor.
They're they're not cover on
proposed bill which is a.
They are powerful Byron and how
these
the Los four hours workers and
not covered by that directive in
their own personal mobile.
Madam chair Senator Moores I
don't know the circumstances of
any release of information like
you're talking about if it was
by a Canadian person
then that committee person
violated this law
whether that's a crime I guess
depends on the definition of a
crime and and whether there's
penalties civil war or not there
there's not in this bill but yes
I I think you're correct if it
was a committee person subject
to the restrictions in the one
forty three and they knowingly
released it or if it was a
release of information the fire
investigation complaint yes they
violated this law and they would
not.
Generally be protected by free
speech how there are there are
certain
you know accidents circumstances
emergencies
That would be what we call an as
applied challenge which means
that under the circumstances it
may have been constitutional but
in the abstract without going
through that analysis of the
exact circumstances yes I agree
that they did violate if it was
a committee person that
committee person violated this
law if it if they release the
information.
Or.
The
need for.
Look at violation of the law.
Zero to uphold prostitution laws
of state or Mexico.
That will.
Models are.
A lot of.
Thank you madam chair so
I'm still completely unclear on
on who has free speech and who
doesn't madam chair so here we
sit in a committee here and I
guess from from.
The good counsel's
definition he gave us all state
we are a committee and therefore
we are instrument of the
government in there for I guess
it begs the question do we have
free speech is committee member
sitting here today.
madam chair and senator Baca
both the house and Senate have
rules regarding
some of which apply to actual
procedures of debate you know
put some parameters around for
example questioning the
motivation of a vote or those
kinds of examples that we have
in both house and Senate rules
There are also numerous
references and masons which we
also use as a parliamentary
procedure to
regarding what is appropriate
and debated what kinds of things
can occur in debate and I I
don't have Mister Buckley want
to add to that.
Madam chair Senator Baca
the.
Acting as a committee person on
a government committee you do
not have the same free speech
rights that you would as a
citizen outside of the committee
and that is the reason why I
think is as representatives
pants he noted you're able to
put rules on the way that you're
allowed to speak or or speaking
committee is that there you do
not have the same extent of of
first amendment rights when
you're acting as a government
official in a government role
it's it's the same reason that I
think is.
It's analogous reason at least
to I think what Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino was was concerned about
about in the case there may be
you know a complaint that gets
out of the public is not in is
not grounded in the fact that
when you take on this official
role and you become a government
official you have less first
amendment protections than the
general public is just a private
individual.
Thank you madam chair yeah I
think
at least I better be careful
myself and I guess because I'm
very unclear where I sit then
because I would think that
really the things that you've
addressed madam chair and and
Representative the council or
more issues of decorum and
procedure in less of subject
matter and so I would think for
subject matter sitting here in
this committee it I think that
we we do have that freedom to to
to really say what we want
representatives of the people
were not we're just the opposite
of a government entity we're
actually a public entity is what
I would argue on the other item
two is I can give you a just a
quick example of of how.
But completed could disclose
this and it be legal even under
the stir current US law that we
have in the case of madam chair
where a person's files an ethics
complaint that they feel is
simultaneously a crime and
actually goes to the police and
discloses that to the police and
then at that time to complete is
made that complaint is now
public have they violated the
law here you know so there's
some contradiction I see that I
just don't know that this and I
and I understand where you're
getting and I appreciate the
spirit of it I'm just not sure
that this piece of legislation
gets us where we want to go
anyway I I do appreciate the
answers and the and the debate
from the committee thank you.
Thank you for the special from
the committee.
Senator Stewart.
Secretary.
To a roll call that.
center about the past.
Senator Ingle.
Use Senator Lopez yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Senator Ortiz a piano yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator phonics test.
Senator Stewart yes.
In our Hotmail yes.
Senator Baca.
Nope.
Senator yes with nine yes one
now you have to pass thank you
madam chair thank you we are
because we have that fifteen
minutes left and then just sort
of explained this earlier to the
committee members and jumping
around on the agenda I was going
to folks who were not on the
committee first Senator Brandt
got here before Senator my ****
what's gonna head and and and
and do his and and that might be
all we have time for today for
the Senator Ortiz if you find
out that the bill listed were
Senator Lopez and myself four
thirty seven mmhm this is not in
our book anyway four eighty
seven is in the book which is a
different.
And so we would have wanted to
put in the
thank you senator for timing
that and and I apologize for
that oversight.
Well definitely get it given
about ten and just so folks know
who has some bills are obviously
gonna get rolled over we're
gonna be hearing bills again
next on Monday the first bill
we're going to hear on Monday is
going to be H. before but we
will get to choose the other
rolled over bills after that.
So had Senator Brandt Madam
thank you for getting the
schedule for we appreciate it
this is something that's very
personal to me
and it's really dealing with the
fact that our veterans
or not getting their ratings for
disability done in a timely
manner
the regulations are supposed to
have those done within ninety
days and if you are.
Terminally ill they're supposed
to help the expedited process
that gets it done in thirty days
I have for you just recently
gone through this with my father
in law that is not happening
and I have been in touch with
Sir the regular haunts office
and he is aware of.
This issue and actually is
working on it and so I put this
together so the Congress we can
request that Congress
investigate why the VA is not
getting these ratings done in a
timely manner.
That's literally what it does.
Thank you senator I don't think
we had anyone signed up in
support or opposition on this
bill anyone in the audience
which to raise our hands
indicate support.
A long time now and this.
Anyone want to indicate
opposition.
No online.
Members of the committee to
phonics
when you are ready I would have.
All right we might get to after
all Senator Maestas was to roll
call the center drive yes.
Senator Ingle excuse Senator
Lopez.
Senator McKenna passed Senator
Moores yes.
You know yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stefanics yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Hotmail yes.
Sen I do yes and senator Sanchez
center my father as a reward for
their response to the.
And try to work with veterans
all the time we get there
waiting for
service.
And with.
Hi I.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Senator masses let's see how
quickly we can do this bill and
can't promise for gonna.
Get through it but let's give it
a try
thank you madam chair will come
back and thank you honorable
members this is a Senate bill
three hundred eighty nine and it
deals with the sports authority
division I think there's a lot
of confusion.
Regarding this this division but
it this bill doesn't reinstate
anything or create anything or
mandate anything that's not
already in law this subdivision
was do funded under the previous
administration it is a currently
under funded now so what this
bill does is shave duties and
responsibilities of the division
number one is currently under
state law there's a twenty five
member of public board they
ships it to a ten member public
board chaired by the lieutenant
governor's office and then it
also eliminates that required
rulemaking and specifies in
statute what what current law is
in terms of the duties of
identifying existing
infrastructure for sports
activities
and.
With regards to the budgeting
last year had a two hundred
thousand and house bill two and
hundred thousand in in June here
the LFC recommendation was zero
the executive recommendation was
a flat budget
so I'm confident it'll it'll
have a flat budget but if it
does not that's even more reason
to pass this bill to shave
existing mandates thank you Mr
chair.
I
don't have anyone signed up in
support or opposition of this
bill he was traded hands one
person is here to support or
opposition feel free
I don't think we have anyone
on the line of questions from
the committee Senator Ortiz Y.
paid out from Madam chairman and
senator
the governor vetoed last year's
bill the changes.
Over the J. that's correct madam
chair Senator Ortiz penal the
main change was that the the
secretary of tourism higher the
director and though and so this
one really has the governor
hiring the the director and up
and obviously the governor would
appoint the body and I think
there was some once again I
think the.
The misnomer was that that I
think the thought process was
that last year's bill created
something it did and it it
merely.
Cut the build down from twenty
five point two to seven last
year now it cuts it down from
twenty five to eleven.
But the other governors of.
The tourism sector couldn't be
here this morning but all of
this bill advances all been.
communication with the
governor's office setting
communicate very well last year.
What
is the the point of order you
do.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam chair thank you Senator T.
Pino will.
As on page one you know nine
dash fifteen eight just ten the
duties of the sports authority
division developing an overall
strategy strategic plan for
recruiting and retaining
Of various forms of professional
and amateur sports events and
this
this would require up we would
clarify doing an inventory of
all sports venues in the state
when the sports authority was
created under the Richardson
administration I did a lot of
tremendous things golf
tournaments Saka softball
tournaments it led to the
creation of the New Mexico bowl
which is the single most.
largest G. R. T. tourism in that
in the state.
And I think this last year the
tourism department worked with
the folks up in Farmington the
Connie Mack World Series is now
televised on CBS and I think in
a few years will rival the The
Little League World Series in
terms of its popularity.
Yes additional discussion from
the committee Senator Stewart.
Chair so looks as though you've
taken out.
Of the disease in the words of
advisory committee we're just
going to let governor point in.
Whatever from wherever yes yes
the geographic this.
So you're just letting that be
fully approve of this
information.
Thank you madam chair Senators
toward a test because currently
under current law it's a pretty
massive lift including three
secretaries superintendent RLD.
chief counsel to the governor I
mean it was written up under the
previous previous
administration's purview in this
what I shave the public body
from twenty five down to ten at
the discretion of the governor.
Because I know those twenty five
member board.
Don't work very well
so but it's just totally wide
open to guests and should be
taught at last year now you're
giving her all wide open to
convicted and let those there's
no designees anymore.
Madam chair Senators toward the
governor under current law could
take whoever all the good under
current law its the you know
it's all those folks I mentioned
as well as
As the additional members I
think one two three four five
six.
Right now she could pick
nineteen public members under
this bill it's down to ten but
you're correct it's that the
discussion of the governor.
Additional session Mr Senator
Moores.
really appreciate what you're
doing for the last year what are
you all.
The governor's office.
Story of figure for them your
reserves and rated opportunities
are still hasn't been able to do
it over four grams works or what
you more like probably.
I was very very very.
We appreciated about this on the
governor's office of our
offices.
Those are kind of in I thank and
rewarded with the structure
will.
I believe are correct you.
What do need to run our.
Madam chair of the center most
yes correct that was my junior
money.
I do think I do have some of the
questions of Senator Stewart
had about you don't have an
appointment but having also
worked in the of the of the
ministrations previous eleven
artist appointees for a lot of
these
policy you know I I really like
when we do our the policy of
boards when we do the the the
will point arose pro tempore
minority and all that this is a
much different situation this is
more wrong
policy correct I'm sure verify
all this thank you madam chair
Sir was there is not there's not
I really appreciate we're doing
like where you're you're going
on this master goes Mr chair
chair of Senator are provided
water be appointed to this bill
says something about per diem
associate center to see if you
know wanted to be on this which
I'm sure he does would he be
allowed to be on this.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Moores I.
Theoretically yes but I think we
should try to show up and not
get pretty.
The last four years what we
normally.
Okay we're doing Senator I
support this I think it's into
the economic driver sports have
you mentioned about table
huge
vestments for the state
obviously partial to UNM
athletics but I also give my
junior money to New Mexico state
further upward program because I
understand how important it is
for on the help of those
institutions that live in the
bill would be competitive
because of money it generates is
just huge absolutely huge.
A lot of support support for the
state.
Representative doing as of late
because of that for the needs to
be taken off of
the Center start up mentor I
want to suggest to Senator
Moores that there's more than
just he and Center TCP know they
care about for what you've done
with capital outlay I was
actually personally thank you
for that moment because I know
you have stepped up and I was.
All games are you with the
football games I see him at the
basketball game so did you and
senator do you know they care
about sports that I you are
absolutely right you've been a
big fan for a long long time
and.
At the rate and then
The.
The fact that was the second or.
And senator you know as I was
looking for language care about
no more than five members will
be of the same political party I
was going to offer an amendment
to add in that language that we
had every time on bills now
where we say and makes haven't
changed their registration last
two years the firm is senator
Morris was talking and this is
not a policy issue I I don't I
don't think that it really
matters on this on small.
Also give back to the future
for.
Right for
okay so we're gonna do passed
motions Senator.
Senator I.
Use Senator Ingle fix use
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes and explain level of.
Senator Pirtle.
Excuse Senator finance yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Hanya yes Senator Duhigg yes
with a yes the of the masses
that are to the community.
Princes Ford.
We are yet to lose our news is.
yeah.
