Senator Campos.
Center guy across.
Senator Gonzales happy birthday
and president Senator Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Center Hermio.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Centamin yes.
Senator Neville.
Center male.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Center city of this happy
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Center Thomas.
Senator Wirth.
Senator the chamber we're still
lacking a quorum.
sing Happy Birthday to those two
senators come to the chamber.
I mean usually hang around some.
Have a car Mr president.
Thank you I'd like to ask all
the members and all the guests
And to please remain standing
for the pledge of allegiance to
be led today by Senator Burt.
Pledge of allegiance in Spanish
to be led today by Senator
daylight savings time if you
haven't turned our clocks back
yet.
As we move into the ari manning
days of the fifty six
And works words spoken humbly
can sometimes touch our hearts
with that truth.
Try that we come together in
these few days ahead
anticipating our finding the
God creator of us all to allow
the good work we've done and
that work we still have to do
here further awaken us to a
Scripture tells us that the
threat of the divine is woven
through the fabric of our human
souls and everything that has
being.
We just these things in the name
of our try in god and all the
names we call you holy father
son and Holy Spirit a man.
Dyess and join me in the pledge
of allegiance.
To the flag of the United States
of America.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
justice for all.
So they'll done hello vendetta
the Los estados Unidos that
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr president good
afternoon to you and to everyone
in the chamber a unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
we are in that order of Business
announces miscellaneous senator
invocation since you're over on
his side of the chamber this
morning but always appreciates a
your words and and certainly I
soul why I think we need to jump
right in Mister president since
we do have a a birthday and
all lead a special Happy
Birthday to her.
Members that we can all please
rise.
your sure we have a burst the
truth you.
Grandson that's pretty cool
pretty special for sure are just
so for the members what we're
gonna do today we have six
confirmations and I think those
the Republicans want to have
after we get done with the
confirmations the Republicans
want to have a caucus before we
come back and you all have a
morning this is the budgets and
house bill one thirty is a K.
twelve plus program the plan is
to do both of those once the
Republican caucuses over this
business messages from the house
where that order business
message from the house the
reader to read the message Mr
president I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the house has
house house bill four three as
amended by the house and request
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa and
passed Senate bill forty seven
as amended by the Senate Senate
bill sixty eight as amended by
the Senate Senate bill three as
amended by the Senate and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
unanimous consent we go about
our business committee reports
where that order of business
committee reports the reader to
read.
polytechnic as a member of the
university of New Mexico board
of regents for term commencing
upon confirmation and concluding
on December thirty first twenty
Not paying attention Mr present
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote upon them with one
motion and that the general
reflect that they're acted upon
governor makes the following
appointment William Phelps
Anderson as a member of the New
Mexico military institute for a
term commencing upon
confirmation concluding on
what's the governor makes the
following appointment Logan
Michael o'brien as a student
member of the eastern New Mexico
university board of regents for
disappointment Senate executive
message number I dated March
second twenty twenty three
that's the governor makes the
following appointment Kodi
Dennis Rivera as a student
member of the New Mexico
highlands university board of
Senate confirm this appointment
Senate executive message number
seven dated March seventh twenty
twenty three what's the governor
makes the following appointment
twenty eight here committee
recommends that the Senate come
from this appointment.
Senate executive message number
seven dated March seventh twenty
twenty three if it's a
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
have chairwoman senator Dick Mr
president of the committee
reports centers we have a motion
to doubt the committee report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
The reader to read.
This president your finance
committee to who has been
referred house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
Munoz chairman Senator me us
thank you Mr presentation as
consenus of the review loud to
read all the committee reports
we've are on them with one
motion in the General flecked
bill three oh nine do pass.
House bill one thirty as amended
do pass as amended respectfully
submitted to senator George when
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the Canadian forces been
adopted in the journal reflect
that they're acted upon
individually Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth to take
us to the next order of business
move we adjourn until twelve or
one PM.
The Senate will come to order Mr
president us as consent that the
rules be suspended journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
and approval of the Judiciary
Committee hearing no objection
it is so ordered Senator
majority floor leader Peter
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
I just that the credentials of
polytechnic be presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
board of regents for the
university of New Mexico and I
now yield to senator Wirth.
confirm the appointment a
polytechnic it to the board of
regents for the university of
New Mexico.
I see no objections senator
Wirth explained thank you Mr
polytechnic and who I've known
as I was doing the math is
pretty amazing to me for thirty
five years
my wife Carol was a bill drafter
long history and then of course
I had the chance when I was
elected to the legislature in
two thousand four to work with
Paula wearing her hat as the
all gelled hearing the testimony
in committee first again I'm
I've this is the second
confirmation I've done with
someone with an incredible
career and state governments
after retiring Debbie Romero
with someone like Kerry coupled
last week or earlier this week
lost track of time but Paula
admitted she's not done
that she is and how she
has kind of handled.
People handle difficult
situations and work throughout
be incredibly valuable skill at
the university of New Mexico is
she's able to craft workable
solutions to difficult problems.
You know and that's part of
Council Service she's out of
riding and other different
positions but one that I think
is definitely relevant to where
she's going now although it's
watching that statewide charter
school kind of really grow and
go through a building phase go
through legislative needs and
Paula's been over here working
that definitely is different
different kind of hats but I
just again want to thank the
governor for this incredible
pick and it's a it's perfectly
and to really help move this
amazing institution just finally
she she graduated from the
university New Mexico in
nineteen seventy two and then
from the law school at UNM in
growing up so this is a perfect
kind of full circle to come back
and I am honored to presenter
for confirmation this position I
stand for questions thank you
senator senators wishing to
Thank you Mr president so.
Certainly a real privilege for
me to speak on.
Paul attack it because I have
been in the Senate for thirty
since then she has been a very
very big part of any success
I've ever had here.
The unimagined intelligent
sometimes of legislators.
And the ability to make them
know that their intelligence is
Because she had a real true
ability to do that.
And
She certainly helped me on the
first interim committee I was
ever chaired with and it was to
do regulate the
had a great number of good
senators and representatives on
their and we had good testimony
and learned a lot about the
industry and then were able to
pass something that has worked
with the administration's of
university because they're the
only ones that might have egos
bigger than ours.
But Mr president I plugged that
Senator Padilla followed by
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr president
it is a true privilege to stand
up and support this country I
didn't make it into the Senate
suddenly she was right there and
every time I needed just
somebody something I would just
seek her out and she was always
very helpful to me as a the
starting out here very very
green wet behind the ears you
giving to the university of New
Mexico with this wealth of
knowledge and information from a
student all the way through all
of the things that she's done in
state government the let's the
sunny Ivy Soto to home
intentioned until they return to
the chamber thank you.
Hearing no objection.
We do have further testimony we
have Senator Kernan.
legislature and and I look to
her as someone who could always
guide me in the right direction
and mentor me and and help me
position it's just incredible
and that more than anything I
appreciate too since you have.
Left the Legislative Council
Service in what you're doing for
the school for the arts and I'm
move on and you're going to
support students at a different
level you're gonna make a huge
difference in their lives as
well so congratulations thank
you thank you senator and we
policy history and timeline to
this building but
Polish.
You know I was here when I first
started I was part of the
Politechnika we're she was the
was where I wanted to start
Sir my brief remarks which is
you visited me on the floor.
And relayed the news to me that
one of my bills was
was a veteran veterans property
tax exemption so then suddenly
what started off as one bill
turned into now I had to pass
two bills and took mandate for
And I I just hope you know you
started off with fresh eyes and
really challenge the system to
take on tough decisions tell
nomination thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Steinborn center Liz Stefanics
thank you Mr president and I
rise to support this nomination
able to call her and get her
advice on some issues in the
bill and she was ready to advice
and I really appreciate her
wisdom I appreciate the fact
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr president you know
I I rise in support of Paul and
impala a and I think she get my
kids out of jail the very first
trouble than I found out who is
to blame in it was a speaker in
the house and told those kids to
do that but Paul thank you for
my family right little boys to
You got a job at UNM and we need
your help there's a lot of
problems at the university we
need your help and other regions
We have center Gonzalez followed
by Senator mantas.
Thank you Mr president and I
also will stand in full support
many years and the one of the
parts that I always felt so
those so all.
To her part.
Is that with the Legislative
you know in providing no that
kind of well.
You know
Doing the right thing you know
the session always that we would
always be back and forth going
on capital outlay between the
house and the Senate impose
happening but Paulo was right
always admired and I used to say
oh my god how what is this going
to do to her later she always
carried a big pile of books with
her and she would put him right
basically the the history of the
capital and the history of the
Legislature were you know things
are of what's happening and what
we're doing little follow the
the other universities you know
and any time that they would
have that to preach to you I'm
sure that you would be there
also to help him as he always
have helped everyone and
you thank you Mr president thank
you thank you Paul thank you
center was all as we have
Senator office followed by
Senator the office.
Thank you Mr president was
present you know too many of you
sometimes of you have been asked
to carry one yet you haven't
really we're in your freshman
stripes yet for those of you
that our freshman year the
period something like uniform
of work that goes on year after
year around the country with
really the the some of the most
esteemed people in the
profession.
The people that are law school
an appointee of for this chamber
for number years but what you
got to know is when you go to
uniform law commission Paul as a
celebrity.
Everybody look at her she's
blushing but everybody knows
to of the top lawyers in the
country they have so much
respect for her knowledge or
skill in and in the uniform law
commission Paul has had a lot of
first as a woman a lot of
accomplishments and milestones
there too he's here that we all
rushed down from the Office
because Phil's party from
walkers to what fill up and and
your home law commercial ties
because there are so few women
Paula and she's an extraordinary
dancer and so she's she's highly
respected for all for legal
contribution but also been cross
see in here today but I hope
that he gets good word about
this why I bring up a a good
friend of ours Paul has made
this experience in the twenty
plus years I've been here a very
personal experience I want thank
policy now I raise gonna ask you
why they haven't been invited to
the house for dinner
and so you're gonna have a long
line a list to try out some
propose recipes but she she
makes this a very human
pastries to make some home
candies to make some goodies in
number out she always seems to
know when to bring them around
but she knows just when things
are getting a little bit rough
around here to to take it easy
and and keep things in
place the heart for the Unimog
school and I'm just very excited
you're going to be there and I
hope this doesn't mean you're
gonna cut back in anyway for
either the contribution made to
the inform law commission and
Senator Lopez followed by
Senator Burt in center whether
it is thank you Mr president I
to rise in strong support of
polytechnic I wasn't here when
she was the head of the
members of the international
women's forum and I had the
opportunity to get to know her a
little bit better and she is an
other places I up I didn't know
about the uniform up lies of
commission but I'm sure I I can
just picture that and picture
being both of wonderful dancer
dear to Paula I has it is very
dear to me and she's going to
make an amazing
an amazing contribution to the
nomination what a stellar
addition to the board of regents
for
for you and M. to have
about New Mexico government how
runs and the wise aware fours
and and as you go down those
rabbit trails sometimes and you
kind of get deep in the weeds
the nice thing about Paula's
she she has seen a lot of it I'm
not gonna say she center all but
I managed to see most of it and
she knows how to read and
there for the guidance and
direction I think that you'll
bring that borders just
wonderful and in is also is a
Senator Sanchez mentioned she is
one heck of a chocolate candy
being completely sheet redesign
your kitchen and it was kind of
halfway through the deal so she
came over to my casita to make
chocolate when I ran home
Alamogordo walked in Sunday
evening when I got back into
recipients of those wonderful
Chaka so she's a great cook I
know and and she makes great
chocolate and yes she is a good
dancer we've had a few dances at
board and and I'm so happy for
you and
and just do a wonderful job that
you know I know you will do
thank you Mr president thank you
senator Byrd twelve Senator
I also agree with what Senator
Byrd said it reminded me when he
said he didn't want to open the
door because you want to leave
that Frank ones that good smell
it's so good and what happens to
walk in Mr president she says
all there's more coming and I
said okay well thank you.
after so many years working here
and helping so many people and
US employees and so many others
we can never never name she is
continue to pour from within in
in to find a purpose in life
where that's what we're about is
giving generously so I think you
Polish for your willingness to
serve in this important capacity
I to rise and support of this
nomination to confirm Pala
Tackett to sit on the board of
regents at UNM.
Of the.
I just they did for all the
that he'll talk to for us in
this building is phenomenal it's
it is what it is but I know that
again all the accolades that
have been given your during my
call you always calms down and I
think not just myself but many
in this chamber as well as the
other I am glad to see that the
governor has seen fit to appoint
colonists calling me I'll be
glad to help make some changes
because UNM's a great
institution but there are series
of issues that exist up there
and and you know this but you do
have persons that can help you
here congratulations and I look
forward to working with you in
another venue thank you thank
So Mister president.
I'm not sure what to say here
but U. N. M. better watch out
because they're about to get
hard but also a great friend in
whatever she does is going to be
done extremely well and I don't
think that we could find a
senator share any further
discussion.
Say no further senator Wirth to
close.
Thank you Mr president I want to
policy had so far and this
really is the icing on the cake
just one final thing that
senator Ortiz mentioned sanity's
Pino mentioned in the cut in the
committee that is super
other state capitals you'll
never see anything like this and
again that is an amazing amazing
legacy from someone who I think
polytechnics command center set
the rules be suspended the
record show that all those
present vote in the affirmative
except those voting in a
negative by show of hands thank
you senator Senator as we're
By a vote of forty one of the
affirmative zero negative the
appointment of polytechnics a
Mexico Senate Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president thank you
members let's all stand and give
our newest region Politecnica
you chances here where the
brother Paul Tackett and her
to the full Senate for
consideration it to the board of
regents for New Mexico military
institute and I know you'll to
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle.
number six I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of William P.
Anderson to the board of regents
of New Mexico military
institute.
Is a veneration of Rahul for
many many years his family has
been the nucleus of a lot of New
Mexico.
And to get him on the border
converse with the legislature.
And when you've been here he was
here about eight or ten years.
He was on the financial part of
Real success for a border
regions because he knows the
institution is live there he
knows the people that are there
and he will know the other
Privilege to be honest.
Part of his nomination for the
border agents in New Mexico
military institute not now yield
the floor to any other Senator.
board of regents and I'll begin
with senator Munoz followed by
Senator phonics.
Senator Kernan.
You know Mr president they talk
he's a former representative and
and he is up in our legislative
body working for us and giving
us good guidance and Senate
very interesting to and a humble
man very humble from the way
came from you have to learn the
history of what it is yesterday
in in giving money to his
children requesting it to and so
I Phelps is kinda made on his
own it's really amazing story
degree and his other son lives
in Montana I believe in and and
does that and so out of the
person you will come in come in
your life and we have a lot of
respecting include a minute part
of your family and Phelps you're
part of our family so thank you
Mr president thank you centerman
Senator Stefanics followed by
presented and today we talked
about the future of the military
institute and how we could use
an independent thinker not just
in life but for that school as
well thank you very much thanks
Alex we have Senator Kernan
followed by Senator Hickey thank
you Mr president it's certainly
my privilege to stand in
thoughtfulness your kindness and
your willingness to really
figure out what's going on and
then to share that knowledge
you've just been great and
you're going to be great for
Hickey followed by Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman
it was has been my incredible
privilege to get to know Phelps
him I said this is someone who's
really got this place figured
out.
Having been here long ago and
coming back and he's just been
an incredible mentor to me
appreciative I am and that that
you've helped me and also
obviously you've helped all of
us so thank you and have a great
time in your new role thank you
full support of this nomination
Phillips my.
Share the district over in the
Roswell area and we've had many
conversations about that first
and foremost what I really
knowledge is is so deep and and
the ease pry forget a whole lot
more than I ever learn but I
have to tell you it's going to
be a pleasure to work with him
and I I just see another
connection how we can work
together so I look forward to
doing that best of luck to you
Phelps thank you Mr president
stand in full support of this
nomination I want to get a
little bit of background served.
It's a Representative Phelps
being here this year was really
important to me as everyone
knows Aidan left capital for my
mother's funeral but Phelps kept
you're not here not watching and
I wrote to my constituents to do
my very best for them back home
could have done it this year
without Phelps so I'm grateful
trying to more oil so
Representative Willie myself and
fell for driving up to Cordrea
does so we're going up this long
canyon also Rossell and he tell
property and I think she's he's
on my dime my guess my truck my
trip in the just sold out a
with them at name me and also
here in the capital thank you I
thank you Senator gonna go swear
Senator Lopez followed by
with his knowledge and
experience and really valued
his answers to my questions
because as a new is a new
legislature there's so much you
ways that really opened my eyes
to will specially I pock and so
that was that was really helpful
and I really got to get to know
him but the other thing that I
the contribution he's going to
make to the institute is is just
gonna be phenomenal and I'm very
proud to stand in support of
this nomination.
Thank you Senator Lopez we have
I'll just say one of the things
I admire most about you Phelps
is is your independence and your
integrity and I think that's so
important in leadership in
politics today that we see is so
really sees himself more on the
side of just good solutions and
I can't pry and and I know
that's what you'll do and and
just like you do here in the
legislature and I know that was
really tough and that's tough
you for that and to take a
little story that I don't know
they were told you back in two
thousand and.
Three I think you and I ran for
Congress at the same time you
were run in the Republican
primary from the Democrat
me was well I think Phelps will
be pretty tough to beat.
And that and that the prediction
was you were the guy and it
didn't work out for either of us
was working to amend a law the
U. it written back in like late
seventies early eighties the
radioactive consultation task
thinking when you wrote this and
just your history is just is
just amazing invaluable and I
know you'll do great so all
leave it there and honor to
to stand in support of this
nomination it is been so
wonderful having Phelps and
you in LESC as well I know we
have some conversations but one
of the things that impressed me
the most about Phelps Mr
use him as a model of how to do
that with the kindness and
intelligence so thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
those of pillars in the
community that almost everybody
knows I don't know that there's
very many people that don't know
him what his family himself have
himself in him he was actually a
neighbor Mr president of of some
friends of mine and swimming and
swimming pool back before I was
even a senator so even even let
enjoyed those years serving with
you we've been committee
committee meetings were in in
little meetings whatever the
issue that was always great
bringing this bill are wired why
do you actually want this so he
was such an asset to us as a as
a coalition of legislators and
definitely miss you as a
very happy with the governor's
pick here at I know she won't
regret it thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Pirtle we have
Senator Woods fall by Senator
Rodriguez Senator Woods.
time together soon and you know
we talked about some.
Sometimes about some first
questions and some slow running
cattle and.
and I appreciate all your your
your advice.
And not in your forward thank
you very much a a futuristic
you for being here today and
thank you for agreeing to
service as a board of regents
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Woods we have center
this all of us Senator Gonzales
and many times in my office
right always helpful always
willing to provide information
and and offered to give us some
analysis and here for his
perspective and very well
he's willing to serve as a as a
regent or handed New Mexico
military institute very
wonderful place to be and it's
going to be even greater to have
you there Phelps thank you Mr
Of some very beautiful
statements and very eloquent
words have been expressed and
they really fit you know the
individual you know they really
do.
you bring in Here huh very
visionary.
You know and you really liked
that part of the novation the
just mention how very brief one
time all the superintendent from
the school was set at one of our
meetings and the Education
Committee.
And the and I asked him will.
And this is one of the things
that we do is so we have these
cohorts.
And once the cohorts are
employees the curriculum and
and out and really raising that
bar and that is beautiful you
know that is you know something
that a if we could bring that to
you know to the entire state you
know would be such a plus to to
because I know that to the kind
of person that you are but the
best of luck and again
congratulations thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Gonzales where center diamond
lucky to have here so thank you
for your service house
Representative Senate finance
committee and now let me thank
you for your service and and
thank you for all you do.
way back in in two thousand and
twelve and I've I've never known
him to be anything but a but a
fine gentleman and that an
outstanding New Mexican.
Although.
And Phelps attached to a little
note.
And it said primaries are a
he didn't know me from Adam and
I appreciate that very much I've
always appreciated any contact
I've had with with Phelps and
special like with this because I
know you will do a great job
although our time was very brief
but I think it's one of those
moments to where you.
Come across someone but during
that time to is very deep and
your thoughts and all that you
times contentious times that you
stood alone and on the staging
ground and of I think it's one
of those things to.
Pinto any further discussion
Senators.
Scene then Senator Ingle to
close.
records show the rules been
called and all those voted all
of present voted in the
affirmative acceptance voting in
the negative by show of hands
thank you Senator Ingle all
centers here seats where voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
I will thirty seven the
confirmation concluding on
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate centering on the junior
Phelps would you please stand up
Center how to mail.
Mr president I just of the
credentials of doll of a mall
gonna have hell thank you Mr
president pursuant to Senate
executive message number seven
dated March seventh two thousand
twenty three I move that the
It is an incredible honor Mr
president to sponsor and
introduce Mr Wallenberg to the
Senate chamber today for the
five he concentrates his
practice on water quality water
Rights Superfund hazardous waste
mining law and money to land
economics and he also attended
the Arizona State University at
the standard day o'connor
college of law graduated magna
the U. S. District Court some
both New Mexico and Arizona he
is chair of the New Mexico
mining association environment
lawyers in America and southwest
super lawyers environmental law
but most importantly Mr Mullen
Burke is very familiar with our
integrity and kindness and we
are so incredibly honored to
have you serve on the board of
lawn mower.
Number as a member of the
Western Michigan University
border regions and I yield to
senator how to meal followed by
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president I stand
western New Mexico university
this servitude leader doesn't
only represent Silvercity with
pride at but he will represent
western university New Mexico's
pride and understands its
support this nominee sitting on
the Senate rules committee this
morning I heard about his
education his background his
skills and I think for the
environmental skills to watch
out for the people of the
community and for the people
working towards degrees in that
of particular university so I
confirm the appointment of doll
Mullen Burke and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the rules been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
The my vote.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By about thirty one of the
pharmacy on the negative the
appointment of the overall lawn
mowing very as a member of the
question Mr university border
his vote thank you Mr president
I we were in a conversation that
there and I didn't think was
gonna go that quick I I just
want to rise supported Allen and
what he's done and and he'll be
a great region shortness we
this process so thank you Mr
president.
You sent me a Senator command
Vigil thank you Mr president and
thank you members of the Senate
Thank you senator could have
board of regents to New Mexico
highlands university and I now
yield to Senator Campos Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
president pursuant to Senate
executive message number I dated
Hearing no objection Senator
Campos explained thank you very
much Mr president as was stated
age of nineteen and of course
his aspirations to eventually go
into law but it in essence Cody
comes from a hard working
does he's very attentive he's
focused on student success he
wants to ensure he's committed
to the to representing students
university we're looking forward
to great things from him as he
continues in his endeavors and
so that Mr president of what
we'll do is just to open it up
senator couples there any
discussion on the appointment to
student member of the New Mexico
highlands university board of
regents Cody Dennis Rivera
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
In the and whether you need this
advice or not but you know
you're gonna find that sometimes
when you're around a lot of a.
Lot of people maybe been doing
the job for awhile or feel like
they may have more stature more
to find that that power that
voice in that.
Not only what's in your heart
that little message but the
value of that to those around
you that you may be the only one
most of the opportunity and
Representative those that need
your voice because there will be
plenty of people there to give
voice to maybe those that don't
need as much advocacy sell of
compliment you for obviously
being a person that you know
earn the confidence to get this
and I wish you well in your
endeavor thank you Mr president
thank you thank you Senator
man to continue on this path and
move for making us all proud in
the state thank you.
Thank you Senator Baca Senator
Gonzales all of a center how to
mail.
board of regents and I really
encourage you to he was
mentioned that you want to go to
law school and anything that we
can do to support you and help
you know will be very valuable
but I'm sure that your thoughts
also and what you bring to the
regions will also help them you
know in understanding the role
with for this country and I'm
sorry that I missed you this
morning I was also in the tax
committee but I'm proud that you
are a native son of northern New
from a background like mine who
works forty hours a week while
being full time in college the
to be the voice of the stand up
for them because we looked at
student regents to help us when
Any further discussion.
Say no further Senator Campos
close thank you very much Mr
president I asked that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Cody Dennis
Rivera and I ask unanimous
Senator seats where voting.
prevent as a student member of
the New Mexico highlands
university border regions for
term commencing upon
confirmation Act including on
December thirty first twenty
twenty four has been duly
here with them as well but there
abuse those ladies and gentlemen
Cody Dennis Rivera.
credentials of login M. o'brien
the presented to the full Senate
for consideration as board of
regents for eastern New Mexico
university I know you'll to
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Logan
M. o'brien student border region
for eastern New Mexico
university.
Is a student at eastern and he's
pursuing a bachelor of studies
bachelor degree in chemistry and
criminal justice he's received
several honors and awards.
There are some questions morning
about how my grades were in
comparison to heroes and I can
guarantee you that three more
semesters added up to his.
always such a straight a student
and I was a people person.
Mr president Logan is involved
in dozens of university based
extracurricular activities
Rio Rancho high school and he's
a marching band section leader
the woodwind captain.
Residents of the eastern
Senate for debate thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle centers
where debating the confirmation
of Logan Michael o'brien anyone
wishing to debate.
just make it sure Logan
congratulations you sound like
an outstanding pack in which
well and we're always here to
support you you know in your
role as a regent the universe
Hey why don't you do this why
you do that a lot of ideas may
surprise people here really
don't start with us they start
at the grassroots they start
with people who are on the
for us to be more competitive
are we really need that voice we
need that fresh perspective so I
bring it then good luck to and
let us know we can do to support
Thank you Mr president Truman I
ask unanimous consent.
The records show the rules been
called all those voted for all
of present voted in the
affirmative except of voting in
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Logan Michael
Brian as a student member of the
eastern US university Versatis
boards a regions for term
Thank you Mr president Logan
would you please rise and chief
here recognition of the New
Mexico state Senate.
president I ask that the
credentials of Rebecca Anderson
the presented to the full Senate
for consideration to the board
of regents for New Mexico school
of the deaf I know yield to
move that the Senate do hear
prime by confirm the appointment
of Rebecca L. Anderson to the
board of regents of the New
Mexico school for the deaf.
See no objections center during
regents for the school for the
deaf doctor Anderson is a doctor
of veterinary medicine she is a
veterinarian for many years and
continues to work incessantly at
providing community service and
engagement in various areas she
is also an author and her latest
I can say is that we are so
happy that she's willing to
serve in this capacity.
Thank you senator Senator is
we're debating the appointment
was quite impressed by this
nominees and two CSM and energy
and what you can bring to the
job she's already been very
I asked what she would do to
bring that love of animals that
caring of animals to the
students and she was already
prepared and already had plans
Si no further discussion senator
the biggest to close thank you
Mr president I asked that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Rebecca L.
Anderson.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty four the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
twenty twenty eight has been
duly confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate center there has thank
you Mr president members of the
Senate I will ask her back and
her husband to stand up thank
I'll now to Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth.
For the next order of business
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business
let folks know where we're going
after.
we get back on the floor Senator
Moores was president the the
grand old party the party of
Thank you Mr president
today is honorary lieutenant
governor for the day is a
constituent of mine Carlos ray
the future he's open to going to
long finance.
Please please help me welcome
thank.
the volcano Vista one this boy's
five A. state championship
volcano Vista from Albuquerque
fitted Albuquerque Sandia last
night I think it was like.
congratulations table and this
that.
Further announcements etcetera
etcetera Brandt.
Miss Suazo present just want to
remind the staff leave
everything were to since we're
president so just for the
members when we come back we're
gonna go to Senate supplemental
counter number one that's house
bill two and then house bill one
thirty as amended and we'll see
