In order to the clerk to call
the roll.
Senator Campos.
Senator about this.
Senator Diamond.
Etcetera do heck.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Center my Estes.
Senator McKenna your Center
Morse.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle
here center Paul.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Santo Stefano.
Senator Wirth center what.
You do not have a quorum Mister
president senators all senators
to the chamber we're lacking a
quorum.
You now have a car Mr president.
deacon checking E. coli master
sergeant U. S. marine corps
retired from Emmanuel missionary
Baptist church I'd ask that you
remain standing.
Sedillo Lopez billable startup
Joey signs my us all the other.
And Johnny Snyder that you
remain standing also for the
pledge of allegiance.
And the national anthem to be
Good morning New Mexico.
Good morning New Mexico.
Good morning New Mexico.
On to the lord in reference to
the lord god almighty.
In the spirit Jesus Christ.
Hello what my god.
The people this fifty six
Lord forgive us for New Delhi
waste and create forgiveness in
a hard for those.
Who have been on garlic toward
us.
Thank you lord for this.
Volunteer doing this time of
challenge and controversy to
labor with love.
While serving and leading a
great state of New Mexico Ford
seeking greater prosperity.
Health education safety
security.
An overall will be.
Hello we pray that you will love
this body to retain the spirit
of respect and accountability.
Hello my god will knowledge to
present as creators of both
heaven and earth and all that
dwells within.
As we gather here this morning.
Please allow your grace and
And throughout our nation we
continue to mourn a citizens due
to gun violence.
We pray for your divine power
over this legislative body to
First encouraging insight
collaboration healthy
communication which is
appreciated by all New Mexicans.
this legislative body right just
work.
God almighty in the name of
Jesus Christ of trust that the
words of my mouth the meditation
of my heart and the legislative
The Vietnam veterans chapter
three fifty eight color into the
chamber.
We're.
Or
Yes from the children's cancer
fund please listen to pledge.
The flag of the United States of
America is yes on the bill of
rights.
The coach's.
For years as.
I I.
Still with.
As well.
Your promote we'll.
Hello.
This is the statement that.
As
of is yes.
United cultures.
Who's the can choose
those owns then the.
and it's not the the.
Whose broad stripes and move us
still is through the.
salute well so data into the
stream me.
The food.
This to the noon old state does
The.
I'll turn it over to the Senate
floor Majority Leader Peter
Hearing direction we're on that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Thank you Mr president so
Couple things I couldn't help
but think your dad to see the
You know that was a special
moment for you and so I just
wanted to point that out as we
start this morning it's good to
have everyone here today it
feels like you know things truly
it feels good to have you all
here we appreciate you being
here chaplain Crawley thank you
for your words
you know I always think about
in particularly you're calm
about the families you know we
can never say enough it takes
all of our families to allow us
to do this so again many thanks
likewise to our children who are
here with the children's cancer
fund and the pledge in English
Spanish
many years in the Senate finance
committee with senator Smith who
passed recently her visitation
as today at three o'clock in
Berardinelli funeral home for
precede the funeral at ten
o'clock A. M..
As I mentioned Mister president
we are going to have students
from the national dance
little bit about in the eye also
we have by a in console from
Grant County that will be
Senator Korea Hemphill and so
again if we'll figure out
little dance and music which we
appreciate Mr president New
Mexico office superintendent of
insurance is holding a brought
blood drive today from ten to
one thirty the blood mobile will
Senate memorial fourteen
children's cancer fund day from
the president's table and place
that on today's calendar here no
objection we remove center more
the memorial she's got twenty
two guests that she will
introduce with respect to that
memorial likewise a today is
Grant County day and we have a
certificate that also Mr
president to our reader that
will be read this morning.
Today is primary care day and.
many years those are provided
from the New York New Mexico
primary care clinics the clinic
serves three three hundred
seventy thousand New Mexicans
Mexicans with incomes under a
hundred percent of federal
poverty they provide over a
hundred million dollars a year
in high quality uncompensated
care and nineteen New Mexico
clinics and for these wonderful
teddy bears that are here so
let's all give them thanks.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
annual legislative reception
this evening at la Fonda in the
Lankan's ballroom from five
thirty to seven thirty Rio does
read also valley chamber of
commerce is hosting Lincoln
fifteen to nine thirty by
invitation the board of
directors for the New Mexico
association of community
colleges is hosting its twenty
twenty three legislative dinner
at hotel Santa Fe seven thirty
to eight thirty by invitation
and the New Mexico continuum of
care breakfast will be held in
room three twenty six from seven
home and hospice care givers Mr
president at this point ideal
Senator Padilla and other
members for announcements up
front I think I'll come visit
with you about the order that
business announcements and
miscellaneous I have Senator
Padilla followed by Senator
Kernan then Senator Shendo
Senator Campos I thank you very
much Mr president a couple items
I would like to ask unanimous
Hearing no objection the server
the I thank you Mr president and
you know we do have a lot of
guests here today would looks
great here in the chamber
unanimous consent to allow
cameras on the floor and in the
Senate gallery Mr president
hearing no objection.
Senator Stewart announces
miscellaneous you have the floor
so go ahead thank you very much
Mr president here from the
histories of a lot of people
that are with us on the floor
today Mr president I happen to
pleased to introduce and I'm
gonna ask her to stand briefly
if you wouldn't mind miss Emma
bar but she's an MSN are in she
has been in nursing Mr president
Indian health services and in
the private sector the Navajo
lands here in New Mexico in
Albuquerque miss more but is the
president of the New Mexico
native American Indian nurses
grandma always said never
mentioned a woman's age but she
did ask me Mr president a very
young eighty three years of age
and we would love her to.
your work thank you I'd also
like to introduce Mister
president Diana Marie bill up to
is a constituent of mine and I'm
gonna move Mr presence on to
make sure we can see here.
Mr president she's not retired
and she told me she's not
planning on retiring anytime
licensing in Farmington Gallup
Hobbs in Roswell she's a member
of the New Mexico nurses
association where she also
serves as the treasurer of the
native American Indian nurses
association and she's chair of
that but basically how are we
going to continue to improve
broadband here in New Mexico you
heard me talk about it yesterday
where we have our official three
year rolling broadband plan for
very important that we properly
that we properly map broadband
in New Mexico and those of you
in the gallery Mr president hope
they will also pay attention
this you can log on to this
New Mexico for broadband to be
even more accurate Mr president
it's also can help us to bring
money into New Mexico to match
the dollars that we put into
broadband thank you Mr
president.
much today I have Connie hardy
Tebbit and she has a lot of
letters behind her name is she's
Connie is she is a nurse patient
and community advocate she says
that is so imperative to promote
healthy environments and safety
nurses and that's the the nurse
to take care of you before
surgery and after surgery which
is very critical as we all know
that me welcome my my nurse from
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president as the.
Percent to a introduce my guess
visiting we had a meeting with
the deal T. on our our bypass
project this morning so at this
time I'd like to introduce our
governor for the pueblo famous
Mr Dominic occupant.
a director of realty Department
TJ Loretto.
guess this morning thank you so
much Senator Shendo welcome to
your guests.
We have Senator Campos next.
Thank you very much Mr president
and to the members of the Senate
state Senate is to help our
young people and to promote them
as they move forward with their
careers a New Mexico highlands
university one of the big
students who are attending the
university from their help and
guide them so that they have a
better understanding in terms of
what this process really means
to ensure that every step of the
way we help young people through
their programs and most
importantly through placement.
that the future really belongs
to these young people as they
move forward that's been the
impotence of our administration
of New Mexico highlands
university and so with that and
for New Mexico and these people
continue regardless of where
they come from they take those
skills back home and they're
dedicated to ensure that their
families their communities and
of the administration and I'm
gonna get into those individuals
who are with our student
fellowship program we have
Mister Max Baca who is sitting
really are stars the future for
New Mexico and as you can see is
I'm trying to get him to smile
as I came in I didn't have a
smile because I was running
around all over the place here
to the future that we have so
with that we have Tiffany here
on.
Kody Rivera.
because the future depends on
them thank you very much.
Thank you thank you Mr Mr
president and it's certainly my
privilege this morning to
introduce a.
nursing education RN's
originally from Clovis New
Mexico is the emergency
department manager and trauma
program coordinator for
Roosevelt General Hospital.
with the focus on emergency
medicine and trauma.
Less is committed to ensuring
quality patient care at
Roosevelt General Hospital and
and getting her master's degree
in the science of nursing.
Misprision she's one of those
ladies that basically is the
backbone of every hospital
because without great nurses
doctors are an integral part of
that but so much of that.
Care has before the doctor's
sometimes what the situation is
those are really really tough
jobs that really I don't know
where you teach those in a class
and you probably can't but you
Thank you very much Mr president
thank you Senator Ingle we have
objection proceed Senator thank
you Mr president at just what a
wonderful day this is to have
these so incredible nurses down
will forgive her from being from
Indiana is she is the chief
nursing officer at Roosevelt
General Hospital import talus
her doctorate from Vanderbilt
center's but she maintains her
clinical skills as a critical
care nurse with the US navy
reserve nurse corps.
Mr president I also have Cynthia
graduated from Mada high school
she resides in Albuquerque's
north valley received her
associate degree in nursing at
Clovis Community College
continued Education received the
currently practices at UNM
working with project echo has a
strategic nurse administrator
and the department of neurology
as an RN care coordinator for
welcome Cynthia only that.
introduce some very talented
nurses as well and just to alert
the body that tomorrow we're
going to be over run with two
hundred over two hundred nursing
today it is my pleasure to
introduce Suzanne Canfield
Suzanne has an MBA and R. and B.
S. M. in PED BC she's the member
fifty up here but forty seven
now if you keep waiting to hear
the rest you're going to know
that I'm over a hundred years
old over here because next I
as a nurse for thirty six years
both in the clinical and
academic settings she started as
diploma nurse receiving her RN
to BSN and she's currently
southwestern United States she
pressured pursued her nursing
education at the university of
Nevada Las Vegas and began her
nursing practice within the
educator now then she moved to
Alamogordo where she obtained
her MBA she continues to
practices.
experience but let's please
welcome them to the chamber.
students who are going to be our
future leaders coming up taking
over our positions so the people
I met are really dynamic in
watch out legislators.
do the memorial do some of the
performances of those students
to go on it will come back to
announcements and miscellaneous
but with that are you able to
our our majority floor leader
senators to be a Lopez percent
memorial fourteen which we will
read in this morning Senator is
around that order business
serving a legislation I would
ask that everyone in the chamber
memorial fourteen be not printed
not referred to committee and
that if you read for the third
time in full preparatory to its
final passage hearing no
objection Senator Lopez.
Senate memorial fourteen a
memorial recognizing the
difference made by the
children's cancer fund of New
Mexico and declaring February
first twenty twenty three
children's cancer fund of New
New Mexico were diagnosed with
cancer and nine children have
already been diagnosed in twenty
twenty three and whereas the
children's cancer fund of New
Mexico was established in
living with and fighting cancer
and whereas the only pediatric
oncology treatment facilities in
New Mexico are in Albuquerque
making it necessary for families
benefiting New Mexico's children
and their families and whereas
the children's cancer fund in
New Mexico maintains a direct
presence at the university of
providing them with assistance
for transportation costs to and
from the clinic with gasoline
and transportation vouchers as
well as providing them with food
and grocery vouchers to help
assistance with day to day
living expenses for families who
are facing overwhelming
financial burdens because of
bravery awards to children
receiving treatment and whereas
the children's cancer fund in
New Mexico provide scholarship
assistance to students who have
been treated for childhood
academic year thirty two
students were awarded the errand
to Hickey memorial scholarships
through the children's cancer
fund of New Mexico helping them
and over as the children's
cancer fund the New Mexico will
assist over one thousand persons
this year extending a helping
hand to all children being
Mexico be recognized for making
a difference in the lives of
families facing childhood cancer
and be it further resolved that
memorial be transmitted to the
executive director of the
children's cancer fund of New
Mexico signed and sealed at the
capitol in the City of Santa Fe
clerk New Mexico state Senate.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president has we all know cancer
is a very difficult disease and
the children's cancer fund has
all over the state so I'm really
privileged very privileged to be
part of this memorial and I'd
like to introduce a very
important families who are down
families Senator Lopez what
we'll do is we'll go.
And then we'll take the vote
then we'll go back and and the
families absolutely okay Mr
president I move that Senator
Lopez I believe there's others
we're debating Senator more
fourteen.
Anyone wishing to speak.
Center how to meal followed by
Senator could have health Mr
University of New Mexico
hospital who works with children
with cancer and so once again I
want to thank you Senator for
bringing this forward and think
I just enough for all that she
this forward as a mother of a
son who was diagnosed with bone
cancer when he was four years
old I know the challenges not
roled large vast state many
times families have to travel
many many hours to access the
I I again I wanna stand in
strong support of this memorial
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Hemphill further debate
Sedillo Lopez I know it's very
clear endearing close to her
heart I think she's picked up
the mantle to continue carrying
this message you know we're
gonna hear from I'm not gonna do
it right now because I know that
sponsor will probably do this Mr
New Mexico Family and when this
issue happens to us are huge New
Mexico families almost always
affected and some of these
leaders are looking at one of
them right now she's just such a
great friend of all of us and I
here on the floor of the state
Senate Mr present but there's
things that go on all year long
by this this group and they do a
phenomenal job to lift up our
New Mexico children thank you Mr
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I also
would like to.
Stand in support of this bill
horrible diseases that affect
everyone of us it doesn't care
about our political stature it
doesn't care about our economic
status it affects every single
I do rise and support I think
it's just you know a terrible
thing to see our children.
They get cancer.
encourage those families and
stand with them in their time of
need and I appreciate this
memorial coming forward thank
you Sir Lopez for bringing.
memorial as many you know my
mother just passed away from
cancer and I see these kids down
here and hold him in high regard
because it's important that we
go ahead and support our
miles from Albuquerque has not
called G. unit not specifically
for children but adults also but
it's one of those things that I
understand the distance in the
Mexico as Pat stand full support
thank you Mr president.
Thanks Center goes any further
debate Senators.
Center for the I thank you Mr
memorial.
Thank you Mr president
I move that Senate memorial
fourteen do now pass and I ask
unanimous been unanimous consent
on the native ceremonial
fourteen children's cancer fund
of New Mexico day has passed the
Senate Senator Lopez to
introduce our guest.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president I'm gonna start by
introducing the families of the
families are sitting right up
stand and I'll start with Philip
by a total.
I I I knew I I on a more marine
Right so the I. T. my tales of
Yachty.
Johnny Snyder Mary Louise Snyder
and Diana Snyder.
And with them is exactly the
compassion and she's helped so
many families all over the state
when they are they are suffering
from
the trials and tribulations of
having to come to treatment in
and then I will introduce staff
who are in the in the galley.
finally we have staff and board
members in the care of up in the
gallery I can't I can see them
based on where I am but of
The staff include his you know
executive director Diana to heck
And the pediatric oncology staff
Dr Jessica Valdez.
Crystal went iser and laurel
Christensen.
heart and it's just a pleasure
to be involved with this and I
honor the children the family so
much for their strength thank
you thank you Senator Lopez all
of our guests have joined us
we are in that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president on now is the time to
hear some good music and some
national dance institute so with
that Mr president I would just
sergeant at arms to bring them
in so the last court violating
He is our broadband guy in New
Mexico I mean a.
Thank you seven yes we we do
have that as a priority this
don't only he might be a little
taller Mr president.
Well Mr president I will admit
he may be a lot taller but I
guarantee he's got better dance
moves and etcetera but the.
a but I just wanna make sure
Senator Padilla was into break
dancing.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen
Senate let's give it up for by a
and console from Grant County.
dance institute so I'd ask our
sergeant at arms to bring them
in for a second performance
sergeant.
If you please welcome into the
chamber.
Hello everyone thank you so much
and the I. New Mexico is founded
with the knowledge that the arts
have a unique power to engage
and motivate children the
purpose of our purpose is to
teach children discipline a
and joy to children in public
schools all across the state
urban and rural communities and
in every corner one thing
remains constant that we know
been to provide access to our
programs for the students who
need it most we provide a
positive and safe learning
environment that celebrates
department of health to make
sure that we were supporting the
social and emotional needs of
children during that period of
isolation and now as we emerge
all across the state this group
of outstanding dancers here in
front of you today R. A. here to
show you what they learn at and
the I. New Mexico energy and
be healthy and you're gonna see
that today we're so happy to be
here to perform.
I'm for you and we thank you so
Thank you so much for allowing
us to come and share our joy and
hard work with you and thank you
for your support that allows us
to serve children all across the
state we always say thank you
You too.
Thank you to my team.
And and.
Good.
Performers.
right after the prayer to get us
all go and
Mr present what we're still on
an ounce and some miscellaneous
I think we're gonna do Senator
Karia handles got a certificate
to read the certificate.
The reader to read.
The New Mexico state Senate does
hereby extend its recognition
cultures lose guys with three
hundred sixty days of sunshine
per year vast mountain
landscapes and small town
atmosphere and whereas Grant
only municipality in New Mexico
still operating under the
territorial charter issued by
the legislative assembly of the
terrorist territory of New
Mexico in eighteen seventy eight
element of green energy and
electric vehicles and whereas
Grant County is the home to
western New Mexico's university
Mexico university museum has the
world's foremost collection of
ancient members pottery and
whereas Grant County is known
for its true west history that
Grant County is where in
eighteen sixty six company B. of
the one hundred twenty fifth
United States colored infantry
regiment known as the buffalo
the shares New Mexico's heavy
burden of the members of New.
Mexico is two hundred two
hundred th coast artillery
regiment many of whom were
trail a national scenic trail at
six thousand to seven thousand
feet providing cool summers as
well as uninterrupted views of
the Mexican border to the south
national and international teams
and boosts awareness and use of
the trail of the mountain
spirits national scenic byway
and whereas western New Mexico
university's early childhood
Grant County has many well known
festivals including the blues
festival.
Play festival festival of the
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
February first twenty twenty
three be declared the forty
seventh annual Grant County day
City of Santa Fe Senator Siah
Correa Hemphill Mimi Stewart
president pro tem sherry do
Lujan chief clerk New Mexico
to people including former US
senator Jeff Bingaman former US
senator and astronaut US senator
I do have some gas Mr president
is is now an appropriate time
may have unanimous consent to
energy some gas hearing no
objection proceed Senator thank
Judy Cruz please rise and please
help me welcome the cruises to
the Senate.
the southwest council of
governments please stand and be
recognized.
Laura how old from Grant County
development director.
And Mister president I also have
And I believe my husband may be
and the gallery maybe he left
but please welcome my has been
J. Hemphill who may or may not
be here.
beautiful copper keychains from
Freeport mac Moran in Grant
County and also these amazing
sugar cookies from Grant County
We're in that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
thank you Mr president I also
have with me today Shannon reed
who is the family and acute care
nurse practitioner she works in
Lea and Eddy counties and
patient of my husband Dr Jon so
anyway we had a good
conversation that that please
help me welcome Shannon to the
chamber.
even also just signal to me but
right now we have sent out a
mail followed by Senator McKenna
Senator Gonzales center how to
mail.
Mr president my two guests also
have left the chamber but I want
by the end I joined in on
helping Latino students learn
how the process works here in
the Senate the house and
executive branch and agency
where there was elected as
lieutenant governor so is happy
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president I thought I was
further down that list that you
have up there for I wasn't sure
if I was on there so I
spelled so high I think I I got
that right so it's been a great
having her sitting here with me
she's a certified registered
And Mr present also with me
today ability Gupte in Amy
Liotta with hoops for hope you
might heard we're doing the
basketball game again this year
but you know I'm excited Mr
president we have a strong bench
we do have a spot on the
starting five with Senator
sapien retiring I'm I'm looking
forward to seeing the ball a lot
The the ball hog you know still
in for Senator sapien so for all
the members practices are Monday
Wednesday and Friday in the
morning if you wanna come out
Thank you very much as president
my guess have stamina and are
still here.
and the and I'm very grateful
for that so I'd like to
introduce.
degree in Texas she's been in
New Mexico practicing for over
twenty six years and the last
nineteen of which have been at
UNM where she is a post op nurse
and takes care people as they're
those moments and so if we can
welcome her to the chamber
please.
she's worked in long term care
to care as well as education
right now she's the associate
dean of nursing at central New
something that is not quite so
healthy for body so if we could
welcome her as wealthy western.
organized on that Mr captain
actually is a former student of
mine.
And and so it is always a
pleasure to see Mr got to men as
the as it continues to come back
Senator Sedillo Lopez followed
by Senator about this Senator
Lopez thank you Mr president my
against them a ring that Toliver
had to leave.
celebrate our youth and beauty
of dance and all a lot of
wonderful publishing moments
this morning.
I'd like to turn the the
In Memphis Tennessee.
Agency present I think it's
important that we recognize of
that somber.
A moment today to recognize the
chamber this the session.
I think we should celebrate our
successes we need to recognize
that this last year we passed
probably most sweeping criminal
board to put citizens into the
process of training and
overseeing law enforcement
officers we did that in this as
we put that bill together and we
omnibus bill but to recognize a
few other things to.
And I want to share some
information we learned the
Judiciary Committee two years
ago I sponsored and with your
support in this chamber we
We did that here in New Mexico
we lead that.
And when you hear in the next
few days talk about around the
nation about eliminating
We did that.
Now you may remember that when I
sponsored that legislation part
of the debate in the chamber was
it would discourage law
to you what we've learned is
Senate Judiciary this last year
just in the last month they have
the largest graduating class
from the law enforcement academy
in the state's history.
enforcement academy despite the
arguments that limiting
qualified immunity would
discourage people from entering
that profession.
And I would like to also commend
And the arguments that were made
against the use of body cameras
at a statewide level and we did
that in the Senate together.
And now that state law.
process and involving the
citizen community to assure that
things that happened in Memphis
and elsewhere around our country
sadly do not happen here in New
Mexico.
the topic today is use of force
by law enforcement.
We will evaluate what New Mexico
law is what the best practices
are and I believe I'm going to
enforcement are shared around
the state in all cities.
In Albuquerque.
In all county governments all
sheriff's all of New Mexico I'll
be our goal this afternoon I
Tiring Nichols.
Thank you Mr.
like to on that note from my
colleague senator Sanchez is
recognized to to today is
February first it is the first
day of black history month and
you know I think we are making
colleagues here today is the
first black history in the state
of New Mexico Center help pope I
would like to recognize you
today on this first day back
history month and thank you for
your service.
or recognize some of my
colleagues from New Mexico State
University who are down here
today saying objects across
Senator thank you some may still
be around to their over their
point of wire up here today but
I do have lore Lambley who is a
prospective grad student and
animus to lime in the economic
development department and also
that what you're trying to do is
not only balance your school but
also you're trying to teach
future people in terms of
graduate assistantships and and
lab assistantships and really
doing some incredible work so
from New Mexico State
University.
Thanks Center Hammond Senator
pope.
nineteen seventy six is part of
the nation's bicentennial
celebrations that honor the
contributions African Americans
have made and to recognize their
sacrifices.
I'd like to talk about one of
those people.
on black contributions.
To society the corner then
double ACP what's on at the time
only the second black Americans
earn a doctorate from Harvard
Americans.
Cardi G. Carter G. Woodson was
both the child and the student
of formerly enslaved people.
He was born in eighteen seventy
five and grow working on his
family's farm.
before started high school at
the age of twenty and worked
alongside formerly enslaved men
and civil war veterans who were
illiterate man who relied on
needed to be taken seriously and
reserves.
In nineteen fifteen he created
the association for the study of
Negro life and history Wally
worked as a teacher during Jim
and popularized black history
and celebrate the contributions
of black people in American
history and as a scholar his
books indicted the American
school system for the various
With that Mr present I also like
to recognize he's already been
recognized for the prayer my
fraternity brother who's now
sitting behind me Checchi
Crawley retired marine corps
Supreme Court judge Supreme
Court justice Thurgood Marshall
and many others.
Thank you Mr president.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr president
Ms consent to introduce a few
guests no objection proceed
Senator thank you very much Mr
COVID what they dealt with the
perseverance and being those on
the frontline I really wish to
say thank you for their
dedication.
practitioner twenty three years
with the Indian health service
she retired in twenty fourteen
as captain in the public health
service commissioned corps of it
service as a federal civil
servant retiring again in
January of twenty twenty one she
has been on our end since
nineteen seventy nine and a
San Juan county Mister president
she has a diploma in nursing
from mountainside hospital
school of nursing
it's a bachelor of science in
nursing Stockton university
sure that she's also part of a
Sanchez circle of human cranium
humanitarian parolees
who are are based on this
years so I also have Mister
president with us.
Mr might give us who is
currently working in the
bachelor's degree in nursing
from UNM in Albuquerque of
course he is currently enrolled
in the master's of health care
informatics at the university of
if we could welcome and my two
guests here.
Senate office Mister president
absentia Geneva McGregor
is a C. R. N. A. F. memorial
Medical Center in Los crucis
she's been a registered nurse
for eight years and she became a
university in Naples Florida and
what she did share with me is
that she is the only Navajo C.
R. N. A. in the country.
Mr Ken Armstrong was also here
practicing are in for over
thirty years and has been in
nursing education for fourteen
years and what is goal is Mr
president is to further efforts
to create state funding streams
and drives to Espanola daily but
as you cities from back east so
this drive is so very different
for the hour and a half drive to
and from work and so I just like
Any further announcement
Centers.
Si no further announcements
majority floor leader worth to
take us to the next order of
business Senator Wirth thank you
day before when we start doing
bills on the floor so with that
Mr president unanimous consent
we go about our business
committee reports.
One that order of business
Recommends a do pass as amended
and that's referred to finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
they were acted upon
individually no objection the
reader to read.
Mr president your conservation
committee to whom has been
chairwoman.
Senator CENIC's Mr president I
move adoption of the committee
reports centers we have a motion
to adopt the committee for all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
motion.
Mr president your engine rural
and cultural affairs committee
to whom has been referred Senate
bill one fifteen has had it
Bill I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion that the
general reflect that they were
acted upon individual hearing
Senator Shannon D. Pinto chair
Senator del I move adoption of
the committee report centers
there's a motion to adopt
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Committee to whom as a perk been
referred Senate bill one await
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence be
referred to the finance
So that was one one committee
report we do have a motion I
move that option of the
committee report we have a
motion to I can report all those
Mr president your rules
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty two
has had it under consideration
consideration and reports with
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that the vote upon them with one
motion that the journal reflect
that there actually upon
individually see no objections
and that's referred to the
health and public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Katy M. do have
chairwoman senator.
it the committee point are
dotted in the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
individually.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate memorial
thirteen has had it under
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report is we have a
the general show up they're
acted upon individually I'd like
to announce to the members of
the body that the this is the
Senate have signed an open
session Senator thirteen.
No objection more on
introduction of legislation
center work no reader to read.
bill and o'neill an act relating
to property amending the mobile
home park act requiring a
regimented application of tenant
payments providing notice before
the sale of mobile home park
forty seven dash to invest six
and forty seven destined as
fourteen MSA nineteen seventy
eight being laws nineteen eighty
three chapter one twenty two
sections six at six and the
committee thanks to Judiciary
Senate bill two ninety eight.
Senate bill two ninety nine
introduced by Senator pope and
act relating to self service
of stored personal property
allowed for rent for in rental
agreements is deemed to be the
maximum value of the stored
personal property allowing the
print in referred to the Senate
tax business and transportation
committee since two Judiciary
Senate bill two ninety nine.
Senate bill three hundred
residence or if the property is
held in a grant or trust Senate
bill three hundred three hundred
have been read twice by tiles
and Representative McQueen and
act relating to animals allowing
fertility control relocation and
adoption of free roaming horses
methods requiring the New Mexico
livestock board to approve the
qualifications of a free roaming
our expert allowing the New
Mexico livestock board to make
rules regarding the approval of
horses providing a penalty
Senate bill three oh one.
Senate bill three oh one have
been read twice by title is
of that the bill please.
The sponsors of this bill are
Senator Brenda McKenna and
Senate bill three oh two
the conduct or character of
justices judges or magistrates
Senator three oh two.
Table three oh two and I read
twice by tires are pretty
Introduced by Senator Pavia and
act relating to political
subdivisions amending the public
improvement district act
allowing a district board to
impose a special property tax
pursuant to that act removing
the option to impose a higher
rate of property tax if approved
by voters in the district
amending the tax incremental
Development Act allowing a
providing that all contracts
entered into by public
improvement district board or a
tax increment development
district board are not subject
to the procurement code
pursuant to the audit act making
conforming and technical changes
Senate bill three oh three.
Senate bill three hundred four
introduced by Senator Tallman
and act making appropriations of
higher education department for
central New Mexico community
college to develop and operate
Senate Education Committee tends
to Senate finance Senate bill
three oh four Senate bill three
hundred I introduced by Senator
Campos and act relating to motor
eighty section to to transfer a
distribution of revenues from
the issuance of special route
sixty six commemorative
commemorative vehicle
transportation committee that's
to finance the bill three oh
five Senate bill three hundred
six introduced by Senator Campos
and act making appropriation to
fire Senate bill three hundred
six.
Senate bill three oh sex is
order printed roof having been
read twice by title sort of
printed referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
eligibility of the teacher
preparation affordable
affordability act to include
licensed teachers removing the
requirement that an eligible
to the education Senate
Education Committee that's to
finance Senate bill three oh
seven.
Senate bill three hundred eight
duties making an appropriation
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three hundred eight Senate
bill three oh eight have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
capital expenditures re
authorizing or re appropriating
balances expanding or changing
purposes extending expenditure
legislature in prior years
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three hundred nine.
the finance committee Senate
bill three oh nine.
Senate bill three hundred ten
center authorizing peace
officers to bring individuals in
crisis to crisis triage centers
for mental health status
examinations authorizing crisis
Senate bill three ten.
Senate bill three ten have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and.
Senate bill three eleven
introduced by senators guy goes
Griggs and others an act
abandonment or abuse of a child
allowing the installation and
operation of safety devices for
the surrender of infants
providing requirements for
youth and families department
issue rules to implement the
provisions of the safe haven for
infants act making appropriation
Judiciary Committee stents to
Senate finance Senate bill three
eleven.
Senate bill three hundred twelve
introduced by Senator Gallegos.
retirement act providing for
elections project pertaining to
the adoption of the police
member coverage plans for
current public safety tele
public affairs committee thanks
to finance Senate bill three
twelfth.
Senate memorial twenty three
County date in the Senate.
Senate memorial twenty three.
Senate memorial twenty four
introduced by Senator Diamond a
memorial celebrating the FFA
youth organization declaring
Senate memorial twenty four is
ordered not printed not referred
to committee placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial twenty four.
Senator Wirth.
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president so
that is it for today will be in
at eleven o'clock tomorrow
morning and I think I yield
first to Senator pope was got
we will be having a majority
caucus meeting in the Senate
lounge at one thirty once again
majority caucus meeting at one
thirty in the Senate on.
Let us know when you can fill in
that something alright other
announcements.
a two PM start time but with the
the Democrats caucusing madam
chair at one thirty I'm gonna
move the start time to three PM
you there at three o'clock
Senate judiciary yeah we're
gonna be looking at use of force
in law enforcement thank you
Senator Ortiz panel.
prepared to join is it probably
will be about almost three but
it could be as early as two
thirty so thank you thank you
Senator Pinto chat room number
nine AM we have a speaker then
we have to roll over bills
besides the bills that are
listed on your agenda today
thank you very much we're in
room three eleven thank you
things change on the floor
tomorrow but in our same room
three twenty one.
Thank you so much any other
announcements.
Senator Burt do you have an
Drury hotel a lot of great
things to eat some beverages a
lot of things to take away and
that we would love to see each
and every one of the senators
Right to Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members it felt so I little
no objection will stand in
recess until three eleven AM
tomorrow morning the Senate is
in recess.
