And I'm going to go ahead and
hand the gavel over to our vice
chair, Senator Hermione, and
just a reminder again for the
members and for anyone who has
speaking up there we have these
wonderful new microphones that
we all love. Um, but the folks
watching online can't hear you
unless you are speaking very
close to the microphone.
So, Senator Morris. I think in
our last meeting you basically
could not be heard at all. Um so
please, just make sure to
Bring those microphones right up
to you.
Go ahead point when you're
pretty close. You get that
feedback.
And it is not a perfect system,
Senator Year Senator Stewart
So maybe pull it to you and
adjust it while it's off and
then just turn it on when it's
when it's there in front of you.
No, I I went back and watched
the Webcast and the presenters
could be heard. Clearly, it's
it's the members that it's
Yeah, Take it away. Guys. Use
your cheerleading voice and
you'll be just fine.
Just everybody knows this
morning if I don't see the
senator in the committee room,
I'll be making adjustments to
the agenda when I senator and
their conference area and so
we're going to start off this
morning with Senator Gonzalez,
who is going to be introducing
us to William Knight.
A reappointment to the
Children's Trust. One word of
trustees.
Good morning, Mr Chairman
members.
Madam chair.
Uh, with great Nour. You know,
um
Um, to present to you.
The reappointment.
To the Children's Trust Fund
Board of trustees.
And, uh, that is, uh
William J. Night.
And all of you have his bio.
And with a very strong,
extremely strong background in
financial part
And very much very involved in
our community.
Oh serving many organizations
and assist a lot of the
non profits and
With his experience. You know
this reappointment, you know
itself.
Is an asset to our state and
without taking more high will
yield to him to give you some
highlights of his experience.
Good morning, madam chairwoman.
Senators. Thank you much for
this opportunity.
And I am open to any questions.
I think you have a little bit of
background. Um
I was honored to serve on the
small Business Investment
corporation.
Uh, for several years, the
Richardson administration
Due to
The pandemic and covid. We had a
real interesting
A couple of years with the
Children's Trust fund. We could
not meet
Uh, we had zoom meetings rather.
And so now we're doing hybrid
meetings where some of us are
traveling to location in
Albuquerque and others of us are
still using zoom.
I'm open to any questions. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Knight. And the
way we do this is we take
comments from those who have
signed up for organized support
organized opposition. We don't
have any of this time, but I
will get a show of hands in the
room if there's anyone in
support of them.
Anyone online and support of the
country.
Signaling and going again online
ending opposition.
Signal with that I'll go to
questions asked if I can have a
roll call vote.
Senator Baca excused
Senator Lopez excused, Senator
McKenna.
Yes, Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Morris? Yes, Senator
Morris Boats? Yes, Senator
Nibert, Senator. Neighbor votes.
Yes, Senator. RTC Pinot Excused,
Senator. Hurdle Excuse, Senator
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart votes. Yes,
Senator Harmony. Oh, yes. Me
about Yes, Senator. Do hit
Senator Do Hig votes? Yes.
Congratulations, Mr Knight with
six voting of do past and five
excused. You will be moving on.
Thank you very much will happen
today, Mr Knight. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Mhm.
And so I'm going to then make an
adjustment to the agenda, and
I'm gonna go next to Senator
Stewart, who will be introducing
Zairi Matthews is being
appointed to the small business
investment. Morning, Mr Chair.
I'm very honored today to be
offering the confirmation of
Syria mother
Oh, well, we all have known her
for a number of years. She has,
uh then with P and M for the
last 17 years, but she left that
to start her own business and to
volunteer on boards she is
passionate about.
Siiri is a second generation
entrepreneur and daughter of
first generation Japanese
immigrants.
She grew up in Los Alamos is a
graduate of loss. Almost high
school currently lives in Santa
Fe.
She spent her first year in
college in Tokyo at Sofia
University, where she was
studying international business
and competed with the
university's judo team. So
serious first entrepreneurial
experience was after graduating
from Baylor University, she
decided to return to Los almost
to work alongside her father.
In his startup international
software company from his work
at Los Alamos National Labs
being passionate about
supporting small businesses. He
along with other business
owners started to nonprofit
organizations to advocate for
small businesses, which
eventually led her to become the
vice president.
Of government affairs for a CI
Otherwise known as in Mexico
Chamber, But her it's her last
work with P and M where I got to
know her the most, uh, for the
energy transition Act. I found
myself in what I described as
mine numbing committee work
where she told about the inner
workings of a utility.
Boy, So that's when we became
friends. I'm grateful for her
friendship and well, what
background so I offer security
Amada
Thank you. Good morning. Eddie
is truly an honor to be here
today to be considered for
nomination for the small
business Investment Corporation.
I am truly honored to be
considered for this appointment
because I feel like I've come
full circle. So, um Madam
President Pro TEM mentioned a
little bit about my background
and why I feel like I've come
full circle.
As she mentioned I did start my
career working alongside my
father starting his business.
It's an environmental software
business that, um was a three
dimensional atmospheric
transport and dispersion model
that was one of the top three in
the world. He had developed this
software when he was working at
Los Alamos National Laboratory.
And then this was a time when,
um Senator Domenici and Senator
Bingaman was really pushing tech
transfer and commercialization.
So he was one of the first few
businesses that had started at
that time.
Yeah.
And, um, so when I came back
from college, I was responsible
for the business side and he was
responsible for the research and
scientific side and size
responsible pretty much for HR
Payroll, marketing accounting,
and I remember my second week on
the job, my dad said
Go and get a line of credit at
the bank. And I said Okay, so I
call our local banker and I get
an appointment and I walk in and
said I'd like to have a line of
credit and he says great how
much and I had no clue. I had to
actually come up with a number
and tell them how much my line
of credit was. So I remember. I
made up some big number and he
says, Well,
Can you show me your financials,
which I didn't even bring my
financials either.
So I am forever grateful for him
for not kicking me out or
yelling at me. He said. Yeah, I
think we'll be able to help you
out. But tomorrow can you come
back with your financials and
and then we'll figure out how we
but it was truly a great
experience from
Working on government contracts
and making sure we got it S B
eight a certification.
Um, I was responsible for, um,
registering our trademark with
the U. S patent and trademark.
Um, office because at the time
starting a business we didn't
have the resources to do all
that and submit that and get
that certified. We eventually
did diversify our business
because a large percentage of it
was around federal contracting
contract work mostly D o D and D
O E.
And because of the uncertainties
from year to year, more
international business as well
as working with you in other
businesses, But during that time
I got involved with, um kind of
helping out JETRO and Judd Bro
was the Japan external governor.
Um, um King brought JETRO to New
Mexico.
Is usually located in large big
cities, and he was successfully
able to win the bid from Arizona
to bring it to New Mexico. So I
had the opportunity to do a
little. That was the purpose of
JETRO was to help and identify
businesses and products that
they can export to Japan. Also
during that time
I was very passionate about. How
do you help um small businesses
and create high wage, clean jobs
and New Mexico and along with
several other small businesses
we create, and we realized at
that time to really support
businesses. We wanted to do it
at the policy level, so we got
together and worked on high wage
tax credit The angel
development.
Tax credits, etcetera.
To really start promoting,
especially the northern area
with the labs there and are also
knowing sand at hub.
And also, um I started the new
media.
Um, New Mexico and opportunity.
More than just media is also
scientific, three dimensional
digital digitalization. It's
also, um, video gaming type of
work, and that's what we also
did as our business because it
was very data intensive and
often times only scientists and
data and we worked with video
programmers to convert that into
a three dimensional image were
non technical people can then
Utilize the data and the
information.
So
At that time, I think we might
have been before our time. We
also came up with the idea of
creating that flat to co
businesses on there where you
can put it at airports or
restaurants or
Or like public buildings.
So we were able to get a little
capital outlay and work with the
Santa Fe community College to
to, um, put up this brat flat
screen really wasn't popular,
but I'm very happy every time
the that I see that at various
Other, um
Other places.
But I've always wanted to own my
own business. I always thought
it was gonna be either copy,
Florist and wine shop because
those are the three things that
I just love. Oh, so someday I
might still do that. But I
finally decided to take all the
skills I've developed over all
these years and really put it
today. Working with and
With his own a strategies and my
nonprofit work. It's been really
wonderful to see the need for
really driving a healthy
economy. So with that, you know,
I would, Mr Chairman. Thank you
Theory and we do have organized
support here for you, and I'm
gonna give each person who
signed up two minutes and I'm
gonna start off with Lillian
Montoya.
Goodbye, Dr John Elling and then
rounding out with Carole
Robertson Lopez. Lillian, if you
can step forward and speak into
the mike and otherwise said,
your name if you can say it
again for the record
Good morning, Mr Chair members
of the committee.
Can you hear me? Ok, No.
Bring it up. Perfect the moment,
okay?
Thank you for inviting me to be
here to echo the support for
security Yamada. She and I have
known each other for well over
25 years like we first met when
she was working. Both served on
the Santa Fe Economic
Development Committee and
business and quality of life
work. And over the years. Um,
we've continued to be actively
engaged in how do we strengthen
New Mexico, You know, we are to
native new Mexicans who have
chosen to stay here cobble
together careers to make our
great state even better. So
we've served on a CI We've
served on the New Mexico chamber
now, but also the Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce, as well as
a number of other initiatives
around in Mexico. I can honestly
tell you that you know, like
many of you
She and I have had opportunities
to leave the state and be
successful elsewhere and we
choose to invest here, Um, in
addition to her professional
work
She's invested volunteer time
That's along the same lines.
Very strategic, so I hope
heartedly support her being
engaged in a small business
investment counsel because it
allow her to take that knowledge
and experience from all these
other things that we've gotten
to do together and apply it in a
statewide way to grow small
business to grow large business
and to bring new business.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Lily, Um Dr John Ellington.
Mr Chairman, members of the
import of sorry Ramada. Um, when
she was four years old, she was
running the software company. I
was just Mexico Angels, and we
were just reminiscing about the
fact that
We were discussing problems and
selling software to small from
small businesses to the
government, and I do recall
before her career at PNM. She
was enthusiastic.
Uh, businesswoman with small
business and truly understand
the need. Thank you. Carol.
Robert. Okay, so she's not in
And so I'm just gonna get a show
of hands. Anybody else's cute
and then any in opposition of
the country. What about online?
Well, now go to questions from
the committee. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. And I apologize, Uh,
Senator, And so Yuria came in
right as you're starting to
introduce her, and I may have
missed it. But I cannot find
what this organization does.
What are you doing? And why are
you doing it?
Thank you, Mr Chair and and it's
designed to help grow small
businesses and book is it
attached to the Finance
Authority or where do you get
the money?
Um, it's this and why are we
not? Why are we confirming you
to something? That's a
corporation.
Mr Chairman, Senator RTZ Pino,
Um, this comes from the
severance tax permanent fund
goes into the small business.
The investment, um, Small
Business Investment Corporation.
I know it, says Corporation, but
it's actually a board that was
enacted during I believe time.
So instead choose. It was
created. Then it's designed
mostly to help out small
businesses. And Mr Chairman
does the state retain a portion
of the profit of the we? What do
we get out of it?
Mr Chairman, Senator or TCP? No.
Yes, they do believe revenue
goes back at reverts back into
back to the state.
So, Mr Chairman, is it part of
like the state investment
counsel? It's it's a
Where do you make your own
decisions about what to invest
in.
And then totally independent of
the investment counsel. Um
Mr Chairman, We don't directly
investment.
Partner partners. They're like
West Occean.
Um, let me give you some of the
other organizations. But it's
those organizations that we
award them. The funds
And then we hold them a funded
2031 out of 33 counties through
our partners Can't think of
anybody better to do this kind
of work.
I just couldn't find anything in
our
In need of updating manual of
everything. I think you're
terrific for this job, and I
wish you well and we certainly
need economic development and
small business. Thank you very
much, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Senator. Step panics.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I might
questions are along the same
line. But first, I'd like to say
she takes on
But, um
Based upon what you said.
Chair of the Community
Development Council.
Because I'm kind of figure out
if it's related to the small
business, regulatory. It sounds
like you're an offshoot.
And I dont Senator I don't We
need an updated book. And if
Jesse, Uh, if we could I think
that these books came from rld.
So if we could get an updated
version of this and that
That cover everything. Oh, they
come from Legislative Council.
I'm sorry I will talk to them
about it. She said she might
have a response. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and Senator Stefan IX.
This was formed in 2001 act, um,
to create the new jobs and
opportunities support the small
business and it was and is
funded by an allocation from the
severance tax statute.
And upon receipt of these
independent audited financial
statement. Board of directors in
charge with reports reports back
to, um the Legislature. But it
is, um
It is an independent. Thank you,
for
Um
Mr Chairman, and, um, Senator
more this year. Um, excuse me
last year.
$7.9 million was released.
And
From that.
Let's see, Uh
And then, um, from that about
24,000 jobs were supported.
And 70% of those loans were
given to minority owned
businesses and 45. We're at
loans were given to women owned
businesses. And as I mentioned,
um 31 out of 33 counties were
served by, um, helping out small
businesses.
It did increase from 49 million
to
I I made
Thank you, Senator, Senator
neighbor.
Um
I didn't have any questions
until I looked at the resume.
And and I do have a Mr Chair of
the
Number
Mr Chairman, Senator neighbor.
So that is with, um and our D.
C.
Which is the
National resource. So did you
work for the Natural Resources
Defense Council?
Um, Mr Chairman and the Senator
Nyberg. I was asked for this
session to help them with the
matching funds. So this is the
federal matching fun. It's an
appropriation piece of
legislation that is allergies
and local public bodies when
they are looking to submit
grants to the federal grants,
Oftentimes they request matching
funds.
And they don't have the
resources to come up with a
matching fund. So this is
creating a fun And of course, as
we all know, that's a very
finite period of time that we
have. So, um it's an opportunity
for New Mexico to be a news
through creating this matching
funds, so I was asked by energy
C to help them, Um this session.
To carry that concern I would
have would be the large bulk of
the money. This organization
that you're seeking is severance
tax monies would
Those mom because they see that
way. Those two
Mr Chairman and senator never
and I from the surface. I
understand the concerns and
issues and I think one of the
wonderful things that
Um, the opportunity that now
that I do have with my new
company is I really decided not
to put myself in a box and what
I choose to really support. It's
not really about the
organization. I don't or, um the
issues or specific industry and
to me personally, I do believe,
um
I'm not work working for the
organization as a whole. It was
I was asked to do one specific
thing.
Which is helping our local
communities specifically clear
what that task was. And I truly
believe that we do need to help
those local communities. And I
truly believe that if other
states will be more than glad we
do often have that, um limited
resources, especially in some of
our rural areas.
So
I try not to judge an
organization.
By past work as I hear your
answer.
Um, actually, it is for this
session and I was asked to work
for this two months on the
Signal further questions. Just
one comment. I never knew this
ultimate. And so what is the
will of the come in Do pass
motion by senators panics if I
can have a roll call vote.
Senator Baca passes Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez is excused.
Senator McKenna. Yes.
Senator. Burkina votes Yes,
Senator Morris.
Senator Moore's votes. No
Senator Nibert Senator Neighbor
votes Yes, Senator or TCP? No.
Yes, Senator or TCP. No votes.
Yes, Senator Pirtle.
Yes, Senator. Perrault votes yes
centers, just a phonics.
Senators. Phonics votes. Yes,
Senator Stewart? Yes, Senator
Stewart, But yes, Senator.
Harmony. Oh, yes, Senator. Okay
about yes, Senator Baca.
Yes, Senator Baca votes? Yes.
Senator Do Hig Senator Do Hook
votes? Yeah, nine. Yes. One
later this morning.
Congratulations.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the Council.
Mm hmm.
Next time in a call up, Senator
Sykora, Ahem. Feel who will be
presenting Manuel Fred Barraza
to bring appointed to the museum
Board of
Good morning, Senator.
Oh, good morning, Mr Chair,
Remember?
So madam Charles Fred.
Marissa.
Are you saying that correct
For the appointment. Now we can
hear you okay?
I'll start over. Thank you,
Madam Chair. It's a great honor
for the appointment. The
reappointment for the New
Mexico Mr. Barraza received a B.
I s in for city where he
currently works as an adjunct
instructor teaching, drawing one
and two studio drawing life.
Drawing printmaking. Art
appreciation been a director of
the rural Book Mobile southwest
for the New Mexico State Library
through the Department of
Regions. He is also the
executive director of the search
International folk art.
Yeah, and on the tailor Missy, a
historic property advice been on
many more countable. Decades
illustrated almost 20 different
books. There's been several
publications that have
highlighted their incredible
work of Mr Browses talent and
beautiful art.
Thank you.
Mr Chair.
And committee members.
My name is Manuel Fred Barasa
normally go by Fred
Um, I have graduated from
Western New Mexico University.
I've, uh and Department of
cultural Affairs has actually
been a part of my life since
1983 when it was actually Office
of Cultural Affairs.
I worked with the New Mexico
state libraries bookmobile for
25 years 23 of those years being
the manager for that particular
bookmobile.
When I retired. I did work for
WFMU for 5.5 years.
As an adjunct.
Professor and then I became a
new Mexico arts commissioner for
about five years. I believe
before becoming a region with
the Museum of New Mexico Board
of Regions, Um
Okay?
All of these.
Positions have been with D. C A
Except for w N M u um, but I
have enjoyed working with
Department of Cultural Affairs
all these years.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you for that introduction,
and so we don't have anybody who
signed up in organized support
or opposition, But I'm going to
ask for a show of hands if
they're six.
Any online in favor of the
country.
Any in opposition in the nun and
the online in opposition. Very
good. Now we do have the cabinet
secretary of the Department of
Cultural Affairs Debra Garcia.
Agree a go. I don't know if you
wanted to make any comments or
just by showing your hand.
Come on up. I'll give you a Mr
Barraza.
Thank you, Uh, Mr Terror members
of the committee. Um Fred has
been outstanding region. He
participates fully. He comes
prepared for meetings. As you
heard, He is deeply familiar,
not only with the work of the
museum but the work of the index
entire department. Um he is
truly an asset to the agency is
about his as the state.
Thank you having it secretary.
although I will now go to
questions and comments from the
committee senators, defendants
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator for bringing this
forward. Thank you for author.
Could you talk? I like for you.
How do you think I mean?
The use of it doesn't have
enough funding. Um, you worked
in the Southwest area.
It looks many of us are very
interested in libraries and
getting books out to people.
But is it being utilized?
Just kind of give us your
impressions. Um
Mr Chair, senators that phonics
It's been a long time since I've
been involved with the
bookmobile. That was I retired
in 19.
Or 1989, but it's been a while
since I've been there and I
don't know quite what's what's
happening with the book on Bill
program and the system. I do
know at one point that the
region in Grant County my region
was when I retired that.
The then secretary stopped at
that particular bookmobile,
which required three other book
mobiles to travel the rest of
the state. Other than that, I'm
haven't been keeping track of
what's happening with the
bookmobile. Mr Chair is I'm
concerned that people are not
low.
But that you might just keep
that idea in mind. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator and the other questions
are
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for being willing to
survive. Just been reading
through the the titles of the
books that you illustrate really
fascinating with hypnotizing
chickens.
Also whiskey six guns in red
light, ladies.
Uh, but
There's a press in in Silver
City called members, but I guess
it's attached to the university
Members Press and Senator
O'Neill always gets his books
published by members Press.
How do you do that? Because I
I'd like to get some books
public.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator or TCP?
No, I I really don't know. And I
really have some ideas from my
own book. So I think I'm going
to need to talk to somebody.
Alright. Good. Thank you. It's
just great to have somebody who
is a practicing active
professional artists working as
a thank you, Mr Chairman,
Senator Morris. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
We have Mr. Chair, Senator. More
morals. Thank you.
Thank you see no further
questions or comments. What's
the will of the commitment to
do? Pass Senators? Stewart,
second by Senator Morris if I
can? Yes, Senator Lopez Senator
McKenna? Yes, Senator McKenna
votes Yes.
Senator Moore's Senator Murray's
votes. Yes, Senator Nyberg,
Senator Nyberg votes Yes,
Senator or cheesy Pinot? Yes,
Senator or cheesy Pinot? Yes,
Senator Pirtle.
Yes, Literal votes. Yes, Senator
Stefan IX, Senator Stefan X
votes. Yes, Senator Stewart?
Yes, Senator Stewart votes Yes,
Senator. Harmony. Oh, yes,
Senator Hawrami about Yes,
Senator Doig, Senator. Do Hague
votes? Yes. Thank you. With the
vote of nine years and one
excused. You will move on to the
full Senate for confirmation.
Later this morning.
Congratulations.
On the next call up, Senator
Pirtle will be introducing
Marianne Cortez
Good morning, Senator.
Mr Chair members of the
committee this morning I have
with you, Mary Ann Cortesi told
it probably butchered that even
after she just told me but it's
Italian. So, um All right. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Um, today I bring
before you somebody who has a
very diverse board, which I
think is is important with a lot
of these organizations because a
lot of times you know, with
people that have only done even
if you look
Over her resume. It's quite
impressive from small business
ownership to working with
municipalities to create what
was old four days in Fort
Sumner, um and among owning a
farm, owning a small business
and contributing in so many
different ways in her community.
I think it's very important to
have people like that on these
boards to really
Bringing outsiders perspective
to, um, life outside of, uh And
so I think it's a great
appointment. I applaud the
governor for bringing her
forward and now ask her to say a
few words.
Mr Chair in in senators, I'm so
glad to be here this morning and
I'm so pleased that I have been
asked for Reconfirmation to this
position.
I've enjoyed it through the past
12 years and
Um, I've been through some times
of transition within the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
Ah, we've gone from, uh, Mexico
State monuments to historic
sides, which was very
Positive change, and I've seen a
lot of the
Changes within the museum
system. And so I'm so pleased
that I have an opportunity to
continue had a lot of work with
the International Coalition of
Museums of Conscience, which
fully support the work that's
done in New Mexico. So in the
second time, I know you have my
resume and I stand for more
questioning if if you have any
Thank you for those comments. We
didn't get anybody organized
Supporter opposition for your
reappointment, but I'm going to
ask for a show of hands in the
committee room for those who are
in favor of favor, nine in
favor.
Nine in favor in the committee
room any online?
Anyone in the committee room in
opposition.
Think that I'm gonna allow the
same opportunity to Cabinet
Secretary Deborah Garcia agree a
go from the Department of
Cultural
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um
I wasn't planning on saying
anything, because I don't want
to get emotional. Um Marianne
Cortez E is, um in many ways,
the heart and soul of this
board. Um she keeps Ri
Always on the prize. She is a
passionate advocate for our
historic sites, along with all
of our other museums.
Um, she has been through this
border. She mentioned through
numerous changes and through the
department through numerous
changes, and she provides
steady, confident, grounded
leadership. Um New Mexico really
could not ask for a better
advocate to sit on this
committee, particularly for our
rural areas and for our sites
that sometimes don't get the
attention that they should thank
you.
Thank you, Cabinet secretary.
and with that I'll go to
questions or comments.
Senator neighbor.
Thank you. Mr Chair district is,
uh, stepping up and has stepped
up for me put up with dramatics
for so many years deserves a
reappointment. So her
involvement not only in board,
but her involved peaks volumes
as to her part of the state and
particularly to the state.
Thank you, senator or cheesy
peanut.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, senator Portal for
bringing this resume. I'm really
impressed with several things.
What are museums of kind, but I
had never heard it before, And
I'm wondering what
Do we have any in New Mexico,
for example?
How the basket would honor
memorial is a museum of
conscience. Uh, there is an
international museums of
conscience. There are over 100
in the world, the very first one
that was designated with
Senegal, the slave door.
And so nine years ago, we were
the basket Fernando Memorial.
Petition to become part of this,
um
Very prestigious organization.
So we went through a vetting
process and we were inducted.
So this is this is an
organization that looks at
A site where mostly there's been
a lot of historic, tragic events
in the basket. Redonda Memorial,
As you know, is a place of was
immense suffering. There's
actually 1300 marked graves
still in that area in Fort
Sumner.
And over, you know
3000 died on the way to Fort
Sumner and several several
deaths occurred. So this is an
organization that looks at a
site and determines if history
can be taught through that site
in a way that the public would
See the strength and the
perseverance of the people who
went through tragedies and come
out with a sense of hope.
And so it's we've. We've been
very honored to be a part of
that organization.
And Mr Chairman is the Busker
Rolando site.
It's a one only one. Yes, in our
area. Yes. And so we do invite
Senator neighbor to come and see
it because we're just 80 Miles
north.
Of you.
No, thank you and your work on
stimulating and facilitating
dialogue relevant to complex
social, governmental and
historical issues. I can think
of about five sites in New
Mexico right now. They could
Really benefit from from
somebody with your background,
so
Our our area.
Divisive activity around Santa
Fe.
Monument on the Plaza and
Albuquerque with Judy involved
in protein. All of those I think
could really benefit from you.
Just think you're in a Linda
continue to serve.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Senator Step
panics.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator for bringing this
in.
Could you talk about your
farmer? What does it do?
We raise cattle and, uh we re
raise hell near the USO area. We
have a
A large a ranch that raises
If you're familiar with the
livestock we really year links.
And we do have some cow and calf
operation and then in the ports
and Rivoli, which is the second
oldest water ride in New Mexico,
we raise alfalfa hay.
Which is sold primarily to the
dairies in the eastern part of
the state.
Very diverse background. Thank
you. Thank you, senator Signal,
Other comments or questions?
What's the will of the
committee?
That move it do pass by Senator
nightwear if I can have a
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca votes. Yes, Senator
Lopez? Yes, Senator Lopez votes.
Yes, Senator McKenna. Yes,
Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Moore's Morris was yes,
Senator Nyberg.
Senator Nyberg votes. Yes,
Senator, RTZ pinot senator or
Cheesy Pinot votes. Yes, Senator
Pirtle. Pirtle votes yes
centers. Phonics votes. Yes,
Senator Stewart? Yes, Senator
Stewart votes yes and her or me?
Oh, yes. MIA votes. Yes,
Senator. Do, huh? Yes, Senator.
Do his votes. Yes.
I voted 11 to 0. You will make
it to the full Senate for a
confirmation later this morning.
Congratulations, Mr Cortez. E.
I'm not going to move on to
dress the and Pascual. I'm gonna
ask that Senator Moore has come
forward to introduce 30.
As an appointment to the museum
Board of Regions. Good morning.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Mr.
Chair. I haven't before so just
looking through the residents of
credit talking, but she is from
a coma.
And she's been on the board.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Teresa and Pascual and I
come from the Pablo vacuum a
served, um, my community in a
number of capacities prior to
2006. I worked for the newly
formed language Immersion
program.
Ah, You may, uh, know that some
of our tribal communities are
seeking to address language loss
through active immersion
programs, and that's where, uh,
after my time away here in the
state of New Mexico, uh, I came
home to, uh, completely
understand.
How quickly language loss was
occurring in our tribal
community, Uh, with that being
said
Language loss is fundamental to
protecting our culture and our
history. And so that became my
journey to protect the culture
in history of my Pueblo. I am
the first and only woman to
serve as the director of the
historic Preservation office at
my Pueblo.
Most of these cultural
resource is and how we protect
them and the decisions that the
tribe makes internally to
protect. Those resources are
generally held by society
leaders who are often times men.
And so my role at the Pueblo of
Atacama has been to navigate
those boundaries. Those limits
while also advocating on the
outside for the protection of
archaeological, historical and
cultural resources here in the
state, So thank you. I'm honored
to be considered for this role
and I stand
There was nobody who signed up
in organized support or
opposition of your confirmation,
But I'm going to ask for a show
of hands in the room for those
who are in support of this.
Comfrey nine.
Any online.
Any in the confirmation in the
committee room in opposition of
the confirmation.
None. What about online?
None gonna once again called
forward, the Cabinet secretary
of Cultural Affairs Debra
Garcia agree ago if you'd like
to make some comments Thank you,
Mr Chair members of the
committee again. It's a
privilege to stand in support of
this contrary, she brings an
incredibly valuable skill set to
the border regions as skill set
that is otherwise absent.
Um from the composition of the
board, including incredible
valuable experience in in as
you've heard, tribal
Um, matters and tribal resources
and also archaeology and
anthropology. Um she, much like
region, Barraza has demonstrated
a willingness and ability to
jump in and get involved in the
committee. She has been co chair
of several hiring committees.
Thank you.
Right, Right. Okay. Um, so with
that I'm happy to stand in
support. Thank you so much.
Cabinet Secretary.
Comments or questions from the
committee.
Senator McKenna.
Okay?
Thank you, Senator Moore's
singletons Miss Pascual in this
capacity.
And I can certainly my mom and I
can certainly
Navigating our societies.
As we try to do very well for
Our current general.
Senators appendix
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator for bringing you with
And you're
Are you called to evaluate?
Land use development.
Sites are not disturbed.
Chairman and Senator Stephan IX
in my capacity as director for
the tribal Historic Preservation
program. We do look at
development.
Where there is an intersection.
Um when development occurs that
has the potential potential to
affect resources that are
significant to the Pueblo of
Atacama.
And that is triggered under the
National Historic Preservation
Act as one of the sections
section 106.
Within that act. There are a
number of processes that are,
um, called for to make a
determination as to the level of
effect how to mitigate those and
propose a plan of action. There
is nothing within the nhp. A
that, um stops or prevents
development. And I think that is
key, and so
I bring that experience to the
table.
In terms of making those
assessments and also working
collaboratively to develop a
plan for mitigation so that
development in our state and
outside of the state can
continue.
Thank you very much comments or
questions. I'd like to just make
one comment, so I'm happy to
hear that pueblo culture history
and the work that you're doing
to preserve language is the same
work my colleague, Senator
Pueblo, and they appreciate
things without what is the will
of our and Senator Morse and
I'll go for a roll call vote.
Senator Baca excused
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Lopez votes Yes, Senators,
Kenna votes. Yes, Senator
Morris.
Yes, Senator Morris votes. Yes,
Senator Nyberg. Senator nagged
our votes. Yes, Senator or
Senator Puerto is excused.
Senator Stone stuff, phonics,
Phonics votes? Yes, Senator
Stewart? Yes, Senator Stewart
votes? Yes, Senator Harm me. Oh,
yes. Hermia votes. Yes. And her
do hig. Yes, Senator. Do big
boats. Yes, by a vote of eight
in favor and three excused. You
will be making it to the Senate
chamber today for a full Senate
confirmation.
Congratulations,
16, Okay?
And with that, I'm going to hand
the gavel back appointment of
Kathy Keith to the New Mexico
Finance Authority. And if you
don't mind, Madam chair, I'm
gonna ask that my intern come
forward with me. Monique
Hernandez is joining me from an
MSU's college assistant might
just to remind everyone we have
a hard stop it 1025 today.
For the committee's community.
Morning, Madam chairwoman. I
guess I'd better not use my
cheer voice with this, Mike.
Catholic. Keith is most Alamos
National Laboratory's director
of community partnerships.
Where she works with the team to
build relationships between the
laboratory across the education
and workforce sector as well as
in the business and the
philanthropic communities. Kathy
has over 20 years of experience
in public policy, including
working as a legislative
director to the United States
congressman as a presidential
appointment to the U. S
Department of Energy.
And as the director of Economic
Development Division or the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department, is worked across the
nation as a consultant,
assisting states and communities
in designing and implementing
innovative economic and
workforce development projects
that serve their needs.
Formerly served as an elected
member of the governing board of
the Santa Fe Community College.
She holds a bachelor's degree in
journalism and political science
from Texas Tech University and a
master's degree in public
administration from the
University of Southern
California.
She is a first generation
college student who has raised
and took him carrying New
Mexico. And not only is she a
good friend of mine, she is also
my former supervisor at Los
Alamos National Laboratory,
where we work together in
community development with the
community Partnerships program,
and with that, I'm going to hand
it over to Kathy Keith for a few
words.
Good morning Committee members.
I'll keep it very brief this
morning and stand for any
questions. Um, So first of all I
want to say that I hope you will
note that Senator Armijo left
me and no longer works for me.
He moved on to bigger and better
things, but he was a key member
of our team and building
relationships with communities
and he's greatly missed by our
office.
Um, I am honored to be before
the committee this morning and
have the consideration of this
committee and the Senate for
appointment to the New Mexico
Finance Authority board. My
background is largely an
economic development and when I
worked for the state of New
Mexico Economic Development
Department, I was actually, um,
a board member at the New Mexico
Finance Authority years ago.
So it's great to be back is also
great to see that the New Mexico
Finance Authority continues to
grow and to serve our state.
Well. It's an honor to serve on
the board to be nominated, um,
and to do the great work of what
an organization that I think, is
a crown jewel for the state of
New Mexico and providing much
needed infrastructure financing
for our communities around the
state.
As well as several new programs
that have been added in the last
decade, most of them supporting
business development.
Thank you for your
consideration.
And thank you.
We do have folks offer their
support first online.
Alright, so you'll have a
minute. That's OK. Okay, having
to speak up. Okay, well, we
We got an email identifying you
and Dr Dennis Erickson. It, uh
in support were a real confused.
So in support, That's you. Is
there anyone in the audience
that which is this weekend or
Good morning. I'm known Kathy
I'm Danielle Duran. I am the
Intergovernmental Affairs met
Cathy Keith, when I Mexico
Kathy has always been a
consummate professional, capable
state to grow and benefit from
her knowledge. She is a great
partner to work with, and you
couldn't find someone who has
done more.
Yes.
Just tell us your name. I'm
apparently not good at reading
these names. My name is Camilla
Bustamonte. And I'm actually
here on behalf of Monica Beta
from north Central New Mexico
Economic Development District,
though I can say. Also having
worked with Kathy Keith.
These words could easily be mine
and anything that anyone else
would. Iterate is support for
Kathy. She's a wonderful person
to work with. So, Madam chair.
Thank you for the opportunity as
from the executive director of
North Central New Mexico
Economic Development District
Council of Governments from
North Central New Mexico, I am
honored to submit this statement
in support of Kathy Keith's
appointment.
To the New Mexico Finance
Authority board. As you already
know. Cathy is dedicated public
servant who has spent her time
career working on behalf of
communities primarily in the
northern New Mexico area in her
many leadership roles. She has
never forgotten about the rural
and frontier communities of this
state and the unique challenges
they face. She has always worked
hard to find solutions.
To those challenges. I first
came to work with Kathy in 2011
when she began much earlier for
me, By the way, I just want to
make that clear when she began
leading the regional development
corporation at the time, I was a
consultant at the RDC under its
previous director, Kathy
immediately reached out to me,
and we spent the next few years
working closely together on many
important projects, including
the implementation of the
regional development.
Economic Development Initiative.
Ready Plan Palamos County's
first commitment to regional
investment Ready Net Northern
New Mexico's groundbreaking
community Braun bad broadband
network and in support of the
tech transfer companies and
other community program efforts
at Los Alamos National
Laboratory.
Now that Kathy leads the
community programs division
Atlanta I am impressed with the
changes.
That she has helped bring forth
our willingness to commit time
and resources to local efforts
and her support to the
communities in our region. The
community programs division is
more focused than ever there
before before on real solutions
that contribute to northern New
Mexico's communities and small
businesses. There is a great
amount of time. Thank you in
summary, Thank you. Who else if
I miss
Yes. Good morning, madam chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Marquita Russell. I'm
the CEO of the New Mexico
Finance Authority. And I'm very
pleased to stand today to offer
my support for the nomination
for the governor's appointment
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority board as chair of our
board In my 23 years at the
agency I've worked under now.
All seven chairs that have been
appointed through those four or
five governors. And I can say
that this by far is really the
best appointment we have seen.
Seen to date.
Her representation and clear
understanding of rural New
Mexico and the the power that
our projects can have in these
communities is unsurpassed. And,
um, so I would just say that
from a fiduciary perspective,
she brings what's necessary to
the table and from a mission,
perspective and strategic
direction. She's what's needed
right now at the New Mexico
Finance Authority, so I know I
speak on behalf of my entire
staff. When I say that the
governor made an exquisite
selection here, and we would
Wholeheartedly ask your support.
Thank you anyone else?
So we have time for one more,
but
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Becky Rally. I'm president of
Santa Fe Community College. Um,
I am honored to speak in behalf
of Kathy Keith this morning. Um,
I've known Kathy since we were
both a whole lot younger than we
are right now and worked with
her and almost every capacity
that she served the state of New
Mexico and I just want to say
that if there is one way that I
would sum up Cathy's work
experience, it's been about
creating opportunities.
Where people in New Mexico and
as a fellow, um eastern New
Mexico, New Mexican, um by
origin, I do know the Cathy does
understand economic development
and creating opportunities
statewide, and she'll do a
terrific job. Anyone online know
any opposition or since I don't
have any help centers to
phonics.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Senator known
Miss Keith for many years and I
can vouch for everything that
sponsored would do it. Thank
you.
Um, from its inception, I think.
Finally, the vision
Right shoulders.
But I think you have a special
place within New Mexico and a
lot of it according Um, But if
you're not thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Not centers do
panics for emotion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I move
for approval. We're on a motion
to approve this. Caca excused
Senator Lopez? Yes, Senator
Lopez votes? Yes, Senator
McKenna. Yes, Senator McKenna
votes. Yes, Senator. Moors Moors
votes. Yes, Senator Nyberg,
Senator. Neighbor votes. Yes,
Senator Or TCP? No excused.
Senator Pirtle excused Senator
Stefan IX. Senator Stepanek's
votes. Yes, Senator Stewart.
Yes, Senator Stewart was yes,
Senator. Harmony. Oh, yes. Army
of its Yes, Senator. Do Hig
exploded, seven in the
affirmative and the rest
explore.
Yeah.
For excuse. We have approved
your confirmation to go to the
Senate floor today. So
congratulations,
Okay, madam Chairwoman, I'd be
happy to present the next
appointment on behalf of Senator
stoles since he's still in
education. If you're okay with
that we can count forward
Heather.
You can't handle it, and I will
go ahead and introduce er.
So we are. We are on the
confirmation of Heather Carol
Reed.
Clan hand happens. Somebody lean
Someone leaned on the
Turn. There you go. First. Go
right ahead, Senator Academy.
Thank you, Chairwoman. We all
saw her resume this morning and
see that she can bring a wealth
of experience to the museum
order of regions and I'm going
to let her speak on her behalf
and why she believes she'd be a
perfect fit as an appointment to
the Thank you, Senator. Hermit.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
am a new Mexican born in Las
Cruces Graduated from Los Alamos
from I wish List. Alamos High
School. I have, say, Gallop high
school, Um
My Children are graduates of a
list of the most high school.
And, um, I spent my career in
Los Alamos, and I spent that
career at the Los Alamos History
Museum. I have a passion for
museums. I was we were able to
as an organization really grow
the museum and its collections
and we completely redid the
exhibits. And that was where I
really got excited. I have
I was privileged to travel
throughout the country.
Visiting different museums and
historic sites while I was
director of the History Museum
in Los Alamos, and there is no
better system in the nation than
the New Mexico Museum system, so
this appointment is such an
honor. I am very excited to be
able to delve into collections
to delve into policy with the
board and the board of Regions.
It's a wonderful group that I
have just getting to know and
appreciate the opportunity, So
with that, I will say
And for questions, Madam,
calling out your name as if you
were here.
So we do have support of for
Miss McClanahan. Uh, if you'll
just take a couple of minutes,
that would be great.
Madam chair, senators.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support.
So some 15 years ago, the
president of those most
historical society, I had the
pleasure to appoint Heather
As the society's first executive
director.
In a move to change the
governance of our non energize
its future.
Over the next decade. Heather
worked with
With saltines.
Transform the society by
expanding its capabilities for
showcasing
The history and stories of Los
Alamos.
Given Heather's strategic
direction and enabled by
aggressive fundraisers.
The society is treasured
archives are now stored and
managed and modern by loss,
Almost County and society's
History Museum is now expanded
campus.
That draws increasing numbers of
heritage tourists from Iraq
thanks to Heather's leadership
and donor generosity, today's
museum campus incorporates two
bathtub broke cottages.
One being the Oppenheimer House.
That's starting Chris
Christopher Nolan's masterpiece
film.
In summary. Heather McClenahan
is a big champion for New
Mexico.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, sir. Um
That was, uh
Public comment and support would
anyone in the audience
Seen a number of you anyone
online?
We did not have anyone sign up
for public comment and
opposition. Does anyone want to
raise their hands seen? None?
Anyone online? None.
Right. We'll go to Paris
Phonics, Madam. Pure. Thank you.
I know we're short. And I think
that Senator
Madam chair. I don't while we
have the secretary here.
This last year, I because I read
a book about Louise Co first
Woman to serve as president pro
TEM of the Senate.
A Republican from the
southeastern part of ST Lincoln
area. She's written a book about
her experience. She served four
terms. It was our last term.
After that, she went on to be an
international travel where and
speaker she started as the first
one of the first education.
Superintendents for the whole
state. So I think there should
be. She should be Maria
somewhere and I'm wondering if
you will look into that, um and
and see what you can do because
she was a Trailblazer. Uh, as I
said, the first woman pro TEM
and her little book, It's called
Louise Co. And the Law book.
Six. It's out of print, but it's
a great little book and just
think she ought to be recognized
down in the Southeast apartment
state.
So that's always a shameless
promotion of the first woman Pro
Tim. So thank you for listening.
Thank you, Senator. So we're on
a motion. Uh,
Senator Morris. Thank you,
madam. Proto Republicans led the
way. Good luck with them. Yeah,
looking good.
Governor of
It looked that is correct for
the governor's office, or are
there any Republicans
And and and actually, senator,
one of the folks that we just
confirmed Marianne Cortesi.
She's a
All right. We are on a motion
for a do pass. Let's have a roll
call vote.
Excused. Senator Lopez? Yes,
Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Morris Morris votes. Yes,
Senator Nyberg, Senator Nyberg
votes. Yes, Senator. RTZ pinot
excused, Senator Pirtle excused.
Senator Stefan IX.
Senator Stepanek's votes. Yes,
Senator Stewart? Yes, Senator
Stewart votes? Yes, Senator.
Harmony. Oh, yes, Senator Hermia
Bose. Yes, Senator. Do huh? Yes.
Votes? Yes. A seven in favor.
Ah.
Senator Do you want to be noted
as a yes on this?
Okay for it.
Let's go ahead, Mark. Yes, we
will see you on the Senate floor
later.
And with that Senate rules is in
recess.
