Mm um, I have
Known
They one l in his second
semester of law school. He's
served as a deputy
superintendent of the Magna
Mexico regulations and
licensing.
Department and basically was
directly involved during that
time in implementing a variety
of regulatory policies for our
state, including cannabis and
rolling that out on certainly
seeing the nuts and bolts of
putting a program like that
together. Prior to that he was
legislative director for the
governor.
And worked with the governor of
variety of capacities. He also
worked in our leadership office
when I first became majority
leader, and certainly that's how
I really got to know Victor. He
is a fair person and someone who
I think will be a tremendous
addition to the U. N n Board of
regions and he'll have an equal
vote.
On that board, and I could not
think of a better appointment
for the student regent position.
I'm happy to introduce Victor
Race.
Chairman had a meal. Um, ranking
member neighbor members of the
committee. Thank you so much for
this opportunity to be here
today. I want to thank the
legislative staff are making
this committee hearing possible
as well. The executive staff I
know heart of those jobs are so
I'm very appreciative. I also
want to take the opportunity to
thank the GPS A for their
nomination President Stokes for
her subsequent nomination into
the governor for submitting my
name before you today.
I also want to thank the issue
and M for their advice and their
counsel since that nomination
has taken place. Our school is
truly well served with you in
those positions and thank you so
much. I also want to thank you,
Senator Worth for your
sponsorship and mentorship
through all the times you've
done working for you and for
this chamber has truly been one
of the greatest honors of my
life. And Senator. I don't know
if you remember when you gave me
when I left the Senate, and you
gave me this copy of profiles in
courage.
But it's something that I keep
very close to my heart. And in
your inscription you gave me to
really pointed pieces of advice
that I keep. Also close to my
heart. The first one was to take
deep breaths. And I promise you,
Senator I'm working on that one
and the but the second one, the
one that I think that I've been
a little bit more successful
with. Is that the greatest
leadership advice that you ever
had was to take the time to
listen, and I hope that the
members of the committee that
I've had the chance to work with
felt that to be the case.
When I worked for the executive.
My commitment was that if there
was ever a chamber or committee
that was in session in the
Legislature that I was still
here.
No one asked me to do that, you
know, And at times, I'm sure
that people would have wanted to
see less to me less of me, but
it was important for me to have
been there because if I could
help in any way I wanted to make
myself available. That's the way
that I've approached everything
I've done trying to make myself
accessible and available and
it's the way that I'm committed
to being. If I'm lucky enough to
earn your support to be a region
Um, you know, I know, but I want
to be clear. I'm not here today
to ask for your support to serve
the executive or to serve the
Legislature. I'm here today to
ask for your support to serve
the students of the University
of New Mexico are States
Flagship University.
I believe, as I know that all
you all do that the students of
the University of Mexico our
institutions, greatest assets,
The investment in our university
students is one of those
important investments are state
makes. That's why I take this
responsibility seriously.
I hope to have this opportunity
to support this university and
its work to create pathways
within undergraduate and career
readiness programs towards
opportunities in advanced
studies, you know, the
University of New Mexico plays a
unique role in our state
success, whether that's in the
work that we're doing at our
Workforce training center in Los
Lunas or work within the College
of Education to ensure that
we're graduating educators that
understand the science of
literacy and I send ready to
help expand our educational
opportunities that deep in
community engagement, enhance
the union brand and support
entrepreneurship and economic
development.
I take seriously the the the
importance of improving our
learning environments,
especially when it comes to the
attention paid a gateway courses
and consumers of all
backgrounds, and that includes
creating a learning environment
that all students feel welcomed
in, including our students who
have differing abilities.
This is an important role, and I
take this responsibility
seriously. I am committed to
being accessible as a graduate
student. It's important for me
to underscore my commitment to
all, um students, especially
undergraduate students, being
accessible is of the utmost
importance to me. I've had
conversations with members of
the U. N m about this
commitment. And if I'm lucky
enough to earn your support
today, I look forward to
spending time hosting regular
office hours on main campus,
participating in meetings with
student leaders on on campuses
across the state and working
with them for innovative
Of ways to make take the pulse
of students and ensure that I'm
responsive to them.
I love the state. I love this
university and students. I'm so
honored to be a Lobo. Thank you
for time and consideration. I
welcome questions from the
committee when the time is
appropriate. Thank you so much
Now you did have some organized
support. You and I met the three
people you identified to speak
on your behalf will have two
minutes each and the chairwoman
will keep time for me and I'm
first going to go to Justin
Laureano, the GPS a president
If you can step forward.
Oh,
Hello.
Hello. My name is Jesse
Laureano. I am the graduate
Student body. Hello. I am Justin
Laureano. I'm the graduate
student body president at you
and him this year's student
region.
Process for applications was the
most competitive we've had in
student memory.
We had over a dozen applicants,
all of which were highly
qualified and
All of which had amazing
abilities. However, Victor's
application rose above them all,
and I am proud to support his
nomination for student region.
And I and through meeting with
him, I have learned that he is
patient, compassionate and has a
genuine desire to make the
university a better place that
will
Make New Mexico a more
competitive state in the long
run when it comes to education.
And that is all I have for him.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you. Justin. Christopher
Chico s, um, President.
Thank you.
Good morning, member Chip. Madam
Chair. Excuse me. Members of the
committee. My name is
Christopher Chico. And I'm the A
S. U. N N president or the
undergraduate student body
president at the University of
New Mexico this year. I'm
honored to be here today to urge
full support of Victor Reyes as
the next student region of the
University of New Mexico.
I met Victor for the first time
several weeks ago, and in my
short time of knowing him, it is
clearly evident that Victor has
a sincere devotion to not only
this position as student regent,
but more importantly to the
university and to the student
body.
As you all know, Victor brings a
wealth of knowledge and
experience from his previous
work in public service, and I'm
confident that through his
experience that his abilities
will directly translate into his
work as student region.
The conversations with Victor.
He has dedicated time to
learning and listening about
student needs and campus
climate. And I am very confident
that he will be a true advocate
for all students, undergraduate
and graduate students alike as
the next in a region
Victor's dedication to the
university and the student body
is unmatched and through the
application process. It was
evident through his resume
through his answers and also
talking with the GPS. A
president Irish full support
Today is Victor raises the next
student region of the University
of New Mexico. Thank you. Thank
you, Krista. Hi, Red Cabinet
Secretary Stephanie Rodriguez.
Hello, madam chair of Mr Vice
Chair and honorable members of
the committee. I am Stephanie
Rodriguez, and I'm the proud
Cabinet secretary with a higher
education department today, I
come before you to show my
support for my friend Victor
race as he embarks on his new
journey as a student region and
my almer matter at the
University of New Mexico, Victor
and I met early on in our
careers and then we're closely
together in the office of the
government of governor in the
beginning of the administration.
We have been through a lot
together in our careers,
including times of policy,
collaboration and budget
prioritization, But more
importantly, I know Victor the
person outside of these walls.
He's a great listener. Thank
you, Leader Worth for that
advice and knows what to do and
what to say to make the
situation better, no matter how
dire Also, a lot of people don't
know this, but Victor
Actually was the one who helped
us with the first part of the
money and policy we got for the
opportunity Scholarship, which
was in House Bill two in the
amount of $20 million in 2020.
Victor worked with the governor
and the Senate Finance Committee
and many members of this
committee to ensure and solidify
that deal that deal in those
conversations have catapulted us
to the most accessible, tuition
free college program in the
nation benefiting more than
42,000 New Mexicans this past
fall semester.
Many of those Lobo's
And the students he will
represent to the best of his
ability. Many of you know this
many of you in the committee.
No, Victor. He has helped your
constituents. He has major voice
and perspectives heard on the
4th 4th floor. He always made
himself readily available, no
matter the hour of the day, he
is ready to demonstrate that to
our lobos and make sure the
student voices actually always
the center of every conversation
at the University of New Mexico.
Thank you for your time today
and allowing me to voice my
support. Madam Chair.
Thank you. Cabinet secretary.
now let the record show that
there were two others who had
wanted to speak representative
Bill Armstrong and Governor
Craig 10 of the Pueblo of
Pictoris. I'm going to go to the
members in. I mean to the
audience. Anyone in the
committee here in favor of this
country, please raise your hand.
Yeah.
Very good. Anyone online?
Anyone here not in favor in
opposition of this country.
Saying none any online.
Thank you. I'll go to questions
and comments from the committee.
Senator McKenna.
Ah, Um, thank you. Vice chair
and Madam chair. Thank you,
Senator Worth for
supporting Mr Reyes for this.
Um, It's an incredible, um
Responsibility. Thank you for
stepping up, Mr Reyes, and I
know public services in your
blood. I saw it.
Um, in my capacity here in the
Legislature and how you worked
for the governor.
Um, I enjoyed our conversation
the other day. Thank you for
contacting me.
Um And I can tell, Um madam
Chair vice chair and senator
than Mr Reyes.
Doesn't seek a title. He seeks
responsibility.
And that's something that's very
evident with my talking with him
and observing him.
Um So, Mr Chair and senator I
really depend upon a student. A
student representatives such as
yourself.
To truly represent you and M
students and teaching
assistance. Um, I regard that
they deserve more
acknowledgement, more benefits
and more compensation. And so
you've got a lot of your
colleagues depending upon you to
voice those real concerns.
They are, after all our future
educators at the university and
other higher education
institutions.
And our leaders and I regard
that they need more respect.
So with that madam chair, vice
chair and Senator worth fully,
um, support this conferee.
Senator neighbor.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Care and Victor.
I, too appreciate you and
Listening to us particularly,
uh, you know, from the minority
perspective on many issues, and
you were a a person that was
willing to meet with us and to
communicate our ideas and
thoughts to the governor's
office, and we appreciate that I
enjoyed working with you for for
a couple of years there.
Um, I do have one question and
would like your greatest
Do you view the, uh
Library materials at the law
school as resources.
Of the students of the faculty.
Or maybe a greater, uh
Uh,
Segment.
Maybe the bar.
Or the public generally.
Madam Chair, Senator neighbor,
I I would without question say
that they are resources and
assets for the entire
communities as the only law
school in the state of New
Mexico. I think that the the
materials that African attained
within the University of New
Mexico School of Law's library
should be accessible Certainly
to members of the bar, but I
think to the wider community.
Mr Chair, and Mr Reyes. I'm
pleased to hear that and you
know when
Uh Dean Washburn was dean of the
Union law school. He went around
the state and made sure that uh,
that everyone knew that they
were welcome, and particularly
the Boris OC ations and made it
Very welcoming for members of
the bar to utilize that facility
and encourage the public to do
so as well. And three weeks ago
I went up to work at the U. N. M
law school and as I went up to
the door, uh, I was asked, you
know what my purpose was, and I
said, Well, I need to do some
work in the library.
And I was told that it was for
students only, and I was
saddened to hear that.
And I would hope that you would
use your influence to maybe make
that change back to the way that
Dean Washburn had it several
years ago. I understood why it
was maybe closed during Covid,
But I think we're beyond beyond
that. And I would hope that you
would use your influence to
change that policy because I
too believe that the taxpayers
support the university. The
taxpayers pay for the
The materials that are in not
only just the law library but
all the libraries and I would
hope that our institutions of
higher learning would would make
those Ah
Libraries available to the
public, and I was
I wasn't. Uh
You know tremendously upset, but
I was very disappointed to say
the least. That that you know, I
was not able to go in and work
for a couple hours before the
basketball game, So I hope
you'll pass that along. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and thank you, Mr
Reyes for stepping forward.
Thank you. Very well qualified.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
And
Victor, I've seen you in this
building for many years.
And I think the work as
representative neighbor. Excuse
me, Senator neighbor.
You mentioned you're able to
work with both sides of the
aisle have seen that you're
responsive. You do listen.
And I think that's something
that's very important for the
position that you're about to.
Officially, um
Be confirmed into
And as a question that was your
question, mr Chair, But more of
a statement is that the student
That sits on the board of
Regions.
Is critical.
The institution is supposed to
work.
Four.
The students.
The institution.
Needs to make changes.
That are necessary to address
the concerns of students.
And there's a whole host of them
over the years.
And I know that over the years
Mr Terror for the members who
set on that board of regions and
there, I've seen several
Sometimes I don't listen.
Sometimes become kind of click
ish.
And I think, really don't
address the concerns of the
students at the university.
And I realized as a flagship
institution.
There's a whole host of other
issues, which is phenomenal for
the state. I agree, but your
role as a student region
Is to challenge the others on
the board also
Um, Mr Chair. I would
You know, and and again. You
have us here in the Legislature
to help and to work with you.
You know us. So you know who to
call some of us. You have easy
access to
Please don't forget that.
Um
I know you're gonna do a
wonderful job.
In your representation.
But please don't forget.
Those who and I don't like to
really use the word any more of
a minority status of students.
Um, is supposed to be a Hispanic
serving institution.
And when some of us look at the
institution, it's not municipal
in the medical school.
Health Sciences Center.
Is in with many of the
departments.
Where
There needs to be a real focus
and not just using the numbers
of Hispanic students but really
serving Hispanic students.
And at some point, Mr Chair. I'd
like to sit down with you and
give you a list that I have seen
and others who have advocated
for some changes.
Um
Mr Chair. I wish you the best.
And I look forward again to some
conversations. Um, in the
ensuing future.
And I remember the one l here
Very well. Yeah.
Mr Chair. I wish you the best as
you finish it getting close to
the end. Yeah, a little bit
better.
Um, but I just wish you the
best Mr Chair and, um, just
don't forget who you represent.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator or TCP? No.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Worth for
sponsoring.
Victor, Um and and I apologize.
I did get here a little late, so
you may have covered this. And
if so, just say already touched
on that and I'll get the
information from others. But
your predecessor was as a
student. First of all, are there
is there just one student region
on the board?
And I'm sure Senator. Yes, sir.
Your predecessor on the on the
border regions as a student
Regent.
Was a medical student.
And he did a great job. I mean,
I enjoyed numerous contacts with
him and and we worked on a
couple of things together.
But it strikes me that now
you're a law student.
And
Your dilemma is going to be to
represent the full spectrum.
Of the student body.
Undergraduates, medical
students those in the two year
programs.
The whole the whole gamut of
what a large research based
university serves.
I didn't have you made plans for
how you're going to get input
regularly from the
undergraduates, for example.
Who for two regions in a row,
now will will not have ready
access. Mr Vice Chairman,
Senator I did touch briefly
about on it on my remarks, but
I'm happy to touch on it again
because I do think it is very
important. I I've had
conversations with the
leadership from S U and M and
other undergraduate leaders on
campus about my commitment to
making sure that their voices
are held. There's an office in
the student union building
that's gone largely unused
That's dedicated to the student
regent. I'm committed to having
regular office hours there to
make sure that I can that I'm
available that
Um, accessible. I want to meet
not only with undergraduate
students on main campus, but
undergraduate students, no
matter where they maybe even if
they're on our branch campuses
across their across the state.
Beginning and you know, hoping
to transfer to main campus at a
later time. That's very
important to me. I hope that one
of the hallmarks of the way that
I have done businesses being in
community being present in
spaces and I don't want that to
change When I if I'm so lucky
enough to have the opportunity
to serve in this position, so
whether it's attending regular
meetings of student government
leadership, whether it's having
those regular office hours
meeting people individually, one
on one going to different events
and opportunities to listen. I'm
committed to doing that.
At work.
Mr Chairman and Victor. Thank
you that that's great and
You know, in terms of Europe,
knowledge of state government
and your ability to make, uh,
ready access for student issues
to the Legislature to the
executive. I think you're
wonderful choice, So I wish you
every every success in your role
and look forward to seeing you
flourish, not just as a region
that as a lawyer
I was gonna preface my remarks
by what the heck? I don't know
if we need do we actually need
more lawyers. But anyhow, have
you thought of social work as an
alternative? Yeah. You know, I
don't think I can escape doing
some kind of social work and
constituent services, no matter
what. My title is so wonderful
Answer. Thank you. Thank you,
sir. Senators, Delfonics.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um Mr Chair
Senator, whereas I consider
Victor a friend and so I'm very
pleased to support him in this,
uh, position and Victor. I'm
wondering if you have shared
with everybody about your
passion for drama and acting,
and he's been seen in several
productions around the state and
especially here in Santa Fe, and
he's very good.
I think, um and following up
with some of the comments about
representing the students, I
just had a
Deja vu conversation with David
Benavidez, who's an attorney and
works with the USA, Kias and
Water rights and
When I was at the university, I
was on the faculty
representation counselor, the
faculty Senate whatever, and he
was one of the student body
representatives. And so
together, we rabble roused, and
he will have some insight as to
Not the issues of the day, then
that have not gone away.
Whether it is, uh, graduate
teaching assistant salaries,
whether it's unionization,
whether it is opening the law
library, I was shocked to hear
that it's not open to everybody
because it's not just attorneys
who actually do some legal
research while they're in their
education, So that disturbs me,
and I hope the president of the
university's listening to this
Um, that concerns me. But
congratulations, and I think you
will do a good job, but we will
be watching. I would expect no
less. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Stewart. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Thanks to
both of you. It's hard not to be
repetitive because we all know
you and we're so happy that
you're doing this. I was going
to talk about your artistic
nature. I've seen you in some of
your performance is not fully
but online.
Points, so
You know, I think bringing
things like that to work like
this expense. Everyone's
knowledge. Um you know what? I'm
I'm also an actress myself
before. This work, of course,
takes every bit of time. Energy
out of you, Um, I was in place
and I choke around that
You know, I used my acting
skills in the roundhouse because
kind of like the theater of the
absurd
place. I like to watch the best
because it's so reminiscent of
what we do up here. I just want
to say, Mr vice chair that I
just think you have the perfect
background for this because
you've been in government. You
understand what we do up here?
And you're just so easy to work
with Republicans, Democrats, so
you really do just it, Bill. I
think so. Thank you for wanting
to do this and for your actions
so far in your continuing to be
involved in state government, So
thank you for that.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you See no further
questions or comments. I just
want to make one comment. Victor
is I have the pleasure to work
with you, both as a county
commissioner and as a senator,
and in both roles you understood
the needs and everything that
comes with rural New Mexico
role. New Mexicans are a little
bit different. And so in my
district, I do have the
University of New Mexico, Los
Alamos.
Where sometimes we don't feel
connected to Main campus. So my
main ask for you is because you
understand rural New Mexico that
you include us and don't forget
us. We're gonna be working on a
funding formula with the Cabinet
secretary just to give you a
quick update. We took a snapshot
of our enrollment during one of
the largest fires in northern
New Mexico.
Enrollment numbers were low, and
that's how we get our funding
based off of that enrollment
number and said, like to sit
with you offline and let you
know what we're going to be
doing with the Cabinet secretary
to try to remedy that. So that
way, the University of New
Mexico Los Alamos gets the
funding that deserved to them
and the students and with that
committee what is the will of
the committee?
Moving. Do pass by Senator
Stewart. If I can have a roll
call, please.
Senator Baca is excuse. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes? Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Morris's excuse.
Senator Nibert. Senator Nyberg
votes Yes, Senator or cheesy
Pinot Senator or GC. Pinot
votes? Yes, senator. Petals.
Excuse, Senator Stefan IX,
Senator Stefanik votes? Yes,
Senator Stewart. Senator Stewart
was yes, Senator. Her me. Oh,
yes, Senator. Heard me of us.
Yes, Senator. Doig. Senator, Do
you hate votes? Yes. Victor with
eight in favor of this
confirmation will see you later
this afternoon in the Senate
chamber for the full
confirmation. Congrats.
Relations. Thank you. Members of
the committee.
Okay,
Committee before I move on
breakfast has been provided for
committee members by Mr Vince
Martinez, who is the senior
government relations advisor or
tristate generation and
transmission and Madam protest,
You'll be happy to know that
there's the gluten free option
for you in the bed right under
your desk. And so we're gonna
move on to the next item on our
agenda. Who is William Wessler?
Has been appointed to the New
Mexico State Police Department.
I'm going to ask that Senator
Worth State to also introduce
this country.
Good morning, Senator. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Um
It's my lucky morning because I
have three terrific conference
me in the next two.
Both have worked in the same
agency starting
From the bottom all the way to
the top, and I'm particularly
pleased this morning, uh, to
present William Weisler for
chief of the New Mexico State
Police Department of Safety.
As I mentioned.
AH, chief has been working for
the state police.
For his whole career. Basically,
he started as a recruit all the
way back in August of 2002 and
worked his way up as a
patrolman, an agent, a sergeant
lieutenant captain from 2016 to
2019.
Then he was the major from 2019
to 2021, the deputy chief 2021
to 2023 and has been serving as
the chief since June of 2023.
I just I will tell you in my
Workings with the chief this
session. I've had a chance to
interact with him on a number of
different things, and I have
found him to be incredibly open
and willing to work
collaboratively. Uh and even
when we've got some
disagreements on certain bills,
including one of mine working to
get to a constructive solution.
So I think, obviously when you
are managing a department of
this size
Um
All the way up to 800
individuals. It takes someone
with a unique set of skills to
do that, and I think this is a
terrific appointment by the
governor. I'm happy to present
Chief here this morning or his
hearing for confirmation
to the to the to the chief.
Welcome to call him the chief
even been sworn in yet you know,
the chief
Ah!
Madam chair, vice chair members
of the committee worth Thank
you.
Um, I want to first off thing by
start off by thanking my sponsor
for his assistance. Um, I would
like to take a moment to thank
all the committee members. Um
I had very worthwhile
conversations with many of many
of you over the past week and
look forward to having many more
productive conversations in the
future.
But also like to take a moment.
Thank all the people who helped
me get to this position here
today. It wasn't for them. I
would not be able to do any of
this. Um, first off my my wife,
Martha is in the crowd.
Um, She's supported me
throughout my career and and is
quite literally the only reason
that I have made it to where I
am today. Two amazing Children.
Madeline and Rowan are also
here.
Inspired me to go out and do my
part to make this state the best
that it can be.
And all the staff who do the
real work day in and day out,
many of which I'm lucky enough
to have had come and support me
here today.
You heard a little bit about me
from the senator this morning
and I will be happy to answer
any questions you are you all
may have here shortly.
First, though I'd like to take a
moment to discuss the position.
I am seeking confirmation in and
the outstanding agency that that
position has the honor of
leading
I spent my entire adult life.
As part of the New Mexico state
police.
I spent my entire life. Uh, in
New Mexico. I'm a native New
Mexican.
Um, so I was humbled to be
chosen as the 23rd, chief of the
state police.
And given this opportunity by
the governor and by Cabinet
Secretary Jason Bowie.
New Mexico State police have a
proud history of service and
tradition.
Black and Gray is a source of
pride for the citizens of this
great state.
The people of this state depend
on us to provide him with safe
communities where they can live
their lives.
Raise their Children.
And pursue their hopes and
dreams.
It is a dynamic time in both our
society and in the law
enforcement profession.
Society is changing.
Technology is rapidly evolving.
With the need for public safety.
An honorable men and women to
serve has never been greater.
I believe the particulars of
what law enforcement looks like
to enter 20 years in the future,
maybe different than today.
But the pride and tradition
Of the state police will remain
It's my duty to make sure that
it endures.
Despite what some naysayers may
claim, I firmly believe is an
exciting time to be a police
officer and especially great
time to be a member.
Of this agency.
Today's officers will do things
and have access to capabilities
Previous law enforcement
generations would never have
dreamed.
For those who want to positively
impact the future of this state.
Now is that moment.
We are realizing there is far
more needed to accomplish the
Police as a team and the public
safety requires a team effort.
We look to merge the tradition
of the past with the potential
of the future to raise the bar
and be an example of what a Law
enforcement agency of the future
should look like.
I am thankful for the
opportunity to guide this great
agency, and we'll work my
hardest to never let the state
down.
I know the road will not be
easy.
But we should never expect it to
be
I did not get into this
profession.
Because it was easy.
I got into it, knowing it would
be hard, but knowing
That it was a noble cause.
A state police. We know that we
stand on the shoulders of those
who came before us. It is our
duty to build the foundation for
those who will come next.
Chief Tim Tim Johnson handed
this agency over to me in a
great position with an excellent
trajectory for future success.
Now it is my job to continue
pushing this agency forward.
The success of state police is
due to the hard work and
dedication of some of the people
of the people in this room.
The people patrolling the
roundhouse outside.
And those who are out guarding
our communities Day and night.
I will one day leave this
agency, but the black and gray
will remain.
My goal is to leave it even
better than the great condition.
I found it in.
That should be the goal for all
of us.
I am confident that we are
creating the success of
tomorrow.
I am very well versed in what
other agencies are doing around
the country.
And the challenges law
enforcement bases around the
nation.
I can tell you that this agency
the New Mexico State police that
the leading edge when it comes
to innovation, forward, thinking
and stealing the highest levels
of professionalism.
This legislative body has done a
great deal to help the state
police moved boldly into the
future.
We were one of the first
statewide agencies in the
country that body cameras
You are funded that and we
implemented it even before it
was a statewide law. And I thank
you.
Body cameras have been an
outstanding tool and displaying
the great work that my officers
do every day.
Helping show a more human side
of the things that we regularly
deal with.
We are among the great best
trained agencies in the country
when it comes to crisis
intervention, due in large part
to funding that you provided
We have technological projects
coming online like our statewide
intelligence led policing
project that will be beyond any
state currently has and serve as
a model for others to follow.
On behalf of the state police. I
thank you for your support.
Hopefully, we get your support
today. At the end of the day,
the goal for myself and the
people and the goal for my
people. It comes down to a few
simple things.
Be good.
Do good.
Remember who you represent?
Make your family and your state
proud.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Now we do have
organized support. You helped me
identify the three who will
speak on your behalf from your
list.
All three will have two minutes
and I'm gonna start off with
Secretary Jason Bowie Department
of Public Safety.
Who's Who's joining us via zoom.
Good morning, Cabinet secretary.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr Vice Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Jason
Bowie and I serve as the cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety. Today. I advocate
for confirmation of Troy
Whistler is the chief in New
Mexico State. Police believe
that Troy's extensive experience
spanning over two days decades
long enforcement coupled with
his academic achievements,
Really uniquely uniquely
qualified him for this role, and
you can see the resume in front
of you. But in front of the
resume, um, beyond the resume, I
wanted to share some personal
experience that illustrates
Roy's invaluable contributions
in 2021. When I assumed my
position is with GPS of the
secretary choice, served as the
interim deputy secretary of that
particular time, and he played
it.
Pivotal role in facilitating my
transition was really his
guidance, his expertise and his
willingness to assist
completely selfless and
instrumental in ensuring my
success and navigating the
complexities of state government
and DPS is leadership during my
transition was really invaluable
and deeply, deeply appreciated.
I wanted to start out with that
fast forward to almost two years
later.
In the spring of 2023 when it
came time to select any chief
medical state police choice
track record really spoke for
itself. We convened an unbiased
interview panel. We comprise
that panel of distinguished
outside law enforcement
leadership from New Mexico and
Colorado and Troy received
really unanimous recommendation
from those law enforcement
professionals. It was the
governor's decision to entrust
him with this significant
responsibility that really
underscored the confidence
placed in his abilities.
And since that time, almost
seven months now, uh, it's been
since he's been in that position
is really hit the ground
running. I've really been
impressed with his ability to
lean in to the challenges across
New Mexico. Choice vision for
the state police prioritize the
community engagement, crime
suppression, innovation of
building a strong partnership
within the department itself.
His leadership style character
categorized and, uh, as the kind
ability and steadfast focus has
earned him the respect and
admiration of his colleagues.
And certainly he has my
admiration and respect alike.
Sense of his appointment in June
of 2023 chief wheels has
demonstrated a proactive
approach by personally
connecting with all the officers
across the states. As you may
know, we have 12 districts
across state and Mexico and the
chief schedule and attend the
district meetings and all 12
districts doing so insured.
Thank you. Kevin it Secretary in
the U.
Thank you.
Jason Greenlee, chief deputy
district attorney, Second
Judicial District.
Hello.
My name is Jason Greenlee. I'm a
chief deputy district attorney
and brother, Leo County. Um,
immediately prior to that, For
three years, I was privileged to
work as the general counsel for
the Mexico Department of Public
Safety, which is where I got to
know Troy Whistler.
And I will say that in my in my
dealings with him three weeks
slur is as smart a cop as I've
ever met in a D a for almost 15
years, and he's just as sharp as
they come.
He also just has tremendous
character. When I was thinking
about how I could summarize how
I feel about
Troy Whistler in two minutes or
less. I would say this
Um, I think it's lost on no one
right now. In society. There are
a lot of challenging
conversations going on around
law enforcement.
And the things that are
happening in our society with
law enforcement.
Um, when I think of how I tell
my own Children
Um, but they can look up to
cops. They can trust the police
that there are really admirable
men and women.
Doing this job every day to keep
them safe. Troy Whistler is a
sort of person I think about,
and I think people that get to
know Troy Whistler. That's how
they'll think about him as well.
So thank you very much.
Thank you and the third person,
Larry Hernan.
Thank you, madam. Chair members
of the committee, uh, Larry
Haran.
And I'm really proud to stand up
here today when chief asked me
to speak on his behalf. I don't
think he understands what an
honor that is for me to be able
to do that.
And what I would tell you is
when I think of chief Whistler
because I've dealt with him on
several issues.
We started his professional
colleagues. I consider him a
dear friend.
And I think I can't think of
anybody better to be chief of
the state police the first two
things he said when he gave his
speech to you was he talked
about his family. He talked
about the people who work for
him.
That exemplifies a great leader.
And I think chief Whistler
carries himself with honor
integrity, steadiness and a calm
that is perfect for somebody you
want to see, leading to New
Mexico State police law
enforcement today is a tough
job, and it's even tougher than
it was before. When I was in law
enforcement. I've been out for
about 14 years I would be
Um, excuse me.
Chief Whistler balance his
family and his professionalism.
even when he's up here in the in
the crazy roundhouse during the
session, he makes sure that he
stays connected with his family.
And he also checks in with his
with his people every time he
comes to Santa Fe.
I had a supervisor early in my
law enforcement career. Tell me
you should choose where you
work not based on days, hours,
days off hours or shifts, but
who the supervisor is and who
the leader is. I would be
honored if I ever had an
opportunity to work for Chief
Whistler. I urge your
confirmation. Thank you.
Thank you and for the record,
not speaking. But just for the
record, Raul about the FBI
special agent in charge from
Alburquerque signed up, Speak on
your behalf.
L'park, AJ 14 and Tim Johnson
with that, Is there anyone in
the committee room in favor of
this country? If you can raise
your hand, okay.
You know, we do have a couple
more minutes. Tim Johnson, if
you want to come and speak for a
couple of minutes.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. I wasn't expecting to
do this today. But this will be
easy. I've known Troy. I think I
met him.
We're both criminal agents in
2004.
Um
Long time ago. He's he's moved
up as I've moved up when I got
the chief's job in 2019. I
brought him to be part of my
staff.
And, uh, we couldn't be in a
better place.
Far smarter than I ever was
better worker, all the things
that everybody has said, Um, I'm
not the government governor may
have missed on me.
She didn't miss with Troy. I can
assure you on that, um she hit
that one out of the park. And so
I believe the troops of the
state police and the citizens
that we serve.
Are in good hands and she
couldn't have made could have
made a better picking. Neither
could you today. So thanks for
the time and hopefully we
congratulate him here in a
minute.
Thank you so much. Anyone in
support of the country via zoom
Anyone in the committee room in
opposition of the country.
Saying Not. What about the A
zoom?
And with that we're going to go
to questions or comments from
the committee and I'm going to
start with senators to phonics.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator for bringing this
comfrey. Um
Uh, forward And I think Mr
Weisler for coming to visit with
me and we discussed a few things
and I'd like for you to comment
on that those, um we had
discussed his handling of drugs
in the communities, domestic
violence and mental health. So
could you just comment on any of
those issues for all of us to
understand your positions?
Madam chair members of
committee. Uh Senator Stefan IX.
Um so you over the over the past
year, we've done a couple of
things specifically related to
those items. Um, on the crisis
intervention front. Um
You know, in part with funding
from the Legislature. We're in
the process of having the entire
department trained with advanced
crisis intervention. So this is
in addition to the crisis
intervention training that they
normally receive in the academy.
Um, I think we're about 88% of
the department is done right
now. We'll have 100%. The
department trained here in the
next couple. Um, next couple of
months. Um, I think you've seen
some of the, uh
Benefits of that. We recently
released our 23 2023 statistics.
And while we had a sizable
increase in enforcement, we also
had a sizable drop in uses of
forest. Um, I think that's due
in part to the increased
training that we have had
Specifically related to drugs.
We've done some restructuring
within state police, um
Created crime Suppression
Bureau. We've been, um,
conducting proactive operations
geared specifically towards that
and specifically in rural areas
that don't necessarily have the
law enforcement resources to
adequately deal with the drug
problem. Um, we've conducted
operations. Uh, just in the last
couple of months. Espanola,
Socorro, Clovis.
Um, we don't want to Pecos. Not
too long ago, um, might be
needing to give some more
attention to that area in the
near future. Um, but that is one
of our goals for 2024 is to get
around to a lot of the rural
area agencies and give them some
extra attention in this area.
Um, hope that hope that answers
your question or anything else
you'd like me to touch on. So,
um, thank you for those answers.
So, Mr Chair
Um
What do you have to, uh, gained
permission from local law
enforcement enter into their
jury jurisdiction to, for
example, intervene on the drug
front or can you just go in and
do what is necessary?
Madam chair, vice chairman of
the committee centers to Phonics
So no in New Mexico State police
has full authority for all state
laws and all state properties.
So there's there's no issue
there. We can do whatever law
enforcement whatever area we see
fit.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I'm not
sure did you mention in your
remarks domestic violence? I
know you talked about crisis
intervention, but
Yes. So I didn't specifically
mentioned domestic violence.
But, um, that has that has been
a big emphasis, and that's also
there's a lot of that, um, mixed
in with the crisis, intervention
training, and so that does
continue to be an area of
emphasis. Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, but very much, Mr.
Chair. Thank you both for
coming. Thank you, Senator
McKenna.
Thank you. Vice Chair, Madam
chair and thank you again,
Senator Worth for for supporting
this contrary.
Um, chief, I was really
impressed with our conversation
the other day.
And it's really evident to me.
With those few minutes that we
had that you conveyed a very
calm temperament.
And yet you have a job that has
extraordinary.
Highs. Um and so it's really
impressive to hear your
colleagues and those you've
worked with for many years to
confirm that
Um, that's really
An exceptional trait and
characteristic for the demands
of the job that I believe you're
going to be converted in.
Um, I also enjoyed our
conversation about some
legislation that Senator Bert
Representative Hernandez and I
sponsored last year and that's
something I regard as urgent
public safety and that is
ensuring that our law
enforcement and first responders
I can't talk to each other
immediately, and you and I
talked about the digital trunked
radio communication fees and how
that's still something that we
need to address. We're thankful
for the governor.
Um, sponsoring it this past
year, but we want to make sure
that
You and your colleagues have it
for the future. And so I look
forward to working with you on
that this year.
Um
Vice chair, Madam chair and
Senator, Um
And chief something that has
Developed for me as a question I
want to pose to you.
And we didn't discuss it when
you and I spoke
And that is
Hmm. Equation of law enforcement
and people of color.
Um, like many people, I was
horrified with the murder of
George Floyd.
Um, it's something I'm never
gonna forget. And
I'm I'm white, Hispanic and
American Indians. So I'm
I'm very sensitive to what some
of our people of color have gone
through in the way of racism.
And some law enforcement.
Um
Madam Chair, vice chair and
senator, chief.
Could you address
What training the state police
uses.
When dealing with
People of color.
Um
Especially in light of the
murder of George Floyd. Thank
you.
Chair, Madam Chair members of
the committee, Senator McKinnon.
Thank you for your question. Um
So no, I'll be obviously any
sort of
Racial Ah,
Impropriety or actions against
any, uh
Any group because of their race
has no place in law enforcement,
and we were all horrified to
see. Ah, what did happen in
2020 in the George Floyd
incident?
Um, you know, state police does
have, uh anti bias and racial
profile training. Um, that all
of our officers
Um
You know, must must take part in
civil rights training. In
addition to just the regular
civil rights training as part of
that there's also a component.
You know, when it comes to our
crisis intervention are all our
various types of advanced
training that are involved in
that, um
But most importantly, it's that
Mhm to have a culture
established.
That any sort of misbehavior,
whether it's racial, or whether
any any sort of inappropriate
paper that is not that will not
be tolerated and that there will
be consequences that that
happens in the individuals that
do engage in that kind of
behavior do have a swift and
certain punishment. Um, I mean,
one of the things I think
That also helps a great deal
with state police is, you know
the makeup of our department? I
mean, we're minority majority
apart department. I mean, 60.
5% of our department. 60 to 65%
is minority. And so you know our
department.
Is made up of individuals from
our communities. New Mexico is a
diverse state in Mexico State
police is a diverse department.
You know, we have
A lot of very large Native
American American portion of our
agency. Um, Hispanic, I I think
that that's um I think that's
our our greatest strength when
it comes to serving those
communities across the state.
Met him chair vice chair,
senator chief.
Thank you And I'm I wrote down
the training components that the
state police has
And that gives me a lot of
solace and, um
Really proud that you'll be
heading that up and
Um, providing the consequences.
When anyone fails to do their
diligence to serve everyone and
respect everyone.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Neighbor.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just like
to note that that was kind of
thing. A coyote ever said about
a blue Wildcat.
Um, Mr Chair, and, uh, Mr
Whistler, I'm I'm pleased to see
you step into this role. I know
that we have had
Challenging times and all law
enforcement offices throughout
the state have had
Uh, difficulty and challenges
and in
Recruitment, filling positions
and really, uh, dealing with
staffing for a variety of
reasons.
I hope that we have
Giving you some tools to, uh,
help your department. Uh,
specifically fill out its ranks
and
I would like to hope that that
will also have an impact on
local law enforcement as well.
And so my question would be, uh,
Mr Chair and Mr Whistler. What
do you see your role in working
with the local law enforcement
agencies not only in terms of
enforcing the laws of the state,
but but
In terms of building
relationships and maybe helping
them fill out their vacant
positions and and dealing with
the issues that they face.
I'm sure vice chair members of
the committee senator neighbor.
So it's critically important
that staple and state police, uh
That we have.
Excellent relationships with our
local communities. State police
uh, especially in the rural
areas. There's not usually a lot
of us around, so we're very
dependent upon our fellow
agencies as our rural
communities are dependent upon
us, right. A lot of those rural
areas only have one or two
officers out on shift, and so
The job of public safety cannot
get done in those communities
without those relationships, and
so that's something that I don't
always
Very much prided myself upon on
having those relationships,
whether it be, um with the
Sheriff's Association in
various, um various sheriffs
around the state and municipal
league. I mean, I was just at
the municipal, uh, municipal
Chiefs of police meeting earlier
this week.
Um
We
Have to have good relationships
with the because many of those
instances it's important that
Staples State police has we have
the resources that they don't
necessarily having a lot of
those communities right when
they have major crime.
Um, I mean, we've seen a
considerable increase the last
couple of years and in murders
and other major crimes that
we're taking over as primary
because those agencies are
lacking the resources. And so we
have. We have filled that gap.
But because of that, I think
that goes to show the importance
on state Police decide that we
help those areas.
Uh, have staffing and and that
they are able to recruit.
Because
It doesn't help us like we we
need them to have adequate
resources. Otherwise it falls on
us. It's a team effort and like
and
It is important.
Um
You know, there's not enough law
enforcement in this state in
general, so it's important that
we all work together to get all
the resources that we can
Um
And so we try to help state
police does everything we can to
help those local agencies.
Mr Chair and
Mr Whistler. I'm pleased to hear
that and you know, at least
In my area. Um, they're in the
Pecos Valley.
We have seen a lot of
Mexican drug cartel activity.
Not only would
Respect to drugs, but with
respect to human trafficking,
and that does take coordinated
effort.
And
Yet it's something that I think
we need to get a handle on. It's
very sad to see some of the
things that are going on and
some of the things that are
being done to people.
I'm pleased to see some of the
successes that that you and
other agencies have had that
cooperation. We need that
comments. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, senator or cheesy
Pinot.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Senator worth and as chief. I,
too, enjoyed the conversation we
had before.
In my office before this
Earlier this week.
Uh,
But there was something that
came up as I read your
Your resume. And as I listened
to you earlier that I wanted to
comment about because we didn't
have a chance to talk about
that. I just didn't think about
it.
But and I'm paraphrasing you
hear someone, but you reminded
us that fighting crime is going
to take more than a police
force.
And I see in in your resume that
that you
You live your words.
You're also involved with
You're on the board of Sandia
Prep.
And and you're a little league
coach.
And he used basketball. I can't
think
Of any better way of fighting
crime, then doing those two
activities.
And whatever you're doing is a
As a as a head of the police
department is great.
That's where we really are going
to see. A change in crime is
when many more people get
involved with our young people.
I think it's it's wonderful, and
I can't think actually.
Of a better preparation for
leading and organizations and
being a little
Having been one myself.
If you can get past the parents
of Little League Little League
team, you can handle anything.
But I really appreciate your
commitment to the
To the work.
The entire package of the work.
And I really your great success
in the years to come. Thank you,
Mr Chairman.
Senator Stewart
Mr Chairman, I move that do pass
on this excellent candidate.
Very good motion for a do past
If I can have a roll call vote,
Senator Baca is excused. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes? Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator.
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Morris's Excuse. Senator Nibert.
Senator Nyberg Boats? Yes,
Senator. RTZ Pinot Senator or
TCP. No votes. Yes, Senator
Pirtle is excuse. Senator Stefan
IX. Senator. Stop Stefan
Exports. Yes, Senator Stewart,
Senator Stewart votes Yes,
Senator. Harm Eo Senator Hermie
about Yes, Senator Doig.
Senator. Do it votes? Yes.
With vote in favor of your
confirmation. You will move on
to the Senate floor for a full
confirmation. Congratulations.
Next gonna move on to the next
contrary, which is the
confirmation of Kerry Armijo as
Cabinet secretary change to the
healthcare 30 department and I'm
gonna yield back to Senator
worth.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee.
As I mentioned, I am really
honored to present all three
confirmations this morning. But
like the last confirmation
Ah, carry army. It was someone
who spent her whole career and
human services 23 years at the
department.
Ah, working our way up seeing
the different programs and
having a hands on approach to
those different programs, and
this is one of the most
important jobs and state
governments.
Um
It serves more than 1.1 million.
Customers all of many
constituents of ours. 1500
employees and an annual budget
of 10.5 billion with a B dollars
And it's in the transition stage
as we move towards the
healthcare authority, which is
going to happen later this year.
And so having someone of this
caliber with this level of
experience, um
I just think it's something we
should be very thankful for. And
so I'm not going to go through
all the specifics, but I I think
you'll get a sense of of why
this is such a good appointment
by the governor. And I just
think we should all be very
thankful that she has been
willing to dedicate her career
to a tough a tough job. This is
a tough
Agency for sure. And so I'm
happy this morning to present
Kerry Armijo to be secretary of
this department. Thank you.
Good afternoon, madam chair and
members of the committee.
It's truly an honor, and I'm
very humbled to be here today to
ask for your support as the
governors nominee to lead the
New Mexico Human Services
Department and future Healthcare
Authority would like to say
thank leader worth. He's my
senator here in Santa Fe for
sponsoring my confirmation. I'm
grateful to the committee for
its time today, and I'd like to
express my deep gratitude to
each of you for your leadership
and serviced the wonderful state
of New Mexico.
I would also like to thank the
incredible group of friends,
family and colleagues who are
here today, showing up on a
Sunday some of them rearranging
travel and other commitments to
voice their support from a
nomination. I really believe
that it takes a village to raise
a leader and each and every
person who is here has played a
role in bringing me to this
table today. I want to recognize
my leadership team for their
unwavering commitment to the
people of New Mexico.
The current and former mentors
in this room, who role modeled
and taught me true leadership
and service, and I want to thank
every single employee of the
Human Services Department for
coming to work every day with
the resolve to serve new
Mexicans with intelligence,
kindness and compassion. They
have really, really hard jobs,
and I work hard because they
work hard.
I'd like to recognize my mom and
dad. Both of them are career
public servants. I watching my
parents, I learned that having a
career in public service is more
of a vocation than a job and
that there's deep, deep sense of
satisfaction to be found in
doing work that has purpose
value and meaning for others.
And finally, I need to recognize
the three people that provide
the core of my support system.
My husband, James, and my two
boys, Henry and Sam.
Over the past year. They have
sacrificed a lot. Um and they
have encouraged me to do this
work when I thought maybe I
couldn't. Um, and because it's
important to me, it has become
important to them. At the end of
the day. My two boys are the
reason that I'm so committed to
making New Mexico a better
place. I want them to grow up in
a community where they will have
every opportunity to thrive and
be healthy.
I am a native New Mexican. I was
born and raised here in Santa Fe
and I began my career at the
Human Services Department nearly
24 years ago.
My first job at the agency was
as the administrative assistant
to the Cabinet secretary, a job
I took because I needed health
insurance after experiencing
some serious health problems in
high school and college.
I found my home working at
Medicaid for nearly 20 years
where I began by developing and
implementing Medicaid, school
based programs and ended as the
acting Medicaid director in
2019.
From there. I was asked to serve
as deputy secretary of the
agency, um, and a role. It was
actually a role it was reluctant
to take initially because it was
so attached to Medicaid and it
wasn't sure if I would enjoy
anything else. But it turns out
that leaving Medicaid was a
great thing. I learned to work
with new teams and identify new
policy reforms, modernizing the
child support program to bring
in more money for kids.
Right setting or major I T
projects so they would be
successful and identifying new
and creative ways to serve our
customers during the pandemic.
The reason I've stayed at H S D
all these years is nuanced. I'm
drawn to the complexity The
daily problem solving and the
constant learning and the
enormous impact of our programs
in the lives of new Mexicans is
never lost on me. I think about
that every time I'm at the
grocery store or at my kids
school, I remember that about
half of the people I see need
our services in order to get
healthcare or put food on the
table.
I consider myself incredibly
lucky to have worked at HST for
almost half of my life, and I've
truly loved every job before I
stand for questions. There are
four commitments that I'd like
to make to all of you today.
First I will always try to do
what's best for our customers.
They are at the heart of what we
do. And I found that keeping
them at the center results in
better questions that are
problem solving better decisions
and better actions. We are not a
perfect agency, and I won't
promise perfection, but I've
learned that staying fixated on
putting the people of New Mexico
first is the best way to make
good decisions and fixed
problems.
Second, I will listen. Stay
curious and be honest. I'm a
person who asks a lot of
questions and seeks out
different points of view and I
will always be transparent and
accountable.
Over the years. I've been
fortunate to have the chance to
work with many of you on
legislation, constituent issues,
policy development and problems.
You're hearing about the agency.
I hope you will continue to
communicate with me and that you
know that you can count on me to
listen and give you an honest
answer every time
Third, I am committed to finding
and lifting up the future
leaders of our agency. I think
it's a testament to the culture
of the department that I've been
able to come up through the
ranks. Um, along the way, I've
had many mentors and leaders who
believed in me, and I will
foster a culture where we can
keep doing the same for our
employees so they can become the
future leaders of state
government.
And finally, I promise to lead
the agency with energy
imagination, intelligence and
love values that a mentor taught
me to break with me to work
every day and to inspect, expect
and inspire in the team around
me.
Thank you again, madam chair and
members of the committee. I'm
humbled by the confidence that
the governor has placed in me to
lead the amazing team of people
at the Human Services Department
and future Health care
authority. I'm grateful for your
support, and I'll be happy to
stand for your questions. Thank
you. Next go to your organized
support, and I'm going to start
with Dr David's Christ.
Ah!
Okay?
Um, Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair,
My Senator, Uh Miss McKenna and
members of the Kim Committee.
Appreciate your service
Appreciate being here today on a
Sunday, Um, just a quick aside.
uh, acting Secretary Armijo used
to joke with me that she didn't
like speaking after me because
she thought
It was a hard act to follow. And
now I know exactly how she
feels. Uh, I think Kerry
articulated a very genuine
honest, humble but accurate
perception of her skill set and
what she can do for the state
and the people of New Mexico or
passion.
For low income families in New
Mexico is clear today and her
comments but has been clear to
me and my 25 years interacting
and when we or another with the
human services Department as
well, And while I think you all
know that she's been the acting
secretary for a little bit over
a year now, after I stepped
down, I think what people don't
realize this. You also
She and I miss Madrid. No.
Castillo Smith were the acting
secretaries of the Human
Services Department during the
Covid pandemic. When I was
absent most of the time, and and
when I did my stint at the
Department of Health
concurrently, and so she's got
the experience to do this job,
she has the compassion and
passion.
To do this job. She's got the
collaborative spirit of working
with people and finding
solutions. That work. Um
For all parties. She's she can
be analytical when necessary,
which, of course I love And, uh
but detail oriented, But at the
end of the day, Kerry has a deep
commitment to getting things
done, And she made reference to
the fact that she's worked with
many of you to get things done.
She was our go to person at HST
to get legislation passed, and,
uh, when I left, she was she was
batting 1000.
In that regard every bell that
she was assigned to carry for
the agency ended up going into
law. So, madam Chair, Mr Vice
chair, tremendous honor to be
here and strongly recommend
Curie for this position. Dr Mike
Richards.
Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair,
Honorable members of the
committee. I'm Michael Richards.
I'm a physician and the senior
vice president of clinical
affairs at the University of New
Mexico health system. And in
that role, I've had many
opportunities to work very
closely with Ms Armijo, both on
health policy issues, issues of
Medicaid finance and through the
Covid pandemic response.
And so today I come to you with
a sincere sense of
responsibility but also great
optimism for healthcare and New
Mexico as I offer my strongest
possible support for Miss Armijo
as the inaugural secretary of
the New Mexico Healthcare
Authority.
Um, her accomplishments and
qualifications for this position
are not just impressive and
impeccable, but they're also a
statement of her dedication to
public service 23 years of
distinguished service with
numerous accomplishments that
that range from transformation
of finance and provider
payments.
Uh, upgrading of the system for
more efficient, a role mint
champion of health care policy
initiatives that have impacted
all of New Mexico.
These are often difficult.
In Takrit.
Um uh,
Um um, policy issues which
require working with multiple
stakeholders, both within New
Mexico, and with our federal
partners. I have seen the impact
of that statewide but as a
health care administrator, I've
also seen the impact of her work
locally.
The university has always
enjoyed a great relationship and
sincerely appreciates the
support that human services
division have provided us. But
in recent examples working with
Miss Armijo, we've been able to
build new programs for
behavioral health and substance
use disorder. She's helped us
focus on building programs for
the developmentally disabled to
include crisis response and
Dental programs. She's looked
for ways for us to support rural
hospitals. Thank you So much for
your comment. Thank you.
Angela Medrano. Madam Chair, Mr
Vice Chair. I'm Angela Medrano,
the retired deputy secretary
from the Human Services
Department. It's an honor to be
with you here with you all here
today.
I have known Kerry Armijo for
over 15 years as a colleague as
a friend, and we have worked
together in various capacities.
Kerry has demonstrated her
commitment to the people. HST
serves with her extensive and
diversified careers You've heard
today, she said. She has a
native new Mexican and
understands the needs and
cultural diversity of the people
of our state.
A few notable accomplishments
that I also want to mention
about carriers that she led the
Medicaid team and implementing
provider rate increases
providers across the state. She
also worked with our federal
partners to streamline Medicaid
eligibility to ensure continuous
Medicaid eligibility for
Children.
Birth to age six. She has also
implemented various program
improvements, as she noted for
the child support payment
program.
And lastly, she has worked
tirelessly to lay the groundwork
for the transition to the new
healthcare authority.
She is expertly utilizing her
knowledge and experience to
continue to move the vision
mission and goals of the Human
Services Department forward and
as she will for the Healthcare
Authority I endorse carry Armijo
for the position of Cabinet
secretary for the New Mexico
Human Services Department. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair.
Members of the committee for
your type.
Thank you. Now I do want to note
that there were three others who
stood who wanted to speak in
support, But I want the record
to show that Cabinet Secretary
Elizabeth Baginski was gonna
speak. Troy Clarke and Bill
Jordan of the New Mexico voices
of Children, but in the essence
of time, I'm just going to have
the records show that you were
here.
So next. I'm going to ask anyone
in the committee room to raise
your hands.
In favor.
And you know, I cabinets Thank
you and Cabinet Secretary. I'm
also going to have you come up
and speak.
Like a true early childhood
educator. I set aside time
That's one minute and 30
seconds. Um good morning, Madam
Chair. I guess it's good
afternoon, Madam Chair and Mr
Vice Chair. Members of the
Committee. I'm Elizabeth
Brigance, Key Cabinet secretary
for the New Mexico early
childhood education and Care
Department, and I stand here
today in strong support of
Secretary designate Army hose
confirmation.
I've had the pleasure of working
closely with Secretary designate
for the past four years and have
seen firsthand how she
exemplifies the core values of a
dedicated and compassionate
public servant. She is honest,
diligent, responsive to the
needs of others and accountable
for actions and decisions in our
work together supporting the HHS
2020 Project secretary designate
Armijo has successfully
navigated complex and
complicated relationships.
With federal government, the
federal government multiple
state agencies in the various
vendors involved in the project
by actively convening executive
leaders holding her own team
accountable for deliverables and
communication and brilliantly
managing our federal
relationship along the way.
Most recently Secretary
designate has been a strong
collaborative partner in our
administration's priority to
enhance the car, a program she's
an active listener problem
solver and used her deep
expertise, experience and
relationships with managed care
organizations to improve the
car, a program I know that
Secretary designate Armijo is
the right woman to lead our
state's new health care
authority or attention to detail
her deep knowledge of health
care delivery and her keen
ability to understand the big
picture.
Will ensure our goals for the
health authority are met, and
new Mexicans will realize the
benefits of having an improved
healthcare system. I urged the
committee to support her
confirmation. Thank you. Thank
you so much in the committee
room. Is there anyone in
opposition of the country?
Saying none. What about online?
Very good on the next go to
questions and comments from the
committee Senators to Phoenix.
Very short comment. I've had the
opportunity Mr Chair and Senator
worth to work with Ms Armijo
over the years, and I appreciate
her.
Dedication. Her skill level has
consistently risen, and I think
she's ready for this great
challenge. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator or TCP? No.
Thank you, Mr Vice Chairman and
Madam chairman and senator worth
again for bringing Kerry's
nomination forward. Um
I just wanted to to say
I really enjoyed it. The
conversation we had about you
know the challenges facing
The
Because we can't even call it a
department anymore. Facing the
authority, Um and I
I just wanted to say how
important it is that you're
taking on the DD program.
The work you did with child
support.
Excuse me confidence that you'll
be able to figure out a way to
fix that program.
But we we we've
We legislators have created a
Extra level of challenge for you
this year.
Because we
Uh, past the
Eight Family Medical Leave
Program Great program badly
needed.
But unless we can figure out a
way to put more money into those
rates
Many of the agency's simply
won't be able to continue to
work with with the
developmentally disabled or some
of the other programs that the
personal care services as well.
So I just want to say thank you
for taking it on. But also if
there's any way we can help you
let us know because it's it's so
urgent that that program
That the rates we pay for that
program get fixed.
A lot of this. These services
have been have suffered.
Does the care that people get
have suffered simply because
they can't attract enough staff.
And and the only way to fix that
is to raise the salaries.
Add the benefits.
We've and and we've been trying
to add benefits.
But if we if we don't give you
the money
Pass on to them.
To fix the salary levels.
They're going to continue to
face the situation where it
makes more sense for people to
work at WalMart were McDonald's,
then then to do the kind of work
that it takes in these in these
agencies.
So I know you're up to that
challenge. But if there's
anything we can do to help you
with that
And met him Vice chairman and
Madam chairman. There is one
other question. I've been
getting a lot of inquiries about
something called C O E.
And I had to ask what is C o e.
And apparently it's category of
eligibility and it is in some
way.
Causing problems with this
transition from the pandemic.
Your expanded Medicaid
eligibility.
To what's going on now, and a
lot of people apparently are
losing benefits.
Because of C O e. Whatever that
is, If you could just address
that and how we can fix that as
fast as possible.
Manage chair, Senator or TCP?
No, thank you for the very fair
question. I know there's a lot
of, um, providers that have been
reaching out with concerns. I'm
we're working with those
provider groups to make sure we
have. We have been working
through lists of eligibility,
um, to meet with those providers
to make sure that we're
reviewing the eligibility of the
DD waiver clients.
This has come up because of the
Medicaid unwinding, which I
think you all know the end of
pandemic era protections that
maintained Medicaid eligibility
have expired. But we are
leveraging. We have not
identified a big systemic issue.
We've seen a handful of cases
where there was maybe a missing
level of care, determination or
the paperwork was not returned
on time. So we are working with
providers. I've got one of my
Deputy secretaries. She's
running point on those. I will
be happy to sit down with the
providers.
Additionally, we are leveraging
every possible federal
flexibility that we can,
including the waiver of a waiver
of asset verification. So for
that population, unfortunately,
we have to verify assets we've
asked. We're implementing a
waiver of that for the
determinations that we can just
keep people covered. This is our
most vulnerable population. It's
very important to me that we
keep them covered.
Um And then we were the first
state to actually request a
waiver of the unwinding itself
for that population. We were in
negotiations with the federal
government on that last week,
and I do anticipate approval of
that.
That's good news. Uh,
Mr Chairman, Vice Chairman and
madam.
Chairman, the the
The point that was raised around
Uh, in one of the constituents
that wrote to me, said, I have
cerebral palsy. That's not gonna
change. Why do I have to go
through annual verifications
that I have still have serious
policy Is there Is there some
way to get a waiver of that or
deal with that In another way,
Madam Chair, Senator or TCP? No,
It's funny that you asked. We
were just talking about that
last week. Um, we it is a
federal requirement to get level
of care determination. Every 12
months. Those level of carers
were also postponed during the
pandemic, and so we've kind of
seen
Some of those issues come up.
I would like to revive that
conversation with the federal
government. We know that people
who have developmental
disabilities. For the most part,
those conditions won't change.
And so if we could just bypass
that, I think it would be really
wonderful for that population
Very willing to revive that.
Thank you. And thank you very
much. Mr Chairman and Madam
Secretary.
Okay?
Big challenges ahead of you, but
I have great confidence in your
ability to to surmount those.
Thank you so much.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you. Vice Chair, Madam
Chair and thank you, Senator
Worth
Um, Secretary designate.
We have not had a cup of coffee
to talk about your job and and
this nomination. However, I feel
like really gotten to know you
because you've made so many
presentations in the Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee.
And I have to say I'm so
impressed with heavy lifts that
you have presented with Bill
after Bill after Bill, I can
just tell you did your homework.
You've had your team help you
with that. And so every
presentation has been on point
and you've been able to ask the
answer every single question
that has come your way.
And some of the bills have been
quite contentious. But you've
just had you just handled it so
well. So much poise, good
temperament. And so I can just
see why those who have testified
on your behalf say what they
did, so it'll be easy for me to
vote for your confirmation.
Thank you. Vice chair, Madam
Chair, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. Do hig.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Senator and
Secretary designate. Uh, this is
something that we had talked
about a little bit when we
visited earlier in the session.
Excuse me.
The end of the session. Crunk is
getting me
Hmm.
Uh huh. But there was a recent
mediation in the Kevin s, Uh
two.
And
Ah, I had heard that there was
some I think.
Uh,
Frustration with HST in that
process. Can you talk a little
bit about that?
I'm sure Madame chair. Thank you
for the question. First of all,
I want to thank you for the
feedback. It's really important
for me to take that feedback and
I will listen to it and I take
it really seriously. Um, if
there's frustration with HST if
we're not being collaborative
enough, that is on me to make
sure that I do the work of right
setting those relationships.
I was a little bit surprised by
the feedback only because we did
negotiate a corrective action
plan over many months and I
showed up at every meeting. I
was participant in every
discussion, and we did walk away
with a corrective action plan
that we agreed upon. Um, so it
was just a little surprised to
hear about the frustration that
hadn't come up, I guess in the
context of the mediation, um
but, um, subsequent to this
hearing, I am absolutely
committed to making sure that we
find the common ground. I think
there's a lot
Of, um
We share a lot of the same
priorities with the plaintiffs
and the co neutrals. Absolutely.
We're committed to doing the
work and I will absolutely reset
the relationship if we need to
do that. Thanks. Great. Thank
you so much.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. Thank
you very much, Um
Mr Vice Chair, Madam Chair
Senator of
I appreciate our time that we
had to chat a bit about, um,
formerly Human Services
Department. Healthcare
Authority. Uh, and I appreciate
your willingness to continue to,
I think uplift the department.
Because there's just so much
work. Um
That you are now undertaking in
many, many different ways.
And I appreciate my colleague,
Senator Enthusiast Pinot for
asking with regards to the DD
waiver.
Um, there are just some have
been so many issues that come
along with it from the
Department of Health.
Um, I think it's oversight and
accountability.
For the population that the DD
waiver works with.
Um, and the families too.
One question specifically that I
wanted to ask. I know that the
Legislature had given money
appropriated money.
For those who provide services,
and I know there's been some
stalling with payments. Where is
that the process is the money
being processed and
You know, given to should I say
matching the intent that the
Legislature had
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez. Can
I just ask? Clarifying question.
Are you talking specifically
about the DD waiver or all of
the provider rate increases?
Well, it would be nice for all
of them. But let me ask
specifically for the DD waiver.
Um Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
There were delays in getting out
the 10. There was 10.2 million.
um, in the budget for the
agency.
Ah, for 2020 this fiscal year FY
24 that there was a delay and I
think the reason for that, um
really illustrates why bringing
The agency is together and
merging DDS D in our agency is
going to be very helpful. We had
some confusion over who is
responsible for what which I
don't think will happen again.
Um, and so we are pending
federal approval for that 10.2
million. It will go out. Um, we
have. We're expecting that
approval imminently. We've been
working with us that the team to
really prioritize working with
our federal partners on that
approval.
Um, and those claims will be
reprocessed retroactively with
no burden the provider so we
will be hopefully getting those
dollars out really soon. And I
apologize. Um
That will not happen again.
There's additional funding. I
believe in house built to for
fiscal year 25 and our plan is
to get those dollars out the
door right away. That will not
happen again. Um, in terms of
the other provider rate
increases that were implemented.
We have executed all of those
$409 million worth of provider
rate increases.
It is a heavy lift to do all of
those, and it did involve some
retroactive claims. Re
processing that has been
completed. I have verified that
myself. I have looked at the
And, um, I appreciate you
sharing that information because
as we have heard over the years,
a lot of the issues that have
affected um those who have
special medical needs, um within
the D D waiver.
And Mr Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
Senator. It's some deep concern
because I know there are a lot
of providers who are not taking
any new persons.
And so where do these persons
go? Where did the families go
for services? Um, and I know
that I think is still a plea for
the Legislature to keep this in
mind as we look at budgets to
being this to my colleagues, but
for the public also to be aware
Um, and for you also Madam
Secretary to be
Um, it's it's so important
because these are persons that
You want to make sure that
there's care provided that
there's accountability also,
that goes with it because once a
parent passes away, this
person's still stay in the care,
and we want to make sure that
it's provided appropriately
safely diligently.
Um, and that that I think that
is the role of the state has to
make sure that this happens
because not everybody is able
body list for those who are in
this room and sitting here at
this table, so just wanted to
plug that.
But I do look forward to
supporting your nomination.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
And then just a quick note for
everyone. We were scheduled to
be on the floor at one that's
been pushed back to 130. So with
that, senator stuff panics.
Mr Chair. Um, I move a do pass a
motion for a do pass by senators
to Phoenix if I could have a
roll call vote.
Senator Baca is excuse. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes? Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes. Votes?
Yes, Senator Morris's excused
Senator.
Neighbor. Yes, Senator Gibert
votes Yes, Senator or TCP? No,
Senator. TCP. No votes. Yes,
Senator. Poodles Excuse Senator
Stefan IX. Senators upon X
votes? Yes, Senator Stewart,
Senator Stewart votes Yes,
Senator. Harm Eo Senator her me
about? Yes, Senator Doig.
Senator. Do it votes? Yes.
Eight voting in favor of your
confirmation. We'll see you
later this afternoon for the
companies.
Thank you, senator. Word for the
three conferees, and I'm next
going to move to the last item
on our agenda, which is the
appointment of Jamison Herrera
to the veteran Services
department. And I'm gonna call
up Senator Pope.
Please make sure you exit
quietly.
It's actually good afternoon,
Senator
Thank you, Mr Chair. Would you
like me to go and get started?
Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair
Committee members today I'm
honored to present to you.
Regular general Jamison Herrera.
Ah, in his confirmation to be
the next secretary for the
Department of Veterans Services.
Um
The general has an extensive
career he has over 34 years.
Military service.
We're talking about.
A new Mexican that started
From the enlisted ranks that you
want as a private and has made
it to become
A regular general and our
National guard.
Um
I got a chance to talk with his
wife this morning.
I've gotten to know him a little
bit the last few years while
serving in the Legislature.
Um, just working on the military
and veterans in term committee.
And I can tell you that
Um
This is a man.
That is all about service.
And serving.
His fellow service members
serving our state and nation.
He has several awards for his
military service, including the
Defense Meritorious Service
medal.
The Meritorious Service Service
medal with four oak leaf
clusters. And for those of you
who are not in the military,
those oak leaf clusters mean you
are receiving that medal,
multiple times.
I know we don't have a lot of
time today, and I just want to
recognize that that I could go
on and on about this contrary.
But what I will say is what I
kind of mentioned before.
Um, I think it's just
An awesome fact to have someone
started E one.
And make the general rank not
for the fact of showing all the
hard work and perseverance he
did to get there.
But we're going to have someone
Who now will be secretary that
will be transitioning to
civilian life.
That will understand what
Enlisted troops.
I have been through because he's
been there.
He's going to understand what
happens at that. Senior N C o
level is going to understand
what's going on at that junior
officer level and what happens
at that flag officer. He's just
going to be a great secretary.
Here in New Mexico.
So once again, I could go on and
on.
Um, but I know we have to get to
the floor and it's more
important to get him confirmed
today. And so with that I would
like to pass it over to General
Herrera.
Our secretary designate for the
Department of Veterans Services
and give him an opportunity.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Uh, committee members for
the opportunity to be here and
Obviously, um and thank you to
senator Pope and all the people
here to support me.
Um, in this confirmation
hearing most my my wife and my
kids are here with me today.
I have my brother and my sister
in law. Several of our military
Personnel here, as well as some
of my teammates from the
Department of Veterans Services
that are that are here to just
to support this, and that means
a lot.
Because we serve
Together to serve our veterans
of the state of New Mexico.
I am a product of New Mexico and
lifelong new Mexican. I grew up
just down in the valley here in
number in New Mexico.
Um
Senator Adamu. We've probably
chewed on some of the same dirt.
Uh,
Uh,
And I say that because I come
from a family of service, my
mother and father were both Navy
veterans. Um, several of my
uncles. My aunts have served
Um
My cousin Steven read off who?
The building Next door is named
after
So I was around service my whole
life.
And understanding that is,
there's something
Greater than yourself. And, um
Biggest thing for me, is it?
I'm here to continue to serve
our veterans 35 years in
uniform.
Has prepared me to understand.
The trials and tribulations of
every service that
Takes the oath to support our
state constitution and our been
blessed with many experiences
throughout my career, as you can
see in my my resume.
I think I'm a very well rounded
candidate. And and I think I've
been training for this job my
whole life.
1986. I was a boy State
delegate, which is an American
Legion program.
The teachers about state and
federal government. Um and that,
I think begin.
The yearning and me to continue
to see the bigger picture.
And I continue in front of here
today to continue to learn.
I feel that, um every day if
you're not learning something
new you've wasted the day.
And
What? I'm I'm learning is that
our veterans and our state are
underserved.
And I'm listening to those
voices from from our state and
all of our constituents in the
state of New Mexico to support
those veterans in the needs that
they have.
I believe that we don't get to
have these assemblies that we
are privileged to have today.
Without those who have come
before us and fought to preserve
our democracy.
And
I certainly have a servant's
heart.
And I will continue to serve our
veterans. It's like I have our
service members in uniform.
And, um with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank. You know, we do have
organized support. We have two
people who signed up to speak on
your behalf. I'm going to give
them two minutes each and I'm
going to start off with Jack
Box.
Yeah.
Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair.
Members of the committee. Thank
you so much for allowing me to
stand.
And support and outstanding
individual. I have known Jameson
Herrera.
I'm a lot older than him. So I
can say I've known him when he
was really young, and I've had
the honor of watching him grow
and mature. Seen him do the hard
jobs in the military. They
needed to be done, and he
didn't. Well, he didn't amount
standing, man. Not only did I
served with him, but I want to
echo again. What he said about
his family. I served with his
brother, his sister in law.
And his sister.
I can tell you that their family
is dedicated to New Mexico.
And those what it is to serve.
As a former secretary.
Veteran service.
I know the challenges he will
face.
I know the needs of our veterans
that continue to grow and need
to be addressed.
And I will tell you that I would
not be here if I didn't think he
could do it and he will do a
heck of a fine job Assisting you
care for those men and women
have given so much to our
country because the only reason
we're here today.
As well as shoulders of those
who are willing to bleed
allowances opportunities, So I'm
honored to stand before you
today and assure
That he will be. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Mr Vice Chair. Thank you very
much for the thank you, Major
General Miguel Gilad, who's
joining us via Zoom. He's with
the New Mexico National Guard.
Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair.
Members of the committee. Are
you hearing me, okay.
We can hear you. I'll make this
as brief as I possibly can. I
want to. First of all, Thank you
for allowing me to testify from,
uh, from the nation's capital.
I'm here meeting with the 54
Agins general about issues
surrounding the National Guard
and our nation and our veterans.
Uh, I want to. I want to just
tell you real quick. Um, a few
months ago, I got a phone call.
I saw Secretary Cassano's on the
camera little while ago.
And she was asked. She was
telling me that we need a new
leadership in our Veterans
Services Department.
Uh, and instantly I said
Jamieson Herrera, by my deputy
agent in general, my my right
hand guy who's there every
single day, ensuring that the
men and women of the National
Guard prepared to do the state's
submission. The nation's mission
a. You know, as you've heard a
son of veterans, brother of
veterans
Veteran himself who spent his
entire adult life first, as also
as an educator and a guardsman
and later full time working for
the national Guard, ensuring
that this state was taken care
of that it's veterans, uh and
its soldiers were ready. And so
I can't say enough about how
much I believe in my teammate.
Uh, there have known for 20 plus
years and help rhymes. Family
supports him so well, I can't
think of anyone who would do a
better job and I'll tell you
that he's a proven leader. I can
see the back of his head from
from where I'm at. You're
looking at him, Uh, straight up
and out, And that is the
presence of a person that you
need.
Uh, ensuring and fighting for
veterans every single day. And
so with that, I will urge you
to, um, to pass the nomination
for him as the next secretary of
Veterans Services. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you so much by a show of
hands. Is there anyone in the
committee room in favor of this
confirmation?
The entire room.
Anyone via zoom.
Okay. Anybody, so there's no.
one in opposition because all
the hands were raised in your
support. Any opposition V is, um
Thank you for that. I'm going to
head over to centers Defend X.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator for bringing
forward this, Uh
Nominee. Um
I do not know Mr Herrera and I
thank you very much for coming
forward. I would like to know
what you believe the role of
your
Department is and what are your
goals? Immediate goals.
Madam Chair. Uh, Senator, so
phonics.
Role of of of this position, is
a liaison and an advocate for
our state's veterans. We do
provide direct support to our
veterans for state benefits or
license our license plates. Um,
our property taxes.
And some and parks passes things
that nature that the state can
directly impact.
We have an advocate for our
veterans to the federal
resources and the benefits that
they've earned through their
service. We help with that
through our veterans service
officers as well as our social
work and assisting our veterans
throughout the state to ensure
that they get the benefits that
they've earned.
So it's a It's a dual hatted
role, and it falls right in line
with the objectives that I have
is I will continue to influence
that I
Is influence at international
level and within our local
governments, as well as our
Additional local veteran service
organizations to ensure that we
understand why we are serving
our veterans. What is necessary?
What problems we're trying to
solve to get the resources to
them in a timely fashion?
But on the state side, I will
directly impact those that I
things that I do have control
over and to ensure that we have
the proper resourcing available
to ensure that the people of our
department are capable of
delivering those resources to
our veterans that they've
earned.
So, Mr Chair. Thank you. For
that response. The military runs
through my family.
And I'd like to know. Um
How you think you can assist
veterans with their disability
ratings because that affects
quite a bit there.
Um, medical benefits and
secondly, any ideas you have for
the number of homeless veterans.
Madam Cherish centers to
phonics.
The first thing for the ratings.
It's about having equality claim
made in the first place. There
are many people that do claims
on behalf of our veterans. Some
of our veterans service
organizations.
But we have the distinct
capability of the accreditation
through the vagina for our state
Veterans Service officers.
To ensure that the claim is
written up in a way that it does
have a much higher probability
of passing as well as assisting
with those probability.
Of
a successful appeal after
maintaining the conversation
again at the at the national
level. I'll give an example of
the pact act when it was
initially passed. There's been
several different passages of
new presumptive conditions.
We're staying on top of those
things so that we can make sure
that we're informing our
veterans and helping them to
appeal.
Possibly a
Immediate denial to extend those
services to ensure they get the
benefits that they're that
they're due in a timely fashion,
And that and by having the
number of employees that we do
have and which I've been asking
for more, um at this very
legislature is to get out there
and educate and inform our
veterans of what those changes
are and help them to facilitate
those claims.
To ensure that they get the the
highest level of rating is that
they've earned.
Secondly, um for the homeless
veterans, we are working very
closely with the Department of
Health aging a long term care as
well as human services
department to ensure that we're
aware of our local problems and
that's again where we work with
our local veteran service
organizations, the V F W
American Legion.
Um
And anybody who is bringing
those cases to us so we can help
to get them to the care that
they that they do need and
Ultimately synchronizing our
efforts.
Um throughout the state. We have
many cabinets that affect this.
These are veteran populations.
Not directly for veterans, but
for all citizens, But we're
veterans fall into that that we
can get them the additional
benefits that they're able to do
and again, taking down the stove
pipes through state government
and synchronizing the efforts.
So where everybody's working in
the synchronized fashion. Thank
you, Mr Chair and thank you for
those responses. Um, I and many
others have high numbers of
veterans in our districts.
So we have high expectations of
you. Thank you.
Thank you, senator Neighbor.
Thank you, madam Chair.
I, too don't know. General.
Pereira, but I did reach out to
representative Martinez, who,
uh,
Has had, uh
A group association with me over
the years on veterans issues and
He highly recommend you, sir,
And he said he couldn't pick a
better person for this position
himself and that you're strong
leader.
And you have a good vision for
The department and he highly
highly respect you and highly
recommend you and so I
Placing my confidence and
represented Martinez, who I
worked with several years. And
he, uh, express that and so I
have the greatest confidence
that you'll be a great leader in
the department as its secretary,
So thank you for stepping
forward.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much. Madam.
Chair, Senator.
And, um, Secretary to be
I wish you the best.
The task you are undertaking is
big.
Yeah, and heavy at times.
And Madam chair for those who
have served our country are
serving. It's a big thank you.
I know Madam Chair. Um
About a week and a half ago.
I attended a funeral service for
One of our young members 23
years old who? Ah
I knew for my son's Association
in high school.
Um
He was home.
And I don't know the correct
terminology. But he was home for
a period of time had just
returned from
From being out and he committed
suicide.
And my question, Madam Chair is
what can your department do?
What are the services that we
can provide?
For all of our veterans, but
even for these young persons
that come back that
Um
I lost hope.
And what is it that we can do as
a state Madam chair to assist
Um, with his
It is devastating in any for any
age that it is, but for this
young man to come back
And I guess feel hopeless. Um
there's no answers.
But I know that, um it's a big
issue.
So I just wanted to ask that
Madam chair.
Madam Terrace, Senator Lopez. We
are currently working on the
governor's suicide prevention
campaign with the Department of
Health and other other state
partners to include our national
garden. Active duty. Uh, suicide
prevention advocates there and
currently, we're there's
legislation that is pushed
forward as well.
For a suicide prevention act
within our program to actually
stand that up and ensure that
we're one informing of the
services that are available, and
we're also, um, doing some press
releases.
As well as through New Mexico
Broadcasters Association. We're
going to be pushing, um, um and
I
Suicide.
Messenger.
But the biggest piece is the
awareness and prevention piece
on the front side. Too often
we're focused on the backside of
how do we solve the problem? But
now we're trying to get on the
front side of that, and the
preventive peace and ensuring
that every veteran knows that
they have
A way.
Before they get into crisis mode
to reach out and talk and that
is using our 988 crisis hotline
as well as some of our embedded
behavioral health specialists
that some of our veterans
service officers have access to
And referring across
Um Department of health and
within the healthcare systems
throughout the state to ensure
that our service members have
access to get help before they
get into that that level of
crisis and somebody to talk to
and that includes, uh, trying to
get engaged with a period
appear.
Type mentorship where veterans
are helping other veterans done
to work through this because a
lot of times our veterans are
not willing to talk with.
We have our house.
Personnel, but another veteran
may be able to at least get them
to a point where they're able to
make them much more sound
decision.
About getting help in the
future, rather than reacting to
the emotions at the time, so
there are several initiatives
that we're working on right now
to ensure that our veterans
understand that
There's there's a different way
to handle the problems.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your response. And just
one more question. Um
And then another comment.
Is, is part of your outreach
like through mail.
Through email and phone calls.
What is your What is the type of
outreach Madam chair that you
are using?
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
We're gonna be using, um
Uh, TV spots. Radio spots,
billboards printed materials.
As well as our social media
campaign to get it. The
Large demographic of veterans.
We have veterans that are of the
age that they don't want to use
smartphones. They don't want to
be on the Internet. They want
something to put on the magnet
on the fridge with a magnet that
says, Yeah, who do I call for
help?
So from that level to our
younger demographic, as you just
described with with with
The issue You described.
Is the social media platform and
where they can get that that
information.
Much more quickly so they can
get the help they need.
Thank you, Madam Chair and then
when we're comment, I had an
opportunity this past summer to
tour the facility down into your
C. It is beautiful.
Um, Madam Chair if you haven't
had a chance to go visit I would
encourage you to go visit when
the interim committee goes but
is phenomenal as a final
Finally for us to be
recognizing, um
And in the beautiful way that
the facility is is, I think,
ready to be open soon.
Um, for our veterans, for whom
needs some long term care,
Whatever it may be that they're
in need of, but it truly is
beautiful, well deserved. And
finally that we've come to that
this point where we can actually
have a wonderful facility to
offer for our veterans. Thank
you. Thank you and senators just
as a reminder were expected on
the floor and about five minutes
and I'm going to head over.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, madam. Madam Chairman. Uh,
General. Uh,
I'm a little fuzzy on the
relationship between
The the Veterans Services
Department and the Department of
I guess it's the Department of
Public Safety. Where's the
National Guard in this?
Then there in the are they in
the veteran Services Department
or in the public public safety
separate, totally separate.
And and would do you retain your
deputy adjutant general role
with the National Guard while
your secretary, or did you have
to give that up?
Madam Chair. Uh senators or TCP?
No. I will be stepping down from
the deputy adjutant general role
to take to take this role. I
will be retiring officially from
the from the military in the
fall.
Um, but there will be a I will
change over to the full time
Secretary of Department veteran
services.
So some So, Mr Chairman, you
have not yet begun serving as a
secretary of veteran, or have
you already taken up that rule?
Yes, I I've been doing rolls
concurrently since September,
2nd so and I just wanted to
follow up Mr Chairman very
quickly on the veterans home.
Who's running that now. There
was a time when the hell's it
started off under veterans and
went to the health department
back to who's running it now.
It is actually officially run by
the Department of Health with
close coordination with us about
veterans issues and and support
there for for veterans, as well
as a liaison with the V A. You
essentially are the recruiters
for the home. It sounds like
You find the people that need
that we're advocates for
veterans and the highest level
of services available.
And and is it full?
Um, it is. It is currently there
the population is is being
transferred over to as a new
homes open. They just started
opening the new, uh
Holmes as as available so there
will be some capacity issues and
space available.
Okay?
Well, thank you. Thank you for
your being willing to tackle
this department. I know we've
had
Quite a bit of turnover. Is that
the secretary level? I hope you
can bring some some real
stability and continuity to what
goes on there. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator McKenna.
Thank you. Vice Chair, Madam
chair. Thank you, Senator Pope.
Um, Richard or general.
Congratulations. We are fellow,
Um elk graduates really
appreciate, um and really
impressed with what you have
accomplished. Since then, I, um
So in my work with the
congresswoman in Albuquerque,
Melanie Stansbury.
I do a lot of constituent
services.
For everybody in her district,
right? We
Each congressional member has
about 700,000 constituents and a
great number of those that I
serve along with my colleague,
our veterans, and so I really
look forward to
Reengaging in that job when I
When the session is over, I've
had really could assistance with
our federal liaisons in the
congressional offices and really
looking forward to working with
your office. And once again
congratulations and really proud
of you as a fellow Pewaukee elk.
Senator neighbor.
Um, Mr Chair. I move that we
approved the the or confirmed
the nomination of Brigadier
General Jamison A. Herrera to
the Secretary of Veterans
services. Very good. There's
been a motion and since in the
essence of time, if you can
raise your hand if you're an
opposition of this appointment
and the committee, none with a
vote of
7 to 0. So you're going to be
moving on to the full Senate in
just a few minutes?
Congratulations and as your
rival in Espanola Valley High
School Sunday Ville, I'm proud
of you as well. Thank you.
And with that the committee
