Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read the report Mr
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
Gerald Ortiz a Pino chair
Senators anticipate all I move
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I think we've also got
a Judiciary Committee report
Senator Cervantes is looking
for.
Our.
Thank you Mr president so what
we're gonna do is go back to our
calendar
from this morning.
house bill want to that Senator
Griggs so Senator Brandt you
might give Senator Griggs a
heads up on that.
Item eighteen house bill one
And then we'll just see where we
are we are waiting for the house
Judiciary.
Committee report.
something Senator Ingle had
indicated he would like on a
supplemental calendar will take
a look at that so with that Mr
presidents unanimous consent we
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing.
House bill one oh four amended
Thank you Mr president phone
Senators this bill the venture
capital program act creates an
authority within the New Mexico
fund under the cap they've to
venture capital investment act
the purpose of the funds to make
investments in new emerging or
expanding business in New Mexico
they create new job
investments and hands the
economic development objectives
of the State.
And that basically is a
description of the bill and I
stand for questions thanks
Mr president I move that the
Senate do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
Tier seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative on the negative
house bill one four as amended
has passed the Senate center
Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and
fellow senators we want to the
action for placing House Bill
one oh two is amended.
To to to to.
On final passage.
The look right gosh.
Has twice as once amended on
final passage now subject to
debate amenities it.
Seeing no objection.
Senator Griggs explained about.
deduction right now if you are
the owner of a pass through
business your personal income
tax or your income tax state and
would allow you to pay it at the
end of the level which
eliminates the cap.
Mr president with that I will
Thank you Mr president I move
that house bill one oh two as
amended.
Do now pass and ask for
hands.
Senator is tier seats for former
go to vote elect your to Senator
Lopez.
I thank you Mr president
unanimous consent to excuse
Brandt is present like to excuse
our diamond Senator
I can excuse enter sign market
share.
Woods and birds Senator person
I have over twenty eight in the
affirmative zero on the negative
and number eighteen.
Senator Steinborn isn't here
senator Wirth will be putting
that on for him numbers present
let's wait for him to come down
I don't have that file let's go
the record show that all action
for placing House Bill one forty
four as amended has been taken
on sept on final passage has
been take this now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
commercial driver's license laws
to conform with federal law.
Failure to make these changes
may result in the loss of about
commercial vehicle will no
longer be allowed to hold a
commercial driver's license
that's a lifetime ban and we
already have a band for
provides proof of federal
immigration status individuals
with temporary lawful
immigration status are currently
forced to go to neighboring
training so with that I stand
for questions.
We're debating Senator Gaydos.
couple questions and
understanding your presentation
we had some protections against
narcotics on.
As we go towards April fools day
Have some issues with marijuana
I didn't see that in this brief
we have got.
So Mister president this is only
dollars a year so this has
nothing to do with those new
loss Mr presence and that's my
exact point federal law does
not.
Show marijuana's.
hate that one of my drivers
would be impaired.
As just wondering if federal law
covered.
Anything on the marijuana faced.
Mr president I don't believe so.
Thanks for the debate Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president the
sponsor please you'll.
include citizens of Mexico in my
district a lot of the harvesters
actually.
use a lot of individuals out of
have at least a temporary lawful
immigration status and currently
what we don't train or give a
folks like this a CDL so they
And madam president senator I I
really appreciate you doing this
because I this is been a huge
issue in my area where we we
temporary license as opposed to
us issuing an eight year license
in my I understand that
correctly Mister president Mr
Ireland South Africa Australia
Mexico that help with the the
harvest in in Travis county so I
really appreciate Mr president
Anymore debate.
I
do now pass now ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the
procedural role has been called
all those for the vote in the
affirmative except for those
voting in the negative by show
of hands senators to your seats
we're gonna go back up to item
number eighteen that's house
bill one sixty four as amended
and Sierra X. will put that on
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
Of the put on final passage.
And the debate is open.
amendment or substitution I saw
that look the Senate chief clerk
gave me.
C. knows seeing no objection
through Senate and house this is
the sponsors are Representative
Sarinana and Representative
Allison the house energy and
uranium uranium mines and mills
the substitute bills provides
for the environment department
and the energy department to
The bill calls for repository
malformation on the sites the
substitute bill establishes a
revolving fund at a bailable to
and Congress that might come to
the state in New Mexico for this
project and I stand for
questions thank you senator
a couple of questions of the
sponsor would yield Senator
Stefanics detailed Mr president
I will yield just please
remember this is not my bill but
this was taken out do you know
if that maybe in the house bill
two.
Yes thank you Mr president
senator for the question of the
Senate the committee substitute
special appropriation to the
environment department of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and Senate bill forty eight
appropriates an additional
hundred thousand dollars to
if those were recurring
probation or just one time
because this will be a recurring
expense will not.
that are appropriations are not
recurring and that they are to
set up the coordination and then
we would be eligible for the
federal funds to come into our
state.
Thank you Mr president thank you
the cleanup and appreciate the
bill.
Thank you senator rent.
Any further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
substitute for house bill one
sixty four as amended do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the roll then called
and all those present voting in
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty four as amended has passed
the Senate Senators panics thank
you Mr president and members of
the Senate.
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the rules be
suspended in that the record
show that all actions for
placing House Bill thirty nine
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
receipts tax exemption sunset
for New Mexico state
university's non athletic events
by five years to July one of
twenty twenty seven it's a
pretty small bill it has a huge
impact in Dona ana county in
in a row and we had hotels
booked all throughout southern
New Mexico and we had George
Strait Los crucis we didn't of
George Strait not passive and so
that helps out our southern New
Mexico community there's no
we debating house bill thirty
nine.
Anyone wishing to debate.
I see no debate.
Senator Hamblen to close in the
bill thank you Mr president.
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senator seeds please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Mr president.
Could you repeat that center.
Sierra Nevada voting no yes
thank you Sierra Lara voting no.
I order twenty the Fuhrman of
two in the negative house bill
thirty nine is pass the Senate
Senator Pirtle explain why he
doesn't like George Strait
And so that was a bad a bad
reference Mr present but you
know I I find it interesting and
and this isn't anything against
southern New Mexico is nothing
against MSU we just have a bad
Senator Pirtle we are going on
to the next item that's going to
be house bill sixty two as
amended thank you Mr chair thank
you so thank you so having.
Senator Hickey.
Sorry are on final passage has
bill sixty two creates a grant
opportunity council
administratively attached to the
DFA to advise the DFA on grant
matters including identifying
various procuring and managing
matching funds for rural
communities and frontier
communities and underserved
populations and smaller counties
funds source has been is and
house bill two and I'm ready for
any questions thank you Senator
Hickey says we're debating house
yield Senate take a detailed yes
I do Senator guy.
Mr presents for sponsoring
center I was just asking are we
work with CDBG grants currently
the company I work with with
have.
Could you repeat the question I
wasn't able to hear it.
Mr president and senator so
currently we have CDBG grants
believe it would be separate
from those.
The agency presence in the my
last question is with this
with this council report to the
This presents centers and of
which
as far as interim committees to
know which committee they would
report to.
Likely the LFC.
Thank you for that Mr presence
will have to be watching for
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president with the
spot for you Senator Hickey
deals yes etcetera etcetera
the DFA and then also there's a
grant program I'm just curious
if tribal communities eligible
for for those grant
opportunities or whatever's in
this as well.
that it's three county
Representative three municipal
three representatives about the
political divisions to grant
professionals and someone from
the council of government but
Thank you Mr president also
under the.
Requests a matching fund created
purpose and so forth I guess the
other question my Mr president
eligible for sure.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you passionate any further
debate.
I see no further debate Senate
getting close on the bill.
show that the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands.
Senator votive I do want to make
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Thank you Mr president.
Going on to the next one that's
going to be.
House bill seventy three as
amended.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
seventy three amended.
on final passage and final times
new return to work program for
retirees receiving pension
benefits from the R. B.
currently an educator who wishes
to return to work full time must
set out a full year before
return for thirty six months
consecutively for non
consecutive the employee and the
E. R. B. employer must pay into
the ERP fund and the employee
legislation will help us feel
some of the vacancies with that
thousand fifty teachers and
formed a fifty educational
assistance aids needed here in
please yield center probably
yield are you Mr president and
thank you Mr president Senator
does it specify what tier they
will return to.
Thank president senator I know
we have an issue now especially
with retirees coming from other
states.
And you know I kind of I I find
it kind of funny that you know
we have somebody would twenty
five years of experience come
years of experience so I hope
our own New Mexico teachers that
we treat them with a little bit
more respect after twenty five
years of experience that they
don't start over to tier three
and it would not
impact someone coming from out
of state because they were not
in the tier system before or
under the RB.
And thank you for that Mr
experience you know this is long
overdue I've never understood
why we punished any.
But especially teachers and cops
I wanted to stay in New Mexico
Paragraph I subsection two
Stewart says retired member
returns to employment for a
period of no more than thirty
six consecutive or non
consecutive months.
are retiring at fifty years of
of age why do we have that in
there if if they feel that they
can throw in another twenty
years of wire we hamstringing
Mr president this is really a
short term fix to bring them
back to help fill these
positions at this point these
folks have already been
receiving their ERP pension so
students of New Mexico and we've
made them that promise that they
would have a retirement.
And these experienced educators
wouldn't just open it to them
that they are the most
experienced the best educators
that really care about our
students why would we hamstring
them and only allow them to work
to get their pension and I look
at it is other fields we have
folks to retire for law
enforcement I tried from the
military and you going to do
something else but even in this
case for bringing them back
they're still getting a pension
within the New Mexico state
police force twenty years.
And he wants to go be a beat cop
in Chavis county for the Travis
county sheriff's department why
would we punish him for wanting
dedicated their life to the
state of New Mexico that somehow
that's not good enough I think
the the educators we've made a
promise to them for retirement
why would we hamstring if they
Senator pro.
Mr president Senator we're not
stopping them from leaving.
Teaching profession they're
actually allowed to stay in the
They make a decision to dedicate
their lives after retiring to
the students and the kids of New
Mexico and they have to give up
their Pinnes pension why.
This is the deal you make with
you know you make when you get
into this retirement system.
And Mister president senator
this thirty six consecutive or
years of their life to New
Mexico.
And I'm sure all of us can think
back I can.
Now granted for me I'm a little
bit spoiled it wasn't that long
ago.
what I would rather have my
pension and not teach because
it's about the same amount of
money.
But they've already earned that
pension.
And they have that.
they're there or not why do we
punish them for coming back and
continuing to dedicate
themselves to the state of New
Mexico.
Senator Pirtle but Mister
president senator why thirty six
consecutive months white one not
just let him teach until.
Mr president center once again
it's not a punishment if they're
their pension to continue to
teach so it is a punishment if
they teach past the thirty six
months the punishment for
dedicating themselves to the
state of New Mexico is they
dedicate themselves beyond the
thirty six months.
Mr president Senator.
Once again it's not a
punishment.
Center for.
their pension.
At the same time while working
collecting a salary so Mister
president center please answer
the question.
Why if a teacher.
Mexico why would we punish them.
For dedicating more than thirty
six months and continuing to
educate our kids.
dealing with the pension and
there are some things that we
have to follow according to
Harris no punishment.
Center for I guess Mr president
You've dedicated that much time
to a career.
In these individuals want to
continue to give their time to
our kids.
educators from foreign nations.
Because we can't fill the
positions but yet we won't let
somebody that spent twenty
twenty five years and education
Because of laws passed by this
legislature.
So that's an issue we can change
that we can address that but.
It's already in statute that
not what does it matter if the
person is pulling a pension or
not we need the educator why do
we put ridiculous arbitrary.
What do we care.
Because guess what happens Mr
president the same thing that
happens whenever other retirees
from other states that have
them living in New Mexico living
in the communities.
We want the G. R. T. money that
comes with that we want the
property tax that comes with
that and it absolutely is a
punishment Mr president.
this from our mind thank you Mr
president.
Thanks infertile Senator Kernan.
Senator Stewart do yield.
I'm happy almost president thank
you Mr president I'm I guess I'm
getting confused a little bit so
point do they receive their
pension and their salary or do
they let their pension said
dormant and just earn a salary.
So Mister.
be fully retired really retired
before you go back to get
another salary so this bill is
suggesting and the IRS is
suggesting now.
that's what this bill does but
really our retirement system is
developed for people to retire
paycheck into the retirement
which you then don't ever get
back so really if teachers want
to keep teaching they just teach
should get tired of it but if
you want to come back for a
short period of time this bill
will let you know our return to
way to lure them back by saying
okay you don't have to wait a
year you will have to pay into
the system and then your
Or is it for retirement is
really an underlying discussion
or have.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president and and that was gonna
be my second question because I
to be over the E. R. B. would
time after time tell teachers
you're better off if you don't
retire.
teachers of that they want to
retire lay out a year turnaround
income that get their retirement
and the additional salary the
really the end of the day
that we have with the shortage
of teachers the ninety day is
absolutely the lowest limit the
IRS will allow and I think it's
my guess is we'll have to look
at that and see if they are
better off continuing to work
are drawing out a year and then
coming back to work but they
still receive their retirement
Mr president that is correct
they they but they have to put
in that fairly high employee
contribution and and during this
period from we've done this I
teaching.
And the more you teach the
higher the multiplier is so
we've now put in place a system
so that if they will teach
We do have a floor amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
bill seventy three as amended.
See no objections Senator Pirtle
to explain amendment.
Thank you Mr president and all
our I will already tell you this
the air it makes no sense a lot
of our teachers are retiring at
the pretty young ages and they
have a desire to teach for for
that makes no sense in the
statute and remove it and ensure
that any teacher that wants to
continue to teach as long as
they want to is not prevented
from teaching and that we don't
they're paying back into the
system E. R. B. and it's not
growing the amount that they get
so it this just makes sense and
so for that I I imagine will be
Mr president I appreciate the
amendment from Santo Purnell but
this would be an unfriendly
amendment.
Senator we're debating senator
And I.
I understand the the you know
maybe do you think that teachers
she was tired teaching.
And she sat at home for a year
and she said retirements pretty
boring.
And I miss my kids.
And so I think that this will
help us in a situation we're in
right now.
We're quite frankly we have a
huge teacher shortage.
So why limit them.
Only thirty six months now don't
get me wrong.
I understand they they have a
classroom and build more years
more time what search terms
talking about.
And yeah with the with the huge
pay increase we just gave.
high that's in the number of you
know your high number years SO
would increase your retirement
but that needs to be their
choice.
Well maybe what we need to do is
make sure we explained that
to go for one year and then they
get in there and they say you
know what I'm enjoying it again
I want to stay another year.
Then they get to this thirty six
months and all of a sudden we
So what this does is it allows
our qualified teachers who we
have an extreme emergency
situation with right now it
looks that's what everyone says.
What we let the teachers make
that choice why don't we let the
teachers have the freedom to do
what the teachers think is the
best for them and for their
retirement.
We do have further debate on the
amendment Senator Candelaria.
and thank you senator poke I'm
can you you mentioned the change
and and I believe several
senators of reference to change
an IRS.
Title I can look it up by.
Senator Mister president senator
Candelaria I do I do not I
cannot provide you that at this
time.
And I guess no takers on that
one.
Mr president I guess the the
period from a year to ninety
days.
My question is is the IRS also
require that a person returning
Is that a condition of the I. R.
S. or is that something we're
adding on ourselves.
President Senator it's okay if I
could yield to center program
absolutely Senator thank you
association the administrative
associations.
But we've been trying to move
away from this double dipping
idea that's why there is a
with us so that we wouldn't of
continue this process of
essentially trying to.
came up with the New Mexico.
Senator.
Understood Mr present those are
all the questions.
Any further quite often thank
Thank you Mr president and I
think you know I think senator
pope walked in one that's a
that's a little bit of an issue
not just in teaching but
work is been at a big issues
since I was on the Alamogordo
city commission.
The the amendment that Senator
We have a teacher shortage in
New Mexico that a that exceeds a
thousand.
And.
I don't know how many teachers
will want to come back to work
graduating teachers to fill the
slot quickly enough naturally.
Show the this is an opportunity
Gonna have to have additional
solutions and I imagine in the
next session we're gonna have to
come up with some to see if we
can bring more.
mean that we're going to just
get forms of teachers coming
back.
But my hope is that this bill
does does help but I think
The numbers that may be we hope
but if they do come back and
they want to stay it only makes
don't really think it's hurting
the bill and I'm hopeful that
it's helping the bill show work
so thank you Mr president.
about this because didn't just
for five years ago we have to
fix the E. R. B. because the
solvency was threatened and so
we went through this whole thing
not a teacher myself but we had
that whole thing about the
solvency of the R. B. being solo
and we had to fix it and the way
we fixed it was by saying you
program right back into the
toilet and I I really think that
this.
I'm in I'm no expert on this
issue but I do remember this
I wonder Senator Ingle would
yield to a couple of questions
on that issue Senator Ingle
detailed.
Yes I'll certainly try
the solvency than I do what is
the the the solvency of the R.
B. right now Senator Ingle.
Person etcetera I think it's
Higher than that in the sixties
and the but many of our
retirement programs are.
Our own the borderline the T. R.
A. probably is the lower of the
all of the.
with people in the future will
even be able to retire at all so
I think with I know we have a
shortage of teachers I know
they're excellent teachers who
our retirement program if we can
come back in three years and try
it again if it if this is the
shortage still results I I just
think that this taking it off
once again echo the wise senator
from Senate district twelve I
mean this thirty six months
doesn't come out and know where
it's not arbitrary I mean what
to this thirty six month rate
you're looking at the report I
see it was unanimous vote out of
Senate education I think that's
a bipartisan voter I read right
so anyway I I purchased body to
Thank you Mr president I I do
want to say that that experts if
there are any in our field
specifically said let's just do
it for thirty six months see if
we get people see if we need
them longer with the salaries
place programs to try to grow
the teaching profession so this
came from the association of
superintendents and
administrators and they're the
ones that ought to know about
Thank you Mr president and the
thirty six months was to help
the superintendents because is
that their bill to get over the
shortage in the classroom they
temporary workers is teachers
are not stay in the classroom.
And so in order to fix that.
Let's let them get their pension
one reason that we're doing it
is to help that teacher shortage
there's no other reason that
we're doing it not trying to let
people doubled that that's why
the time frames on their this
For a second time Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I just I
I found in the L. E. S. C.
It says they are just does not
have a set rule for a layout
period a shortly out period
might draw increased scrutiny
however many other states
the rehiring of retiree due to
unforeseen circumstances was not
prohibited so long as there was
no pre arrangement to re hire.
in this state stay with the R.
Candelaria and with his answer
to me a few minutes to research
it and get a form.
The teacher and the school
district pay into the E. R. B..
But the.
Employer the teacher the
employees are in the teacher
because they're getting income
that has no liability attached
to it.
So actually doing this should
help actually build the solvency
saying yeah we're neutral on the
bill
they were concerned about it
but.
Since there's no liability built
in.
however.
If you listen to some of the LFC
meetings through the interim
you'll see that we don't have
there are very few young people.
Going to school to become
teachers.
So they come at a high school
now and go to college it's going
By putting this amendment on
there will allow those teachers
to come back.
And the state as long as we need
them.
Si no further debate centered
on.
And thank you Mr president.
You know I find it interesting
here we are on the Senate floor.
And yet we're asking serious
questions Mister president and
we cannot get a real answer.
There is an answer as to where
But this is just a bandaid on a
serious issue that we have.
Very serious issue that we have.
because as soon as they come
back to the classroom they give
up their pension.
What kind of sense does that
make Mr president that we're
Do I want to give three years
here in New Mexico and then lose
my pension.
Or do I want to take my pension
to Texas Arizona Oklahoma
about here so this three years
dangling this three years in
front of these teachers that are
retiring is not going to have
the effect that you think it's
going to have because we've
already put the wall they can
their pension and a full salary.
I don't understand Mr president
why we hamstring ourselves we
this body along with the house
your twenty five years earn your
pension and we want you to
teach.
Because you're qualified
educator because you have the
That the you want them to leave
the state of New Mexico.
You're forcing them out you're
giving him no other choice.
By removing this arbitrary made
up thirty six months ceiling.
We're just saying as a teacher
as long as you want to teach
teach please.
And we would be happy for you to
stay.
So Mister president I move
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seventy three
as amended I ask unanimous
negative by show of hands.
Senator seats where voting on
Senate floor amendment number
one.
had a meal voting no Senator Sir
mantas voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no
Senator pope voting no Senator
Ortiz Pena voting no Senator
Senator Hickey voting no Senator
Tallman voting no Senator
Candelaria voting no Senator
Gonzales voting now.
Senator Duhigg voting now
Senator voting.
Senator gonna Hemphill voting.
Senator souls voting no Senator
Senator Stefanics the we get
sentenced of an exploding on
Senator Lopez doing this and
this morning now.
Senate Senator Senator Pirtle
and thank you president members
of body unfortunately I believe
one side of the aisle just put
the unions over the kids and
So thank you Mr president I
guess and I don't want anyone to
yield that I I just in my own
mind if got to figure this out
so.
We don't take away their of
want to lay out another ninety
days and come back again.
Until we figure out at the end
of the day about the the return
to work policy when it sunsets I
years if they choose then they
can lay out another ninety days
and come back and do to get us
to remove it but until we really
know what the impact is going to
be I think this is a great plan
get out of retirement I'm gonna
come back I'll give my
retirement benefits and I'll get
my salary and I'm gonna try this
probably one year to time that
an opportunity and I know we
have teachers who have recently
retired they're going to be glad
to have that ninety day lay out
and then be able to come back.
Thank you Senator Kernan Senator
I think this is probably a bill
that will help solve some of our
problems and I know in my part
of the state we're having
trouble with teachers and I know
when I was in school.
And I'm hoping that there is us
from program like this maybe the
Interstate.
So I hope the solution good no
Senator Moores K..
caliber we spent more time after
school and we did in classrooms
so I think this will help our
problem the.
sense that there is more money
flowing in there and and they do
need it we're gonna have to take
a look at that some day.
As we have the judicial
retirements and a problem up
take a look at some of these and
maybe this will help in a way
that we hadn't counted on and
I've been here many years when
we restricted people from coming
And sometimes I think we need to
take a look at some of those
things but and when you're in a
crisis situation like for and
that's where we are now so maybe
percent per paycheck on a
returning teacher that will
still be paid to E. R. A..
Why are we continuing to.
their pension and that money
would go back into the R. B.
their contribution as long as as
well as the employer
contribution.
And thank you Mr president
center but they don't receive
percent for it is sent to the ER
bi Fund.
Attention.
Thank you Mr president center
but they'll never receive any of
that eleven percent.
would we continue to take that
Levin percent per paycheck from
a teacher that is returning to
teach.
Mr president and senator
And thank you for that and
Mister president center thank
you for that answer.
Do we have any further debate.
Center for removing explained
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seventy three
as amended.
think something's being lost in
the air or or something's
happening I don't think Mr
president members of the body
quite understand what we're
doing.
so that's four years of of being
able to return back to work.
and so this would simply take
instead of three.
Or four years would make it
But I find it disingenuous that
somehow teachers are going to.
Set up the ninety days and and
work three years in New Mexico
What they're gonna do Mr
president members of the bodies
are gonna laugh at your thirty
six months.
And they're still knowing that
they're going to be leaving New
to where then they start over
within those states on a new
pension program.
So Mister president members of
and granted to them.
Forgiving their last twenty to
twenty five years to the state
of New Mexico and this would
just go ahead and extend that so
that they have a little bit more
one Senator.
Mr president we you know I I
appreciate the amendment from
Senator Pirtle on this one as
well.
number I also want to clarify
that in this bill is ninety days
is not a year and this would be
unfriendly.
We had a very settlement number
member but with the sponsor of
the bill yield for a question
Senator pope detailed Mr
president I do.
So this presents Sir
retired.
That they can come back they
don't get to reset it.
Because you have to re retire.
because I think there's some
confusion as to whether or not
someone can build and step out
again that's what the bill says
the bills pretty clear that that
I think what normally happens I
think what we're trying to do.
Is we are trying to get those
teachers who have been retired.
be home that much with her
husband.
And so she said you know the
kids are Bonner you know and
more enjoyable than my husband
so I'm going back to work.
said would you please go find
something to do you're driving
me nuts.
So you know and it happens all
the time I talk to retired
people all the time to have that
same experience.
would feel completely different
about this if we don't have any
teacher vacancies I feel
completely different about this
if we only had fifty teacher
They even get close to
recovering from that.
We need to get retired teachers
back in the classroom if they're
willing to go back in and if
they still can't.
Yeah that should give us zero
six plus years.
That should help.
a teacher shortage you can't
answer can you.
We were talking about this for
ten years.
What's allow retired teachers to
get back in the classroom if
and then jump back in the order
the way we wrote a lot if we
wrote the law that way okay who
cares.
A lot of like we want sitting
out because because we no longer
What you have right now is a lot
of retired teachers they're
going in and and being of
substitute teachers.
the highly qualified teacher.
Teaching the students every
single day.
This is why I'm gonna support
this bill no matter which way we
go on it but let's not tie this
It is imperative that we get him
back in the classroom.
We're trying to get a hold of
Stan rounds right now to see if
the the the superintendents
but it wouldn't surprise me if
they really care about the
thirty six months that wasn't
just a number that they set.
So you know give us a minute
let's try to find out if that
legislature hello and get back
in the classroom and teach our
kids.
I hear everyone in this chamber
talk about how we need teachers
how we need teachers in the
classroom.
We have an opportunity with this
Trained and in the classroom.
Let's take that opportunity
let's get it done.
Further debate on the amendment
with Senator Stewart.
work they can do that right now
they're retired they want to
come back they give up their
retirement they go back they get
a twenty percent salary increase
they put into their retirement
day you have to give up your
retirement and you can go back
tomorrow now then you continue
to put into chart retirement
system when later you want to
retirement so if you want to
teach for a long time you can
and you do and let me say that
there's just not very many
people who use the return to
work if they want to keep
things in the pipeline for
teachers up the pay passed we're
here and all over the state that
tier service who are saying I
was very tired this year I'm not
lot of things to enhance our
teachers and and I just want us
to not.
I think that things are
different than they are anybody
same as with the previous
amendment there is legitimate
concern about the solvency of
this E. R. B. Fund.
Si no further debate on the
amendment center part of the
clothes on the amendment.
And and thank you Mr president
and and I find it funny.
That.
If if a teacher.
Why do you care.
Mr president.
If a teacher wants to take their
pension to day and take the
And then this notion that
somehow this is going to have a
negative impact on the R. B. but
yet we just heard that if
somebody return to work after
retiring their salary would go
I'm in the private sector I
don't quite understand.
But this is what I'm hearing
today on the floor.
decisions for themselves why are
we putting arbitrary numbers in
this section of law.
I can tell you Mr president from
the debate and from from the
This is a simple fix to allow
teachers to make the decisions
for themselves.
It doesn't have a negative
impact on the RB Fund.
And if it's better for them to
do the system and the in the
amended as the rules be
suspended the record show the
rules being called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting the
negative by show of hands.
We have center serve on this
voting no center how to meal
voting no Senator Steinborn
voting no Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
voting no Senator McKenna voting
no Senator Pinto voting no
Senator Stewart voting no
Senator Duhigg voting no Senator
Hickey voting no Senator by
Senator when US voting no
Senator Ivey Soto voting no
Senator souls voting now Senator
Stefanics voting no Senator
For.
number one has failed to pass
the Senate Senator Pirtle your
batting average is starting to
really struggle.
But I appreciate you going down
swinging Senator Pirtle and
thank you Mr president but you
Thank you Mr president and I'm
I'm gonna support this bill I.
I would have liked it better
with either of the the amendment
What would appear to me to be an
extreme teacher shortage.
And I think many of you all that
over the past ten years for
traction and Mr president since
then we've got other initiatives
going on.
The grow your own inch and some
other things and and hopefully
into the classroom because we
can't hardly wait any longer.
Every time we look at workers
Mr president members of the body
trying encouraging you to
support the bill.
But at the same time I want to
gonna be the answer for the
other initiatives that we have
right now we've just got to
figure out ways to get these
people or people qualified
Should appear and make decisions
that may or may not.
Get the people in the our
classroom to fix the issues for
the bill so this would be my
first time.
That's okay
of debate on the amendments
Sir I do rise and support of the
I interrupted his dinner so I'm
sorry stand on those not
listening but he'll probably go
back and we look at the
recording.
was would you least be neutral
if we just at thirty six months
and they said yes so they
actually won't even look at it.
so we need to get the R. B. that
account grows it doesn't shrink.
I think that's called common
sense.
and that's exactly what happens
when we have a teacher go back
this retired there's no
liability to the actuarial.
is now for employers search your
details less will let you know
control judgment call stand what
the information was so we know.
further because we'll need to
thank you.
Further debate Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman hello
it was mentioned the little you
know a while ago and I don't
want to call it counseling but I
think better advice you know
anyone that's looking at
point of saying well I think
I'll retire I want to go another
five years you know it would
really be you know of a very
You know the other part is that
it also helps you because you're
on the group insurance for your
part is being paid higher you
know by the employer.
Now.
Additional return to work salary
that puts you on a higher tax
bracket.
So you know you have to look at
the lungevity part of this and
return to work.
And they tell me what I I really
wish I would have listened to
when he told us that they wish
they would have been that are
off the original base when they
retired so this are things that
I think really you know just
better advice but all the other
part those mention is maybe we
It wasn't that they wanted to
retire or that they didn't want
to teach they just needed a
break.
You know and maybe this is one
enhancement for more training
the you know of this are the
things that you know I feel that
very strong.
And I know for my part the when
president and members so I just
thought I'd share that with you
thank you.
Thank you senators are less.
Si no further debate Senator
of the tools we can do to try to
get more educators in our
classroom just like the rate but
we're going to be more I'd also
say that
them that but this is an option
in the toolbox to try to fill
these positions.
That being said Mr president I
move that.
House bill seventy three
amended.
native slide show events Senator
states please where voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
House bill seventy three as
amended has passed the Senate
reports that order of business
committee reports the
refrigerator for.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom is been
referred house Judiciary
respectfully submitted Joe's a
savant as chair Senator on this
move adoption have a motion to
that's really important.
Seeing no objection the
committee presented often.
miscellaneous I yield to senator
Steinborn thank you very thank
you very much Mr present this to
present colleagues I'd like to
ask unanimous consent that I be
There is a house bill one sixty
four this presents the bill that
passed unanimously on to clean
up abandoned uranium mines.
Thank you senator Senator timer
we're trying them thank you know
I'm a yes in your hearts.
To everybody listening across
New Mexico thank you the general
reflect that Senator Steinborn
was.
eleven fifty nine am I move we
adjourn until twelve or one PM
the Senate will come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee see
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session no
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee no
objection it is so ordered
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so we're going to go
now to the green Senate
two will be Senator Ingle with
that Mr president Ms consent we
know that our business third
reading of legislation and I
yield to Senator Cervantes for
item number one house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
be suspended the record show
that all actions for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill
Sixtyeight as amended repeatedly
on final passage has been taken
a lot of work that was been done
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee the Senate finance
committee and through hearings
that have taken place in this
that problem is manifest itself
in Albuquerque the bill you have
in front of you represents the
culmination of that work by
looking at the legislation has
attacking crime and we put them
together what has been referred
to as an omnibus crime package.
What's important about this bill
is a recognizes that attacking
officers needs and it requires
us looking at prosecutors and
public defenders it requires
just looking at the court system
it requires us to look at the
correction system and our
efforts to rehabilitation as
On and so Mr president members
the Senate you have a very
comprehensive and the
complicated somewhat bills that
all go through in trying to
dress in just bullet point form.
did do is the bill went to into
Judiciary Committee again
tonight with one the last
amendment which was to try and
add what is been referred to as
lot of work from the Senate
finance committee and its
members even last night and
Senate Judiciary even again
tonight those present without
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield Senator serve on
this deal I yield and the agency
present us a brand if I may
before we begin may I ask
Mr present water qualifications.
Ms raven has been on staff of
the Legislative Council finance
committee I'm sorry for quite
compile what was our approach
this bill which was to take a
look at all the legislation
that's been introduced this
session including that in the
budget itself to try and put
them into what you see before
here today will expedite the
debate discussion she'll be able
to refer me to parts of the bill
that may address any of the
questions that are presented.
Senator Representative thanks
for not having it I don't have
This presents I wasn't on any of
the committees that worked on
this although I've worked on of
more crime bills that I've ever
worked on before the session.
so.
there on the bottom of the page
the distribution of funds could
you explain that section to me
and and where those funds are
coming from and that we
recognizes your important
contribution to this bill
section twenty five is been
amended in our committee process
to adopt what has been your bill
bills will to you'll find it in
section twenty five I believe
your your next question Senator
was with regard to a source of
funding for a particular section
I think you're referred to
everywhere yeah well.
Let's see how it works
having a will train law
enforcement and supporting our
law enforcement officers and so
the this section the bill
provides for modifications to
to attract more law enforcement
officers a governor's made that
a priority I think there's been
a clear.
Desire of this legislature in
this particular the Senator
yet be certified but who will be
certified within a specified
period of time allow us to use
grant monies to retain them or
to to recruit them even though
actually help retain officers
and so how much.
Yes Senator that and that
appropriation is already in
house bill two and it is in
Clearly agree that it's good to
have someone that knows where to
find those things
on on page four I just want to
thank whoever put this together
great for our law enforcement
community
Etcetera then reject I believe
you're referring to let's make
sure we're on the same document
hoping we are we should be on
two two two eight four five
point one.
understand so we you should be
referring to a believe the
section three of the bill which
increases the to survivors
benefits two million dollars
which would make New Mexico the
Every day they go out they put
their lives on the line for us
and for our safety.
And so I'm not sure whose idea
that was on a given to you since
your sponsor the bill but thank
ceremonials it was his idea and
of something that he's felt very
passionately about as we worked
on this project.
Thank you.
on on page five we're you have
this new underlined area that
talks about the council's will
I'm is presenter unfortunately
we don't have a good system in
place for a tele communicators
in other words this is the
procedure process by which we're
establishes and and you and it
in New Mexico law enforcement
standards and training council
all part of our effort to assure
that our law enforcement
officers have all of the
police officers and.
Tele communicators.
Is that the dispatchers of what
that is one of the
telecommunications.
relates to a tele communicator
training beginning on section
twenty of the bill.
Thank you Mr president nine I
look forward to getting there
sometime tonight.
Very few of us know who tele
communicators are.
I thought that was just summon
the use the telephone.
To the right.
subsection C. identifies the
council and the membership of
the council so you'll see the
council shall consist of the
director of the law enforcement
academy and the directors of all
will be confirmed by the Senate
the council members shell be and
consist of at least one attorney
who's employed by the district
attorney's office one attorneys
employed by public defenders
and to citizens at large one who
shall have experience in
behavioral health and I'm either
of these two appointees shall be
a police officer a **** pretty
So much present presents so the
only ones that can't be a
retired police officer would be
the last one behavioral health
provider.
Agency presentation of the
the to members who have
experience knowledge in
providing adult education and
then and then I'm sorry after
that some Michael will be the to
citizens at large so be the
Thank you Mr president center I
am.
I don't necessarily have any
arguments against who's on the
board here I'm just hoping that
is someone going with an agenda
on to this council and trying to
train our officers to
you know the things that are
safe so do are you comfortable
adding others who are part of
the central part of the criminal
justice system so by adding a
prosecutor to the council adding
a public defender we're getting
input from the people that are
and I have heard we know much of
the fact that too many cases are
lost because prosecutors are
able to work effectively with
prosecutors and cases are lost
Did we reach out to the police
chiefs association that we would
actually been established over
efforts in the past to try and
establish as counselor believe
we had the same legislation in
the last sixty day session as
Status the membership of the
council itself but we in putting
together this omnibus package
relied upon the Sanchez and the
others who worked hard to put
together the original
legislation.
I really think that we need to
be careful about putting things
in place that are going to.
Yeah this council will decide
what training is done this
council will decide how law
enforcement officers are trained
enforcement officers to ask
their input
why didn't we reach out to them.
I'm just presenter I would first
the board begins in section five
which on sorry in the preceding
section section four subsection
representation on on this
council by those who do know and
work day and day in and day out
in the training of law
enforcement officer so I don't
know that I can agree with any
those organizations to get their
input on what the council should
look like so you know let's
let's try to be careful not put
words in people's mouths and I
should be on the council
although I'll note that in part
the council is intended to have
some independence from of the
law enforcement profession and
I'm trying to look at the the
council's actual duties I think
they start on page six
time I've seen this so.
And I will tell you one of the
reasons I'm walking through this
this presents Senators we've
And then we find out later on
that doesn't affect them well.
That actually harms them and I'm
just trying to make sure we're
not doing that.
important thing I get that it is
it's it's.
Critical they be trained well.
It's critical they be trained
will miss present senator for
them.
what we have to be careful of
is that the training is
appropriate for the job.
And so
Yes it's it's hard to read some
Present on section seven we have
new material and law enforcement
officer database.
can you go over that with me a
little bit as to what the
and I just had to let you know
the New Mexico police chiefs are
in favor of the legislation as
is the New Mexico municipally so
there has been some outreach
there that'll give you some of
training and the.
or the training really of our
law enforcement officers and
you'll see that that most of
that is already the references
you had I think are already in
preparation and keeping of a
database the goal of this part
of the bill was to recognize
that there should be a
repository of information
related to law enforcement
judgments against the law
enforcement officer for improper
use of force so the goal here is
to keep that database and you'll
see also in the bill a
requirement that the database be
understanding of any past
criminal convictions for on duty
conduct or civil judgments for
improper use of force we don't
want to have a problem of law
enforcement officers rare is
into a section seven and the
database I I I would pass to
yield to senator Wirth to
address your concern and a bit
will take out the section seven
are there some timing issues and
putting this together so that we
actually have the resources to
get this right and so I will
that will.
Alleviate some of the question
Senator Brandt on section
seventy might jump over those
for now.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator Wirth appreciate
read this through this first
time I've seen it when it was
handed out on the floor so
I would love to work with you on
that as you know you know I have
family members who are in law
enforcement and so I would
really appreciate being able to
work with you on that.
Sen rand to buy may the agency
worth is had with the
administration there's been
something that's overly
ambitious to to compile and have
that database up by that date so
that's the reason for Senator
etcetera if you if you see this
in the future I ordered doesn't
come out tonight you'll see in
subsection C. the requirements
of the database and you'll see
there the reference to criminal
Thank you Mr president thank you
center for sheet that and
And some of the fastest reader
in the world so truck driver
with me
Mr presents under the director
of Law Enforcement Academy.
and you'll see that in section
eight the director shall be
under the supervision direction
of the of the secretary of
public safety.
So some of the the section
thirteen.
know Senator I I think it is
worth the perhaps at least
spending a little bit of time on
section twelve this is mostly a
section twelve and thirteen
month mostly existing language
that but requiring approval of
the council in addition the
board so you'll see that and set
and section twelve and I think
that's again important because
we're going to allow law
enforcement officers to be
again with oversight from the
council.
what what is is that current.
And we made the changes to that.
This presents center that is
existing language for most part
you'll see above minor change by
regard to tuition and fees so
you'll see that in subsections
B. and C. the tuition fee
schedules is will be promulgated
by the council as opposed by the
Mistras the borough still exists
also there are
Once again.
long answer get to short.
Thank you Mr president I I
appreciate that and think that
that those answered I do see in
section fourteen or back to the
board in their.
certification board then they
actually certify with the
officer if I'm understanding
correctly has gone through their
training successfully completed
their training and then they
council and you're you're
actually right in this case
we're talking about a law
enforcement certification board
and so and once again an
independent board or they were
This is certification board or
the server is more will include
a retired judge of municipal
police peace officers assure of
county and city governments and
civil rights claims and then the
last one is the an attorney
employed by the public
defender's Department.
Senator the the I'm sorry are
you talk about the judge
component yes Sir.
Mr president Senator subsection
B. one for retract retired judge
by the governor so you my
understanding my appreciation is
the governor with a pick a judge
who has experience and a good
competence in relevant areas of
it.
So but some of this one of the
previous one but in the past
we've had some of the on that so
I think we have to be careful
sometimes that we assume too
much.
make good appointments.
With some notable exceptions.
is actually pretty serious and
you have a few.
Law enforcement officers in here
the the municipal police peace
officer.
Who who helped me understand how
these attorneys who.
Practice in the area of civil
rights.
I get the actually who
Senator recall that just this
last session we passed the Civil
Rights Act which related in part
our last the last session so the
goal here is to have an attorney
who practices in the area of the
civil rights cases so rights
cases against law enforcement
officers are law enforcement law
who brings those type of cases
would help the board to assure
that the people that do serve
and the vast majority who do
serve are are beyond reproach.
what training would be required
by getting them confused.
Mistras that's right we look at
subsection C. this for children
nice is been revoked the
certifications.
Simple majority slightly when we
we talk about the nicest
suspenders of a revoke sorry a
peace officer certification.
silent as to how the board would
conduct itself presumably they
would adopt their own bylaws
in my experience a border
Commission does and it's hard to
wanted to if they felt that that
would be safer they they would
be able to set that in there.
bylaws Mr presents under the
bill is silent so yes there's
nothing in this bill that would
prohibit them from doing that.
So as for the money to go over
any of the things for
telecommunications because quite
honestly does not anything I've
ever.
systems just military.
and so that was.
Very interesting experience but
I wouldn't have any idea what
the right training or what the
this bill and going section by
section but but I also
appreciate your invitation that
sometimes I slow down those
areas they may want to skip over
were I see an opportunity for us
that the training here specifies
what would be included in that
training there are some
important components of that
that I think we should really
highlight and and the command
Addressing methods of the
escalation and dealing with
racial sensitivity all of these
and others are included in the
component requirements of the
moment pause and recognize some
important opportunities for
training there.
So Mister president
So basically these are are
these.
that's dispatching law
enforcement to call.
Agency present my understanding
is that this reference here's to
the dispatchers to the call.
dispatcher unless you're doing
both and I'm not sure that they
do that very often.
you're only talking to law
And sometimes on my worst enemy
but if you go back if you go
back to section fifteen there
are answers for you in the bill
senators of section fifteen has
definitions for the public
safety tele communicator
receives calls or dispatches the
appropriate person that's reason
I answered your question as I
did a moment ago but we also
have a definition here for
dispatch you see that person to
distinction between the two I
think the person you're
describing as a dispatcher would
be the same thing as a tele
communicators is to provide.
Things present and and actually
The it's good training for a
nine one operator might might
think about the the future
clarifying that although I think
the receiving calls.
you look at subsection G. one of
section fifteen the tele
communicator somebody who
receives calls for dispatches so
it would it would apply to both.
This further quite frankly my
life my pain levels going a
little too high to continue this
for now
appreciate that and
All all of come back to it later
I think I need to or if anyone
else is going to debate the for
And and it was my intention to
do that after some questions to
make sure that I touch on the
things that I was not asked
about to make sure we cover them
all but I I want to take the
opportunity to to thank you
Senate number on it and some of
us and I know you're one of them
don't worry too much about who
gets the credit which chamber
gets credit or what member get
the credit we're here to get
So Mister president Center I
appreciate that and
You know I I don't care who gets
the credit I just want what's
So that we can keep our kids
safe from the state so thank you
for that.
Senator sure to the rescue.
nine thirty I just want to check
the time nine thirty five point
four.
Senator sure let's go all right
thank you Mr president you know
normally of people are coming
about the three little pigs
Senator all of hope hope but Mr
president I did find a quote
about baseball in here and I
wanted to ask about that.
Versus the bomb threat but there
was one thing here let's say in
the state I just saw a minute
ago we're shooting was still a
misdemeanor of the threat of
twenty five of the bill okay why
why is it not worth they both
the same Mister president
senator.
and the issue here is we we put
some additional components in a
shooting threat so you have to
place a person or group of
persons in fear of great bodily
law enforcement officer and in
this case we've made that threat
a misdemeanor.
And I understand your question
to be why with that would be
different than a bomb scare bomb
example a shooting threat would
be intentionally communicating
to another the person intends to
bring a firearm to a property.
And that's one of the
possibility bring pharma
making bring those weapons here
to the capital and in making a
threat.
Of placing a person or group
persons in fear of great bodily
harm would be an offense under
reasonable penalty for making
this threat but not something
that would be a over over done.
So Mister president senator but
But they didn't come in here to
to threaten us I mean they
certainly weren't pointing them
anybody all of everybody that I
saw was.
Was certainly
here to make a point the same is
people carrying signs or you
know we're in kids for whatever
it is they're doing
of Senator Brandt the offense
takes place when the person
carrying of a firearm has an
intent to place to place a
person or group of persons in
in fear of great bodily harm so
I can understand I think
recently some people would be
fearful of individuals carrying
weapons in the gallery above us
be difficult to prove although
these days you look at what
happened in Washington DC
generous six people were foolish
enough to leave social media
that was a that was foolish but
the but the things that we don't
see on the news just as a side
note were all the people that
were walking around taking
pictures of the artwork and
stuff like that are clearly
weren't trying to be
insurrectionist.
we have an an amendment that's.
Cutline numbers and looks like
an amendment to the that's a.
Curiosity.
sections to keep us all oriented
because you're right we don't
have line numbers and even the
version of the bill I have
probably has different page
numbers and years.
twenty seven starts on page
thirty.
Senator sure you are you at a
loss of words Senator never Mr
president I didn't think so you
still have the floor Senator Mr
this right tonight in maybe I'm
just being a little overly
sensitive I think the Majority
Leader for the Democrats has
asked you to speak and as I can
observe things the minority
I'm I'm looking for the other
signs of the apocalypse.
The
president you know we only have
more realistic question here so
in in section twenty seven
there's a variety of things here
about offense as we get to to a
paragraph be.
possession of a firearm shall be
guilty of a third degree felony
what's the difference.
So Senator question this is
creating a new definition of an
individual this person being
described as a serious violent
felon you'll find the definition
of what would be a serious
violent felon in the bill and
violent felon and we we and
number eight those parts of the
law where an individual who
commits offenses under those
sections would be then deem to
serious violent felon and what
we're doing is we're creating a
felony only subject to three
years but if you look at the
language in subsection C. of
section twenty seven you'll see
the language there that that has
penalty up by three years from
what would currently be I'm
sorry from three years to six
years for would presently be a
felon in possession of farm in
I did go back and look at it but
can you Mr president and
senator.
Does it make sense to.
we put in a separate little.
Something in here to say that
this person gets more white and
we just make it a different
level of felony.
So Senator you ask a question
that from all of our hearings
all of the data research there
seems to be very little evidence
that making these types of
adjustments has a meaningful
the third time we've done so.
And we keep doing that we keep
adding some additional years it
plays well it's good politics
they've never been able to find
any data or evidence to suggest
that although we've done this
repeatedly now increasing these
penalties that there's been any
corresponding decrease of the
level of felony that has a
greater.
A penalty.
Senator because the of the
candidly the reason for that is
sometimes don't do well between
those categories and so we've
done here is we've done if
you'll forgive me from
describing it's kind of a third
degree felony plus so of the
All right thank you Mr president
and senator my attorney has just
to inform me that I have the
right to remain silent and so
I'm going to do so.
Senator sure thank you.
I would just give a little bit
of time with the Senate was
sentenced in place.
As we get those distributed.
Again for those are watching the
Sixtyeight as amended amendment
sponsored by senator Wirth
Center were to move an explain
amendment thank you Mr president
senator Wirth to explain the
amendment thank you Mr president
this is the man that we
discussed earlier basically all
it does even though it comes
reasons that we discussed
earlier.
Senator Cervantes.
Was present yes I think we
discussed this amply in the past
amendment here simply does at
all I think the moment to
reemphasize the point Senator
Wirth making which is
unfortunately we can we want to
make an amendment to this bill
now we have to effectively
we have to work on a new
amendment to the entirety of the
house bill.
Senator debating Center pharma
number one.
sensor for House Bill sixty
eight and ask for unanimous
consent.
Senator is where voting as
there's been a request unanimous
consent any objection.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
by Senator survive this Senator
about this to move explained the
amendment.
Mr president when asked to
withdraw the moment this time.
There's been a request to
withdraw the amendment.
We're back on the bill Senators.
Any further debate on the bill.
Thank you Mr president with the
senator yield Senator want to
steal you Senator I you know.
Just one of the challenges the
same bills of the last second as
that we work out of the body and
unfortunately you did not and I
have to raise it because this is
such a serious issue school
violence.
Twenty five year plans.
The languages in the bill now
says making a shooting threat
consists of intentionally
communicating to another person
that the person making the
president that we agree to
change before which is that my
concern about this language is
that is third person is for it's
intentionally is reporting.
In our young people in society
which is if you see something
say something.
That's not I think the intent of
Senator brands Bill the intent
is to make the the crime of
language that we approved on the
floor before which is clearly
says.
Which clearly says that making
the through the the threat
Would that be a friendly
amendment Mr senator and senator
we do respect you're looking at
the the wrong version the bill
you're looking at an earlier
version of bill that was
amended.
on the floor different from what
we pass here AS Senator Brandt's
Bill center brands bill
eliminating the language you're
asking about numbers the
communication of the threat to
somebody else and it was like a
hearsay or third party
the Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill
Sixtyeight that was passed out
at the beginning of the debate
looking at the pop pop top of
page twenty eight.
Tell me what I'm missing here.
Yeah and even then
The same language.
subparagraphs only because as I
pointed out due to the way we're
having to do this and so sitting
house bill every time we do one
of these it changes the whole
page numbers so for example
difficult for me because I've
made all my notes and done my
preparation with one version the
bill is changing as we go
through it but if you referred
to by section subsection letters
section B. subsection B..
On page twenty six.
clear that the crime is the
person communicating the threat
not the third person.
Your state reference that you
just mentioned.
section seven.
The the crime consists of making
the threat communicated to
another person so you gotta you
gotta anytime you're you're
communicating three other making
that's the person who received
or heard the communication and
any you're right we change the
word your call earlier I think
there was a word statement we.
Amended the bill on the floor to
with the words intentionally
communicating but the most
important amendment we made
with the help of Senator Baca
was
it's that part is the most
important part that clears up
the confusion what we have here
is making sure incorrect system
intense communicating to another
person that the person making
threat and rather that the for
that the crime is the
communicating of.
That person's intent that's
doing the communicating.
was change made by the bill
drafter to what they thought was
clarify the language or have
more more clarity I'm not sure
exactly what I understand your
a house bill you'll have to have
the entire building drafted.
This presents a would just make
an amendment on Senator work
then we just make another
amendment in the bill.
ideal but given that were less
than twenty four hours from
finishing up is the only women's
Committee may the only
amendments to be made to this
bill house bill now in this
chamber is to amend the entire
initially tried to.
Considered increasing funding
for substance abuse so we could
move the needle on crime and
amendment that was previously
passed but I'm really concerned
about this particular problem in
the bill
because I feel like we are again
putting a chilling effect on
Senator Steinborn there's no
others.
This is a debate.
Well.
The Santo system in place for
enrollment.
Senator Steinborn mass that you
yield to the Majority Leader
we're trying to figure out if we
I stand in place while we work
it out this presents.
Mr president.
amendment that I just did which
was Senate floor amendment
number one we just need to use
that as the the base and then
Senators time born within that
amendment to Senator voters will
do both your change and Senator
Steinborn should change within
this just hand written in and
sure that the amendment that I
put on the floor has to change
the section as well too because
section seven then runs all the
numbers backwards that makes
sense so so I'm having the staff
seven by your amendment senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
Some three zero gonna do we're
gonna stand in place for fifteen
minutes and folks can take a
Fifteen minutes senator thank
you just one thing before we do
that unanimous that we go about
our business committee reports
on that order business committee
reports the reader to read.
Thank you Mr president so we're
all moving lots of pieces and
we're just the committee report
we were going to do is not quite
The Senate will come to order.
All Senators make your way into
Mr president I move we signed I.
How senators to the chamber.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president center would you want
yield the Senator Woods for item
number twenty nine house joint
memorial one Senator Woods.
miscellaneous one that order
business senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so we're gonna pass
over the item number one on the
supplemental calendar that was
House Judiciary Committee subsea
Woods unanimous consent we go
about our business third reading
of legislation I yield to
Senator Woods for item number
twenty nine one that order
business center was.
the minute.
Senator put it on final passage.
Mr president as for unanimous
Number one.
Be on final passage in has been
taken and so that is now subject
to debate amendment and
substitution.
President.
This is.
During times of drought in we've
had a pretty good draft here.
And we're this is to ask our our
To to look at the uniqueness of
New Mexico the different climate
zones in New Mexico the
different things that we do in
our state.
You know the annual receipts in
That's pretty good says
industry.
And we just ask that the the.
A funny thing happens when we
start talking about agriculture
And they incentivize that.
So that you will pay more put
more fertilizer on more water on
increased production.
The federal people to think
about.
Is that.
We need to justify the use of
that water.
And produce products that.
To use water wisely to to bring
in a lot of cash crop into the
state.
And.
Mr president that's kind of the.
Just to this operation and I'm
I'm so sorry that I was I unable
to.
And this right away.
my friend.
ready for any debate or any
questions Mr president.
Thank you senator what's we are
debating House tomorrow one
See no objections.
Senator Representative.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield.
Senator is denied you.
intricacies of how the water
affects it
I do know that our state is in a
huge drought and
can you just explain a little
We're actually we're asking them
to
consider the impacts of drought.
Because it affects your yield so
And how do we entice them to
come it's a profit motive.
So we're just asking the the.
Congressional delegation to
Mr president center right thank
you Mr president thank you
senator I think.
this is important for our
commercial delegation to.
you that feed us and I
appreciate that and you know I
went with four I moved out of my
last home my I had several trees
for farmers do for us I grew up
in middle California and Central
Valley were most of the farming
is done.
and
account we also need to try to
figure out what to do about our
our water table and.
I think some of the things you
talked about with the force
to re look at how the manager
for us and here one of the
things I've always recommended
to them is that they talk to the
Mescalero tried because I will
further debate on the move on
the Joint Memorial.
Si no further debate on the
Joint Memorial Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman I disliked
the budget for to do that in the
course.
I've got a little program that I
have tried to get together with
research but Mr president I move
that.
House joint resolution.
Joint Memorial.
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator Stewart voting to your
seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
the Senate center was.
Thank you very much thank you
much to the chamber.
Thank you senator what senator
Wirth Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms consent we're going
number one a unanimous consent
we go that our business
committee reports on that order
business the reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
pass as amended respectfully
submitted George moon yo's chair
Senators.
Go ahead move adoption the
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I miss that we know
that our business third reading
of legislation a of Senator
Ingle for item number two one
Senate that the rule basically
been and records show that all
options for placing House
government election an Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to nineteen.
explained the bill.
Present there's a very simple
bill basically what we're doing
is allowing our counties.
it doesn't take effect until
after the next election which
will be next November in the
effective date of this bill is
January first twenty twenty
three.
assessed values and that's all
it is done many times thank you
thank you Senator Ingle centers
we're debating.
Anyone wishing to pay.
elections an Indian Affairs
Committee substrate for House
Bill two point two one nine.
Records show the rules been
called all of present voted in
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to nineteen has
passed the Senate Senator Ingle.
Present thank you and I have a
list of the salaries and what
they'll go to and I'm gonna run
the blue counter item number
twenty three House Bill fifteen
that Senator McKenna.
Senate to pardon me House Bill.
Fifteen twice amended.
On final passage.
Thank you Mr president.
I introduce this legislation
last year and this year it was
introduced in the house by
Mexico tribal pueblos and
nations to have cooperative
agreements with New Mexico tax
state taxation and revenue
department to collect gross
The power to tax is a
fundamental aspect of tribal
sovereignty.
The taxation and revenue
us zero Senator lipa the Navajo
Nation and the Fort Sill Apache.
governments in our state.
The New Mexico TRD collects
tribal gross receipts taxes on
transactions on tribal lands and
property tax from its membership
yet we have the same expenses
that any other municipality has.
For example the Pueblo of
Actimize G. R. T. is eight
percent.
However they cannot collected
two five percent.
So Mister president this
legislation was originally
recommended by the New Mexico
Thank you senator we do have a
floor amendment.
The reader to read the floor
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill fifteen as
one to house bill fifteen is
already twice amended.
See no objections senator Phil
explained what the amendment is
thank you Mr president so my
My concern all along has been
that we are the people the in
this in this body and the other
people on the other side I guess
when we cede our authority to
either the executive or the
judicial branch.
And so substantially similar
just undefined.
why would anybody do one way or
the other.
Well I don't know.
And I don't care what I care
If we say nope that's not
substantially similar then we go
to court.
And Mr president I just think
it's it's it's time that we as a
authority to the department.
And so all I'm trying to do here
is say define what what the
substantially similar means.
In that so the so the tribes
nations in pueblos certainly can
do what they want with taxes
they get to benefit from those
taxes.
Not trying to say they can't do
Keep the courts out of this so I
think this is a a good amendment
it it shouldn't simply makes
that definition and then we can
all move on and I'll be happy
agency presentation thanks share
expert in internet agency and
for.
And Berkeley Rogers.
She is a member of the chest not
law offices.
May I have permission to collar
she had to leave.
Senator.
So Mister I'm not sure that I
object special on this I'm not a
jerk about this but.
the procedures of the Senate and
I understand that we all got
weird we put on weird masks and
we're stuck in our own CO two
back in our brain costs and just
be stupid every once in awhile.
But.
consent the record show whatever
not only do we not at our chairs
when we vote not only are we not
wearing the proper a tire
And so for that I think maybe we
are.
I don't at the she needs an
expert I don't think I'm harming
her bill at all.
Thanks Senator senator Wirth
some is wrong his we're going to
do I I just think at this point
we need to go to the tax to the
tax bill that's down so we're
she in Santa Fe which is in
Santa Fe I would suggest you
call her and bring her back
Senator.
Thank you Mr president so I have
contacted Representative Harper
While I was going through that a
request Mister president I do
have a response to.
To the question presented and to
Senator share which I have
One moment Mr president.
So Mister president I asked I
there's never been an instance
of arbitration for termination
of any of the cooperative
agreements.
more over.
He did say that.
Senator so Mr Chairman.
Yes she did email that to me and
So Mister president.
So the first step then based on
what we were told is first we
see the power to the executive
definition that's clear in law
right now in.
And just taking care of it.
So and again it's not that.
It's not that I think there's
we're all about us ceding power.
To the executive or the
judiciary in in this when we do
it both.
So that's that's that's.
Thank you Mr president and
senator moreover I can add an
additional response to of the
inquiry Mr president Senator.
and the tribe or pueblo that the
dispute resolution is
arbitration as outlined in the
cooperative agreement as I said
the cooperative agreement.
Senator so Mr president what
I've heard is that arbitration
always succeeds and no one ever
goes to court after arbitration.
Senator CEO I do.
So Mr president and senator.
This arbitration always work
when you're involved in.
and go through it there's very
limited exceptions you can't
appeal unless you contract to do
that typically it's binding
arbitration and that's it.
So Mr president.
substantially similar is that
binding arbitration.
Does that bind us to anything.
Because again what is
substantially similar.
bill carefully enough to be able
to give you a direct answer so
ideal Center McKenna Senator
can.
Mr president and senator could
you please repeat the question
thank you.
the the nations tribes and
pueblos to to collect their
taxes to use their taxes to what
they want to do with their taxes
and I'm all in favor of that.
where there is quilt binding
arbitration where the state and
the nation pueblo tribe must
accept whatever comes out of
that.
Eventually a judge will tell us
what tax policy is instead of us
telling the judge what tax
policy is.
In in in really the it has
nothing to do with your bill at
see here once again this is the
Legislature ceding authority to
someone else whether it's the
executive.
Or the or the judiciary.
we set something we said right.
There we go on and off we go.
Thank you.
Further debate on the amendment.
as I said here this has nothing
to do with this bill.
It has nothing to do with the
the the policy and and if we
think that it ought to be five
I think we're protecting
ourselves as a as a legislative
body so I move Senate floor
amendment number one to house
bill fifteen is already twice.
Senator is more voting tier
seats if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand we are on
the amendment Senator Steinborn
Senator McKenna voting no Center
pope voting no Senator Duhigg
voting now Senator Padilla
voting no Senator Hickey voting
now Senator mantas voting no
Senator Gonzales voting no
Senator Wirth voting no Senator
Lopez voting now sentence
defendant voting no Senator
Hemphill voting no Senator
no explain my vote Senator
Moores voting no.
bipartisanship looks like.
Thank you Senator Pirtle we're
back on the bill si no further
debate on the bill Senator
McKenna close up.
Representative thank you Mr
president so as this bill came
over from the.
House.
the Fort Sill Apache tribe or
the Navajo Nation.
And.
But then I noticed that the
Senate Indian rolling cultural
Senator McKenna I'm just.
Thank you Mr president yes I'm a
I'm not aware of that proposed
with that amendment and it of
the Fort Sill Apache is excluded
Point one four nine dash eleven.
Through twelve dash to.
Senator so the thank you very
has their own section.
And so wasn't considered.
Has its own agreements.
With the state and so we didn't
Just one moment Mr president.
Senator now thank thank you very
much Senator McKenna thank you
actually I have developed my own
expert witness.
Etcetera etcetera we're still
seeing no further debate
etcetera mechanicals.
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands says
we're voting to your seats
Seneal is very now.
Senator Baca voting no Senator
Pirtle voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
By a vote of thirty five the
colleagues Senator Wirth.
Your.
item number one House Judiciary
Committee subsea for House Bill
sixty eight cents of this
Senator Hernandez.
Which of.
Looks like a typewritten taped.
Amendment to what is our usual
blue form so that'll help
Yeah this intends to amend what
was sent floor amendment number
one right so so we're clear
about that.
unanimous consent of the Senate
the rules be suspended the
record show that all actions
necessary for placing.
What is house bill house
Judiciary Committee substitute
I think was business present
Senator Steinborn pointed out
rightfully that some some of the
language of seven words from the
bill that you receive this that
apartment number one did not
my heart he's taken what was
seven words down to to and so
much more precise in artfully
worded we like to use the word
elegant so that's good of the
there's a second offence in the
commission of a crime of a drug
transaction or an aggravated
burglary where there is a fire
arm that's brandish your use
that there's an enhancement of
had to go back and tracked
through other sections for the
effective date so we change the
effective date because the all
the section numbers changed when
center with limited section
as three times amended Senator
we are we need to debate the
amendment we do have Senator
Brandt who wishes to debate.
So
two to Senate floor amendment
number one.
To House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill
Sixtyeight as amended amendment
sponsored by Senator serve on to
questions we do have debate on
the amendment Senator Brandt
this presents is really not
debate on the amendment I'm just
trying to figure.
Procedure out
thank you Senator Brandt any
further debate on the amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator Cervantes to
close thank you Mr Mussa former
unanimous consent here sometime
thank you Mr president can lay
as soon as consensus is better
question Adams consent any
objection.
In the bill G. as president I
appreciate the fact that we got
through about a third way
through the bill and although do
we get to a lot of questions to
things I think the Senate should
recognize and appreciate that
in the second degree that was an
important priority of the
governor and we're we're take
care of that here we're
increasing the penalties for
violent felons who possess a
firearm particularly those in
the transaction of a of a drug
new crime for threatening as
Senator rants Bill those
threatening to to do a shooting
we're protecting judges by
creating a crime before in a
crime for Topshop you for that
this would make it a crime to
steal cars kind of cars we've
increase the penalties for
people who steal materials such
as copper aluminum and other
metals.
able to get that data without
having to get a warrant if they
can show an ongoing
investigation show probable
cause.
We're putting a number of crime
reduction requests because our
grants to local governments and
law enforcement to do so.
And we're proud or also
providing an entire new section
for funding of violent.
a product of work from the house
suggestions in the house and
from my good friend Sir my nose
and the finance committee
members who really took all of
the important parts of the
And so Mister president the
second be proud of this effort
working with the house members
and with the governor we look
forward to helping New Mexico's
New Mexicans recognize we got a
serious crime problem and we're
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill number sixty
eight as amended do now pass and
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show the rules
then called and all those
present voting affirmative
So we are voting on the bill
Senators.
Anyone wishing to vote now
please raise your hand.
Having clothes Senator you you
made that in I want even
repeated.
the Senate Senator mantas the
members of the Senate Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so UNM's
I'm gonna business announcements
miscellaneous one that order
business announcements
number two and we'll start with
item number one that'll be
Senator Correa Hemphill house
bill forty three
and then as soon as we get that
serving legislation I yield to
senator Clemente Hemphill thank
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill forty three
president house bill forty three
once amended is there charter
school facility improvements
bill and this bill does three
New Mexico finance authority for
charter schools to receive
public financing to purchase
facilities and it also creates
clarity between charters and
finance authority rather than an
appropriation to the public
project revolving loan fund and
the change was made in
consultation with New Mexico
president thank you Senator
Hemphill house bill forty three
was passed I know you and
unanimously by the house but in
addition to that by our a Senate
education and House
received significantly less
funding than traditional public
schools I eat clearly this bill
will support facility needs of
it those existing charter
charter schools with a proven
track record thank you Mr
president thank you senator we
do have debate Senator Pirtle
followed by Senator o'neal
Senator point of personal
stop that.
Thank you for find that out
Senator.
Senator Pirtle fall by Senator
o'neal Senator Pirtle thank you
Mr president just rise in full
support of this legislation I
charter school and and
Albuquerque for high risk kids
and this is really going to
really help us out so really
appreciate this bill thank you.
this and I think it's it's
really actually very important
thing for charter schools to get
into proper facilities for those
Mr president I don't of the the
Sanchez deal but I stand in
solidarity with senator from
Roswell Booker T. and sit in
the close.
Thank you Mr president I move
that Senate bill our house bill
forty three once amended do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the role it's been
I have a forty one the firm is
in the negative house bill forty
three as amended has passed the
house bill one forty eight that
Senator Griggs Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
or substitution solo gestione
Senator Griggs to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr president house
bill one forty eight extended by
this is the bill that we passed
back in June twenty twenty
during the special session.
Thank you senator Senator
debating house bill one forty
that shouldn't that house bill
one forty eight do now pass and
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the rules been called and all
those present voted in the
By a vote of forty one of the
Mr president we're on a roll
let's go to item number twenty
six and Center Gonzales house
bill one seventy one Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president I ask
On final passage has been taken
on that it is now subject to
debate amendments or
substitution.
See no objections Senator
Gonzales explained the bill.
members through all of Mr
president last year we passed
Senate bill one thirty three and
this is to help communities
program to allow aircrafts up to
thirty passenger jets to
participate and lower to the
match requirement for
communities that already have
stand for questions but I do let
me move the amendment thank you
said that we do have a floor
amendment the reader to read the
amendment Senate floor amendment
number one to house bill one
I move Senate floor amendment
number one two two two two eight
three four point one then Mr
with New Mexico D. O. T. they
have already they already have
in place the requests for this
year for the smaller aircraft
this is what it does.
I use present in this present to
the the center explain a little
bit more on.
Or the so this was air
ambulances.
all this is for aircraft small
aircrafts.
Thank you Mr president I think I
got it confused with another
bill thank you.
Mr president with that I move
that
The Senate floor amendment
There's been a motion to adopt
you want to use in doing that
unanimous consent senator Mr
president yes.
Is there a request for unanimous
consent to adopt Center for
bill Senator Gonzales thank you
Mr president as I mentioned this
was started last year it has
really helped with the small
airports and the we do have a
larger aircraft going up to
thirty passengers.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president yeah I
think this is a this is a good
bill it it comes up a little
as well but I thank the sponsors
will work with us over the
interim and maybe we can figure
further debate.
Seeing no further debate.
Senator Gonzales to close.
that the record shows that the
rule has been called and that
all those present voting in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator voting tier states.
By a vote of thirty nine the
affirmative soon the negative
house bill one seven one is
twice amended has passed the
Senate Center Gonzalez.
Senator o'neill house bill one
thirty four as amended.
Sentinelle is thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Yes.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one thirty four
as amended do now pass.
explain the bill thank you Mr
president and members this bill
reinstitute the sports authority
within the tourism department
and the funding makes it
possible for the sports
Senator is we're debating.
See no debate Senator never
closed on the bill this thank
bill and
And we're gonna.
Yes.
Records show that the roll then
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
Please raise your hand.
House commerce and economic
development committee said super
house bill one thirty four as
amended has passed the Senate
Center o'neill.
eleven Senate memorial thirty
one that Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales.
unanimous consent that the
Senate that the record shows
that all action for placing.
Senate memorial.
Number thirty one.
the memorial.
Thank you Mr president put on
this is us is so last year.
Through the department of
It has been brought to my
attention by the New Mexico
school boards association that
they would like to request that
the memorial with study and that
Flat per deem of ninety five
dollars per.
Per session when they meet.
With that I stand for questions.
Hello Mr president high heel.
Mr center I did get some
questions at school boards
association on this in is it
Discussion and.
Communication with them it would
be for regular school board
meetings.
And also when they travel you
school board meetings and or for
the school board association
meeting but let work through
that.
Hi all I had thank you and I
feel.
Senator Gonzales thank you for
bringing this I will I will tell
you that I've heard from some my
constituents who serve on
community college boards with
the exact same issue.
The exact same.
Problem that a lot of the school
board members have.
Have suffered in so I would I
Gonzales Mr president no.
And Senator huh
That would be you know the.
Sir Senator the.
I think this president I'm
I hear your.
I don't want to report also
because of the.
Certainly
The Senate say stand in place
for a moment yeah I'm I'm I'm
just I'm I'm I'm finishing the
amendment to make the to make
the changes okay.
Senator Brandt.
and and Senator have that there
was a change that we made when
we're dealing with some of the
COVID things that messed up the
You know I forget the exact
number of years but all through
the department of finance I
don't think that they have been
reviewed for about twenty years.
for virtual that was one of them
the other part was so you know
through the department of
finance is so they found it very
for you know it was discuss any
was brought up to the if you
will so all up to.
Up to four hours you know and
school board I think senator
soul served on the school board
Sergei goes you still serve on
the school still serve on school
boards so
you know a lot of us got our
Image with it was just left
there right just below what the
state the Max was.
But then we change these rules
to deal with.
not paid just like we are and I
know some people of pretty Ms
for travel and all that kind of
stuff and I get that but the
so maybe one of the things we
have to look at and I'm not
gonna mentor bill because I
don't like doing that on the
floor on a moral I guess maybe a
little ridiculous but
Mr president in the Senator
Yeah let's perhaps something
that can be considered a right
now the request was to look at a
dollars per session or per time
that they meet.
Senator Representative.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you senator I I think it's I
see if the the senator that that
I just insulted would yield.
Etcetera etcetera.
Around.
Senator Brandt
constitution says the kind of
perfect.
Thank you Mr president Sir I
appreciate that answer I didn't
think there was I think we're
the only body that's
senator for sheet that and think
of something maybe we ought to
look at I I understand your
morals just on per diem Senator
and and I appreciate it I
what what might be fair
to compensate people for their
time when it comes to school
boards his letter it was hours
twice a month to get ready for
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president this president I'm I'm
actually not going to submit
the.
reminded me correctly that the
alley as he does not have
authority to do anything with
regard to higher education for
the community colleges.
R. although I would think that
they would be able to do it with
those that are an extension of
when the L. E. S. C. looks at it
they may want to consider the
suggestion made by Senator
Brandt and once the legislation
comes we can expand it out to
the to other educational groups
seeing no further debate Senator
Gonzales to close on the oil.
Thank you Mr president I move
the Senate memorial.
Senate memorial th.
All those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands centers where voting tier
seats if you wish to vote no
I have a thirty seven the
different Israel then they get a
several mile thirty one has
passed the Senate centralist.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
Senate that the record shows
that all action for placing
I see no objections center
Gonzalez to explain to explain
tomorrow.
Thank you Mr president put on
this is being done and the you
And the this is so looking at
the cost.
Of what goes into the classroom
and the costs for school
administration.
expenditures on both sides.
And it's very known very
interesting the in our committee
hearings we have some very good
questions we have some very good
concerns.
identified nine districts with
the way over percentage of what
goes into administration but at
the time he says I don't have an
expense a versus so.
To administration but the other
part is so.
You know that we can get the
maximum dollars into the
classroom and this is what it
does.
Senator Gonzales to close on the
moral.
Thank you Mr president I move
that sent a memorial thirty do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate for the
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Gonzales resident members thank
you.
have literally done all the
bills on the calendar on house
bills we have.
the you know there's a few more
memorials there but I think
president I'm gonna ask
unanimous consent we just stand
in place and once we get that
amendment done we'll do that
bill and I think that's going to
be it for the evening.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms that within our
Council I know we've all been
read high speed four into one
final item tonight it's Senate
supplemental counter number two
item number two has taxation and
that that the house tax revenue
subs to for house bill one sixty
three is amended.
As amended
As amended on final passes now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
Senator when you us to explain.
Thank you Mr president house
Individual taxpayers that pay
under seventy five thousand
single and hundred fifty over
and military tax exemption solar
market tax credit and the G. R.
T. reduction for for them and
hygiene projects their anti
print provision anti permitting
provisions in this bill.
percent of G. R. A. G. R. T.
rate reduction by one eighteen
twenty three and additional one
eight and twenty four.
Demonstrating are commensurate
G. R. T. in New Mexico.
debating house taxation revenue
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty three as amended
we do have a floor amendment.
The reader to read Senate floor
Senator Wirth to move explain
amendment thank you Mr president
move sent floor amendment number
one to house tax and Rev
Committee subsea for House Bill
one sixty three is amended twice
reimpose is a.
A one time nine million dollar
That's required to make the
change in the law line up and
the final thing it does is takes
the child tax credit.
years Senator is correct and it
was inadvertently doubled to ten
years this just takes it back to
five years exactly like it came
over from the house that's what
the amendment does.
See no debate on the amendment
Semenya's Senator Wirth to close
on the amendment thank you Mr
president of the Senate floor
amendment number one to house
Projections see no objection
Senator menambah in Senate floor
amendment number one has been
added to House Texas revenue
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty three is twice
hard on this I just want to call
out one particular item here
that I think is pretty historic
for New Mexico the social
security tax exemption is really
gonna change a lot of people's
go head on into this but you
know here in New Mexico were one
of twelve states it's still
taxes so security we're gonna
put ourselves in the fast lane
in terms of retirees and
retirement here in New Mexico
president this becomes a multi
generational tax cut for you
know New Mexicans which is a
very beautiful thing the average
families going to see somewhere
security since nineteen eighty
three and we all know this is a
sacred trust we all know that
this is something that people
already pay their taxes on so
we're in a very good position
here to make a really huge
difference with this one
the sponsor yield seminars
detailed Mr president center yes
I will you.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator
before was amended was roughly
about five hundred and thirty
eight million.
Thank you Mr president Senator
what's the total budget that
we're spending this year.
million dollars and capacity and
so that we had looked into some
other funds in the in the
process and found out there's a
little bit more in in there are
reserves are gonna hold strong
about eight point eight point
six.
Six.
Eight point seven million in
total is about is a budget eight
that there's going to be more
capacity going forward those of
you that serve with me on Senate
tax this is an transportation
And when that bill went into
effect in July of last year.
We realized in my municipalities
in my to communities that we're
The one thing that I just to be
in this tax bill.
Was language to support the
continue we have an opportunity.
To get some of the money back to
southeast New Mexico.
That this legislature is
spending.
forward we're not gonna be able
to support the industry that
supports the state.
And I'm very disappointed that
it is not in this.
Once I would like a little
recognition of where this money
is coming from.
And a little bit of help from my
municipalities.
I don't know if it's gonna pass.
And if it does pass will have a
little bit of money to get this
through until we can fix this
problem permanently.
Thank you Mr president.
We do have for the debate
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
the floor amendment but I
wondered if if the senator Munoz
would yield to couple questions
maybe he could answer these
questions federal yes Mr
Mr president senator of we're
getting the number but that the
nursing was about nine million
dollars if I remember correctly
off the top of my head
five years but it one year left
but actually had five years left
and so we had then virtually
made that mistake of for the
sustainable we're looking that
up and if I remember right it
total impact of the bill Mr
president and senator it's
relatively minor amount to but
maybe.
Fifteen million something like
that.
Mr president sent roughly in
included in this but I noticed
on on this yellow description of
the summary of the bill on page
five you have a chore a table
table one revenue impact by
Housing because better lease are
included on the chart and for
and for Hobbs the the impact is
pretty significant fifty eight
And I guess those are those are
thousands right fifty eight
thousand not not millions and
then up over a million foot is
that from how does that work I
Mr presence intern those are
based on poverty levels and that
those that haven't enacted the
communities that did increase
the G. R. T. they have been
paying money.
Are getting any help with the
fewer members the hold harmless
clause right and there's
communities and and I'll use
mine for example this is wrapped
in senators and those bill the
community the best we can about
gross receipts we're almost at
nine percent where the Max that
really can charge before people
start going to other places to
as as of the hold harmless gets
phased out phased out phased out
the cities and and and started
to suffer more more Gallup's
budget impact is about two
trade area and so when you raise
that trade area.
G. R. T. tax it it suffers on
some of the poorest people in
support Maxence and so this is a
conversation we need to have and
So so Mr chairman and senator at
as I'm just eludes me what the
basis for selecting those
particular communities was Santa
damning is one of the poorest.
Cities in the state and it's not
on this list I am just missing
some connection here.
Mr president let me try to
the the G. R. T. increases and
so that in an act amendment and
so they've never.
Have a chance to level offered
again increase on their G. R.
T..
Okay says and I.
Okay well I am a only good that
at at at it is very confusing to
tax on food and and and
Gave it to the given the
opportunity to the counties and
municipalities.
We're helping the ones that
didn't tax themselves.
that G. R. T. increase and and I
think it was part of the hold
harmless that we allow them to
enacted an increment some of
those cities and I think Los
crucis enacted it almost
the perfect example that I can
tell you we have a population of
twenty thousand our trade areas
is a populations about seventy
thousand we are at the Max I
believe tell us is on the list
reason they didn't couldn't
raise it there already too high
that we figured we hold them
harmless and and and if we look
at some of those they're very
about at twelve thirty at night
but
I'll have to try to figure it
out later on my own thank you Mr
president thanks center there's
a panel where further debate
Senator Pirtle.
this to you know it's a story we
all know how would you compare
this bill to of the story.
The puppy who lost his way.
and then I can compare forty.
And thank you Mr president of
the world was changing the puppy
was was getting bigger so you
see the puppy was like industry
and that they were both lost in
And what's your question.
Thank you Mr president that's
all I have.
Senator Griggs.
What what Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
talks about when he talks about
hold harmless.
We we discussed hold harmless on
the floor.
Senator Molinos makes a valid
argument about the challenges
that Gallup station.
But the argument.
Stopping of hold harmless
payment.
Thanks not because we had to
build we had two bills dealing
Because Mr president it was.
It was somewhat more expensive
than the other.
But.
It's not going away this year
although this helps from
communities.
Not going away next year it's
only getting worse.
did this time Mr president and
and members I don't believe was
the right solution.
But I do believe there's a lot
on this bill but Mr president
we've got to.
We've got to work on a hold
harmless to find a different way
And we've neglected to fix it
right here when we had an
opportunity so thank you Mr
president and thank you members
of the body and senator Munoz
together and make it a good one.
I'm just looking forward to the
opportunity to make some other
things happen in this state that
Sentiment us detailed.
Mr president center Committee
yield to the majority floor
so I'm trying to understand and
Senator Ortiz two panels working
on this looking on page five we
have the revenue impact by
municipalities I'm trying to
whole lot about Los Alamos which
didn't.
More a bit Carlsbad and I think
Los Lunas are very blue collar
work type communities can you
explain to me why they have
Centerman yes.
Mr presence in that that's a
calculation or they show zero
and and it shows a Pueblo Leri
so if you look at the the chart
some of those ended up with a
zeros a Los Lunas may gave away
a whole bunch of their G. R. T.
to Facebook and and
infrastructure costs and
construction so they there may
sandals Bill inside this tax
package.
Mr president etcetera I'm not
corporations but it just
confused me that there's quite a
an understanding but that was my
question thank you Mr president
thanks Senator goes Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
just for the members I I just
have been informed that there
Senator Baca the child tax
credit as it came out a Senate
finance was was ten years and we
were taking it back to five
years which is as a came out of
the house that amendment was not
issue with that we can have that
debate San ideal Center Baca
center Baca I thank you Mr
president I appreciate that
disclosure that.
Senator Wirth just again and
Si no further debate centerman
also closed on the bill.
Mr president I move that house
tax revenue transportation for
except for those present voting
the negative slide show hands
centers where voting tier seats
if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty nine the
affirmative on the negative
house tax revenue committee for
house bill wants to substitute
Committee for house bill one
sixty three is three times
security tax and Veterans tax
credits hopefully that will spur
New Mexico and and hopefully
we're doing the right thing I
think it helps quite a bit so
those bills and this is the way
tax packages got rolled together
there's a lot of hard work into
the good representative for a
lot of hard work into it Senator
Wirth put a lot of hard work
Thank you Mr president the NM
sis and we got our order
business announcements and
miscellaneous one that order
business announces
miscellaneous.
Mr president is go back in
substitute for Senate bill
twelve as amended by the Senate
with emergency clause and Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill one forty as amended
has been received Senator Wirth
I thank you Mr president so that
is it for tonight we're going to
be back tomorrow morning at
eight o'clock so if there's any
other announcements now's the
Having things and removed for
more session said sergeant arms
if they leave all the paperwork
on the desk.
Any further announcements.
For everyone by saying that I am
not have committed so it's and
governor not spend more than
five minutes and I'm gonna keep
to that.
this falls in these last hours
of session
where some of the most important
work for the state gets done I
think body for allowing me to to
make a brief stint.
with you as a man
Representative.
I will be resigning and retiring
from the Senate on by the end of
the calendar year.
So barring any special or
And I will share with you that I
was I was toying with the idea.
well I was the executive
director of equality New Mexico
By okay Meryl Streep.
And and Baroness Thatcher quoted
in that movie and she said
something that just struck me
and help me make the decision.
And in the last ten years I've
tried as best I can.
Alongside all of you.
To.
So I I briefly Mr chairman as I
said by the Senate.
Want to thank you all.
For your collaboration and work.
Which has the infamy of shutting
down the Senate house basketball
game on a call of the Senate.
which is probably one of the
Broad bipartisan support in a
time when the numbers in these
chambers were formal far closer
between Democrat and Republican.
certificates and driver's
licenses reality in New Mexico
and hopefully by noon tomorrow.
The the the house will stand up
senator Sanchez and thank you
senator for ensuring that that
piece of legislation made its
way into the omnibus package.
required all of us to just
buckle down and do do do our
institution in the state and for
our communities.
fear in many ways is challenged
our commitment to democracy
itself.
But during that time we've been
able to come together and I was
proud to work with many of you
including senator Wirth.
credit for New Mexico families.
Do not the small business
recovery small business recovery
loan program that is now doled
out a hundred and sixty million
Miss Mister president I didn't
think.
The people who live in Senate
district twenty six on the west
side of Albuquerque for putting
their faith in a plucky and much
The state.
That.
Has allowed me.
I am ready for an amazing new
chapter of life.
You know when I when I over the
last ten years.
Senate and for the new members I
realized there's basically three
ways that you leave the
legislature one is you are
criminally indicted and sent to
prison that I think is the least
But ultimately I've always
thought the best choice is to
voluntarily retire and to pick
when you choose to hand it off
think every person who is helped
write this chapter of my life
you are too many to name.
I think my husband Corey very
Kind of prayers I think.
At least for me they are prayers
there there there brief briefs.
Problems.
Want to speak to one of the
following.
remiss if I didn't say that.
Unless there is realistic to
tional reform of the Legislature
people like me in their mid
career just cannot Sir.
practice I can no longer
dedicate a hundred and fifty
percent of myself to this
institution and that is what
I've always chosen to get.
And so now it's time for other
didn't want to thank all the
members present for their
support in making some real
public infrastructure projects a
reality on the west side the
pool property conservation
especially when I think Senator
I'll keep this positive so I'm
not making this a negative thing
but I do saying that the Supreme
Court decision in state ex rel
Candelaria be Lujan Grisham will
can get home including me.
Want to share with you to.
Meditations as I we.
The first is one of my favorite
And and was a member of a movie
that and and Great Britain to
ensure that workers had the
right to vote and other basic
rights.
He who is mingled in the fray of
duty.
The braven tour must have made
You've never turned the wrong to
rights.
You work in the fight.
I'll spare you the other one I
won't read it it was
Senate but I be excused from the
floor session beginning at eight
AM tomorrow as I will be
representing a clients beginning
the empaneling of a jury in a
my deal with everyone tonight
Is if you do I feel that I have
been an important part of your
Ripley bad maybe but at the end
of the day I would like everyone
to get home so I would like
everyone to reserve any
statement good bad or
Mr president
for the last time.
Thank you.
To the people of New Mexico.
For the last decade of my life.
All I can say.
Important point.
It is thank you.
I love you thank you Mr
o'clock tomorrow morning said it
was sent Reese is ATM tomorrow
ATM today.
