And so less.
Senator Hickey here Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator me out.
Senator Kernan.
Senator then yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator oh now.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart senator Tom in.
Thank you address that everyone
please rise.
For the indication to me that
today by United States Air Force
veteran Reverend at in this the
Pledge of allegiance in Spanish
to be lead today.
By Senator Hotmail.
And the salute to the mass of
like to be led today by Senator
Kernan.
You make us to lie down in green
pastures U. R. L. heme you are
Jehovah Gira the god who
provides you on god almighty el
righteousness Jehovah to scan
New.
Thank you god for your love for
your mercy and your grace
although we do not deserve it
the business that will be
conducted here today be
conducted with the wisdom of
Solomon the wisdom that operates
out of love and compassion for
parade itself is not puffed up
does not behave rudely does not
seek its own is not provoked
thinks no evil does not rejoice
all things love never fails now
father as the business for the
people are conducted here today
let these words ring as built in
and the name of the lamb of god
the chamber says.
But I'm at the less than.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Once again I'd like to welcome
members a unanimous consent to
go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection where in
that order business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you president thank you
We need all the wisdom
compassion and patience that we
can find so again I just
appreciate you being here and
again I appreciate our Senate
very much Mr president unanimous
consent to remove Senate
memorial seventy that's the end
scene yes family and institute
of flamenco from the plate
Wirth thank you Mr president
believes Center Lopez whose
memorial this is we'll have
someone with her to introduce
we're gonna wait we'll probably
put the Senate memorial onto a
today we have lunch
sponsored by Charlie markets and
others from Powdrell as barbecue
in the lounge so definitely I'll
dinner will be served in the
Senate lounge sponsored by Marla
show it's and many others and we
very much appreciate.
chamber.
Hearing no objections cameras
are to be about only the Senate
chamber today Senator Mike over
the thank you very much Mr
president units consent to
Hey Senators wishes to make
announcement Center could
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president I have
some very special guests this
morning or this afternoon now
one inspired us all in with
their testimonies and sharing
their story and their hard work
I'd like to recognize like the
touched all of our hearts with
her honor help
on house bill one thirty one and
Callaway please welcome these
Mr president I also have their
family up on the rostrum that
I'd who I'd like to recognize I
have Laura Lewis please stand.
And I have hopes family up there
as well Annabel Burnett.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator today Hemphill we have
further announcements then
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr president of the.
Seek your permission to
two constituents called me
recently and.
Yes my questions about what goes
on up here and I try to explain
it to him and they said no
that Senator Mr president like
introduce a Kathy clay Barker
and lead to cell death so let's
give them a warm round house.
further announcements Senators.
Senator my SS thank you Mr
president I just want to rise
one which was introduced on a
Thursday and then passed the
Senate that Friday night and was
concurred to by the house at
high noon on that Saturday those
consumable for manufactured
goods which closed a fifty
million dollar hole in in the
tax code for manufacturers it
started the the our path to
at the time to reinstitute the
food tax combined reporting
which was chat which was
championed by our leader
combined reporting was halfway
done and then we got it
completely done in two thousand
request of the chief executive
down to five point nine which is
where it remains today but is
not a big portion of our tax
revenue but anyway all those all
those proposals and and things
the film industry unlike some of
the proposals last night which
I've never heard of before.
in which we just gave away half
a billion dollars in the
Senator Lopez.
I thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
we have a special guest I am
honored to have a special guest
chamber about who this very
special woman is it sitting up
next to the lieutenant governor.
Her name is Emma and CDS.
If you don't know whoever and
about flamenco here in the state
of New Mexico.
There's a.
I'm going to be a little bit Mr
State of the art and the past on
the art of flamenco to her
daughter a daughter Emma and CDS
and of course she has continued
and she has passed to this
nineteen seventy three and
toured with them for fifteen
years until she began teaching
at the university of New Mexico.
missin CDS it has developed
dance program in the world with
a flamenco concentration.
there are many students Mr
president members that I think
seventeen evidencing else's work
was recognized with the course
of membership into in order then
if that you save I'd like
catholica which is a special
really retired from this
wonderful work of expression and
dance and what I call sold in
our state.
So Mister president she also has
Albuquerque's creative Bravo's
legacy award.
She does have of course our two
children body so in seniors who
continuing this tradition.
Mr president I mean.
To even just be here to describe
of what this wonderful.
such an honor that she's here
with us today.
And I know Mister president we
were hoping to have a a
presentation of some flamenco
but I've invited for them to
come back next session earlier
hear the music thank you Tara
the the song and the soulfulness
that comes through it reminds me
if he thought also it it's part
of that that legacy that we come
from and that we are who we are
as people.
Mr president if you could also
presenter of the certificate
from the state from the Senate
today to thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez we're
still in that order business
announcements miscellaneous and
that they had some money owed to
the counties for the twenty
twenty to primary and general
election from the secretary of
state and I just wondered if you
Chavis county fifty four
thousand Diana County ninety
four thousand eighty county
thirty four thousand Grant
County seventeen thousand anyway
it goes down to the bottom here
would appreciate that Mr
president thank you thank you
center Watson I I do believe we
have an update on that you'll to
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr president all funds
you have I appreciate that so
much my care my County clerk's
appreciate that.
Thank you I'm I'm glad that you
we do have further
announcements.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and also
to on the and not a knowledge
have their performance in
Albuquerque and it was so
beautiful that most of the part
of being invited and also to be
Very nice and then of course I
also have a.
My daughter in law that does a
lot of work with you and that
Sarah Williams when Silas and
you know so she has really
brought into light a lot of
Thank you senator that as we do
have further announcements
Senator anticipate a.
Thank you Mr president and I
just wanted to also rise up in
started has done so many things
in in the community and it spun
off of course the festival which
is one of the premier tourist
that but also a charter school
that is spun off from the fest
from the institute and that's
the tier of interim charter
school which is housed in a
building is next to the
always never fail to remind your
son working of and that is that
I was his little league baseball
coach in many years ago he was
very very much that was in the
Thunderbird June minor leagues
and and that was a great
experience it was great to see
you again have a and all of your
work thank you so much for what
you do.
so honored to to meet her
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino when it's
much more detail and stole my
thunder about the legacy some of
the legacy that she has created
never at the level that more for
fun than anything else I even
took flamenco for awhile and
gave me even greater
appreciation for for the
Thank you Senator Lopez are
there for the nonsense center
how to meal.
Thank you Mr president and I
just want to stand up and think
about for keeping it less less
of the Socionext alive and well
beautiful Espanola valley I
can't wait to collaborate with
you and join together thank you
Mr president.
Thank you center have a male any
further announcements Senators.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take is that next
order of business I thank you Mr
president so we're going to the
gonna do to Senate bills item
ten Senate bill one forty six
that Senator Shendo item
thirteen Senate bill four ninety
one that center when you all us
I'm sorry number twenty house
bill one twenty six and that'll
be Senator souls and more work
our way down the house bill's we
also are going to have a consent
order business Mrs from the
governor of the reader to read
the article Mimi Stewart
president pro tem and members of
the New Mexico state Senate dear
president pro tem stored and
twenty three respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
In general so the message from
the governor has been received.
Yep.
messages from the house when
that order business messages
from the house the reader to
read Mr president I'm directed
to inform the Senate that the
house has passed Senate bill one
here with respectfully submitted
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk.
The journal show the message
from the house has been received
the Senate respectfully
submitted the same Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received the
reader to read.
committee substitute for Senate
bill nine with certificate of
correction Senate bill one
twenty as amended Senate bill
one eighty two as amended Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk in
general so the message from the
house has been received.
and request the concurrence of
the Senate to the house
amendments respectfully
submitted the state Marty's
McCutchen chief clerk.
we're going out of business
committee reports around that
order business committee reports
the reader to read Mr president
your health and public affairs
committee to whom has been
referred Senate Joint Memorial
chairman Senator participate
now.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate to agree
to be allowed to read all three
of the committee reports that we
Senate memorial sixty seven do
pass as amended.
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty one.
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
German center to Savannah Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report we have a
motion to it up committee report
all those in favor signify by
Mr president your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred Senate memorial sixty
nine has had it under
consideration reports same with
regular recommendation that it
committee report we have a
motion to adopt committee report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee port has been
adopted.
as amended has had it under
consideration and reports that
same is been duly rules and it
grossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
committee report and as we have
a motion to adopt the trade
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
Canadian forces been adopted
elected mounts of the members of
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill three ten
as amended has had it under
consideration reports the same
has been duly rules and gross
preparatory signing by the
The adoption of the committee
report.
You like me to do that during
the real growth Mr president I
do move adoption of the
committee report thank you so
to announce to the members of
the body that the options of
Senate have signed an open
session Senate bill three ten as
amended.
bill for twenty five as amended
has had it under consideration
and reports that same as been
duly and rolled and engrossed
preparatory signing by the
officers of the Senate
president I move adoption of the
committee report of the
enthusiasm Center thank you.
Senator there's a motion to
doubt the committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
seven health and public affairs
committee subs two percent a
bill for twenty five as amended.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth take is that next
order of business thank you Mr
seven these are the house
amendments to the Senate health
and public affairs Senate Bill
Coates is it a committee
substitute yes committee says
Senate bill one eleven as twice
amended Senator there's been a
motion to have the current scene
objective Senator souls real
explain what those amendments
are.
was moved it back out that this
bill as a three year sunset
instead of a one year sunset
thank you center so centers
we're debating concurrence to
Senate health of public affairs
close on the concurrence.
Thank you Mr president
Okay is the same thing to close
I move that the Senate concur
Senator is there's a motion to
end up.
The amendments the house
amendments.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye those opposed may.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth say is that next
order of business thank you Mr
president Ms because that we go
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
you're ready as I as I said
we're gonna do to Senate bills
this morning we are going to
reverse the order and do item
twenty and work our way down I
also know that there's a consent
calendar and we'll see when we
can slide that in with that Mr
president unanimous consent we
third reading just a asset the
volume state a minimum so that
would The presentation can be
heard.
Senate bill four ninety one
Mr president a few years ago we
in invert Lee made it withdrew
the transfer the need to happen
annually for insurance for
is kind of an emergency with
that'll stand for questions miss
present.
Thank you senator Senator
innovative sent before ninety
one.
do now pass us as consenus and
records show that all actions
that records show that the roll
then called and all those
present voting the firm except
those voting negative slide show
hand.
You Mr vote no please raise your
hand.
The negative central for ninety
one has duly passed the Senate
senator Munoz.
down item twenty a house bill
one twenty six that Senator
cels.
Etcetera so thank you Mr
president us is unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
substitution thank you senator
souls this if you explain what
the bill does.
HB one twenty six the L. E. S.
C. has been for the last two or
three years they're working on
half twelve here and more and
more the high school graduation
requirements resemble a Jenga
tower that's about to topple
over you can't put any more
credit it gets very difficult
for students to meet all of the
request credit requirements as
we currently have them this is a
redesign of those high school
graduation requirements for
requirements but this will start
phasing in the new set of
requirements the main pieces is
it reduces the requirements from
twenty four to twenty two
needs for career technical
education for AP credits for
band for all of the other kinds
of activities that we know help
questions thank you senator
souls centers we're debating
house bill one twenty six as
amended.
We do have a floor amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
by senator Linda M. Lopez
Senator Lopez to moving explain
them and then thank you very
much Mr president I now move
Senate floor amendment number
floor for several years
Presenting a bill with regards
to having ethnic studies as an
offering within our public
school system.
passed through the other chamber
and but with this redesign at
this point in time Mr president
there are public schools.
Districts public school
districts who are currently
it's not mandating there already
are again Mr president school
districts that are currently
offering and for this to be part
of this new design I bring four
for us to chat about and see if
it's difficult for me to say
whether this is friendly or
unfriendly first it is only
allows in many districts already
do this it's already allowed
ethnic studies is already
and we know how difficult things
can be in these last couple of
days of getting any time on the
other chamber and that would
jeopardize the many hours of
work the LFC is put into and the
negative towards the ethnic
studies or having it allowed in
there but at this late date it
jeopardizes the entire bill when
he has to go over for
concurrence and so for that
reason I would say it's an
the amendment.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor of the bill you please
yield missiles deal Mr president
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez Mr
president was our discussion of
ethics studies to be included in
the ongoing conversations and in
the last year to the public get
department is done a revamp of
the entire social studies
curriculum and requirements and
studies.
Senator souls Mr president the
curriculum the curriculum the
standards that are set up to
Room for individual instructors
as to how closely they follow
specific standards the standards
or guidelines for teachers.
of our state and and the history
and that history of our state in
a majority minority state should
include ethnic studies so I I
come to come to fruition like
this but I am disturbed to see
the ethnic studies is not listed
in the four units and social
science which include United
Mr president thank Senator Lopez
we do have further debate we
have Senator Brandt.
Thank you president with the
stand against this amendment I I
believe this our souls is
correct it's not necessary it's
already in our social studies I
think it just clouds the waters
it makes it more confusing for
process and that can be passed
to be signed if it's if it's
meant to be in there but I think
it just makes the the bill Wirth
it's a good bill the way it is
and it's just not necessary that
couple of of a.
Topics to put in for their
curriculum.
Mr president Senator is yes
local districts can choose to
history shall include New Mexico
history.
Thank you Mr president I think
that's you know as part of it is
the districts get that local
option and if we keep
prescribing things and I know
districts to to make you know
what what should be in their
graduation requirements and if
we're going to continue to take
the forty away from the local
districts and we probably don't
do that and the districts can do
that ethnic studies of the
districts choose to and it's
already in the curriculum so
they want to greater emphasis
process they can but I would
Si no further debate.
We do have for the debate on the
amendment etcetera Maestas thank
thank you Mr president will
Senator yield which seven would
you like all of this on the
the amendment Senator Lopez to
close on the amendment I thank
you very much Mr president I did
have a bill that was introduced
to the session.
We were in front of Senate
education.
vote so it never got out of
committee either tabled or
whichever.
I do remember in our
conversation Mr president
on an amendment.
So I prepared as was mentioned
and it was suggested that maybe
we could have this discussion on
the floor of the Senate.
Mr president this ammendment has
been sitting up there for a
somewhat embedded in the you
know the standards that we have
currently in the new bill in
front of us but Mr president
ethnic studies is not just to be
present to their students ethnic
studies is the classes dedicated
to either native American
studies Africano studies Asian
American studies Mexican
chair Mister president.
So I just wanted to say we did
have a bill.
we've done this a few years in a
row and yes it could be
Representative nother bill
the state and stable what is
being allowed what is not again
Mr president this just offers
may in the bill and with that Mr
president I do now move
memorized.
I don't okay
And they do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
to your seats please.
Senator Representative voting
no.
Senator Burt voting no senator
bill voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
and amendment number one is fail
to pass the Senate.
We're back on the bill senators
on the bill we have Senator
Maestas followed by Senator
you Mr president center I want
to first of all stand in and
rise and support of this bill
and just commend everyone for
their tremendous work over the
past two three four years the up
succeed in the twenty first
century so I want to commend the
chairman for that
of the and and similar to
primarily our criminal code and
curriculum bills need to be done
cognisant of the rest of the of
the overall curriculum but I do
just have a want to make a quick
point and have have a concern
Under the social studies Mr
president it says four units of
social studies and I'm looking
at the top of page thirteen
Mister president four units a
social studies which include
Semi colon and then government
and economics comma.
Which course content contained
civics and world history and
geography so Mister president
Mr president and senator it is a
classic government and economics
there for credits in this area
and so there's U. S. history
geography which includes New
some in the original
introduction of this bill it.
It took a step back in my
opinion Mr president for for
financial literacy education as
we know Mr president financial
elective not grand the student
isn't required to take it but
every high school offers it so
the curriculum is there it's a
full semester course of
financial literacy the
by alia State took that out and
so of.
So one on the house floor it
added in and we're grateful for
that so now it continues a full
financial literacy curriculum in
the social studies
classes and so it was decided
that by Elia see that that
personal financial literacy so
the magic words a personal
financial literacy are in the
curriculum as mandated but not
course Mr president or should we
just incorporated into the
economics class of as you recall
in twenty twenty one house bill
one sixty three.
education it was six nothing
granted the chair was absent so
that dialogue was never had it
course it did died for the lack
of time on the Senate floor in
twenty twenty two house bill one
not hold a hearing.
And then this year in twenty
twenty three Senate bill one
forty one was introduced and the
sanitation Committee did not
hold a hearing so in my opinion
full semester course or not so I
asked the leadership of L. E. S.
C. and and all of us here on the
floor to keep an eye on that
curriculum keep an eye on
whether it's incorporated keep
an eye on the the tests and
where we just had a ten year
struggle to eliminate
installment lending and things
of that nature that that our
students fully grasp their
relationship with money how to
utilize money to the best of
anyway thank you Mr president
thank you senator.
We do have further debate on the
bill Senator McKenna.
Mr president I wasn't able to
in the bill so take that for now
you can speak to the bill and
changes that you may would like
to see but specifically to the
amendment.
Where we already voted that.
Senator souls thank you Mr
president I move that house bill
one twenty six as amended do now
the bill all senators to your
city.
The.
Senate Senators souls.
Thank you Mr president that this
is just part of the ongoing work
of the L. E. S. C. it'll be four
years as we roll this in and we
will continue to monitor and
look at how these are working
you Mr president Senator Shendo
is ready on on item number ten
on the counter Senate bill one
forty six so that's where we'll
go next Senator Shendo thank you
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
I see no objections etcetera
etcetera yes the Senate bill of.
applications for a tax credit
from a hundred eighty days to a
hundred twenty days they also
modernizes the tax evasion
statute to encompass a new
sections or just a of of.
The talks about resolving of
protests on property taxes and
so forth with the county or the
state so with that I stand for
Senator Ortiz we do have a floor
amendment the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
Thank you Mr president the this
ammendment.
In Senate finance we're looking
over the numbers and and when we
looked over and there is a
striking of of fifty twenty five
that and then it complete
section two and it says the
system tax amount over fifty
dollars so just bringing up the
dollar amount with that I'll
stand for questions on the
Etcetera etcetera on the
amendment it's a friendly
amendment.
Any further debate on the
amendment senators.
the yield Mister Mister
president yes I will you Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
senator to questions does the
secretary of tax and revenue
amendment she Mr president
Senator yes you so supports the
amendment okay thank you and is
Mr president Senator is
Representative Harper support
the amendment.
This was present okay what we're
striking the Senate finance
committee amendment so we're not
putting an amendment on we're
taking language out of the bill
dollars it's it's it's not its
way but we want to move that up
to fifty dollars because it
takes more time and staff to
collect that that is worth
collecting so we just open the
amendment was sent over TCP in
on the amendment.
Senator Ingle on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president.
thirty six hours on this
particular bill and I've heard
that you and Representative
Harper kind of a team now is
that correct.
we do he is he is my
constituents in my district.
Senator Ingle.
I'm trying to stretch out in
here that response Senator share
night until loan I'd in the it
is confusing us we do call my
here the same way so I don't I
don't blame is a Mr president
so.
Sen Clemente and.
Do we have other debate on the
amendment.
I
Senate bill one forty six as
three time and amendment as for
a voice vote that's two times
The eyes have it.
Now it is three times amended
sentiment yes we are back on the
bill Senator Ortiz vanity Jewish
to speak on the bill.
This book three times amended do
not pass and asking them to send
of the Senate the records show
that the rule is been called and
that all those present voting
By a vote of thirty nine the
pharmacy on the negative Senate
bill one forty six is three
Thank you Mr president unanimous
that we gonna resentments
miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements
this thing is senator Wirth I
haven't done number one but
there were some issues on number
one in our consent team has been
working very hard so we had a
number two is a back up so just
reading of legislation and I
would yield to.
Senator Diamond Senate consent
counter number two first item is
record show that all action
replacing Senate memorial twenty
nine on final passage has been
taken in and is now open to
debate amendment or substitution
and I will yield to Senator
student civic engagement group
that are all over the state many
of them in our districts.
Many of them from the north for
severely impacted by the fires
help them with this education of
people and asking the governor
to have an importance of for us
day sometime in the fall stand
move the Senate memorial number
twenty nine do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present are shown voting
in the affirmative except those
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action
replacing Senate memorial number
thirty seven on final passage
has been taken and is now open
to debate amendment or
assault programs can be the task
force to make recommendations
for policy and legislative
changes to improve local county
state and federal jails as well
as detention and correctional
wishing to make Senator
committee the agency present I I
rise in support of this I did
want to bring up though I've
asked some questions in some
legislation about women's
women the associated with a
group called the women's
liberation front they're
alleging first eighth and
Fourteenth Amendment violations
worry about that for these women
your concerns Senator are there
covered in previous somewhere
well I that those comments were
made a few days ago and I.
questions about protection for
women in prisons we can't just
say it's covered in pre a pre is
actually fairly loose of course
is a great law well intended but
it's actually fairly loose and
had certain types of of
policies under prea and then the
binding ministration change
things quite significantly so
the body that you know we we
can't just say we're gonna rely
on pre I I very very much
support the moral of no morals
written very well and we we
definitely want to be in
DC thank you Mr president thank
you service maintenance any
further debate on the memorial.
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the world has
been called and all those
presidential voting in the
affirmative except those putting
negative by show of hands
Is present thank you senator
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action
replacing house bill one eighty
body in New Mexico there are
there is existing law regarding
the obligation to print public
notices in Spanish speakers
amount to more than twenty five
percent of the population more
of a statutes read that
on this list of those that are
able to public to publish in
print public notices and that is
the community all newspapers the
only Spanish language paper in
circulation south of Albuquerque
list so at this point Mr
president and Senate body I'm
asking the Senate body to
support adding the commuter rail
to that list of Spanish only
language papers thank you
Mr president I will DO and
famous present I'm I'm just
curious who's who's running the
clock on this one I've got it
right here.
We do have
to Senator how to meal because
Senators are debating house bill
one eighty two.
See no debate Senator Diamond
close Mr president I move that
Senators tier seats where
voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
House bill one eighty two has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Hamblen thank you Mr president
body Senator Diamond.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president this bill
simply updates the training
requirements for those who work
this bill does is it updates the
training requirements for those
individuals who work with them.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Lopez centers we're
twice amended do pass and I ask
unanimous consent in the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present are shown voting
in the affirmative except those
voting on the negative by show
Senator many of us to your seat.
House bill four forty six is
twice amended has duly passed
the Senate Senator Lopez thank
you Mr president thank you meant
members of the Senate Senator
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution and I
would be able to Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto thank you
very much was president as
president we passed back in two
Instrument that was recorded the
county clerk's office this just
simply updates that and makes it
more functional with that we
have just have a question
Senator is we're debating house
bill two fifty as amended and I
Senator Ivey Soto this presents
a Scribner's error.
Affidavit which is actually was
Senator Griggs is bill
originally
to do these governors there so
that if somebody records a deed
Senator Brandt is present
sponsor can you spell that
certainly I'm is present it's
actually a capitalized.
Because is name for somebody
president so this is just so if
you'd put something in wrong on
accident.
Or type a like we see in the
summer bills they don't have
been rolling in grossing to fix
the most boring bill of the year
thank you.
Senator Griggs thank you Mr
president great bill gray bill.
Any further debate senators we
misspelled Tammy and they put
ten mu and so now instead of
going back and do re doing the
entire thing this allows them to
correct that in that time frame
back to the person and they say
all I don't know if I want to do
this it's actually a good bill
thank you.
Thank you seven yes do we have
any further debate on the bill.
pass and I ask unanimous consent
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present are shown voting
in the formative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands.
By a vote of forty one that
important going on to the next
item an ideal to Senate I'm in
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House government
elections in Indian Affairs
I would yield again to Senator
Ivey Soto Senator Ivey Soto
thank you very much Mr president
now for another boring bill but
one that some of us may find
licenses to be able to
if you laces in another state to
be able to come in within thirty
days in New Mexico we included
osteopaths reached out they then
said they would like to be part
of this as well.
And then in addition to that we
had another bills that we added
optional licensure but we won't
have a we we won't have the
expense of the board we're doing
some updates to private
investigators and then we also
then dropped in the content of
See no debate Senator Diamond to
close Mr president I move that
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
those voting in the negative by
show of hands Senator Stewart
voting to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of fourteen the
Fuhrman is here on the negative.
House government actions and
interferes Committee substitute
go on to that Senator Diamond to
the next bill on the consent
calendar Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
starting time right now Mr
president and Senate body I
learned lower of my chiropractor
but one of the things that they
have a challenge with is that
self insurance offered issuance
of renewed under the health care
purchasing Act that offers
coverage of the services of a
chiropractic physician shall not
impose a copayment or
coinsurance on those physician
you center have and we do have
debate.
Senator Moores.
I'm sorry Sir Senator Brandt.
president Senator does this
include natural paths like or
gentleman in the lounge who
worked on me yesterday Mr
president and and senator I do
not believe that does include
hundreds and they complement
each other.
Senator Representative rooms
present I've I've worked with
both I've never heard them
complement each other to that so
president I move that house bill
seventy five as amended do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present are shown
voting in affirmative except
Senator Ortiz Pino Italy returns
the chamber hearing no
objection.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty in the
formative to the negative house
bill seventy five as amended has
calendar item number twenty one
that Senator Stewart for house
Education Committee subsea for
House Bill for eighty one.
Senator Stewart.
has been taken subject now to
debate amendment or substitution
say no objections Senator
Stewart to explain.
So Mister president
Representative Lane I don't know
more modern up back then we were
using the title structured
literacy for the science of
reading a so this is now
and I stand for questions.
Senator debating house Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill for anyone.
Anyone wishing to debate.
lane is an active member of the
L. E. S. C. as is Representative
Brian Baca we work together on
that committee we're all very
proud of that so Mister
voting in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands thank you Senator
Stewart Senators we're voting
tier seats please.
I to forty in the affirmative
zero the negative house
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill forty one has
duly passed the Senate center
Stuart thank you so much Mr
president members of the Senate.
Wirth the agency present we're
just going to go down the list
on the regular counter I am
twenty two just work our way
down and if you need Sanchez I
can go over that again if you'd
senators a heads up on who's on
what bill item twenty two house
bill three fourteen is Senator
Lopez item twenty three house
bill four hundred Senator Korea
Hemphill I am twenty four house
Pinto and we'll see where we go
from there so Mister president
Ms consent we go back to that
order business third reading of
legislation you Senator Lopez
for item number twenty two house
I thank you very much Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill three one
four as amended two times on
very much Mr president members
of the Senate what a house bill
three one four is doing is just
if I may just to add some
but in that process Mr
president's it did state that
put it was to be provided the
public records involving
cannabis charges right are no
automatic expungement applies to
and what we are looking to
clarify is that this applies to
records that only involve
cannabis and cannabis
paraphernalia charges and it
courts to create a free
administrative process that
allowing people charged with
these cannabis offenses to
request
We do have debate Senator
mantas.
Thank you Mr president president
it's worth probably taking a
moment on this bill
I'm a little concerned because
the bill did not go to the
Judiciary Committee which I'm
Of the the concern I have a
little bit with the bill is that
when we pass the cannabis
legislation the goal here was to
do now is put more of the burden
on individuals to take more
affirmative steps to expunge
their records for cannabis
I'm I'm hoping I'm I'm seeing a
Representative sensing center do
appreciate for microphone so I
know this area of law which is
practice so Mister is present I
could I could perhaps ask the
to then pass Senator doing to
yield Mister president I
appreciate that.
Mr president I could Senator
concerns that the senator serve
on says is is articulating now
but I I I I actually don't think
that's what's happening in this
bill
the way that we had set up this
charges that just don't exist
and so what we had set up isn't
working so this really is is an
attempt to to address that but
and address them on as they they
do identify them this provides
the individual with the way to
go to that if if they don't want
to wait while the court is is
doing that process then they
but overall it is not putting
all the onus on the individual.
Thank you senator and of I know
you.
Now Senator Maestas formers
and again I it would've been
helpful I think you've heard
this Judiciary because of of
some of these issues and of the
the concern that I have to
that's been expresses that what
does it really mean to expunge
but not really assuring that
there's a for complete
expungement of all references to
the record and so the the the
issue really comes out of this
an individual who is entitled to
an expungement by the decision
represent themselves to expose
you to the are they maybe asked
if ever apply for expungement
and never received an
expungement and once again this
is an area where I I admittedly
we're maybe we would have had
that of that opportunity in I I
raise that just that I hope in
the future we can see the bills
that appropriately belong there
Mr president and I appreciate
Thank you Senator on this.
We do have further debate we
have Senator Pirtle I just
finished committee center for
thank you Mr president I told
you so.
Yes president thank you the it
says or if they
would have resulted in a lesser
offense
do we have a list of what those.
did it lesson.
charges.
Senator Lopez.
witnesses my expert witness is
just just Briana semata.
I
see no objections organizer
I see no objection thanks for
witnesses welcome to the
chamber.
thank you Mr president center
what what I'm what I'm not
asking about is things that are
no longer crime so I know we've
kind of you know legalize
cannabis but I'm I'm asking on
on the second page at the top it
bill's gonna work is those.
Those sorts of of charges.
Or or going to be affected by
this expungement so what would
president senator are you what
you what you're currently
referring to that is currently
in statute so we're not changing
automatic expungement of those
things and so now that it's it's
gone I understand the process is
gonna be different gonna
automatically do it and I think
the comment from senator it was
very helpful that the onus is
not once again and not no longer
crying but that they were a a
lesser offense and now we're
gonna automatically expunge
those so what what kind of
Mr president Senator we're not
changing anything within the
statute what we are doing here
is just clarifying the process
because as was mentioned
their records cleared of the
cannabis use but they've been
charged with
there needs to be a better
process and that's what the
courts what we're bringing
expunged.
Thank you Mr president sentiment
maybe I I want to make sure I'm
clear on this but it is going to
provide for automatic
expungement now we're is.
were changing right we're we're
just gonna make this automatic
is that correct Mr president
Senator it already is automatic
again it's the process that we
I'm just trying to think my
brains a little foggy this
morning Mister chair Mister
president in that if someone
maybe is going for a job
etcetera and it's a much better
streamlined I guess process for
them to go and have their
their records expunged it's just
the actual process we're we're
mainly changing the initiation
of the process would that be
would that be fair to say.
street is.
Say no further debate.
Senator Lopez to close.
Thank you very much Mr president
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands.
Centers where voting to your
seats please.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Burt voting no.
By a vote of thirty for the
formative in the negative house
to Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth first.
Senator thank you CENIC sort of
business I thank you Mr
president Ms because that we go
about our business messages from
to concur in the Senate
amendments to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five forty seven as
McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal show the message
from the house is been received
an ideal to Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous
thank you Mr president
I move that the Senate refused
to receive.
Senator Peter Wirth and Mr
president this is on house
motion on which we need to vote
on Senators we're debating.
Refusal to receive Senator about
this agency really could the
and and the thanks Anderson is
looking for that.
Etcetera etcetera Mr president
if you vote yes then you will
refuse to recede.
the motion be to receive but
that the sponsor advised the
body to vote no that's the the
customary procedure practice
that I'm used to but I may be
I I move that the Senate.
Used to receive.
From the the.
From the members from House Bill
five forty seven.
Senator is there's a motion for
the senator refused to recede.
would be able to Senate pro tem
Senator Wirth and Senate pro tem
Stewart center worth thank you
Mr president Mrs and we go back
to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
conference committee for our a
house our tax bill I'm I'm going
to appoint Senator Benny Shendo.
We have center Shendo Senator
Brandt and senator Wirth who are
appointed to the conference
committee more details on that
conference committee and the
location of that that'll take
place will be coming for the
we're gonna go back to the third
reading calendar to item number
three so unanimous consent we go
to that our business third
reading of legislation and I
yield to senator Correa Hemphill
action for placing House
appropriation and finance
committee substitute for house
bill four hundred as amended on
final passage has been taken and
legislation will direct HSD to
conduct a study and design a
plan to allow New Mexicans of
different income levels to
access health coverage through
representatives of Indian
nations tribes and pueblos the
study would fully explore the
feasibility of the plan
including a financing plan
process for maximizing federal
funding and with that Mr
president like to yell to my co
sponsor Leo how to me on.
Center how to mail thank you Mr
leverages our existing Medicaid
program using existing federal
law the plan would lift
Medicaid's income cap and allow
New Mexicans above the current
income level to access health
coverage through Medicaid by
paying for affordable premiums
and copays based on their income
thank you Mr president with that
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president if the
sponsor would yield for a
question or two.
Mr president nailed.
Mr president and Senator Woods I
it's my understanding that this
specific.
The study which has not been
conducted previously.
that was funded I don't think it
was ever completely finished but
that was for the Health Security
Act.
president and senator.
It's my understanding that it a
study like this has never been
completed previously.
Senator Wirth okay.
Done some work on this already
have you got any idea what they
have done so far and what I'm
don't want a repetition of
what's already been studied so
the question I have Mister
president and senator could you.
Woods thank you for the question
that this is a completely new
proposal that has not been
studied before so it's my
understanding that the
Mr president and senator explain
to me.
The Obama care it was enacted to
provide health insurance for all
information our knowledge that's
not part of this bill Senator
Woods so this is just
a study that is already funded
for Medicaid forward so I don't
I'm not prepared to go over
obamacare at this point though.
Center was.
what we were going to study that
Obama Kerr didn't cover already
so how will we know exactly what
It's my understanding that.
Mr president unanimous consent
to have my expert witness
Nicholas where the vote from New
witness into the chamber and
find a seat for him.
Senator Woods once he settled in
if you can restate the question
you tell me your expert witness
what part of health and Human
Services our department of
your question are you asking
where what department Nicholas
where the **** is from in HSD
sees for from the New Mexico
Center online property.
And we're going to direct.
Madam senator.
study will be conducted by HSD
in consultation with the medical
advisory committee and
representatives of the Indian
you're asking for a half a
million dollars to do the study
is that right Mr president and
senator so Mister president and
senator that's correct so in H.
explore the feasibility of the
Medicaid forward plan including
a financing plan recommended
provider reimbursement rates to
maximize access to health care
enrollees and of course once
they come up with a plan wants
eight HSD comes up with the
completes the study comes up
enact a plan or not Mr president
and senator.
So with that.
With that the.
Ultimately how many people do
So Mister president senator
thank you for that question the
estimate at this point is a
hundred thousand individuals but
that's a number that the study
have a hundred thousand people
in New Mexico this not insured
right now is that what you're
saying Mr president and senator
Senator could I have helped so
Mister president and senator
about insurance a hundred
thousand or two hundred thousand
of these your study is your
study when you say.
Well just tell me real quick
instead of me trying to look it
up what what is the parameters
of your study missed president
and senator so.
the hope is that there would be
all different income levels
would have an opportunity to
purchase their health care
coverage through this option and
The notice that four hundred
percent of poverty level.
For a family of four that would
be someone making a hundred and
twenty thousand a year and
Senator Hemphill Mr president
and senators so that again the
estimate is about a hundred
thousand people that would sign
up for this there are
approximately two hundred
eligible are for possibly once
the study is complete and I plan
on is designed people under four
hundred percent of the third
affordable option to individuals
and families below four hundred
percent of the poverty line.
And can you explain to me at
this point what New Mexico New
we have right now and what the
function of that health
exchanges Mr president and
senator.
So Mister president and senator
are you referring to the
exchange where people can shop
around and pick their plan.
of a study to for HSD to conduct
a study and design a plan.
I apologize but you see I know
very little about health
insurance.
Probably only what I've learned.
Well I've been in this
particular.
because
It depends on on who uses it and
who don't use it and and who
pays into and who doesn't pay
into it and I know that you're
covering.
Two hundred thousand people in
the state of New Mexico so we're
hoping in the federal government
would kick in for a little bit
understand that's what you're
studies done I can read that
part but the problem I have is
that it sounds like we've
The governor had this very
thing.
and her state of the state
address this year.
So I understand where this bill
made promises you know to to
feed all the kids and and you
know do several things that we
I'm I'm glad that we're bringing
in the bill forward.
Because I believe that things in
the budget should go through
this very process and and have
vote on it and and my
constituents expect me to stay
here and vote and.
all about this but you know it's
it's confusing.
Obamacare.
And that's been several years
ago.
don't participate in the work
force and these are the very
people I believe and I may be
making generalizations here so
And so there's no incentive for
them to come into the work force
when we do this.
hospitals the indigent fund
because we was gonna make better
health care out of it and
provide that money we took
two hundred thousand people the
most expensive health care they
can get is an emergency room.
But the indigent care was what
the counties did and now you're
telling me that we want to do a
study and give those people
health care this way and yet.
The very people were trying to
help there was of a little deal
So we just now this was just a
secret shopper kind of a deal I
really did need to see him well
I had some.
So now you want to put more
people on the program when we
don't have practitioners in the
state what I'm imagine the only
doctors and requirements but you
know what that's kinda like.
The a program we have going have
you ever had a a veteran talk to
you about the VA problem say
Now if you're sick that's not
very good health care.
So.
I have a problem with state run
even showed up Mr president but
just think about what we're
doing we took a billion dollars
out of the budget with a tax
package.
And we're trying our best.
To create a program that's going
to be reoccurring here for even
Now.
Money may grow on trees and
Santa Fe I don't know.
you Center was we do have for
the debate Senator meetings
followed by Senator Steinborn.
Thank you very much Mr president
essentially is you know the the
folks that currently are below
hundred thirty three percent.
They're eligible for Medicaid
what we're doing is we're
looking at everybody else all
the way to the Medicare age
Medicaid plan is is that that's
basically what we're studying is
that right.
Mr president and senator
sweeties yes you're absolutely
correct.
don't know why I wonder if
you're expert knows are there
currently any federal waivers
available for this type of
Medicaid expansion.
it's an federal statute.
Mr presence enter is so we
didn't need a waiver to expand
president Senator.
Would we potentially need
waivers to offer certain
services to this expanded pool
potentially center correct info.
president center are there do we
know if there are any we it as
regarding the ACA right because
they see it was looking at these
people kind of stuck in between
So do are we aware of any legal
hurdles that the ACA presents to
this type of Medicaid expansion
because we'd be looking at that
a similar population.
individuals under the age of
sixty five which includes above
a hundred and thirty three
percent poverty and two aren't
currently eligible for for for
that you're asking a
straightforward question I I do
share share some of the
concerns.
With
I think we're headed in a
direction of.
You know non sustainability and
and we've passed out I don't
know
maybe at least seven bills that
Chiropractic's you have to cut a
cover prosthetics in the mental
health thing I mean all the
things I mean these are all good
things right they're all good
things but things that are not
being covered in the political
reflect on that and I hope the
folks that look at this study
will have that lens of that self
reflection.
Of the political reality whether
you agree with that or not it's
it's good I think it's a good
And and be realistic about that
and and I hope the study will
reflect some of that and let me
give you just one quick example
of how the NHS turns people
away.
something of cost effectiveness
or something like that and if
they meet every year every three
years but they they come up with
that with the health care
rationing and ban is politically
quality adjusted life year.
And it's interesting because
just was just yesterday we're
talking about putting a value on
someone's life.
Right value dollar value in
uncomfortable doing that but the
British are not uncomfortable
doing that because I've been
doing it for almost a hundred
years and the current going rate
I I'm probably a few years
dollars a year for quality just
to
healthier.
So what does that mean what does
that mean well it means that
your your love life essentials
how much money they're willing
to spend on on the you for me.
They'll say well if this
treatment if it's more than
forty thousand dollars a year.
And they put a dollar amount on
that in other words.
If it was possible to save your
life for to offer you a high
likelihood of a curative
Very little almost nonexistent
private health care over there.
And so I I I really hope you
know just to the stakeholders
once again I I very much in
gonna be interested in the
have if we continue this Russian
we're gonna be telling people no
and we will to some degree be
putting a dollar amount on the
curative therapies for the
very privileged to be part of
the discussion of medical
malpractice act about how we how
we put that we associate
people's lives with with dollar
signs very uncomfortable very
I think the best way to
if if the state is going to look
at trying to find adequate
healthcare coverage with I I
think is very it's very
there's a cut I think it's
equatorial Guinea they they
discovered a lot of offshore oil
and they got us fairly small
population where they do with
their money well the offered
everybody health insured health
forced ask ourselves some very I
think uncomfortable questions
here in the near future thank
you Mr president.
Thank you senator razor that
further debate Senator Steinborn
this bill on this bill is just
the study is that correct
Senator Hemphill Mr president
and Senator Steinborn that's
correct it's a study that is
business economics you know
Medicaid first of all I think as
a society we benefit when people
are healthy.
For healthy they got to work.
And they avoid chronic
one another but the thing about
Medicaid Mr presence editor is
that Medicaid proveedor.
We spend the federal government
matches that with three dollars.
participate maybe that isn't.
that is economic development.
And we do need more providers in
the state there's no question
about it
want to say I mean normally if I
were to say to you if I give you
a quarter if you give me a
quarter and I give you seventy
five cents is that a good deal.
Most people say yes to that
We do have for the debate center
Morris he was present it it's
laughable to think that Medicaid
is economic developments we pay
the bill low rates the four four
percent of state population on
I'll go somewhere else so just
in case continue that expansion
is not economic development
actually hurts what helps is
when you have private pay or
of their potential patients are
going to Medicaid.
They know they're not going to
make money they know they're not
gonna get that so it's it's it's
Are the part of the mix that we
have in New Mexico part of the
problem the number three issues
that doctors around the state
talk about is malpractice
can to make it hard in the state
to practice medicine we're
taking a couple steps this year
that I'm proud of but let's not
kid ourselves but turn it over
to Medicaid is economic
debate.
Si no further debate center cut
a Hemphill to close in the bill
thank you Mr president thank you
colleagues for your helpful
input I appreciate the debate I
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
senators to your seats please
we're voting.
Senator share voting no Senator
Woods voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no
senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
Senator Ingle voting no.
Senator thank us voting no.
duly passed the Senate Senator
putting him co thank you Mr
president thank you members of
the body and thank you to my co
sponsors in the house and
senator Leo how to meal.
thank you I believe Senator
Brandt has some guests you'd
like to introduce Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president.
the floor
course you all know my lovely
wife Tanya and this is the other
Tonya Tanya Watkins and then
Rebecca Walken's her daughter is
to see what should be done and
you know to to watch her
favorite Senator work today so I
really appreciate them being
here and was body would welcome
them to our chamber.
the thermostat that the capital
should lead by example
conserving energy and maybe
lower it just a little bit be a
been simple to the state on
conserving energy Mr president
bit at a certain point hopefully
we don't not too early in the
morning or late at night but
that was also something that for
the new members haven't seen
that'll be next item twenty five
will be Senator Vontaze yet to
step out for a minute so we
might jump over that and come
back to it item twenty six will
bill two thirty four and then we
will take a break for committees
to meet and we'll see where we
are in terms of time coming back
with that Mr present unanimous
and we go that our business
third reading of legislation I
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill one eighty
nine is amended on final passage
has been taken and that it is
out of here regarding the
southeast New Mexico college and
allowing them to participate in
alternative retirement plans to
member is required to take a
minimum distribution as CH
specified about federal laws to
do we don't have to keep coming
back and doing that.
I see no debate Senator Kernan
close on the bill.
Mr president I'm is that house
bill one eighty nine is amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the world has
been called in that all.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
zero the negative house bill one
eighty nine as amended has duly
passed the Senate Senator Kernan
thank you very much members go
on to the next item item number
twenty six on the calendar.
one sixty one twice amended.
Be on final passage has been on
final passage has been taken in
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
department of the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration and that and
renames office as the
intertribal Indian ceremonial
president is consent to skew
Senator Duhigg inTaos returns
the chamber hearing no objection
and senator serve on this Mr
president hearing no objections
so ordered.
record show that all that the
role has been called in that all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative slide show hands
thank you Mr president and
members of the body thank you
Senator Wirth just wanted to
confirm we're gonna jump down to
item number sixty five is that
correct.
Thank you Mr president
honorable.
election for placing House joint
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty four as amended
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitute.
effort to change the shoplifting
statute of the crime of
aggravated shoplifting and also
retail theft crime to allow
officers prosecutors and judges
House Bill to thirty four as
amended.
Anyone wishing debate.
See no debate.
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator is to your seats please
I have a thirty in the Fuhrman
is here on the negative house
Judiciary Committee substitute
Peter Wirth to take us the next
order of business thank you Mr
president accent we going into
business announcements
miscellaneous.
early session of the number
twenty five house bill one sixty
nine well we wait for him
We're going to do some of the
item sixteen we'll do that and
then I believe seventeen
eighteen we've done on consent
so we also can do item nineteen
which is Senate memorial sixty
for Senator Cervantes so madam
president and Ms that we go
about our business third reading
of eight legislation ideal to
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for item
sixteen center more at thirty
seeing no objection from that
order business third reading of
memorial thirty on final passage
is been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution certificado to
undertake a study on the
feasibility of requiring health
insurers.
To provide.
In their coverage for the full
Falling through the cracks right
now for a long time we tried to
include them in the waiver
programs that include them as
being part of developmental
lives really doesn't fit in with
what's usually offered to the
developmentally disabled so this
is a bill that takes a look at
trying to find the niche in
from strokes and other factors
and with that'll stand for
questions or debate.
Is there debate on Senate
memorial thirty Senator Woods.
does you who are we just had a a
request for money for a study
for health insurance will this
coverage of for people who want
to buy a policy this one is
focused madam president Senator
Woods much more on on whether or
injury.
Senator Woods I'm I'm sorry
madam president and senator but
I don't understand the
difference in the two why would
we include this.
that's alright I don't have to
understand everything madam
president thank you very much
thank you Senator what's any
other debate.
of the Senate the record show
that the role is been called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands centers we are voting on
Seeing no objection we will do
that a Centers to your sheet if
you wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
thank you very much madam
president.
Thank you Senator Wirth I thank
you madam president next slide
you'll to Senator McKenna for
Senate memorial sixty four item
nineteen.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
memorial number sixty four on
want to thank.
The body for their overwhelming
supported this memorial.
it is a solidarity to Ukraine
efforts against the war against
ten.
That it really is a.
An investment in democracy and
invasion it happened again in
nineteen thirty two to nineteen
thirty three when Joseph Stalin
invaded their country side and
sent a moral sixty four Senator
Steinborn thank you madam
president I I actually think
that's a really important
memorial and I so appreciate the
Senator for bringing at my
that country
But there part of Russia at the
time and then it's now become
part of your.
assaults on democracies.
And genocide.
Then it continues it's only when
we speak out we stand together
it's so important we stand in
solidarity with these countries
this country that we help the
people of Ukraine there's
organizations like the world
kitchen you can donate to that
are feeding people who are
the world kitchen textually help
those people.
The only thing they want Madam
presence Senator is to have a
democracy is to live in freedom
countries as they went about
their lives and building their
own identity their own
democracies.
And that's all that Ukraine is
trying to do and our support is
state I know that the state
investment council took action
at the beginning of this
conflict to make sure we weren't
investing funds that were
further aiding this aggression
but
present thank you senator next
we'll hear from Santo guy it
goes.
Present the.
yes madam president shields.
Madam presence Senator I
appreciate the memorial just had
a couple questions I had a
sponsorship does your memorial
have anything of that would
allow us to bring these people
over from Ukraine to be able to
Thank you madam president center
I I which it had of those the
promise of my bill there's a
group now actually the present
company madam president centers
to bring adults there six
hundred dollars per person and
children two hundred dollars
person
and I'm trying to bring over
Venezuela and also Ukraine so I
think as a body we need to think
through not just memorialize and
these people but finding ways
Thank you senator Senator
Padilla.
Thank you madam president a
unanimous consent issue Senators
Craig Hemphill and Ivey Soto and
to the return of the chamber.
sponsor for her leadership in
bringing this and getting so
much support for this memorial I
think it's very important for us
to look outside our beautiful
state sometimes and look at
delighted to be part of it and I
also want to thank the sponsor
for letting me be a co sponsor.
Thank you madam president
president thank you Senator
I just don't really understand
why a the state of New Mexico is
is setting this memorial in its
current form I I think there's
oil is high in and we all know
that brushes major export is is
oil that's where their money
comes from that's how they're
funding the war that's how they
have money to do it and yet
would put an end to the war put
it into the dying in the killing
that's going on in Ukraine but
yet there's just a lack of
courage coming out of the
presidential office in just a
lack of understanding of of how
madam president and and that the
Sanchez making but if we want to
get serious about this there's
ways that we can do it would
help those in our country as
memorial that address that and
and without yield thank you
madam president thank you any
other debate.
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
you.
Okay we're going to go back to
Yes I remember fifteen Senate
Joint Memorial fourteen as
mentors and Senator Hickey will
be R. Sanchez Senator Hickey.
Madam president.
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
Senator Hickey to explain the
memorial.
Thank you madam president.
coalition of educational leaders
The New Mexico school board
association and public charter
schools of New Mexico to form a
legislation in twenty seventeen
to do so the governor also had
and executive order not too long
ago and this updates that and
substantially help in the
process and originally it was to
report back by December first
but we amended in committee to
senator Senator Kernan.
Thank you madam president I
stand with my co sponsor in
support of this memorial and I
think those of us that have
knowledge of what goes on within
this in the memorial that's a
piece that they requested and
that was done in and so I think
going forward I think it will be
helpful and hopefully we can
levy eight some of the stress on
do away with our reporting we
have to have data but I think
sometimes we just over do it and
we're gonna find out at the end
of this study with whether we
can reach some balanced a
Madam president I move that the
Senate.
Do now pass.
A resolute Joint Memorial
in the negative by show of hands
centers we're voting on Senate
Joint Memorial fourteen just
mended to your seats if you wish
to vote no please raise your
hands.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative is here in the
negative senator Marco fourteen
that our visit now submits a
miscellaneous seeing no
objection more announcements and
miscellaneous Senator work I
thank you madam president so
that's all we're going to do for
this earlier session a house
the rural read messages from the
house.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
rules and rules copies of Senate
bill seventy two as amended
officers of the house in open
session and return same here
with respectfully submitted the
Sammer.
M. Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
house bill four twenty nine and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk unless the house will be
entered into the journal.
rules and grows copies of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to thirty two
with the emergency clause house
bill two seventy House Bill
respectfully submitted Lisa am
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
A message from the house be
entered into the general.
I'd like to inform the Senate
that of the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
the officers of the Senate in
open session.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president Ms
that we go about our business
consideration reports that same
has been duly rules and grossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
report adoption of the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may committee
report is adopted and I want to
Madam president your Disher
Committee to who has been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five Senate bill two
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen madam president
announce to the Senate that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty five and Senate bill two
oh six have been signed in open
that our business introduction
of legislation saying no
objection or on introduction of
legislation the reader to read
House Bill three ninety
introduced by representatives
audit of the race our testing
fund House Bill three ninety
House Bill three ninety have
been read twice by title is
read an act relating to
corrections including cannabis
in the definition of contraband
prohibiting cannabis in places
of imprisonment providing
house bill four twenty nine.
seeing no objection more on
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth.
Thank you madam presidents
that's it for the morning
session we will be back this
Announcements from the chair
Senator Shendo thank you madam
president your Senate tax
business transportation will go
in at three thirty we're going
Thank you other announcements
Senator Duhigg thank you madam
president the Senate rule our
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting at the call of the chair
so I should just keep an eye out
for posting.
ascena Senator menulis thank you
madam president Senate finance
are going just issues Arizona
defeats Princeton.
Games about have time so we're
and so I appreciate that and
with that madam chair I hope
Arizona wins.
Thank you any other
announcements.
Seeing none.
it hasn't so well the time we
are waiting for you to call us
for you thank you madam
president madam president I just
want to get understand I'm sorry
for everyone having to hear this
twice I've been somewhere else
because there will be here till
we get back on the floor.
Thank you any other
announcements.
Seeing none senator Wirth.
Committee too who has been
referred Senate bill four
seventy four as amended has had
it under consideration and
reports that same has been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory to
Pirtle co chairs Senator Hamblen
madam president I move the
adoption of the committee report
on the tops of the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
signed in by the officers of the
Senate.
So Senator Wirth No sorry the
reader to read.
Madam president your Judiciary
the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
Those PO's name the eyes have it
the committee report is stopped
I like to announce to the Senate
that Senate bill two sixty has
been signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session.
etcetera recessed until six
thirty this evening seeing no
objection we'll see you back
