But, um, we're doing 2
confirmations and then some
bills after that. Our vice chair
chairs for confirmations, so I
will hand it over to him.
Thank you so much, good morning
and happy Valentine's Day,
Valentine's Day for some of you
who are celebrating Valentine's.
We're gonna move on to the first
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Thomas Emmett
Jennings to the New Mexico
Military Institute Board of
Regents, and I'd like to welcome
up Senator Ezel, along with Mr.
Jennings.
For the
opening up and
Your comments.
Senator, welcome to the Rules
Committee for your first time.
There we go.
Thank you for this opportunity
for me to introduce my friend
Tom Jennings.
Before your committee today for
appointment to the Board of
Regents at New Mexico Military
Institute.
Madam Chair, Mr. Coche.
I have been confirmed in my
lifetime at my church, and I
have stood for many young people
when they have been confirmed.
But this is my first experience
here in the Senate Rules
Committee.
Going through the confirmation
process.
And I guess my question to y'all
is, uh.
If my friend Tom Jennings is
confirmed by your committee.
Does that make me his godmother.
I just had to get a smile on
y'all's face.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Mr. Jennings, I have known him.
I don't know how many years now.
He does have a twin brother. I
hope y'all not hold that against
him.
He is very involved in all the
activities that do go on in our
area. He has also attended New
Mexico Military Institute.
His civic duties there in
Roswell are too numerous for me
to mention, but I would like to
give him the opportunity to tell
him about all of his
accomplishments throughout the
life.
Thank you, Senator, and good
morning, Mr. Jennings.
Good morning, uh, chairman and
Vice chair, uh.
It's a pleasure to be here.
Uh, into, uh,
Take this opportunity for the
consideration of my appointment.
Uh, as they said, my name is
Thomas Jennings, and I reside in
Rossville, just a few blocks
from the New Mexico Military
Institute at 710 North Kentucky
Avenue.
Uh, on some mornings I can hear
reveling in the distance from my
residence.
And I've heard that revolut
since I was a kid.
Uh
I would like to introduce
several special people in my
life. First, Lorena Segovia, my
wife.
And uh my partner in my
Valentine, by the way, happy
Valentine's.
And second, some of you may
know, uh, Senator Tim Jennings
or
Former president pro tem, my
twin brother.
And he's always followed me his
whole life.
Uh
You know, we started, I started
21 minutes ahead of him and I'm
still about 20 minutes ahead of
him. He's kept gaining.
Uh, and thank you, uh, to our
friend and Senator Candy Spence
Chazelle with a nice
introduction and representing
Chavis and Eddie County's in the
New Mexico Senate.
As you may note in my resume,
Mayor Tim Jennings was a former
member of the New Mexico Senate,
serving as president pro tem. On
this day 15 years ago, Tim's
wife Patty passed due due to
cancer.
Many of you may know, Patty and
have worked with Tim and Patty,
but please keep them in your
thoughts on this special
Valentine's Day or uh Tim and
Patty and our family, and uh
cause I know a lot of you know,
uh, new Patty.
Jim and I have always worked
together.
Most of our lives, and I'm
grateful for his support today
and every day.
I served as mayor Roswell from
1994 to 1998.
And now Tim serves in follows me
as mayor of Roswell.
While serving as mayor, we
established we established the
Roswell UFO Festival that put
Roswell on the map and garnered
worldwide attention.
Now, my brother.
Now my brother is working to
show me up and is bringing the
Reno National Air Races to
Roswell.
Um
Which will be another uh
significant tourism event.
And it's gonna, it's gonna
happen right after the, right
before the balloon fiesta.
So we should have a lot of
people looking up into Mexico in
uh September and October.
Uh
As many members of our family,
my brother and I both graduated
high school from the Mexico
military in 1968. We both attend
then attended Creighton
University in Omaha graduating
in '72.
As Roswell residents.
We have both worked to enhance
our community. While serving as
mayor, I request, I was
requested to address the high
school graduating class of the
Institute.
While reading the class roster,
I noted there were many
graduates from Roswell and even
fewer from New Mexico.
Commenting later to my brother,
Tim, about the concern of the
too few graduates from Roswell
and New Mexico, Tim took the,
took the ball.
And worked uh with New Mexico
military general general Jerry
Childress and Steve
Representative Lieutenant
General Richard T. Knowles.
Together with the legislature,
they developed the lieutenant
General's General Know's
legislative scholarship that
benefits and encourages every
legislator, district to have in
sponsor a scholarship at New
Mexicoil.
Today we have uh cadets and
students from all over New
Mexico. And, you know,
personally, I'd like to thank
you because diversity, uh.
is a big deal and, and to have
someone represented from all
over, uh, it's, it's really a
significant thing.
Uh, you know, I would like to
say New Mexico military, uh,
Recently won the state soccer
championship.
And that's because we have kids
from all over the world.
There's many Brazilian kids,
many Mexican.
Children, many kids from China.
So it's really becoming an
international school.
While serving as mayor, I
reached out to the United States
Senator P P B DiMini, and
together we established the
first countywide character
counts program in the nation.
Uh, then in 1997 when Levi
Strauss closed one of their
largest uh manufacturing
facilities in Roswell. Uh, I
want again work with Senator Da
Vinci, and we established the
Rosville Chavis County Economic
Development Corporation to
promote economic development.
In our city and region.
After serving as mayor,
Uh, the only thing that I really
didn't do that I wanted to do
was establish a Big Brothers
program, Big Brothers Big
Sisters program in southeast
Mexico.
We established it in 2000, and
we've been serving in 9 counties
in southeast Mexico since then.
Uh, recently, uh, we've joined
with the Big Brothers, Big
Sisters organization of Central
New Mexico, uh, so we can better
serve the whole state.
And now we are working to join
with the Big Brothers, uh, in
northern New Mexico, so we can
have a Big Brothers agency
throughout the state, because
oftentimes we get funding from
the state.
And uh it's easier to go raise
money when we go to a, a company
or something to ask, asking for
money or for support, we can do
it on a statewide basis.
Uh, as an institute alumnus, I'm
active and support the
institution.
Following and attending many
sports activities.
In the annual trail ride, and
established and funded a
scholarship to facilitate uh
cadets educational
opportunities. I'm honored to
have Governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham nominate me for the
appointment to the Board of
Regents of the New Mexico
Military Institute.
I look forward to serving.
To promote and develop the
facilities and staff to further
duty, honor, and achievement of
the New Mexicoil Institute.
As respectfully requested that
you favorably consider and vote
for approval of Thomas E.
Jennings as a regent to the
Board of
Regents of New Mexico military,
and I thank you your time this
morning, and again, have a nice
Valentine's.
Thank you, Mr. Jennings. Now we
do have some organized support
for you, and you might be in
trouble cause the first one on
your list is your twin brother,
Tim Jennings. If he could come
up and then those of you in
uniform in the back, I believe
you were gonna say a few words
as well if you can come up and
once again, state your name for
the record.
You'll have a couple of minutes
each.
I'm gonna sit on this side
sometimes. I'm, uh.
Tim Jennings, I'm
5
I'm Tom Jennings, uh.
Brother
Uh
He was always in front of me, on
top of me and.
Everything else, it was real
tight and on Labor Day one day.
You know, my mother, I mean, I
pushed him out.
And he was slow to get out, but
he wrapped the cord around my.
And it's all right, but you
know, I was also, I turned
around and pushed him out with
both feet.
And uh
You know, I was a slow learner
but I didn't want to be known
the rest of my life as somebody
who was born with my head up, my
brother's, well, anyway, and so.
That's the way it started and
uh.
It's OK. I've, I've had some
brain damage from the cord being
trapped around my neck, but I,
you know, I haven't had to live
with anybody telling me
anything.
About where my head was, so I've
been doing real well.
Uh
My brothers John and Tom were
both mayors, and I was served
here and it was really fun, uh.
We all went to the institute and
Uh, our oldest brother went to,
uh, Roswell High, and after
that.
My dad said the rest of us were
going to the institute, and it
was really a uh eye-opening
experience for us and we had uh
A lot of things we've looked at
that school forever, uh.
And
Watched at our uncles went there
and then one went to Annapolis
and graduated in 38 from
Annapolis from there, the other
one went in 46 and graduated in
50 from Annapolis.
Uh
You know, one retired as a rear
admiral and uh built submarines
during World War II.
On the Arizona submarines at a
new Gratton.
Uh
One was 2 in his class and one
was 2nd from the bottom.
So we have a lot of diversity in
our family and and uh.
And that's good, but, you know,
my brother, one thing we he's
looked at.
He would always come with ideas
like the hike and bike trail in
Roswell, uh.
Talking about the institute when
when we put that deal together
with Bill Wiles, uh, you get
scholarships which you all can
give every student, uh, it's one
of our best things that ever
happened, Bill Wells raised that
we were all classmates and uh
we've watched the institute, we
still go to the trail rides with
the alumni and stuff so we're in
we're in tune with it.
We're not somebody who lives.
Uh
our past life at the Institute
as we've gotten older. No, we
look at about things to make the
school better and to make it and
to make it accessible to all
kids.
Uh, we come from a very diverse
background and.
And so it's good. I think my
brother will be.
really good for the institute, I
think he's a wealth of knowledge
on on.
Anyway, anything from
landscaping to on how the
construction and things ought to
go on about your plans and.
from his experience as mayor, he
was on mayor or city council for
8 years and then he, he and Stan
Crosby, another classmate, and
dusty Huckabee, who was not, but
he was a lifelong roles they
started the whole UFO festival.
They started it. They had no
support from anybody in the
state.
None
Until when the support came, was
when they came down.
And he was, he had.
The people from
Every magazine time life,
everything.
Everybody in the world showed up
at that UFO festival.
And to that date, to this day
right now, we get between 750
and 850 people.
Every day.
Every day
That's, it's the most
If it's not the most visited
museum, it's 2nd.
And, and it was all done by
people who looked outside the
box and looked and when there
were some, and I mean, it, it
was so bad even Stan Crosby, who
was a cadet with us, uh, whose
father was killed in Korea, uh
who also.
His, uh, he had to pay for the
billboards that we placed on uh.
On the
I-40 to tell people to come to
Roswell.
It's a kind of dedication that
people have and and uh.
He's had it and thank you all
very much. I think you'll do a
fantastic job at the school, has
a lot of things, a lot of
issues, and we're all we're
close enough to it all the time
that we know it.
Thank you for your comments and
senator, just so you know, we do
15 minutes for your opening,
which includes the organized,
uh, support, and we've come to
the time. So what I'm gonna do
then is ask for those of you in
the room who are in support of
this confre if you can raise
your hands.
Seeing 1234567. Are there any
online?
So 7 in the room and I'm gonna
ask, is there any in the
committee room and opposition of
this country, one online and
support. OK. And anyone in the
room in opposition?
Seeing no any opposition via
Zoom.
Signing none, OK. We will then
go to questions from the
committee. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, uh.
Sure.
Yeah.
Um
I was uh
Happy to hear that your brother
was gonna stand for you this
morning, I thought for a while
it was a toss up, but uh.
I was tickled to death, but
today I think he was completely
truthful.
I think everything he said was
the truth, I think, uh.
But, um,
The brothers uh and the family,
quite frankly.
Uh, including their.
Their father, um,
have been very instrumental in
their community. Now, I'll tell
you that sometimes he bets on
the wrong football team. And
that's what caused problems from
time to time, but uh I'm sure it
is so.
In in his new role as a regent
that he may have more um
Um
More tendency to understand that
the orange down South is still
a, a good place to be and I know
he does, but we have fun with
that, but I look forward to
supporting you, sir. You
welcome.
Will be a uh positive addition
to the border regions. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Senator,
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh.
So good morning, thank you. Do
you know the Jennings, they just
do public service every one of
them, their entire life, so I
appreciate that about your
family. I have been in that
Roswell museum, uh, uh, on July
4th, 1 year, hotter than you
know what? But I became a true
believer after going to that
museum and hearing the reports
of folks that were there in 194.
7, so it, it's an amazing place,
Roswell. It just has so much to
offer and I've been a big fan of
the New Mexico Military
Institute for a long time.
Um, I've had several graduates
from my own, uh, neck of the
woods in Albuquerque and so, uh,
it's a great school and it's
good to have it Jennings there
hoping to run it. So thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you so much,
Senator Block. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and um,
Congratulations, Mr. Jennings,
um.
I personally think you're
twin brother Tim is much better
looking than you.
Uh
I definitely uh appreciate um.
Uh, my good friend, uh, great
senator to sit there beside you
and support you for this as
well.
I, I just got a couple quick
things here,
so Nimi's a little bit different
than.
The other universities for
obvious reasons.
Um, what, what's the difference
between a region, say at UNM or
Western versus uh Niemi.
I is there any?
Madam Chair,
Co-chair, uh,
Senator Block
You know, I think you'd have to
ask uh your legal counsel.
I
I just think their Regents or
like a board of director, I'm
not sure what the difference is,
maybe nomenclature may be the
difference.
Uh, I'm not sure, but they're, I
think they're, uh.
All land grant schools, so they
get funding.
Uh, from the state.
And they're all pretty similar,
except we have a different
mission.
And uh
I think that's the difference.
OK, thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, I, I
will say for the public who
can't see this.
The, the resume is quite
impressive, uh, very, very deep
and, uh, obviously, um, you got
Nimmi blood running, running
through you and through your
family, which I definitely
appreciate with your, your love
of Roswell, your love of the
institution.
And um
I, I, I couldn't pick.
I think you'd be a much better
regent than your brother, um.
So that, that being said,
I'm very excited for you to to
take this, is there, are there 3
or 5 regions that need me.
Yeah.
Madam Chair, there are 5,
senator block, there are 5
regions. Thank, thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, and then lastly, how many
of them are veterans?
Out of the 5, do we know?
I would defer to the, uh, uh,
General
Uh, MB.
Mac Burnett, uh,
And, and in addition to that,
I'm wondering how many alumni or
legislators.
There were a lot of veterans,
but uh I know I think Senator
Steinbon.
is the only alum that's in the
legislature.
Uh
But I, I don't know. OK, that's
OK. I was just, well, general,
general, please come up and
state your name for the record.
Good morning.
Go
Good morning.
Uh, so, uh,
Chair, vice chair.
I send a block.
My name is Boris McBurnett. I am
the president.
20th superintendent of New
Mexico Military Institute. So
for your question, sir, the
answer is 2.
But once actually our
New people are confirmed,
there'll be one.
OK. Thank you, General. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Well, I'm excited to
support you, Mr. Jennings, um,
the resume is deep in in public
service, and I think you'll do a
phenomenal job as a regent there
and um I look forward to seeing
great things from, from Niy.
Thank you, sir, for uh
everything you've done for
Rodwell in the institution.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair. Thank you
for a second time, Senator
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
actually do have a question. Um,
I saw this on uh
Then Senator, now commissioner
Nibert's resume also, and that
is your part of uh the New
Mexico landman Association. Is
that a boil and gas association.
I just don't understand what
that is.
Madam Chair, last year, uh,
Senator Stewart, uh, if you've
watched the movie.
Landman, kind of like that. We
are oil and we're, we're like
realtors except in the oil and
gas business, and if anybody
hasn't watched Landman, uh, when
you watch it, be sure to, to
know and understand that uh Demi
Moore is a Roswell resident and
she's the star, and I think an
Emmy winner this year.
Uh she's
from as well.
But we are realtors in the oil
and gas business. All right.
Thank you so much for answering
my question. Thank you. Thank
you before I head to Senator
Townsend, I just want to say
it's nice to see a New Mexican
who has so much pride in an
institution they're up to
possibly help and lead, and to
know that you're part of a
family legacy and the pride you
have in Roswell.
And how you see the institute as
an extended part of your family
is comforting to know that if
you're appointed, you'll be
carrying out a legacy, but
taking care of what's part of
your family. And so that's good
to see, Mr. Jennings. And with
that, Senator Townsend. Yes,
thank you, um, Mr. Chair, I make
the motion that the rules
committee, um,
support the nomination to the
Senate floor of Mr. Tom Jennings
to the border regions said MMMI.
Thank you, Senator. There's been
a motion to move you forward for
a full Senate confirmation
today. And with that, if I can
have a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Yes, ma'am.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 7 yes and 3
excused, you'll move on later
this morning for a full Senate
confirmation. Thank you so much
for joining us and we'll see you
later.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, thank
you all very much.
We're gonna move on to the next
item on the agenda, which is,
um, the appointment of Kayle
Daniel to the New Mexico
Military Institute Board of
Regents, and I'm gonna ask for
Tobias then to come forward.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, may I make an
announcement? Absolutely.
Um.
So I am uh being followed today.
I have a shadow, that shadow
arrived an hour before I arrived
today, so, uh, she's really on
board. Uh, it's, uh, Elaine
Jensen, who's sitting right
there and I just feel bad that
my shadow arrived before I did,
but uh
it's
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you and welcome to your
shadow. Senator, good morning,
you'll have 15 minutes.
for both of you to make comments
which will include the organized
support that has written in and
so you can begin.
Thank you, thank you. It's Madam
Chair, correct? OK, I just, I
was confused here. chairs. I
see. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee. The New Mexico
Military Institute has been a
cornerstone of, excuse me,
exceptional leadership,
education and service in New
Mexico for 134 years. As the
state's premier military junior
college, high school, and now
middle school, Nimi has shaped
generations of leaders who have
excelled in military, business,
in public service. It's rigorous
academic and leadership programs
instill discipline, integrity,
and strong work ethic,
contributing to a highly skilled
workforce and engaged citizenry.
Nimi's economic and cultural
impact extends beyond its
Roswell campus, attracting
students from not only across
our great nation, but around the
world.
And fostering a legacy of
excellence and that benefits New
Mexico and beyond.
I am proud today to introduce to
you Brigadier General Kaylee
Keel.
She is a highly accomplished
military leader with over, over
30 years of experience across
military, federal, and corporate
sectors with a distinguished
career as a senior military
officer and legal expert. She
has expertise in government
acquisition contract, fiscal law
and served as corporate counsel
in complex litigation matters.
Brigadier General Keel serves as
the senior center attorney at
the Air Force Nuclear Weapons
Center headquartered at Kirtland
Air Force Base in my, uh, region
of Bernalillo County, where she
manages a team of acquisition
attorneys and legal
professionals. She is also a
brigadier general in the New
Mexico Air National Guard, where
she serves as the chief of staff
with responsibility for the
strategic vision and guidance of
the New Mexico Air National
Guard.
I stand for questions.
Thank you so much. If you'd like
to make some comments.
And I'm gonna ask that you turn
your microphone on. There you
go. Is this better? Yes. Good
morning. Good morning, senators,
I'm very pleased to be here. My
name is Callie Keel and by way
of brief background before I was
a lawyer or before I was a
general officer, I was a 14 year
old kid from Farmington, New
Mexico, who wanted a better
education and to get out of a
unstable situation at home.
I'd actually heard about New
Mexico military institute in
middle school, uh, when I was in
civil air patrol, and I was told
that there were scholarships for
kids who had decent grades, so
not to date myself, but I went
next door, borrowed a neighbor's
typewriter and typed up an
application for a legislative
scholarship to New Mexico
Military Institute, and at that
time, I was fortunate that
Senators Pete Domenici and
Senator Jeff Binghamman selected
me as
A scholarship recipient to New
Mexico Military Institute. My
mother, single mom, was thrilled
because otherwise we couldn't
have afforded the tuition so I
mentioned that because the
institute then I attended in
high school, I graduated in
1994.
And it provided me with the
foundation for the success that
I've had in my career and in my
life. So it was the first time
that I learned what leadership
was, what accountability was,
what academic excellence was,
how to apply for college, my
mother had dropped out in 8th
grade, so going to the
institute, I had a whole new
world in front of me that I
didn't know, uh, that I had
before. So I mentioned this when
I tell you that.
being nominated is truly an
honor for me. It comes from a
very personal place and I look
forward if confirmed, to
continuing that service to the
school that changed the
trajectory of my life.
And so I, Senator Block had
asked the question about uh the
difference in regions and the
one thing very common for all
regions regardless of the
institution is very important
fiduciary duty that each regent
has to the institution and
thereby to the students that it
serves, and that is something
that I take very seriously.
I believe that my background, my
experience, my leadership over
30 years, my ability to think
strategically and critically
will serve me well in this role.
Uh, I also ask very tough
questions and I'm an independent
thinker. So I have a couple of
my bosses here, I think they'll
attest to that, but I think my
characteristics will serve me
well, should you choose to put
me forward for full
confirmation. So thank you very
much.
for your time today. I
appreciate.
All of you, uh, stand for any
questions that you might have.
Thank you for that before we go
to questions, we do have some
organized support that's here
with you this morning, and I'm
gonna call forward uh Major
General Miguel Aguilar and
Brigadier General Matthew Henry
to step forward and although
I've called you out, if you can
restate your name for the
record. Good morning. Good
morning. Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Miguel
Aguilar, uh, I'm a Major
general. I'm the adjutant
general for the New Mexico
National Guard, uh, and also
the.
Acting Secretary for cabinet for
Department of Homeland Security
Emergency Management.
Um
I'm also an alumni of the Mexico
Military Institute.
I'm the son of a farm laborer at
a Dexter, New Mexico, um, and
that was probably where my life
was headed to.
We're not for attending the
Mexico military institute.
Uh, in the junior college and
going to the ROTC program and
beginning a lifelong pursuit of
leadership that has led me to
where I am today.
Um
I will also tell you that of the
21 star jet or the 41 star
generals that I have in the
guard today.
Um, to our alumni of the Mexico
Military Institute, uh, Callie
is Brigadier General Carper is
of the
4 full-time kernels that I have
working for the army side of the
National Guard.
3 of them are graduates in the
Mexico Military Institute.
This school is incredibly
important to New Mexico. I
believe the legislature believed
that 130 years ago when they
funded this idea that uh Colonel
Goss had about providing an
opportunity for New Mexico
children to get a military
education.
It is as important today.
Uh, to our children as it was,
so that's why I fully support
Calli, uh, being a member of the
board of Res. She is absolutely
right.
Um, she asked hard questions. If
you approve her appointment
today and get her onto the
Senate floor. She won't fill a
seat. She will fill a role as a
member of the border regions and
I will tell you I fully support
her. Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much for joining
us.
Thank you. I've got my stopwatch
here because I know General
Aguilar is going to track my
time, so I want to make sure
I'm, I'm brief in my comments.
So, Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
committee, uh, thank you for
allowing us to talk about Cali
Kiel. You've heard her resume,
you've heard what my boss said.
I work as the director of state
programs, but my other job is as
a commander of the New Mexico
Air National Guard for General
Aguilar, and so I've worked very
closely with Callie for the last
12 years. Um, I'd like to talk a
little bit about her as a person
you've heard her resume, uh,
which speaks for itself. But uh
what I would tell you
is that she's uniquely qualified
for this position for various
reasons, and we heard her attest
to that, uh, the, the 3 general
officers that uh that tag
alluded to.
The Institute is very personal
for all of them, and all of them
came from unique circumstances,
which is why this school is so
important. And Callie
understands that. It's very
personal.
Uh, she's got extensive
experience in the skill sets for
a region that you would expect
in terms of the long range
planning, uh, the
accountability, the fiscal
fiduciary responsibilities, uh,
those are without question, but
in terms of her character
traits, I always try to think of
words that I would describe
people when I have these
opportunities. And the words
that I would describe her with,
number one grip.
You heard about her asking tough
questions. That's probably an
understatement, um, but she's
very tough. She grew up in very
challenging circumstances, uh,
in this institute paved the way
for her being the professional
and the officer that she is.
Um
The other, uh, the other thing I
would say is in the different
times that we've worked
together, uh, I don't think I've
made a command decision in over
a decade.
Without having her counsel. She
understands what's right. She's
got inherent judgment and
ethics. Uh, she doesn't have to
think about it. She inherently
knows those kind of.
Her service has been invaluable
to me in the senior leadership.
Um.
One thing I would just say in
closing is uh she's passionate
about the institute uh too sure
remains healthy, not just for
the now, but for the future
generations of New Mexicans to
ensure that they have the same
opportunities General Aguilar,
John Carper, the other leaders
have so.
Critically important position. I
know she'll.
So thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
There's no other uh organized
support or opposition. I'm gonna
go to the committee room and ask
by a show of hands how many are
in support of this country.
11. Are there any online?
OK, and I'm gonna ask, is there
anyone in the committee room in
opposition of the country.
See none any online.
OK. With that, I'm gonna head to
the committee for questions.
That are blocked.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Well, this is gonna be one of my
favorites.
OK.
It's nice when a
Lieutenant Colonel gets to
question a general, so I'm gonna
take advantage of this if you
don't mind.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, general, I
believe the um
The tag said.
How many, how many general
officers are.
Um, alums of Nimi.
If you can't, if you can turn
your mic on.
3 or 5 senator and.
Mr. Chair, sorry. And I think
we're all 3 present.
So it's you, General Carper,
And General Aguilar.
Yes, Senator, and you're the
only Air Force One. I am and the
smartest,
I joined the Air Force and it
definitely so. That is awesome.
Thank you, General. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, you
know, one thing, um, and, and by
the way, I appreciate your
service at the Air Force Nuclear
Weapons Center, um, working on,
in my opinion, uh, cause you
know my background, that is the
number one mission of the DOD is
nuclear deterrence. Uh, it's
near and dear to my heart, so.
Thank you for that. Um, the one
thing I noticed in here in your
resume.
Under key military awards and
decorations.
And I didn't know.
Are you, are you prior enlisted?
Chair, vice chair, Senator
Block, I am, I am prior enlisted
for.
7 years and I was an honor
graduate from basic military
training.
Well, thank you, General, for
taking my thunder. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Because that's the one thing
that stuck out.
To me, um,
So I, I enlisted in '89, I'm not
sure when you did.
But for those of you who aren't.
Uh, veterans or who aren't in
the Air Force.
The honor graduate.
Uh, for basic military training.
is the top grad.
In the flight of 50 airmen, from
what I remember. Number one.
And that right there is
extremely impressive because you
are.
The best student.
Best at drill, best at
inspections.
Best at everything.
And trying to get through basic
training, uh, the 6 weeks it was
for me in '89 and whenever it
was for you, of impressing your
Not drill instructors, but your
training instructors in the Air
Force. That that's a huge
accomplishment and I just want
to say, um, really good job for
that because you don't see many
honor grads uh in basic
training, um, and, and I was not
one, so yeah, I can probably
understand why.
Um
Can you just, uh, basically, uh,
tell me, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, in general, um, why do
you want to be a region here at
Nimi.
Madame Che Vice Chair Senator
Block.
I'd love to be a regent at NEI
for the personal reasons I
talked about, which is service
back to an institution that gave
me so much at the Institute, I
learned about service before
self and and serving others, and
that's what I've.
basically tried to do my entire
career. And so to come back now
full circle and have the
opportunity to serve as a regent
and to be part of the governance
is super exciting for me and I'm
also really excited about the
new leadership that we have on
board with our new
superintendent. There's so many
exciting initiatives that the
institute is moving towards,
such as the IPA, the middle
school preparatory program, so I
am.
Very excited to be a part of
that and helping the institute
not only with the challenges
that it faces, but the
opportunities such as IPA going
forward and seeing, of course,
what, what new leadership does.
So very personal for me. It's a
full circle moment, and I am
thrilled to hopefully carry the
institute into another, another
130 years into the future. So
thank you for the question,
Senator Block. Thank you,
General. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair.
And I, I will say you have
Three great men.
Of high integrity that have um
Have been personal references
for you with General Aguilar,
who I know, uh, General Herrera,
who I know who's now the cabinet
secretary and General Henry, who
I know, um, I couldn't think of
3 better references with the um
Uh, integrity and dedication of
service to their country, then
those three men, so I appreciate
you. I appreciate those men
supporting you 100%.
I, I also want to say thank you
for being um.
Uh, in the, uh, New Mexico Air
National Guard, because right
now and I've talked to General
Aguilar about this previously.
Um, we had a great
We had a great.
Um
Mission
In the Air National Guard when
we were a fighter when we had
fighters flying tacos, and I'm
so happy that we're gonna get a
couple of birds back, I think we
already have them and we're
doing this total force
integration, and I know you're
part of it and you're part of it
in general Aguilar is part of
it, and I look forward to seeing
um a robust flying mission.
Uh, here at, at Kirtland Air
Force Base, where, where you
serve all also at the Air Force
nuclear weapons Center.
And, um, I, I hope that as the
only Air Force retire retiree on
the regions.
That you can, uh,
Tell our Air Force story to
those cadets, so we get more.
Air Force people than army
people out of Nimi.
If you guys are OK with that,
which it doesn't sound like you
are with um.
But that's OK, but this is a
very
Interesting time, probably the
most transformational time in
the New Mexico Air National
Guard's history.
Um
Sitting in with the active duty
wing there and what you guys are
doing and um.
So I really appreciate your
service there and General Henry
leading and General Aguilar, uh,
as, as our tag, I couldn't think
of better leadership, uh,
leading our airmen and and
soldiers ah here in in New
Mexico.
So you have my full support, my,
my last question to you is,
Um
Did you, do you enjoy being a
one star more or a lieutenant
Colonel Moore. Adam chair, vice
chair, center block. I enjoy
being an airman more.
Definitely, we were, we were the
ones we were actually, uh,
doing, doing the work and
turning the wrenches, so it all
went downhill once I
commissioned.
Thank you, General. I, I,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I, I got
to tell you, you're, you're,
you're good. That, that was a
great answer. I appreciate that
answer.
Uh, integrity first service
before self and excellence in
all we do, and you, general, are
the epitome of that.
And I look forward to uh hearing
great things from you as well
and um thank you for all your
service that you've done as an
airman, now a regent, an
attorney.
Um, very, very impressive. Thank
you, General. I salute you.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Madam Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's
kind of hard to follow that.
Um
I, I don't have any questions.
I'm just so impressed with your
resume. I keep thinking about,
wait a minute, where else can we
put her to work, uh, so we don't
get folks with resumes like
yours in this committee very
often, so, um, I personally want
to thank you for your
willingness to share your early
story, but not everybody's
willing to do that, and I think
it's important.
for us to realize how important
New Mexican military institute
is to some of our students, so I
just want to thank you for being
willing to do this work. I'm
still thinking about some other
place we can have you work for
the state. So, thank you, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Doohe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I was
gonna say the same thing. I,
your resume is very impressive,
and what else can we, uh, we,
weasel, wheedle you into. Um,
but, um, I really appreciate it
uh.
Hearing your
You're focused on the importance
of your fiduciary duty as a
regent, um, and hearing everyone
say that you ask hard questions.
Uh,
I think that is.
That is going to be, uh, that
is, that is a quality that, uh,
I certainly
highly value, especially in a
position like this. Um, I know
that the most of the the
students at Nimmi are out of
state. Uh,
And it looks like
The out of state tuition has
gone down over the last 4 years
in the in-state tuition has gone
up over the last 4 years.
What, what do you think the
regions should do to make sure
that more, uh more New Mexicans
are getting the benefit of NIMI.
Madam Chair, vice chair, Senator
Doig. I don't have the stats off
off the top as to the out of
state versus New Mexico
residents. I do know that since
my time, uh, as a cadet, that
enrollment is down in general
and that that is uh something
that I would like to tackle as a
regent. I haven't had a brief on
the school at this point as to
maybe what those driving factors
are, but I do know that.
I can say I, I don't know if
this is a driving factor, but I
do have a thought and sometimes
our New Mexico cadets aren't as
prepared to enter the academic
rigor of the Institute, and I
think.
That can sometimes have an
effect on, on enrollment. And so
I know that at least in my
personal experience, I come from
um Farmington where the public
school, it was, it was fine, but
I was way behind when I got to
high school when I got to Nimi,
especially in math and science,
and so I was really struggling
to keep up. I don't know if that
is still a trend today with our
New Mexico students, but I think
that with the advent of the IPA,
the middle school, that will
also
help prep New Mexican students
be prepared for the academic
rigors that they face when they,
when they come to the institute.
So, more to come, I guess as I
hopefully get into the seat and.
crack open some of these
questions, Senator Doha to get
better data on
What that difference might be
and what those driving factors
are.
Thank you so much and I, I am a
terrible multitasker, so I'm
gonna go back on the webcast and
listen more fully to your
answer. I apologize for having a
side conversation when you're
responding to a question that I
had asked, uh, but thank you so
much for your willingness to
serve. Uh, and I look forward to
supporting you on the floor.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Brigiddier general.
Oh, I'm looking through your,
also just wanted to compliment
you looking through your resume.
It's pretty outstanding. We've
got, uh, Lieutenant Colonel
here. I've got a major behind me
is our analyst, uh, to be able
to see the area of expertise we
have in this building is
incredible. My dad retired as a
trainer for the army.
Uh, so I've never been into your
situation where you guys have
actually served for our country,
but I appreciate that and I have
a
Dina Carnet from Nami, uh, she
sent me a note, making sure that
I was here to make sure that
Of these two confreys went
through because she says it'd be
great for the institute.
And in reality, that's what
we're looking at is how do we
position this institute to keep
the history that it's got, but
continue to grow it in a, in a
favorable way, and I think now
that I see that you're a
graduate and you've got a huge
history in the military, I think
you are gonna be a
Keep peace on forward and so I
just wanted to thank you and
congratulate you, uh, we'll be
looking forward to support you
on the Senate floor. I think
it's incredible that you're
here, both y'all, uh, give
credit to putting Emmy's future
is, but I just want to state
that publicly. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Before I go
to Senator Townsend, I just want
to say the comment that was made
by the Major General of you
wouldn't be filling the seat,
but you'll be filling a role is
pretty powerful and
representation matters, and
having you there is really good.
There's a fellow northern New
Mexican, I like hearing your
story and on how it led you into
a path into the direction of
where you are. And that not only
would you be helping if
confirmed in leading the
institution, but ensuring New
Mexicans like you and I who have
stories similar to
Ours would be represented and
would be respected on their
journey. And with that, I had to
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, Madam
Chair. I'm proud to, uh,
Make the motion to um or the
Senate Rules Committee to
For confirmation to the Senate
floor.
Uh OK cool.
New Mexico military institute
Regents.
Thank you, Senator. There's been
a motion to advance you to the
set up for full confirmation.
I'm gonna ask for a roll call
vote.
Senator Bergman's yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantley is excused. Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes. Senator
Townsend. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Jara.
Senator Duhaig.
With a vote of 8 yes and 2
excused, you'll move on later
this morning for a full Senate
confirmation, and we'll see you
then.
That concludes our confirmations
for the morning, so I'm gonna
pass the gavel back to our madam
chair for the remainder of the
agenda.
Thank you, and if folks could, I
could keep it down is there
they're leaving the room so we
can continue our business. Uh,
anyone who is here for SJR 6,
the sponsor has asked that that
be rolled, so we will not be
hearing SJR 6 today.
But come on up, Senator
Gonzalez, but we will start our
bills with SJR2.
All right, we're, if folks can
keep it down while we continue
with our business?
Go ahead, Senator Gonzalez.
All right.
Go ahead. Yes.
Thank you, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, members, uh, with uh SJR
2.
This would amend Article 20 of
the Constitution of New Mexico
by adding a new section too.
And this is prohibit the
expenditures.
Boring cumbrance of the trust
fund created for public
employees.
Retiree healthcare for any
purpose except for the sole and
exclusive benefit of the trust
beneficiaries, providing for
administration of the trust.
And affirming certain property
rights.
Ma'am she remembers the retiree
Health Care Act was created in
1990 for the purpose of
providing comprehensive core
group health insurance for
persons who retire from public
service.
As of December 31st, 2024, the
trust was at almost $1.6
billion.
The proposed legislation would
not request any new funding.
Current members for the retires
is 48,000365 with a total
membership of 65,000783 as of.
February 1st of 25.
This includes state, municipal,
county, public schools, higher
learning, employees, along with
public safety, such as
firefighters and police.
active participants contribute.
Contributing is 93,000595.
As of
June 30th of 23.
Active employer contribution to
the plan is over 300 entities
statutory language in the
retiree Health Care Act under.
10
7 C-15 retiree healthcare funds
contribution states as the
condition of employment for each
participating employee or of an
employer that chooses to become
participating employers after
January 1st of 1998 should
contribute funds.
An amount that is determined to
be appropriate by the board each
month participating in employer
of deduct the contribution from
participating employee salaries
and shall remit to the board as
provided by any procedures that
the board may require.
As such, many public servants
who have dedicated their career.
To government entities having
been making contributions to
this program with the
expectation of having a benefit
when they retire.
New Mexico retiree health.
Health care looks to protect
this contribution similar to the
pension system did in the
forty-third Legislature 2nd
session of 1998.
Similar to the pension
requirements, Gassy.
is performed for other
post-employment benefits and
determined to be 46.99% funded.
Or FY 24 from 16.5.
Just 4 years ago when reported
for FY 20.
S S J R 2 protects the fund,
which is an asset to the
program.
Used to determine funding's
status for both Gasby operation,
and to the program sovereignty.
Uh, Madam Chair members, I also
have some witnesses and I have
my other co-sponsor with me.
representative.
Right, go ahead, representative.
Um, Medicare and members, um.
Representative senators, I'm
sorry, um, I am just, uh, if
approved by the voters, this
would affirm certain property
rights for this fund, and it's
really a long time in coming,
uh, as you know, the parafund uh
allows those property rights,
and this would
But this, this would put this
fund equal to the Para fund, and
I stand for any questions. Thank
you.
Thank you. And did you wanna
hear.
Expert to say a few words. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
rules committee. Uh, I am Neil
Keefer. I'm the executive
director for the retired
Healthcare Authority. I'd first
like to start off by thanking
our sponsors for this uh
resolution that we bring before
this committee. Uh, just a few
other things that I would like
to maybe make note of, as we
know what this resolution, it is
to protect the many New Mexico
employees and former employees
who have been contributing, uh,
such as myself who plays a
portion out of my paycheck that
goes to this program and hopes
that this benefit is going to be
around in the future. This fund
is really to help.
uh, kind of address that and
putting some of that money aside
that I'm making as a
contribution now, so that when I
get to retirement, I would hope
to have the ability to use it
among so many other retirees and
and individuals as the as the
senator just stated.
Um, in addition with this, uh,
we know that this trust fund has
also been the hard work and
sacrifice of many different
groups to help us get to where
we are. We do recognize that. We
know that our members have had
to sacrifice as far as
individuals who have seen
payroll increases. We know our
retirees who have sacrificed
certain rule changes to ensure
that this program and the
viability of it continues and
continues to move forward. We
know the legislatures, uh, as
they had to make tough decisions
as well when we do look at the
employee and employer
contributions that we have
brought forth for you before
you.
In the past and having to decide
whether or not this is something
that, uh, you know, we want to
pass and continue to ensure the
viability of the program, and we
thank everybody for that hard
work. It is definitely being
reflected in that almost $1.6
billion that we've achieved, a
little bit of perspective as far
as we're looking back, uh, back
to 2007, we were at 122 million.
Uh, so I, I believe, you know,
when the early days when the
conversation was happening, uh,
probably wither and ERB and
protecting their uh trust funds,
uh, we were nowhere near close
to.
having those dollars, and I'm
sure maybe there was a little
bit of skepticism on where we
would be, but now, coming from
1990 where we had no
pre-material funding. This has
been on the backs, like I said,
of, you know, those individuals
that have been contributing from
their pay, um, as well as, uh,
making those contributions and
premiums has really helped us to
move forward. Uh, as far as
employers, we know this helps
them as participating. Uh, we
want to ensure that this fund
continues to grow, not just for
our members, but it helps them
when it goes to reporting on the
financial.
uh, statements, this can be
reported as a liability. So when
we're at, you know, 53%
unfunded, it is being reported.
Some of the bigger entities that
show this on funded liability is
the state of Mexico, 405
million. City of Albuquerque, 1
12 million. Bernalillo County,
47 million. City of Las Cruces,
26 million. So by improving this
fund, and that's a part of this
fund, we can continue to help
lower those liabilities.
Uh, we do know that with the
statute that this does bring
some, some concern in regards to
the property right. Uh, but we
do know that this fund really
has been the growth of members,
uh, before me as well as me that
had been contributing for the
course of their career, um, into
this fund, and it's those
dollars and the employers as
that form of compensation for
working for the public, uh, that
we have been utilizing to help
ensure that uh we've been able
to grow it and keep it around
for the future.
Uh, what we do see is this trust
fund has been mentioned is very
similar to the pension systems.
We know that such as myself, I
contribute to that pension
system as an employee and
employer, and it's the same as
far as for retiree healthcare,
and that I am contributing the
same way, uh, maybe at a much
lesser percentage, uh, but it is
also to ensure that we have the
benefits, and we really look at
this as part of a, you know, a
retention as a recruiting tool.
Uh, when individuals are
looking, you know, the pension
is a great thing to bring them
into the public sector, but
knowing not only that you're
going to have health.
Care benefits as an active
employee, but that you're gonna
also have health benefits and
retirement, and that's a big
decision for lots of retirees.
Many that I have talked to on
the phone, raise those concerns
that without these benefits, uh,
that it would really, really
tough, you know, our retirees,
they utilize their benefits,
whether it be prescriptions,
whether it be the visits that
they have. This is a form that
really helps to protect them and
ensure their quality of life as
well. Um, so we we really do
appreciate that support. Um, so
we really just hope lastly that
with this important legislation,
that it would have the
opportunity to come before the
people so that they could vote
on protecting this through the
Mexican constitution.
So I thank you, Madam Chair, and
I will just make note. I hope
some of the stakeholders are
able to speak. If not, I do have
a list of many of the
stakeholders who are actually
supporting this resolution.
Thank you, and I understand.
Thank you. Uh, we have 3 people
signed up as your, your
organized support. Uh you have
about 6 minutes left, so we're
gonna go to each of them for
about 2 minutes. Uh, Edward
Webster.
Come on up, uh, there should be
a, a handheld mic up there.
Oh yes, right there. Tell us
your name and go ahead for about
2 minutes,
Madam Chair,
committee members, my name's
Edward Webster. I am the uh
government relations director
with NEA New Mexico. Um, we
stand in strong support of SJR
2. we have retirees that rely on
the service as the senator said,
it does two specific things to
the Constitution.
Guarantees that these benefits
cannot be used for anything
except for members and retirees,
and also makes the RHCA the sole
fiduciary, um, gives them sole
responsibility fiduciarrily.
For um the administration and
the investment of the fund. Um,
we're seeing healthcare costs go
through the roof right now. Our
retirees, if these resources
weren't secured, um, they don't
have the ability to go out into
the private market. So we
strongly encourage you to vote
yes on SJR2. Thank you.
Thank you, Renee Garcia.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members. My name is Renee
Garcia. I serve on the board of
directors for the retiree
Healthcare Authority, and I
encourage on behalf of our
members for support of SJR too.
OK. Thank you. Uh, it's online
we have Carter Bundy.
No? OK.
Center we're there, were there
other folks as part of your
organized support that you
wanted to have speak.
You still have about 4 minutes
left.
Uh, we do have a few.
Madam, I do know that there's
others in the audience. I don't
know if they wish to speak, but
some of the other ones that are
representing us, uh, as you did
say, Mr. Carter Bundy, which is
with the American Federation for
State, County and Municipal
Employers, as well as the
Mexican Federation of Labor. We
have the American Federal uh
Federation of Teachers that is
also supporting us in in
conjunction with NEA. I believe
we have a representative from
the Association of Counties who
I believe is supporting us, uh,
that might be in the audience
that may be willing to speak. We
have enemy are the New Mexico,
uh, educator's retirement, as
well as the um retired.
Uh, public employees of New
Mexico, um, the Superintendent
Association, I don't know. I
think of, uh, by being in
attendance as well, I'm able to
speak if if there's a minute or
two. You've got a couple of
minutes left, so if any of those
folks are
are here, come on up.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Catherine Crociatta, and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
New Mexico counties. We do stand
in strong support of this
legislation. Um, we think it's
important to protect the fund
for our public retiree members.
We urge your support. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
There are other members of your
organized support. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, John Lipshutz with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor AFL-CIO. We represent over
40,000 workers throughout the
state. Uh, we stand in strong
solidarity and thank the sponsor
for bringing up this measure
again, we do believe that our
pension should be secured, and
for that reason, please uh
support this measure. Thank you.
Mad, Madam Chair members of the
community of the community my
name is Sue Griffith. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico retired educators.
This spill came up before last
year, and we are really
supporting it this year because
our retired educators.
Feel like this healthcare is one
of the most important benefits
we have. It is truly a
recruiting recruitment for
teachers to come to New Mexico.
So please support our.
Thank you. All right.
With 2 minutes to spare, you
have any wrapping up comments
you want to make, senator.
we're ready for.
We did not have anyone sign up
in opposition, um, like with the
vice chair does and does anyone
wanna uh raise their hand in the
audience to indicate support of
the bill.
All right.
A whole bunch of you, anyone
want to raise their hand to
indicate opposition.
Right. Anyone online support or
opposition.
All right, went online and
support. All right, we will go
to members of the committee, the
nursephonics.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, um, Senator and
Representative for bringing this
forward.
Um
I opposed this last time, but I
will support it this time, but I
caution you, if this were to
pass,
Um
This
Could, uh, this will.
According to RFIR Creative
property a vested property
right.
And I believe you're gonna have
more lawsuits.
I caution you in terms of what
you're asking for.
And I'm a retiree. I'm under the
retiree healthcare system, but I
think that this is more
complicated than you expect for
the future. That's all my only
comment. Thank you, Madam Chair.
These under Townsend.
Thank you, chair.
Um, the exact same question, but
I want, how much of Maner um.
that how much money is in this
fund today.
Uh,
uh, Senator Johnson, as far as
the amount today is about 1.58
billion based on the last
report.
And Madam Chair and Senator, are
there any government employees
that would not be covered by
this.
Any state government employees
that would not be covered
equally by this.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
anybody that is working for the
state that is in a full-time
position that's working, they
would all be covered. Uh, the
only ones would maybe be
seasonal employees who had to
beat that definition.
My, uh, Madam Chair, my tendency
is to support the bill, but I
have
I have really
Um
Pretty strong
Um, concerned that
In line with the senatorsonics
that
I like creating this guarantee.
You and, and the.
The personal
property right.
You may open yourself up to
scrutiny that you have not
envisioned.
And um
I would, I would strongly
suggest you get some legal
Advice before you go too far
forward. Thank you very much.
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
And, uh, thank you for bringing
this forward. I
I
I'm kind of, uh, on the same
path as Senator Stefaniks and
Senator Townsend on this, um, I
just wanna make sure I
understand this because and I
appreciate your time in my
office.
Yesterday, every day, every day
is like a blur. It was
yesterday, day, day before OK.
I don't think I had my 9th cup
of coffee at the time, yeah, so.
Can, can you refresh my memory
here? I, I, I didn't hear it, is
there 1.5 billion in the fund
now.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
it is about almost 1.6, we're
about 1.58. The market's been
kind of fluctuating, so we're
just kind of. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'll
just call it 1.6, that's.
That's fine. Um, what's the
average age of a New Mexico
retiree.
Like when they retire, do they
retire usually if they start at
18 or 21, they retire sometime
between 41 and 46.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Block, I mean, we of course have
many different retirees as far
as the ages when they become
eligible, uh, particularly it
could be somebody as far as the
enhanced or non-enhanced can
actually uh determine some of
that age, but I believe we're
actually in the mid 60 range, I
think for average retirees that
are coming to our office, uh, to
retire, and I believe the actual
average age for all of our
retirees is actually in the the
lower 70s, I believe. Thank you,
sir. Thank you, Madam Chair. So
what you're telling me, I want
to make sure I understand this
is that we have people that have
been working for.
30
The 40 years when they retire
and they and they come see you
in their mid 60s, is that
correct? Did I understand that
correctly, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, there are individuals
that worked that many years, it
could also be individuals that
started late in their career.
Um, and so it's based on years
of service, either for the
pensions as well as us and they
right.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I want to make sure I understand
this. So basically, are we, are
we as um a state and letting the
voters decide to firewall off.
This fund
So we can't touch it unless we
do some.
Extraordinary measures to go
back in and and um.
Take money out of this fund, do
I understand that correctly that
we're firewalling this off so we
can't use this for anything
else.
Madam chair, Senator Block, uh,
yes, this fund is being
protected for the individuals
who had contributed to it.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
You know, what, what really
concerns me, did you happen to
see this piece of paper?
Uh, Madam chair, uh, Senator
Block, uh, I'm not too sure what
the pink paper is, uh, it's the
FIR I have read the FIR.
One thing that really concerns
me, um.
In here
Scares the crap out of me,
actually.
I, it says here in the first
bullet under significant issues
and I, I need you to just tell
me what the strategic plan is
here, because we want to make
sure we're taking care of our
retirees, that's what it's all
about.
Everyone favors that, by the
way. Unfortunately, there's only
a limited amount of resources
for a lot of people. It says
here, and I want to read it word
for word, it is projected that
the NMRHC fund.
We'll go into a deficit from
July 2032 until July 2040, so.
If we have roughly 1.
1 1.6.
Close to 1.6 billion.
We're gonna be at a deficit.
Starting in July 324.
8 years, so that starts in 7
years where we're at a deficit
for 8 years.
The plan for this is to have
this firewalled off where we
can't touch it.
But it sounds like the state is
going to have to.
Inject
A lot of money in those 8 years.
Is that, is that the plan, sir?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
uh, actually, the, the deficit
spending period is actually
going to be in 2034 FY 35. Uh,
so I would have to look at the
solvency that was used in that
projection. But with the deficit
spending actually is stating,
it's actually when it's talking
about our reserves, uh, no
longer exceed our expenses. We
still have that trust fund
there. This trust fund is used
as part of our protection on our
rainy days. Um, many other
programs out there should
actually have some type of
reserve, whether it be 3 months
or whether it be more.
But under the Gatsby government
sandals board and being another
post-employment benefit, we do
have to do a lot of calculations
at looking at our liabilities.
But with this particular study
with the solvency, all it's
saying is what we currently
collect today from the employees
and employers, what we collect
from our premiums from our
retirees. What we receive from
our Medicare Part D plan that we
get from the federal government.
The interest we earn, all of
those revenues, it's just saying
at that particular time, we are
and the tax expense, but I want
to make sure I, I, I'm
transparent and that we receive
that.
It's just saying at that point,
that will go up, but we would
still have our trust fund that
we could pull against to help us
during that time. And that's
what this fund could help be
utilized as well. All right,
thank you for that answer, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so.
What you're telling me, I want
to make sure I understand this
is we have 1.6 billion in the
fund, does that not include the
trust fund, or is the trust fund
included in that? Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Block, the
1.6 is actually what we're
referring to as the trust fund,
uh, in regards to our budget, we
get separate revenue as well as
we do have some, uh, short-term
investments that is not. Thank
you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So,
Going back to the other part of
my question is, do you foresee
The state having to inject funds
into that period of time.
That a firewall, you know,
firewall we can't take from that
side of the wall.
But do you see the state asking
the state for more funding
during that period of time to
cover the benefits of, I would
imagine, thousands and thousands
of retirees that we have that
are counting on these benefits.
Madam Cha said her block, um.
Making those predictions are
always tough, but what I will
tell you when we do that
solvency, we project that there
is going to be no additional
increase in premiums. We're
saying that's 0%. Our board
reviews this on an annual basis.
This last year we had a 2%
increase on our benefits. So
when we're making these
projections, we're keeping a
very conservative approach with
it. That's also probably looking
at a conservative approach to
whether or not any um additional
pay increases would be passed.
That actually would continue to
help us. Um, there would not be
any consideration of
Plan design changes. There's
different tools that we could
utilize that ensures that we can
continue to strategically, uh,
push out that deficit spending,
but also make sure that this
program is viable. Some of the
other things that I can't always
control, uh, senator is
sometimes the different
regulations that may come on us,
which is part of what offsets
our calculation of whether the
federal government to the
inflation reduction Act, whether
any state regulations, sometimes
there is some increased fees,
and so there is some transition,
but we are, we are confident
that we've continued to manage
this program.
Uh, back in 2007, we were
actually expected to be
insolvent in 2014, and through
through through the
Work of our board and our
directors, they've actually
pushed that out from what was a
seven-year insolvency to now
beyond actually 30 years. So
that's what the strategy and the
basis that has gone through, but
we would always like to continue
to work with this legislator to
kind of uh ensure that we get to
that 100% funding, but I will
tell you right now, we are not
asking for any additional
appropriation, uh, for this uh
resolution, um, as we have maybe
in the past. Thank you, sir, for
that answer. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And I
understand that it's very, very
difficult to manage.
funds with different
regulations, uh, inflation,
we've had record inflation over
the last 4 years.
Inflation reduction Act did not
reduce inflation, by the way, we
had up to 9% in 2022 and 20%
compounded for the past 4 years.
That being said, I want to touch
on Senator Stefaniks' um
concerned because I'm, I'm not
familiar with it when this, this
was defeated pretty, pretty
handily.
Um, last year, is this the same,
same wording, is there anything
different from this bill from
the last one?
Uh
Madam Chair and Senator Block,
there is actually one component
that we pulled out, and it is
mentioned in the FIR in regards
to the funding mechanism. There
was some wording in there that
uh was looked at that it would
remove the ability of the
legislature to be able to adjust
those funding mechanisms, uh, we
recognize that in the
conversations that we had with
various legislators, and so that
was actually removed. That's
something that does remain in
the pension system, but it is
not what we were looking for as
obligating. So the legislature
would still have the right.
And the ability to continue to
look at the employee and
employer contribution rates, uh,
that are set by you as far as
that percentage, um, and could
just that, as well as, uh, the
other one that I know that there
was concern with regards to the
tax suspense fund. Uh, we do
receive that, we know that's a
concern, and we know that
sometime in the future, this
legislature will probably take
that up and look at it. Uh, that
is giving you that opportunity.
We we're not trying to obligate
the state, but we were
definitely trying to protect the
dollars that we as the public
employees have put into this
fund. Thank you, sir. I
appreciate that.
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um
I want to just touch back on
these, uh, the increased legal
liability, I think where Senator
Stefaniks and Senator Townsend
were going.
Uh, if this, if we get a
A surge in lawsuits uh because
of this. How are those lawsuits
going to be funded? Are they,
are they taken out of this fund
that goes to retirees or how do
we pay those legal fees or
settlements.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Block, I I guess I would, would
ask the committee if maybe they
could give me an example. One
thing that I would look at is on
the flip side for somebody such
as myself. If you told me that
you were diverting money that
was money I was put in for this
program, uh, I would consider
that being something that I
would be concerned about filing
a lawsuit saying that this money
has been used for something that
when I first was hired, uh, was
an expectation that I had to put
into and it was going to be a
benefit, uh, that this dollars
were going to be at least used
for. I understand there could
always be things that can happen
with economic.
and socially, uh, that this
legislators worried about, uh,
but I also looked from the flip
side of um, you know, the
question of these individuals
have been contributing to this
program, and I think it would be
on the flip side, but there's an
alternative lawsuit, I am
definitely happy to take that
back. We've had our general
counsel looking at this. We've
actually had one of our uh law
firms that we do have on
retainer, uh, looking at some of
this language, uh, we are not
taking it lightly. We are trying
to look at the different aspects
of it, uh, to be able to address
your questions, but to also make
sure that we are trying to
continue to plan.
for the future. I, I, I greatly
appreciate that answer, sir, um,
because that's, Madam Chair,
that's the risk that we're
facing that we just don't know.
I mean, how many lawsuits are we
gonna get? How much is it going
to cost? Is it gonna be uh
taking from some of these
retirees who have worked their
whole lives to pay into this and
they expect something back, and
of course the government doesn't
keep its word many times as you
and I know, and everyone here
knows with Social Security
benefits that are gonna be.
Uh, getting about 75% of your
Social Security benefits by
2035.
Um, and that's when I turned 65,
by the way, so I'm not too happy
about that, and I know the
retirees and stayed in Mexico
won't be too happy about that.
Uh, just lastly.
Is our is is our setup on this
fund or this program? Is it, is
it mire other states in the
country.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
it does for some, there is a
wide array of different
arrangements out there and
funding mechanisms, as well as
the benefits that they provide.
Um, the one thing that I, I will
say that's been a remarkable
thing for New Mexico as we've
continued to see, uh, based on
the growth of this fund that
we've been moving up as a
program with different studies
that have been released, some of
them are outdated, uh, where we
were kind of lower on the totem
pole when we were only at 3%.
But as we've continued to move
up, this is actually reaching
either into the top 15 or top.
10 of retiree programs out
there, but they do vary. Thank
you, thank you for that, uh,
sir. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
just lastly, the
I
I put my Air Force commander hat
on where I try to get as much
and I know it drives some people
crazy, and I get that I try to
get as much data as I can to
make an informed decision.
And we have this big blind spot.
Out here, the legal liability.
Like Senator Stefanis and
Senator Townsend said, I, I
don't, I don't know.
If we're hurting these people,
or we're helping him.
And you, you don't have the
numbers and didn't expect you
to, um, I know you guys are
still going back to look at the
The uh
The um the legal liability
potential costs. I, I would hope
you could get me that number.
Before a floor vote on the
Senate.
So I can support this on the
Senate.
I know maybe this will pass now,
but right now I, I can't support
it until I get that data so I
can make a better informed
decision on the floor of the
Senate. And I think that's more
than fair. Um, I, I appreciate
all your answers. You're on top
of it, you know this stuff
inside and out, um, I appreciate
the two legislators to your
right that have taken this on,
but I need that, I need that
information before I can make a
better informed decision. Madam
Chair, Senator Block, we do have
it. It's actually within our
OPEB study. It is a requirement
as a
state that the Government
Accounting Standards Board when
we have to recognize our
liabilities. So it was
projected, I want to say about
3.3 billion is what our
liabilities are looking at. That
is where we are, like I said, at
that 47%, um, as the senator did
say, that's the progress that
we've shown where we were at 44,
where we were at 33, we were at
25. Going back many moons ago
when we were at that 3%. That's
where we've gone through this
practice that we've actually
been able to grow this. And when
we do look at our current
revenues, we do anticipate that
there's going to be some
additional infusion.
into this program. And when I
talk about sacrifices that
retirees that had to make, we
look at the minimum age of 55
that was put in place before
many people such as myself, even
though I may qualify before it,
I will have to wait till 55 to
actually join this, so there is
a little bit of provision there.
There's not a plan to to to the
to the non-enhanced, uh, but we
have taken different actions to
ensure the viability of this
program. And the good thing is
we still have some of those,
those tools available to us, but
we want to be conscientious,
that we want to make sure that
this, as far as the goal when it
was set by this legislature.
Was to provide affordable
comprehensive healthcare, and we
want to make sure that we don't
keep pulling those levers and
we're trying to be very
conscientious of it, so that we
could help our retirees. I, I
appreciate a lot, sir, and thank
you, Madam Chair. I, I.
I don't want to ask any more
questions, cause what I really
want is I, I'd like you to come
visit me in my office.
Cause I have a lot more detailed
questions and I want to move the
committee along, um, so I can,
you can sway me over to that
support vote.
All right. Thank you, sir. I
appreciate everything. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
So Dagos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
Representative Senator,
gentleman, um, I, I have a few
questions, but I want to premise
it, preface it by, uh, I, I
tried to looking into some of
the areas and try to understand
the broader view that I'd like
to take you to page 2, line 25.
And I'm wondering if you could
clarify it, so in, in looking at
uh section D, I wish you would
have clarified the best vested
property rights, um,
And the nature of it, uh, in,
in, in writing, just so he is
the bill goes forward, everyone
would understand that. Can you
give me an understanding of
that.
I'm
Madam Madam chair, um, Senator
Gallegos, what, what we're
looking for as far as with this
being that property right for
our members is the ones that
I've had that 1% coming out of
their paycheck, as well as the
2% that our employers have paid
or for the enhanced to pay 1.25
and 2.5. This is the
compensation that we were uh
awarded as far as to to pay into
this program, we want to make
sure that that is being
protected. We're not looking at
protecting any of the additional
dollar.
for the legislature, we're
trying to make sure that the
ones as far as the beneficiaries
myself, contributed into this
program that that is being
protected. That's what we're
looking to have that property
right afforded to.
Well, thank you for that, madam
chair, Representative senator
and gentleman, uh, and then it
goes back to the clarity, I
think if I understood you right
that uh this didn't have
appropriation.
And that the state would
accumulate or, or pay for any
kind of lawsuits wouldn't come
out of this fund. Is that not
correct, Senators
representative.
Uh, Madam chair, said the guy
goes, I, I guess without knowing
the specifics as far as the
lawsuits that we're talking
about, um, it makes it a little
bit difficult, but I mean, we
work as any other agency, uh,
you know, we do have, uh,
obviously our attorneys, we do
have our insurance that helps
helps protect us. So depending
on what that would be, um,
I obviously believe we could
address those. I mean, I think
right now what we're trying to
do is just make sure that we
don't have lawsuits from
employees who have been
contributing all these years and
now saying that their money is
maybe uh being used in a
different way than what they
believed it was gonna be for.
for them and
representative senator and
gentleman, I, I guess, uh,
My thing is just listening to
center phonics in her opening
station, a statement there's
some fears, and I'm not one that
uh ever votes for.
A bill to go to another
committee to be fixed.
But in that discussion, I just
wanted to ask you, so, um.
Early on, what it talks and we
got synopsis in this pink format
that says uh credit trust fund
to minister public employees'
healthcare benefits and
prohibiting any changes to such
benefits. And I'm just
wondering, uh, for right there,
what happens?
Um
If, if just thinking through
cost doubled. So in, in your,
you talked about attorneys,
you've got everything figured
out. If insurance costs double
up, I'll just go back
historically as we would give
um.
Money to students, education
increase, so we don't have any
what we we give money to.
Organizations, but we don't have
any.
Uh, controls over the increases
COVID.
Some huge increases in COVID,
not our control, but I'm just
wondering as you go forward with
this trust fund, what happens to
those benefits if
Things were to go out of line as
far as cost. I know you're at a
limited amount. You're watching
what's coming in, you're
watching what's going out. What
happens, uh, if, if increases
double. And, and that just goes
back to the earlier
conversation, there's no
appropriation to this bill. So
I'm just wondering if things go
awry.
How do you handle that? What do
you do with it? Uh, what's your,
um, I, I'm on a board for
insurance and we're always
looking out, you know, 20 years,
and just trying to amortize
everything, try to figure out
the values. I'm just wondering
what you, your thoughts are on
that and Mr. Chair.
In general representing.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senators, um,
yes, you know, so when we do see
within our industry this is
always a concern of when we're
looking at medical trend, what
is that increase? Could health
care potentially double? That's
actually what we use this trust
fund for is really to help us
when something like that does
occur, if we need it, if our
current budget that we have does
not support, uh, based on the
revenue we have to the expenses
that we'd anticipate. It's one
of the reasons why we do have
the ability to tap into this
trust fund to make sure that we
can.
Uh, cover those expenses. What
it does, what it does do allow
us is the following year we
worked very closely with our
consultants, our actuaries, and
our board to evaluate that
increase. Do we need to look at
what our premiums that we're
bringing in. Do we need to look
at the plan design as far as
that cost share relationship
that is between us and our
retirees to ensure that this
program is around. Maybe we make
adjustments there. We look at
what we're receiving from the
federal government, because we
do have our Medicare plans and
being a Medicare, uh, egg whip
provider that
Part D, there's additional
funding we get there. We work
with our, our vendors who are
part of the Medicare Advantage
plans on what they're getting
from their uh contributions from
the federal government, from the
MAPD plans we offer. Uh, we look
at our pre-mediccare where we
see them moving and aging into
the program, where we can make
these adjustments. It's part of
the many different factors that
we can utilize to always ensure
that we're offsetting those
expenses if we need to, uh, but
it helps us in those unexpected,
uh, you know, whether it be
COVID or something else that
came up, uh, those unexpected
expenses could hit you. But
that's what you have the
reserves for. In this case, our
reserves are our trust fund. Um,
and that's what we use to manage
it. So this gives us the ability
to the following year, the year
after that, to keep making those
adjustments. But what we had
hoped for is if we saw something
where double increase is that we
wouldn't have to have a
knee-jerk reaction really raised
the, the, the benefits and
premiums so fastly, but actually
give it a chance to level out
and take a methodical approach
of how we need to increase.
it. And that's what we would do
to ensure that, you know, we're
we're managing those expenses,
um, similar to what many other
states that that do this, as
well as a few others that I know
have constitutional protections.
I think that
Man and chair now, Senator and
Representative, uh, and, and I
guess my thought on that is the
way you're looking projections
and everything else, uh, that
the state would not be appoint
at any time to have to bail this
out. You're looking at your
reserves, what you have, uh,
even to changing to the um
different plans that you would
have available. You don't
foresee anything in the way
you're uh pushing this
legislation that there'd be a
point for a bailout.
Uh, Madam chair, Senators, what
I could tell you is we do do a
stress test in regards to our
program and our fund.
And currently where we have
entered as regards to the dollar
amount, uh, our actuaries are
feeling more comfortable that
through this stress test, that
we're in a good position, should
there be pressure on us. Uh, can
I project, uh, predict
everything that would happen in
the future? I, I don't know, uh,
but that's where I say we have
the ability to uh be very
amenable and taking different
approaches to ensure uh that we
could get back on track if there
was something that was
unforeseen.
Well thanks for them, I'm
cheering.
Senator Representative
gentleman, um.
Being a baby boomer, I'm just
wondering, are you seeing a
growth in the number of
retirees, and do you know what
that percentage is?
And
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Gallegos, actually, we, we were
seeing a year over year growth
and we've actually kind of
flattened out, um, recently, and
I do think that's contributed to
a couple different factors. Uh,
We know some people are just
working a little bit longer. Uh,
2, when we put that minimum age
in effect, I believe that's kind
of a tampered down a little bit
of people who were enrolling on
the front end, um, but what we
are seeing is more people are
aging into Medicare. We do have
age, age boomers, but we've
actually seen that the biggest
difference of why we're kind of
flat or maybe even a slight
decrease, is we've actually seen
more retirees pass away than the
new enrollment that's come in,
um, which, unfortunately, we
don't like to see that, but we
know with the
like us, we handle somebody all
the way through their life or
their retirement, that's usually
most cases, the only way they're
gonna come off our plan. Um, and
that's similar to many friends
and family that I have known
that have been on this program
as well and utilized it. um, but
I do think it has been
sustainable, but it's been some
of those rules and actions that
the board took in place because
they were wanting to make sure
that.
And Senator Representative and
gentleman, uh, just to give you
just a little bit of background,
uh.
When P&M sold the gas company in
Mexico asset. I was like 45 days
short of 30 years, lost half my
retirement. I would say more
than that.
Um, but,
Knowing that I understand where
your members are.
Because when you're considering
a fixed income, and something
does whatever that was beyond my
control. They picked a date that
they had 2 423 employees, so
it's a prime time to bail on us,
uh, but the thing is, I think
there's things that happen in
society, we don't have any
control over.
And in reading and
understanding, trying to
understand Erbil have more
fears.
And I feel for your members
because it happened to me. Uh,
things happen that we don't have
any security over.
Uh, but, uh, currently in the
way this is, I'll wait for other
testimony, uh, I'd be standing
in opposition to your bill just
because there's still some
concerns and questions we have
going forward. So with that I'll
yield. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend for
a 2nd time.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
The more I listen, the more
concerned I get. Would you just
for the
So I understand. Who do you work
for? There's a lot of wheeze and
testimony. I don't know who he
is.
Uh, Madam chair, Senator
Townsend. So I do work as
executive director for the
retiree Healthcare Authority,
and I apologize sometimes when I
do say we, uh, I have a 12
member board that I report to.
Um, this member board is a
diversified group from the
Association of Counties, the
municipal municipal League. We
have both of the Perent I mean
both of the pension entities
that serve on it. We have a
representative from the
healthcare authority. We have
the Teachers Federation, we have
the superintendents that's on
it. Uh, we have, uh, the
treasure that's on it, um.
Apologies that may be
forgetting, but as a broad
representation of members that
are on our board that are here
to, uh, you know, work on behalf
of their constituents, but also
ensure that we're making the
proper decisions for this
program and the viability of it.
I appreciate that, um, Madam
Chair, um,
So, does PERA support this?
Bill.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend, um, in regards to the
FIRs that I've read is, is
neither one of them see any
impact to them. Uh, we are, uh,
uh, a sister agency that runs
independently, um, and we don't
really have any effect on them,
but we do work very closely with
a lot of the endeavors that we
do, whether it be educating and
supporting our retirees. We work
closely with both Perra and ERB,
as you saw one of our ERB board
members actually had stood up
today in support of it, and we
really
work as much in unison to
provide the support to our
retirees who sometimes have
questions in retirement, go to
page 3 item E.
There's a statement that I, I
want.
He says nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit.
Modifications to retiree health
plans that enhance, make better.
Or preserve.
The soundness of the trust or
individual retiree health care
plans. Does that prevent a
reduction in benefits, if the,
if the world just goes upside
down and uh
You know, health care costs.
Quadruple, I mean, we all hope
that doesn't, but doesn't that
lock in the benefits and say you
can't reduce the benefits. Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend, I actually.
Don't believe that does. I think
we removed the language that was
kind of obligating the state.
What this says is if you want to
continue to help us, uh, that's
going to help enhance our
program, our funding liability
or even the actual uh uh
soundness of this if you wanted
to give us additional dollars,
uh, I believe that could be done
to help this program go more.
That's all I think that it's
stating is that we're not
preventing from any additional
uh support that may come to this
program. We're just not asking,
sir. What I'm asking is, does
this prevent
that
The reduction in benefit.
Uh, Senator, uh, I mean, Madam
Chair and, and Senator Townsend,
I don't believe it does. No.
I, I really think you got some
work to do because that's not
what the FIR says, and I don't
believe that's what that
language says. I, to me, what it
reads is,
You're preserving the fund, and
I get what you're trying to do
to preserve the fund. I'm not
arguing with that, but if things
go south.
Insurance costs skyrocket. I
believe that language prohibits
a change and, and
And we have to be careful of
that because that would cause, I
mean, I hope that never happens,
but we have to have off ramps in
all of these.
Good public policies.
Yeah, prohibit that from
occurring. So, thank you, ma'am.
Cheer.
Thank you. Anyone else want to
be on the list?
Madam I to comment on that. Hold
on, wait, you gotta wait until
you're asked a question.
Senator Stewart.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, in full disclosure, I, I'm
retired educator and so I am in
the retiree healthcare
authority.
I just want to comment about the
The
The soundness
of this agency and what they've
done over the years.
Um
You know, they're part of what's
called iba, the inner agency,
uh.
Group that looks at how to lower
healthcare costs to get the best
healthcare. It's part, it's APS,
it's NEMSA, it's retiree
Healthcare Authority, and that's
our state plans. So they've been
a good partner with our other
agencies that cover healthcare
and um, you know, they've
struggle because
The amount that employees pay
very small and the amount the
state pays is very small. Uh,
we've tried for years to
increase that a little bit. Uh,
it doesn't work, you know, we
haven't passed those bills, but
in spite of that, they have
lowered benefits. They have done
the fiduciary responsibility
that they needed to do to make
sure that these plans worked,
and they do work, uh, for
thousands and thousands.
of retirees, uh, so.
It's not inexpensive. It's
expensive. Healthcare is
expensive. It's really run by
insurance, our insurance
industry. Uh, so I just wanna uh
say at this agency in my mind.
Um, has been very good at
looking at benefits, lowering
them when they needed to uh
lowering their increasing the
age of retirement so that you
can't get into that until you
really are at an age where you
need to retire, uh, so I do
support this, um, and I support
this agency because of the long
history that they have doing uh
what needs to be done for our
retirees, so, uh.
I just wanted to say that my
chair, thank you.
Thank you.
So blocked very briefly for a
second time.
I just want to say I appreciate
Senator Stewart's comments.
I, I think from
Uh, some people on this
committee, we're definitely not
questioning the the soundness of
the competence of this committee
who works very, very hard
providing.
Uh, is it best the services they
can.
I think the issue some of us may
have is just some of the
unknowns with the legal
liability, how that's going to
affect our retirees and like you
aptly, I agree with you 100%,
this body has not raised.
Um
Uh, put cost on top of the
retiree, uh, to help maybe
solidify or enhance the fund
here, so the gentleman, um,
is
And and the organization.
I don't think if we came across
as questioning the soundness of
confidence, absolutely not.
They're working the best that
they can with what they have,
we're questioning.
Uh, a lot of the inflexibility
of the language center. Townsend
pointed out as well as the legal
liability Stefanis turned up,
uh, mentioned, and I think that
right there makes a lot of
people nervous that the benefits
may, may not be there, uh, in
the future, but these guys do a
great job and I definitely
appreciate their work. Thank
you, Madam Chair. There's no one
else on the list. Um, I have a
couple of questions.
So
We, this is largely uh.
Modeled on our existing.
Let's see article 20 section 22
that provides constitutional
protections for PERA and ERB.
Are we, have we seen lots of
lawsuits?
Around those benefits and and
those vested property rights.
Madam Chair, I don't know that I
could speak on behalf of.
ERB um in regards to what their
uh legal matters might be, um,
all I could say is I know
there's always questions in
regards to the colas, um, which
may be a separate different
matter since they are a pension
system, uh, they kind of work in
reverse. Uh, we are a, a benefit
system and, and, and what I
would say with, with the
Constitution and why this is
different than the pensions, um,
why we didn't have that
provision, uh, why in the FIR on
page two, it, it does state,
notably
The proposed constitutional
amendment does not include
protections against underfunding
the plans, which are present in
the current constitutional
provisions for the pension
plans. So once again, another
area that we are different, as
you do mention with those
lawsuits, and when we do talk
about what, what the guarantee
would be.
Well yeah and and and and we
have.
We have Supreme Court precedent
saying that the colas are not a
vested property, right? Um, and
just as, as we keep hearing
about this legal liability.
I'm thinking
Wouldn't we be already seeing
that if, if this language.
And creating this vested
property right, was going to
cause a flood of lawsuits, I
would assume we would have been
seeing that with PERA and ERB.
And, and I don't think we, we
are, there certainly have been
suits, there's suits about the
cola, um,
There are suits about Madam
chair.
I'd like to comment on that. I
can't speak on behalf of Perra,
but I was involved in 1998, uh,
199098, I think it was on the
constitutional amendment 2,
which protected the para fund um
from
Some of our leaders wanting to
use that fund to invest in other
things, um, that constitutional
amendment 2 did pass. Um, I
became the chairman of or I
became a member of the Para in
2002, which was only 4 years
later, um, and we didn't see a
lot and I was on the board for 8
years. Um, I didn't see a lot of
lawsuits.
As a result of that
constitutional amendment. So I,
I just wanted to comment on
your, on your question. Thank
you, thank you.
Um,
I, I do think that the language
that you have in here that says.
But nothing will be construed to
prohibit modifications to
preserve the actuarial soundness
of the trust fund, does, does
allow for that reduction, if
need be, but I'm curious there
in.
In the existing constitutional
language for PERA and ERB.
There is language that you guys
don't have in here, uh, that
says the legislature shall not
enact any law that increases the
benefits paid by the system in
any manner or changes the
funding formula, um, unless, uh,
adequate funding is provided.
Now that funding formula part
clearly would not apply. Um,
But why you have language in
here that would give the
legislature explicit.
Authority to enhance.
Uh
But not this other language.
It says, shall not enact any law
that increases the benefits. Uh,
why is that?
Uh, Madam, uh, as we have this
conversation with, uh, the
legislature, there was the
concerns that if that language
was in there, that the
legislator would not have the
ability for the employee and
employer contributions, which is
in there by statute, um, which
is that 1% and 2% for uh
non-enhanced and the 1.25 and
2.5, that that would take away
the ability of you guys being
able to make any changes or, or
lowering them. The other concern
was the tax distribution fund,
uh, that we are currently
receiving those dollars, is that
it
would not allow you to make
those changes. Uh, we recognize
that. We are not trying to
prevent uh the legislature for
having the ability to make those
decisions, to review this
program as it does state in our,
uh, retirement, uh, the
retirement Act. Um, so that's
why that was removed. Uh, we
continue to say that we are
really trying to protect this,
which is protecting the dollars
that our members have put in.
OK, thank you. And, and I'll
say, I, I find in the existing
constitutional language, I find
it very confusing that we have.
We have both the the same
language we see here.
The end of the bill and this
language language saying
You can't do anything that
increases benefits, and then
also nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit
modifications to enhance.
That seems a little
contradictory to me.
Or or preserve, or preserve,
right, right. The preserve part
I get, the enhanced part.
confuses me a little bit with
that that other language that we
don't see in here, um, but I, I
appreciate your explanation.
That makes sense to me.
Um, what is the the will of the
committee.
I I move it do pass on Senate
joint resolution 2.
All right, we are on a motion
for a due pass. Go ahead and
let's go ahead and call the
roll.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantly is excused. Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez is excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Yes my vote.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
No, and I'd like to explain my
book.
Senator Jara me. Yes.
Senator Doig.
Yes, uh, said Nurse Stefan to
explain her vote, followed by
Senator Townsend. Thank you,
Madam Chair, um, I wanna support
the work of the agency, but
We have established a health
care authority, and I'm working
pretty closely with the
healthcare authority on trying
to get the best rates for health
care for the participants, and I
recognize that Medicare
supplements and Medicare Mediap.
is a different animal.
And I think that we.
haven't united.
In terms of looking at all the
health benefits for all the
people of the state of New
Mexico. Thank you very much,
Beneture. Thank you, Senator
Townsend. Yes, um, I'd like to
support the effort as well, but
you have
We have to maintain.
Capacity within the legislative
body to make adjustments when
things go awry.
And I do not believe this does
it. I think it ties our hands,
and we're, we're spending a lot
of money up here right now.
And I am, I am, I still.
I'm very concerned.
that we've
We're spending more than we can
afford to, uh, when things go
awry. We're enjoying a lot of
great things right now and I
hope it continues, but
We have to have the ability to
adjust just like we do at home
when things go south, and so I
would hope that the next time I
see this,
That there's some off ramps that
give the legislature clear
ability to adjust when things
go.
Ary. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator
Representative 5 with 5 yes, 3
now, you have a do pass.
Thank you, Madam. Thank you. I
know that a souls was hoping to
go later, uh, because he is in
uh education. I don't see
Senator Woods here, but you see
Senator Campos. Senator Campos,
come on up.
Check you in a couple. OK,
thanks.
And all senators real quickly
before you.
You start, um, actually, no,
never mind, go ahead.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, the Senate Rules
Committee.
Uh, just quickly and again uh
with me is uh the expert who is
gonna assist with today's
presentation, uh, and I want to
express my admiration to Carol
Miller for the ongoing work that
she does on behalf of.
Frontier, New Mexico.
Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the uh
Senate Rules Committee. Senator
John Memorial to request the
governor appoint a task force to
study the needs of frontier
areas, meaning the
unincorporated areas of a county
that are sparsely populated and
isolated from larger population
areas, yes.
Ma, Madam Chair, there you go.
Does that, is that a little bit
better? All right, OK, thank
you. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
members of the Senate Rules
Committee. So as I was
indicating Senate Joint Memorial
to basically request the
governor appoint a task force to
study the needs, a frontier
areas, meaning an incorporated
areas of a county that are
sparsely populated and isolated
from larger population centers
and services, including the
rural communities. The task
force would access government
services.
Uh, the, the levels and
infrastructure and the resources
available uh availability in
frontier areas and to study how
uh our state statute might be
modified to assist frontier
areas in their provisions of
infrastructure and the
establishment of community
operated infrastructure
networks, uh, that's where I'm
gonna go ahead and stop it, if I
may, Madam Chair, members of the
Senate Rules Committee defer at
this time then to my expert who
continues to do endless work in
Insisting, if you will, our
frontier areas and that is Carol
Miller.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and especially
um Senator Compos. This is a
completely grassroots effort,
um.
Coming out of communities that
are struggling really hard. We
had a moment, we had our 15
minutes of fame. We'd like to
talk about during the pandemic
on the ways that we really
rallied and were able to provide
everything from toilet paper to
sanitizer to school lunches to
our supplies to the children and
elders of our communities. What
we've learned and what we're
Trying to address his that we
don't really have any incentives
to come together and work
together in unincorporated
areas, uh, the programs that we
provide our siloed from each
other, each with their own kind
of administrative requirements,
for example, the Oako, the
volunteer fire departments, the
EMS, the library, water
associations.
Community centers, all of the
infrastructure we provide is
expected to be provided by
volunteers, and it's just not
sustainable anymore. I can talk
about our mutual domestic where
our president tried to retire
for about 5 years and we're
just, we have population loss.
We have people aging out and we
do not have the people to step
up to take some of those tasks
on.
And we also have very little
economy, so one of the models we
looked at that I was familiar
with where the rural health
outreach grants from uh
Department of Health and Human
Services, where if you actually
agree to work together, you
become eligible for additional
resources. So this is the way to
study what if we found a new
mechanism which for the time
being we've referred to as
operated infrastructure
networks.
Could we in that point be able
to have resources from the
state, both financial, technical
assistance, and others where we
could have a position, two
positions in a community that
could oversee all of those
programs, uh, we've, I've
brainstormed this with the uh
state auditor who did create a
very good program of simplified
audits for the Oakos.
But we just, our taxes
contribute to the infrastructure
of the entire state, but we're
not getting very much back to
our areas at all, and it's
really a struggle for us, so the
idea of having a task force that
would bring together all of the
relevant programs with community
members and say, is there some
way that we could create an
entity, we see it like a.
lingo a quasi nongovernmental
organization where we actually
create a legal entity that would
be eligible for state resources,
whether cash or other resources.
So with that, I know this is a
new idea, um, you know,
storming over the summer. I'd
like to recognize Senator or
TCino who is spending a lot of
time now in one of those
communities and learn for
himself just the dire need.
Uh, for some way to get
additional state resources.
Recent studies from the public
health community, now identify
living in an unincorporated area
as a health disparity. The
trickle doesn't trickle all the
way to where the need is. So on
behalf of my community and a lot
of communities surround the
state. We really hope that we
could spend the interim really
studying the way.
To help us make it through um
just really made it and and have
programs available to our
community. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
available for questions. Great,
thank you. I don't have anyone
signed up in support or
opposition.
On this bill, would anyone in
the audience like to raise their
hand to indicate support.
Sandra Or TCP now. Uh, would
anyone like to raise their hand
to indicate opposition.
Come on up, Senator.
Miller spent a great deal of
time
orienting me to this to this
particular measure, this uh
constitutional amendment, I
guess it would take.
Just a joint resolution.
Um,
Memorial Senator Memorial.
As you know, unincorporated
areas don't benefit from the
taxation that's collected in
their communities. And this is a
way
That
Short of incorporating, which
becomes a an incredible, an
incredibly steep.
Uh, climb
This is a way for them to
participate in trying to figure
out how to finance some of the
needed services. So I think it's
a great idea. Carol's put a lot
of time into it, some other, uh,
states are taking a look at this
as well, and I would urge your
support for it.
Thank you, Senator. It's good to
have you back.
All right.
Um, did anyone want to raise
their hands and indicate
opposition.
See then, members of the
committee and and committee
members, uh, just so you know.
I don't wanna roll Senator Woods
for a 2nd time, and we still
have some of our souls built to
get to. So on memorials, we're
gonna limit members to no more
than 5 minutes.
All right, so Harya followed by
Senator Stephonics. Thank you,
Madam Chair, I just want to
thank the two of you for
bringing this memorial forward
as somebody who represents a
majority of rural New Mexico and
northern New Mexico, we see the
issues when it comes to mutual
water domestics, uh seas and
land grants that we're saying
that it's the same people who
have been volunteering for
years, and we need to work on
what's going to be the solution
when it's time for them to no
longer be able to volunteer.
Now, the only thing I want to
bring your attention to.
The both of you is the FIR
brought up an issue that I want
you to talk to the Indian
Affairs department. Um, I'm not
gonna ask the question, but that
you sit with them because what
they stated is the definition of
frontier areas as areas sparsely
populated, rural and
unincorporated regions is
unclear regarding Indian
nation's pueblos and tribes. And
since I represent two pueblos in
the Gicaria nation, if you
could, if this advances, if you
can sit with the Indian Affairs
department and have
that conversation. But other
than that, Madam Chair, I just
wanted to say thank you and
Carol, just so you know, my
cousin, Senator Ortizi Pinon did
his due diligence when you talk
to him, that he reached out to
me to talk about the memorial.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Stephonics.
Madam Chair, I would move with
Du pass if you're ready.
All right. Any further debate?
Senator Block. Thank you, Madam
Chair, just uh just one
question, Senator TZ Pino, thank
you for being here on this, uh,
Senator Campos for pushing in,
thank you, ma'am. Um, just real
quick on, I, I'm trying to
understand this because I, I got
my
County commissioner had on here
on page 2.
Uh, line 14.
Whereas the starting at 12,
whereas current infrastructure
resources are outdated.
In many rural communities and
frontier areas.
And siloed by systemic
structural barriers.
negatively affect the provision
of services while depending
almost exclusively on volunteer
labor and deliver essential
services to residents.
So
Sandoval County is probably the
best uh county that has the
rural, um, tribal.
And in suburban urban areas.
What, what systemic structural
barriers or counties putting in
place to prevent
Services to the rural areas.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee and senator, it really
depends on the county, and some
of it is the way that the
counties themselves.
do not have the resources or the
ability to reach all areas. I
can give an example about uh
programs for senior citizens,
uh, are, our senior citizens
have a very difficult time, uh,
accessing some of the services
because of transportation and
time and, and access to the
lunch, and we have tried to have
a senior lunch one day a month.
in the community and the way the
law is written that the counties
are under the agency on Aging
Act, you have to have a 5 day a
week program to have any
program. So ways for
So there are other programs also
within counties where there's no
ability to innovate.
Because of structural barriers
in legislation that is going
there. Um, I've been very
interested in uh
Kern County, California,
recently tried to attack this
from a different direction.
They're the only county we found
that now has a groce receipts
tax, exclusively for
unincorporated areas in that
county with the board of people
from those areas addressing how
to get how to spend that
funding. It's been going for
additional law enforcement
presence. It's also allowed them
to extend
the hours of the library. So we
understand that counties are
under a lot of state and federal
requirements also. But then you
have a community, uh, like mine
offarco that has the community
center, a library, a mutual
domestic and a sick, yeah, two
land grants going right down the
middle, um, it's just really
hard for us to provide the
services that the community
needs.
to fire EMS, all of that, we
have 270 people according to the
last census in about 60% are
elderly, and somehow as
volunteers, we're supposed to
provide those services. And the
structural barriers are not
Barriers getting funds to us,
the counties also have some of
those structural barriers and so
do state agencies, but it's
really time to see if we can
actually get resources to
communities in need.
Thank you.
Oh, I'm
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK
I'm sorry, I did not have my
microphone on for anything.
We're on a motion for a due
pass. Is there any objection to
that motion?
See none, please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative. So, you have a due
pass. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Senatorpino for joining us.
All right.
Uh, Senator Woods.
Senate Memorial 2.
And if.
Someone wants to let Sen of
souls know that we'll be getting
to him soon.
Good morning, Madam Chairman.
I have with me today Laura
McCarthy, the state forestry.
With the
Energy, minerals, and natural
resources department.
And Madam Chair, today I'm here
to present Senate Memorial 2.
And uh send memorial to as a
request of the New Mexico
Legislative Council to direct
the creation of a wildfire study
group.
With the wildfire risk in New
Mexico this memorial will
establish a study group from the
state forestry, Mexico PRC.
Mexico Association of Galies
utilities, co-ops, wildfire
science, technology, and a new
name.
Which
The uh
Commissioner of Public lands
asked me if she could be
included in this, so I
evidently,
She thinks it's a good idea
also.
The study group will develop a
comprehensive approach on
Working on more safety and
prevention measures to protect.
Life and property when it comes
to wildfires, the study group
will develop recommendations to
in identifying areas that are
most at risk.
Ensuring emergency response
plans are developed.
With community stakeholders in
the case when wildfires do
occur, the study group will look
at the measures that quickly and
efficiently extinguish fires.
The studies for the memorial
will meet during the interim and
have final report presented to
the appropriate interim
committee to present its
findings and recommendations on
November 1st, 2025.
It's a 5 month commitment from
June 2025 to November 2025 for
the study group.
And won't have a big financial
impact on the legislative
council can allocate funds to
the Forestry Service or the
contractor to oversee the study
group.
Understanding there is a fire
planning task force in place and
this group looks at building.
And home preventing majors
again, the wildfire study group
defined in the memorial can
recommend on where the gaps in
the current wildfire policies.
The study group will be tasked
to research best practices.
From other states are
experienced with the expertise
of the members in the study
group that is working and what
is not.
Overall this memorial and study
group will help the effort and
look at a more comprehensive
approach in creating for policy
that is good for New Mexico.
And Madam Chair, if I could let
the state forestry have a, a
quick word.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
I have two tangible examples of
good things that could come out
of this memorial.
One of them is coordination
between the utilities and our
fire response agencies and by
that I mean the federal agencies
that are responding to fire,
wildfires and are organized with
the state of New Mexico in a
southwest coordinating group
that during active fire season
is meeting sometimes 3 times a
day to allocate resources and
make sure that
Mexico has adequate coverage and
engagement.
A stronger engagement with the
utilities, uh, through that
process would be an excellent
outcome of this memorial as
well, we don't currently have a
protocol for post fire hazardry
removal in the days immediately
after a wildfire when the
utilities are actively removing
trees in the rights of way, but
often trees are taller than the
rights of way themselves and
uh, we don't currently have a
protocol for addressing that
kind of a situation, uh, but
what we know is that the public
that's affected by the fires,
what they need and want a rapid
restoration of power. So, uh,
with that, Madam Chair, uh, that
concludes my, uh, remarks.
Thank you I'm sure I do have an
amendment.
That if I could get uh
Someone to move them in with
this adds the uh uh state.
Commissioner of Public plans to
the other group of people.
Sure. Uh, I will.
Move the amendment for the
purposes of discussion. Go ahead
and talk.
Is there any more information we
need on it? No. OK, that that's
the only amendment that I did it
OK.
Is that Stewart. Move adoption
of the amendment. All right. Is
there any objection to that
motion? See, none that, that
amendment is adopted on the
memorial as amended. Uh, you do
have 2 people signed up to speak
and support. I don't see anyone
signed up to speak in
opposition. Carlos Lucero and
Michael D'Antonio.
Come on up if you're here.
And
You're welcome. Go ahead for,
for about 2 minutes max.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
Doha and members of the
committee. Carlos Lucero with
the Public Service Company in
New Mexico.
And we'd really think that we
thank the sponsor for Senator
Woods for bringing this memorial
to our attention.
With the recent increase in
wildfires not only in New Mexico
but nationwide. PNM has been
working on adding to our fire
mitigation plan and working with
our communities, the state, and
forest services are more
preventive and awareness
measures.
We believe SM2, Memorial 2 I'm
bringing a study group with
their expertise during the
interim would be a good approach
to address wildfire prevention
from a con comprehensive
standpoint, and how we could all
work together.
Especially in the areas of our
state.
In high fire high fire areas.
For these reasons, we support
Senate Memorial too. Thank you.
Thank you, as Mr. D'Antonio
here.
OK.
Madam Chair, um
My name's Bernard Treat with
Xcel Energy. I'm standing, uh,
Mike D'Antonio and I represent
the company together. He was
trying to call from home but
couldn't get in. So not to, not
to keep you all, um, our, our
comments, are right in line with
what uh
Mr. Lucero just made and so
we're are standing in full
support.
Of Senator Wood's Bill. Thank
you, ma'am.
Thank you. All right, we did not
have anyone sign up in
opposition if anyone would like
to raise their hand to indicate
support, you gotta sign, you
have to sign up an hour before.
Thank you. Um.
If anyone would like to to raise
their hands to indicate support,
go ahead. All right.
We got a number of folks in the
audience. Anyone want to raise
their hand to indicate
opposition?
See none. All right, members of
the committee on the memorial as
amended.
I'm try move would do pass as
amended on Senate Memorial, what
is it? 2. All right, we have a
motion for a due pass.
Is there any objection to that
motion?
See no I
show they show all members
present voting in the
affirmative. Senator, you have
a, a do pass as amended. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. All
right, we're gonna start with
SJR 3 and I think Senator
Stewart is going to
Uh, fill in for Senator Souls
until he can be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senate joint resolution 3.
Thank you.
would take us back to where we
were before 2003 and in in we
would have a state school board.
Currently we're now one of 4
states who don't have a state
school board.
It would use the current PEC,
the publication Committee, uh.
Designation to kick in that
state school board in addition,
the governor would have 5
appointees. Now this would have
to go to the.
Voters in 26, it would not begin
until 28 and there would be
enabling legislation that we
would have to pass about terms
of office and how we would get
it started.
Um, before 2003, for 40 years.
We had a school superintendent
we had 3.
People. We had Leonard Deeo, uh,
Mike Douglas, uh.
I always forget the middle one
Alan Morgan.
The education community are
really doesn't like political
whiplash.
That's really what we've gotten
since 2003, we've had 9
education secretaries.
Uh, in that 20 years since we
passed the last constitutional
amendment.
Um, NCSL and others have studied
other states. The states are all
over the map.
On how they manage education. As
I said, I think there's just 5
states that don't have a state
board of education.
Uh, Currently, the public
education commission of Maine uh
work is around uh state charter
charter schools. Uh, we would
have to do enabling legislation
to move that, uh,
Work, uh, to the state Board of
Education.
So, uh, that is a very short
summary, I am happy to answer
questions, uh, for Senator
Soul's joint resolution, and,
and I don't know anything about.
Support or opposition. Well, I
was just going to say I, I have
down who the the organized
opposition is. I don't know who
Senator Souls is organized
support would be. So if anyone
is here who you know you were
part of his organized support.
Can you raise your hand?
OK, I'm not not seeing. All
right, ma'am.
Did you talk to Senator Souls
about being part of his
organized support? OK.
All right. Then we're gonna go
to the organized opposition, um,
I have
5 people down, uh, you all will
have a total of 10 minutes to
divide as you like, so I'm gonna
say your names, go ahead and
line up. Uh, Greg Frostad,
Rebecca Burt, Terry Cole,
Matthew Paul, and Dominica
Chavez.
Go ahead. I would suggest about
2 minutes each, but y'all can
use your 10 minutes as you like.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, Mr. Vice Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Greg Frosted. I'm
Assistant secretary of Education
at the Public Education
department, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak in
opposition to SJR 3.
The joint resolution would take
us back to the governance
structure of the last century.
Having a state school board was
not better, and the legislature
and voters replaced it with what
we have now, which is a cabinet
level agency with a secretary.
There is no body of research to
support SJR3, having a state
board of education has not been
shown to lead to improved
student outcomes.
However, it would take
significant time and resources
to make the change.
Time and resources that we could
better spend on improving
student outcomes.
The PED works very closely with
our sister agencies on many
important projects such as the
longitudinal data system NMRIs.
Or rise, excuse me.
Literacy projects such as the
summer reading program and the
Office of Special Education.
If priorities and policies for
early childhood and higher
education were to be set by the
governor, while the state board
of education sets policies for
K-12 public education,
collaboration between the
agencies would decline to the
detriment of schools and
students.
Schools would experience slower
response times from the from the
distributed governance model of
a state board.
Answers to urgent questions
requiring immediate action may
have to wait for regularly
scheduled board meetings.
The ECECD and the PED share
administrative oversight of
preschool programs located in
K-12 public schools. Currently,
the PED and ECECD work together
to reduce reporting burden on
both agency on both agencies
access to data through the PED's
reporting system.
The provisions of SJR3 would
lead to additional reporting
burdens as the state Board of
Education and ECECD would not
share priorities or policies and
may have may not have data
sharing agreements.
Having 10 elected members of a
state school board will slow
education policy innovation and
will be less effective and
efficient.
Thank you.
Go ahead. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today. My name is Becca
Burt, and I serve as the chair
of the New Mexico Public
Education Commission.
I'm here to express strong
opposition to SGR3 on behalf of
the entire PEC.
At first glance, this may seem
like a simple structural change.
However, the implications for
charter schools in New Mexico
are significant and troubling.
The publication commission was
intentionally designed as an
independent authorizer of
charter schools separate from
the political shifts that often
affect traditional education
governance.
This structure allows us to
focus on what truly matters,
ensuring that high quality
charter schools can thrive and
remain accountable to the
students and families they
serve.
Moving to a board of education
would fundamentally alter this
dynamic.
A boar would have broader
regulatory responsibilities
beyond charters inevitably
diluting the focus on charter
school oversight and innovation.
We have seen in other states and
at district levels that when
charter authorization is
absorbed into a larger
bureaucratic system,
responsiveness declines,
innovation stalls, and schools
struggle under one size fit all
policies.
On the most recent vistas, 88%
of charter schools authorized
under PEC scored its traditional
or above, 44% of them were rated
spotlight schools. These schools
serve over 30,000 students in
New Mexico, providing critical
options for families seeking
specialized programs, cultural
relevance, and alternative
learning models, weakening the
independent authorizing
structure will jeopardize their
ability to serve students
effectively.
Rather than dismantling a system
that is working, we should be
looking for ways to strengthen
it, ensuring that the PEC has
the autonomy, tools and
resources to continue supporting
and providing rigorous oversight
and the support for charters.
For these reasons, I urge you to
oppose SAR 3 as drafted, the PEC
has a current makeup of 5
Democrats and 5 Republicans, and
while we run under partisan
elections, you would never know
by our body of work or voting
records.
We implore you to leave the PEC
untouched and protect the
independence and effectiveness
of charter school authorization
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Terry Cole.
I'm president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We respectfully oppose
this legislation.
Because it would inject, we
believe, more politics into
public education, and that's the
last thing we need.
Putting a large partially
elected group of people in
charge of our state's education
system is a recipe for division
and acrimony.
Local school boards across
America are under fire for
governance issues. Many local
boards are hotbeds of political
chaos, and they routinely lose
focus on student needs and
outcomes.
Why would we want a similar
situation at a state level.
Please recall, New Mexico once
put an elected body in charge of
the utility regulation in our
state, and for many of the same
reasons, we're talking about a
state school board today, we
ended up with a daily cocktail
of dysfunction and poor decision
making. And rightly so, we
retreated from that model.
We also want to emphasize that
this resolution does not
adequately protect public
charter schools. It would
eliminate the current state
charter school authorizer, which
honestly is performing very
well.
Finally, the number of adult
decision makers is not driving
students unacceptably low
academic performance.
This resolution is not going to
fix what's broken.
Let's not advance a so-called
solution that hasn't worked
before and won't work again. We
hope that you vote no this
morning. Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Matt Paul
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. We oppose SJR3 and
ask that you do the same because
it politicizes and diffuses the
oversight of our state's most
successful schools.
Nearly 11% of students choose
public charter schools in New
Mexico, and they achieve more
academically because of it.
45% of students at charter
schools read on grade level.
36% of low income students at
charter schools read on grade
level as well. Those results
don't resemble a last place
education system.
Our statewide authorizer, the
PEC focuses solely on charter
school oversight.
Our schools, all of them.
Set rigorous academic
performance goals and are held
accountable to those goals by
the PEC.
The stated direction.
To help students achieve an
associated accountability lead
to better outcomes for kids.
This works because the PEC
focuses on charter schools.
That focus also takes the
politics out of the oversight.
DC members take office through
partisan elections, but the
practical focus of their work
helps keep politics out of it.
That won't be the case if the
body is tasked with making
decisions on curriculum,
calendars, or nearly anything
else in education.
We should be focusing on
learning from our public charter
sector to help all schools
improve, not pull the rug from
under them and place them in a
structure that has already
failed.
Instead of longing for the past,
we could bring a structure where
the legislature and executive
determine goals and carve a path
for the state and education,
just like charter schools do at
the school level.
That would take us forward, not
backward, like SJR3 does.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Dominia Chavez, advocacy manager
at New Mexico Kids can. We
oppose Senate joint resolution 3
and ask you to vote no. New
Mexico has a long ranked at the
bottom in education, while 49
states, each with different
governance structures continue
to outperform us. The latest
NAEP results show our education
crisis is worsening.
With more students falling below
basic proficiency and our most
struggling students slipping
further behind. Louisiana moved
from 50th in 2019 to 16th in
2024 in grade 4 reading and from
51st overall in 2017 to 30
seconds. How? By focusing on
high quality instruction,
student interventions and
supporting teachers. Our
solutions will be found.
in the classroom. There are
currently 2 bills, Senator
Stewart's literacy bill and
Senator Soul's math bill that
focused on what matters most,
improving core instruction.
This resolution will also make
education more political, not
less. Education politics have
intensified, and elections for a
state board will be no
exception. That's why only 5
states use the system, this
resolution proposes and why New
Mexicans voted to move away from
this system just 20 years ago.
We urge you to oppose this
resolution and focus on what our
students need most. High quality
instruction. Thank you.
you.
Thank you.
All right, I think um some
Merete,
ah.
I'm looking at the time, I, I
want us to, I'd let our floor
leader know that we're gonna be.
We're gonna be a little late
down to the floor, and we're not
getting to, uh, third reading
until after the joint session.
I said I, I don't, I would like
to have a discussion on on this
bill, um, but I want Senator
Soulz to be here, uh, when we
take a vote. I think that is
only fair. So we might, we're
probably gonna end up rolling
the vote to Monday, um, but we
can go ahead and do a discussion
now.
So members of the committee who
would like to be on the list.
And Madam Chair, I don't think
I've done a good job for Senator
Souls, and I think her, his
supporters that were here
before, I recognized them,
didn't think this was going to
be heard and left, so I, I
really think we should roll it
over and have him here, uh,
instead of me. OK, that's fine
and, and, and frankly.
And that in which case maybe we
should just save the discussion
for Monday, um.
Yes, yeah. OK.
I think that that makes a lot of
sense. Um, in that case, uh, I
think that's all of our business
