On that order business message
from the house.
Surgery.
bill one as amended by the
Senate in return same here with
respectfully submitted this I am
Ortiz retention chief clerk
journal so the message from the
to inform the Senate that the
duly enrolled in gross copy of
house bill one with emergency
clause has been reading folder
and signed by the officers of
the house in open session and
from the house has been received
I'd like to announce of the
members of the body at the
offices the Senate have signed
an open session house bill one
with emergency clause.
The house.
Mr president your finance
committee to home has been
referred house bill two as
Sentiment us move adoption the
committee report centers we have
a motion to adopt the committee
report.
All those in favor signify by
saying Hey.
Yes.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Around that order business
announces miscellaneous.
excuse Senator Wirth I thank you
Mr president having one fifty
nine am I move we adjourn until
twelve OO one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
request of senator share Center
shares requests now being a limb
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM.
This will come in order.
ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
know the Senator Gonzales or
that order business third
reading legislation.
Senator Gonzales thank you Mr
president and thank you members
final passage has been taken in
that it is now subject to debate
amendments or substitution
seeing no objection Senator
Gonzales explained the bill.
To individual citizens of the
state of New Mexico and what we
have done here through the
through Senator Mr Senator
Tallman.
And also the assistance of LFC
and the assistance of for our
To relief payments to.
Our citizens of our state and
one of them.
That the amendment from the bill
is that the first one would be
thirtieth and then the second
one would be August first and
not later than August thirtieth
And we would have twenty million
also for non filers to a total
of six hundred and ninety seven
million.
No Mr president and members so.
We do have all the system that
mechanics parts of
full implementation of the
system.
And again you know this goes to
our citizens of the state of New
helpful households with the any
Lujan you know from this
assistance to our families with
that on Mr president I would
expert witnesses very well Mr
president it is so we have stirs
my of the orders from LFC.
And we have all done the less
sergeant arms of Phyllis court
our expert witnesses into the
chamber.
thank you Mr president if the
sponsor would yield just to a
couple questions Senator
Gonzales do yield Mister
president I will Senator share
Senator thank you Mr president
and I know that others have had
similar concerns about this.
So the question is.
payments are how do we know who
they're going to how do we
verify that there really
residential New Mexicans and
particularly not Texans.
do the bill requires the
applicant for relief payment to
include proof of social security
number or individual taxpayer
citizens the ITN's our tax
process the numbers issued by
the IRS individuals who are not
eligible for a social security
would qualify for relief
payments through the H. S. D..
Additionally the bill requires
proof of New Mexico residents
be a dependent of a recipient of
a rebate check from section one
of this bill.
Okay Mr president Senator sides
will make sure so if they
President on the Senator that is
correct.
Okay so the the people then that
are the non filers and that's
who we're talking about here who
Mr president Senator all this
would be individuals that
their income is too low.
Okay Senator Mister president of
great
How do we verify residency how
what kind of system do we have
will be able to use the same
process in place for verifying
residence.
For other state programs.
verifying New Mexico residency.
So Mister president so if I
understand right of the TRD
already has a system that that
had that you know do we know our
time that we have a deal with
COVID nineteen.
And during this process so so up
thank you senator just a couple
quick comments Mister president
I view this more of a as a re
funds in a rebate and and it is
of New Mexico and so what we're
really doing now is simply
giving those taxpayers their
money back.
so this isn't a gift from
then I'm glad that we're finally
get around to this because this
is taxpayer money that simply
was more than we needed.
And of.
I know people don't like to hear
me say that but oil and gas is
what's doing this right now.
And always does it when we have
more money.
And so there was a big article
taxed it was about six hundred
thousand dollars in revenue to
the state for that weekend six
hundred thousand dollars muscle
metals.
I'd like to point out Mister
dollars and how were.
From oil and gas and that's why
we have this money today so
thank you Mr president thank you
president.
Has was mentioned I served on
the subcommittee that worked on
this piece of legislation and I
want to commend and thank
Senator Gonzales who chaired it
that the senator just mentioned.
There is twenty million dollars
in this bill set aside for non
filers for whatever reason.
Chapman for the commitment that
they that they have made
outreach to the non filers to
make sure it is known that this
is available to them and I want
to thank secretaries grace for
bill and understand our
intention is to help people who
are suffering.
Current circumstances including
inflation.
teams come that the state have.
It is important that we keep in
mind.
Our state who are most in need.
money is not I don't have to ask
the city to yield I know very
well of these leadership in this
bill and I just want to commend
him and to urge everyone to
president and just to follow up
a little bit on Senator shares
COVID
recently The New Mexico tax
research institute published a
to the state of New Mexico and
for many I just want to express
great gratitude to the oil and
gas industry and not only to the
oil and gas industry but to lazy
And so I hope all of you should
go back home and report to your
constituents mention that to
them that this is made possible
by an industry that is critical
support of that industry so I
would like to express my
gratitude publicly to them.
Senator Kernan center gave us.
Senator Mr presence I like quick
Senator Kernan just talked about
but it sort of brings me to a
problem that we we have in
southeastern I'm just trying to
lot of then camps in trailer
park facilities now we Mr
president center would they be
qualified as able to get this
tax so the majority in Mr
are not because they do not have
utility bills.
Senator Gonzales Mr president
and a senator
Of from all the information from
Senator Gallegos Mr president
center so they would have to
reside for a hundred eighty five
but do not have a utility bills
you the answer that you're
looking for tonight but they are
different ways of of doing this
and also as we mentioned you
know the databases that have
say that there would be some
form of information you know
documenting that residents.
Senator.
I guess my thing is is it a
continuous hundred maybe five
days hundred eighty five work
days missed present.
Senator Gonzales.
I'm sorry I'm sorry I apologize
for that it does not have to be
a continuous of hundred eighty
five days.
Senator.
President center that sort of
brings me my predicament I
state lines with that o'neill
thank you.
Thank you senator go sentiment
us.
Thank you Mr president in in
this is been a long struggle and
currently happen and I want
everybody to be aware of what's
happening in the economy we know
that inflation is here we know
the feds are triggering interest
and that's not reflected in the
cost in the economy
we know that the supply chain
issues going to come to an end
at some point and that's one
refresh recessionary pressures
throughout this rebate will not
even change a tech in the U. S.
economy or New Mexico's economy
when the money's put back in but
we need to prepare ourselves in
money into reoccurring situation
and we in New Mexico need to
plan for stability so we're not
in those recessionary pressures
or we can ride them out we put
have before twenty eight percent
is what we're going to leave
here today plus or minus it may
show that differently as we see
a book throughout but because we
change but the number one thing
that you can see in the economy
and you can see people and gas
prices are everywhere they're
three ninety nine a gallon for
have to trial travel more miles
to go to work.
And employees travel sixty miles
round trip sometimes a hundred
twenty miles round trip but
economy inflation hitting is
hitting families harder than we
really realize and so as we move
forward be prepared for
cautionary measures because one
by thirteen percent we just did
a junior bill for fifty million
dollars that targeted things
that matter to to legislature's
in their districts the hardest
thing you're gonna do this
legislature.
Mexico recessionary proof
Planning New Mexico bill
reserves and build stability in
our budget we'll be able to hold
that budget at the have lower at
and not have to come back and
Is to get money in the economy
and help those people that are
struggling.
That's the number one thing that
should be on our money as we
leave and head home knowing that
we did what we think is the
You know the reason we have this
money to give back is because we
over corrected and Tax.
It's an opportunity for us to
inflationary itself is a
misnomer.
I asked the question today in
committee.
I didn't get a very good answer
but it will be inflationary
economy with no goods or
services in return that's
inflationary.
But still we over collected tax
and because we over collected
You listen to Senator share.
And got this idea but I hope you
had a little thought about it
should be for us to be not
cutting government spending it
should be that we are taxed
increasing taxes on the people
the workers of New Mexico that
should be what really is hard in
this administration and this
legislation increase taxes by
over three hundred million
dollars and it's time that we
are now coming back to a given
seven hundred million dollars
backed and I want to applaud
people the hard working men and
women in the state of New Mexico
and he was ignored any caps
beating up beating it and
finally that drum beat got to a
some of that money back to the
people New Mexico so instead of
having to cut government
services maybe we should focus
on the taxpayers and not raise
their taxes in the future during
represent our party let's not
raise their taxes like you just
did let's get the government
right size reduce the size of
government get the government
off the people's back and I just
want to applaud Senator share
thank you for leading this
effort for lab the star last
session and it's a special so.
Because of course it for you I
this body we see a bipartisan
thing happening here this
evening I want to also rise and
and recognize my colleague from
across the aisle Senator Kernan
and some of the other comments
carrying that message so well
for your region of the state is
not lost on someone like me that
helps to build things in my
district so I I want to rise and
say thank you and again I also
want to say you know just do the
And if we do two fifty now two
fifty later Harvard get sliced
out we're project protecting our
state budget we're protecting
our reserves you heard
the math everybody fifteen to
twenty dollars if you're getting
five hundred dollars as a single
filer or per vehicle if you will
that's about twenty five
Phillips to help your vehicle in
and you know again let's just
let's not forget that we're
finally finding something really
remarkable to work together on
here in this chamber so thank
you Mr president thank you to
thank you sent over there saying
no further debate.
Senator Gonzales closed on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president Tom.
I move that house bill two.
that.
The rule has been called and
that all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
floating in the negative by a
show of hands centers where
Sierra.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative one in the negative.
with emergency clause has passed
the Senate Senator six things
bill has to explain his vote is
present colleagues I'm here
standing for Senator Pirtle I'm
the time line so it's not all
about the primary and general
but I'm still a little bit
worried about the discussion we
just had on those that are
some fairness issue still in but
with that that's reason for my
no vote thank you thank you
senator Chris Senator Gonzales.
everyone has put into this you
know by the discussions that
have taken place the debate that
has been taken place the
comments that have been made but
be going to approximately one
point four million individuals
in our state you know and hi
would say that this is something
that assisted and thank you Mr
president also thank you senator
Gonzales Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president thanks to
in committee except the bills in
the Judiciary Committee for
rolling and grossing.
Service I second the motion.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
aye.
The Senate has adjourned.
