Senator Hickey here Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Mars.
Senator then yes.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator po.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Etcetera so.
Etcetera Stepanek's.
Senator Wirth here Senator
Woods.
You do not have a quorum madam
president.
You do not have a quorum madam
president.
Please stand for the invocation
Senator to heck.
The pledge in Spanish to be led
by Senator hot amigo.
And the salute to New Mexico
how queen Esther save the Jewish
people from extinction.
The word Esther in Hebrew
translates to hidden and is one
of only two stories in the Bible
large and solutions to problems
seem miles away.
Yet Esther risks her life and
the life of her community in the
finding your way out of the
darkness to bring light to
others in your service to our
communities.
May you always remember however
darkest scenes god's presence
To light up your hearts to offer
you a fresh start today I'll
sing it once in Hebrew and then
in English.
I do not.
Read also hi you are offices
diem that note surfaces law
allows team no se loan the
session of the data then
Session and tenderness patience
for bear RN's kindness so
wherein is bearing love from
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
From at the less than.
the members unanimous consent to
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection were
announcements miscellaneous
Senator work thank you Mr
Pressman present all you'll
Seeing no objection will allow
cameras to stay Senator Padilla
thank you very much madam
president units consent to
Hamblen.
Sedillo Lopez all right and the
exam so they return to the
chamber I guess conservation got
out madam president thank you.
Interfaith minister interfaith
minister well anyway as the lone
maybe the long Jewish member
Mr priest father thanks for for
having having her today so we
appreciate it and you did a
beautiful job.
Thank you thank you ma'am thank
you senator Senator Peter Wirth
was a beautiful moment to just
hear your voice and think about
a fresh start so that's a good
thing at this point having
slogged our way here and we've
legislature with exhibits in the
east and west halls of history
today is also Napper Pathak
stress release relief day at the
doctor news will be here
tomorrow in the Senate lounge
giving Napper Pathak treatments
from ten to one o'clock madam
president I have to shadows who
that takes him outside after
graduation he plans to attend a
trade school to become a rig
welder with the ultimate goal of
owning his own company one day
at Santa Fe community college
he's considering a career as a
land surveyor or as an
agricultural engineer perhaps
working in state government
big welcome to the state Senate.
Fe from Austin Texas and reached
out to some say they want to
come over and see our Senate and
I very much appreciate them
doing that and let's all give
introduce guests and then we'll
give a little roadmap.
Senator had a meal madam
president I just want to share
with the whole body that today I
wrote the blue bus into town
rode the bus to Capitol south
ray then switched buses with
parking right and got on the
orange bus at south capitol
station and made it into the
round house that was a good way
worked on their ventilation
systems and the best part madam
president it was free so it's
encouraging people from the
Espanola valley to come and
celebrate with us on March
work that I'm doing in the
community and then ending with a
positive note everyone knows my
mentee from Mesilla valley high
school behind me Dominick's on
the vial I want to congratulate
So Senator had a meal how long
did that trip take you.
Madam president the walk to the
bus stop was twenty five minutes
and then the ride to and from
gallery today I have my brother
in law David Kernan who is from
south of Dallas and it has good
friendly and Sullivan who grew
and their friends Paul and Julie
they're all the way from
Oklahoma so we have a good group
from out of state coming to New
Mexico so if you'll help me
welcome them thank you.
Seeing no objection we will do
that Senator Woods thank you
madam president and I to want to
praise the Prazer.
in our life so thank you so much
and I'd also like to praise the
young gentleman over here that
says he's a welder.
In a future politician.
milk what Wilder that that was a
long time ago thank you madam
president thank you Senator
Woods her panic attention.
Other announcements
miscellaneous Senator Brandt.
Seeing no objection we will let
you do that thank you Senator
Brandt Senator Sedillo this.
Thank you madam president I have
less water their climate is much
like New Mexico they are here
because of world learning which
is based in Washington DC this
world renowned nonprofit is
building a better future for all
of the world's most pressing
challenges such as poverty
conflict and inequality they
have made a difference in more
than a hundred fifty countries
and counting they're hosting a
is a car than us who is a native
New Mexican and civic engagement
and environment policy science
expert they are up on the day is
and what first a is that just
Washington DC Mohammed because
L..
Molly Spiro.
Sarah a guy off.
Okay
Thank you madam president for
the members the plan is to do
the set on Senate bills one
through eight and then number
bill at some point today so when
we get to that point madam
president it will do is get a
little bit of the work off the
table up front so unanimous
consent we go about our business
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house joint
resolution six house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
The journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for House
bill four twenty eight House
Bill three seventy seven as
amended by the house House Bill
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk.
The journal show the message
from the house has been received
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president of consent I'm sorry
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one as amended by the house
and request the good currents of
the Senate to the house
amendments respectfully
unanimous consent we go to that
our business committee reports.
Seeing no objection were on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
Madam president your finance
respectfully submitted senator
George when US chairman.
Senator Padilla can you do the
committee report thank you madam
will read all the committee
reports Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty seven do pass.
thirty seven do pass.
Senate bill four thirty three do
pass.
Senate bill for forty two as
House bill one twenty seven to
pass.
House Bill two oh one as amended
do pass respectfully submitted
senator George when you also
Those opposed navy the committee
report is adopted.
Madam president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
respectfully submitted Senator
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman
Senator to the panel madam
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
reports Senate bill three sixty
three do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill three seventy one to
Senate bill four seventeen do
pass and that's referred to the
Education Committee.
Senate bill four twenty nine do
Senate bill four forty nine do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill two oh seven as
amended do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
centers where adoption of the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose nay committee report is
adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president so just as I mentioned
we're gonna start with the
Senate bills and work our way
down one through eight and then
Senate bill three fourteen with
the emergency clause seeing no
objection we're moving to third
reading of legislation Senator
step on this thank you madam
has been taken and B. would on
final passage now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
Senator so fun yes to explain
the bill thank you madam
water trust board during the
interim and fortunately this
year we're able to fund all of
the projects that were submitted
applications to the areas of to
the fund and for approval you'll
nine qualifying projects will
stand for questions.
Is there debate on Senate bill
three fourteen.
You just Senator vantage to
yield.
No I just thought for passing a
bunch of projects we had to have
a list of them or something do
you you happy to yield and I've
heard the question the question
Senator is answered by the bill
itself if you look at the bill
the bill actually identifies
each of the projects by naming
County and source so there's a
the bill itself the the we don't
have a separate crib sheet I I
was looking for short cuts madam
president but I guess we don't
have one thank you.
madam president and senator I
move that Senate bill three
fourteen do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
racial rules been called in all
those present voted in the
they return to the chamber.
Seeing no objection we will do
so Senator Wirth then presents
with the emergency clause.
Thank you madam president yes
emergency clause if you please
tier states to be counted if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
thank you madam president
members of the Senate.
Next we will move to Senate bill
three ninety six Senator Shendo
thank you madam president I just
amendment or substitution.
Senator Shendo to explain the
bill thank you madam chair of
members of the Senate what the.
fifteen dollars to twenty
dollars all right now out of
that current fifteen dollar fee
two dollars goes to the more
cycle of training of fun so this
Is there debate on Senate bill
three ninety six.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president only the Sanchez deal
the just wanted to kind of
distinguish this bill I've been
a fund for their education and
so I supported it in committee
appreciate D. O. T. working on
this in the center bringing a
bill thank you madam chair thank
you any other debate.
them to send to the Senate that
the record show that all.
Show that the rule has been
called and that all those
present voting in from of the
except those voting negative by
show of hands.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative serum the negatives
Senate bill three ninety six as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Shendo thank you
madam president thank you
of the Senate that the record
show that all action for placing
Senate bill three twenty seven
on final passage is been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
born out of the New Mexico
finance authority the.
Process has worked perfectly
this is the third time I've
lifted the the sunset and we're
Is there debate on Senate bill
three twenty seven.
Seeing no debate Senator Padilla
to close thank you very much
madam president I ask I move
show of hands senators we are
voting on Senate bill three
twenty seven to your seats those
who wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president C. Senator souls here
let's go ahead and go to item
number five center would the
Unanimous consent of the Senate
but the record show that all
actions for placing Senate bill
one ninety eight twice amended.
Senator Woods to explain the
bill.
Madam president this is a bill.
Clerk but because I have found a
mistake in my phone bill if you
can believe it.
run will allow will this bill
would allow for the an economy
of lottery winners.
Under the theory of my theory
that if you want a million
People from automatically of
charging automatically of.
Becoming a a close friend to a a
Learn how to handle his new book
new found wealth and I am a
believer that many people that
win lotteries are besieged by
Take the new found wealth and
and keep it.
For their own use their own
family their own.
madam president if I could
introduced the amendment.
We'll have the reader to read
and I'll come back to you
Senator Woods.
This ammendment Senator Woods if
you'll move the amendment first
I'm gonna move the amendment
One part of this ammendment of.
The very first one is to remove
the Senate Judiciary amendment
It goes to read the authority
the authority a lottery
contractor the Human Services
When we look at that we thought
we had too many lottery
contractors in.
But the way it reads is the
employee of a lottery contractor
the employee is a lottery
contract madam president.
And the second part of the
amendment.
lottery New Mexico lottery Act.
And
But because there was so much.
Of this bill that was struck
now.
Amending the New Mexico lottery
Act and then just go on with not
line twelve providing to the
economy of lottery winnings
Thank you Senator Woods to serve
debate Senator Steinborn.
Think on the amendment of how
does not amount on the bill Is
Madam president and now move the
amendment number one to Senate
bill one ninety eight twice
amended.
sponsor all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those posed nay.
The amendment is adopted back on
debate if you're ready all right
president.
A debate on Senate bill one
ninety eight Senator Steinborn
thank you madam president will
the senator you.
prohibition on the secrecy of
information of the winners has
some exclusions and one of them
is to the Human Services
Department and I'm wondering
can you talk about that
certainly that some you probably
thought about does this bill
still provide that information
regarding.
To those that manage child
support because that would
I haven't thought about
transport us certainly know what
you're talking about Senator
when it comes to child support
you you're supposed to disclose
that so it's amazing part of
this Senator of.
In my life as an employer I have
to the child support division
because my employer was not
paying that and so I understand
what you're saying and what
you're saying is how does a
president I don't have a good
answer to but I'm assuming in my
assumptions that word will get
out through families this will
that he's won prize money unless
he is just left the state all
together and have have banded
them all together so and and my
idea in my perfect world.
because this could be someone
who doesn't even live in the
same town but I think that's a
really important point madam
president that even if we don't
have an answer now we need to be
someone who is being asked for
child support so that they can
determine an appropriate level
that they should pay for the
through the Human Services
department and manages it this
want to make sure that this
income ends up being reported to
those entities think it's
factored and.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I'm sorry that was a question
all right Senator Woods you
that you have to to report to
the Human Services department of
your salary are increases of New
Mexico it's a law so when you
And madam president to I was
just going to point out that the
bill itself says that they have
to disclose to the Human
Services department which
Seeing the saying none.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam president there
was something in the analysis
that with the revealing winners
identities has in some cases led
to the discovery of scammers use
computer codes to rig the system
to have a response to that madam
president.
Can we take a conversations
outside so Senator steel Lopez
if you'll repeat your question
had not thought about with
regard to the bill and that is
that transparency that in some
cases revealing the winner has
revealed to us scams are people
Thank you madam president thank
Senator for the question of the
transparency is what this is all
about and that's that's what the
Is not making up winners and
taken the money there so that
that particular
Cedric is do we trust government
or do we not trust god.
Is is government absolutely fair
to to trust government to do the
right thing.
The people in the lottery system
have got internal controls to
about that then that answers the
question thank you thank you any
other debate on Senate bill one
ninety eight.
Do now pass and I just re and
then miss consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
Senator Shendo until returns the
chamber.
Note that objection we will do
so senators we are voting on
Senate bill one ninety eight
Thirty four in the affirmative
seeing her on the negative
Senate bill one ninety eight a
stress amended has duly passed
Item number four.
A Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one seventeen
Senator souls.
bill one seventeen as amended.
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator souls to explain the
important part of our behavioral
health system they are what have
worked with the medical board
the medical board wants them
they want to be under the
medical board this is the
Is there debate on.
Senate health public affairs
committee substitute percent
bill one seventeen Senator
Steinborn thank you madam
president with the senator you.
this bill and who advocated for.
Madam president and senator of
the prescribing psychologist
came to meet having been taught
with the medical board in order
to do that.
Thank you madam presence on so
did they want to create.
more oversight of their
profession I mean is that what
about their profession and the
whole prescribing side of
psychology they're very similar
Okay so then present senators so
this gives him kind of dual
membership on the medical board
as well right madam president
senator they do have dual
membership yes.
close thank you madam president
I move that Senate health and
public affairs committee's
substitute for Senate bill one
seventeen as amended do now pass
the Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute
percent the one seventeen as
amended to your seats please if
you wish to vote no please raise
I owe the thirty one in the
formative seer in the negative
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute percent the
Thank you we're gonna move to
item number twenty five the
Senate joint resolution twelve
Senator Wirth mentioned earlier
taken and that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution so this is the
Senate joint resolution said
transferring land from one
department to the other there's
no no money involved no it's a
simple transfer basically a few
new facility that is so much
needed and at this point
basically we're just
transferring the land to get it
done from one department to the
close madam president I move
that Senate joint resolution
twelve do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
no please raise your hand.
president members of the Senate
thank you Senator Wirth thank
you madam president unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee report seeing no
objection were on that order
recommendation that it do not
pass but that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirteen do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chairman Senator seven
the reader shall read all the
committee reports Senate bill
fifty do not pass but that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
Senate bill two sixty four do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
Sorry.
Madam president.
Senator on that last reading the
I didn't maybe here the reader
correctly that the referral was
thanks let's just re read that
one okay if you could please
share Senate tax business and
transportation making the
committee substitute for Senate
bill three thirty six has had it
Now be referred.
All right thank you continue
right the Senate bill three
thirty eight to pass.
Senate bill three seventy three
Senate bill three eighty eight
do pass.
Senate bill four seventy one do
pass.
Joseph Cervantes chairman
Senator Vontaze we would
absolutely reports the option of
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Thank you madam president thank
you a lot of do passes did you
did you hear that madam
president yeah did you hear that
earlier to do passes from other
of the night and I'm sure that
we're all in a terrific mood as
a result of all of that so we'll
well I don't know about you but
I'm in a terrific mood I could
tell from the very beginning of
about Sir work thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection were on
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president so we're gonna go back
be going to item twenty seven
which is house bill seven is
twice amended we're just kind
of.
Seeing where we are the floors
unanimous consent we got out of
his third reading of legislation
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Bill to sixteen as amended be
and Senate bill two sixteen
significantly increases current
state law bankruptcy exemptions
including the homestead and
personal property exemptions and
time and Senate two thousand
twenty one with that I stand for
questions.
Mr debate on Senate bill two
present etcetera etcetera would
you just tell us a little bit
more about this bill where it
came from.
Thank you at who asked for it
Senator.
Thank you madam president
be pretty pretty good a couple
years ago where and where pass
you know's unanimous and house
which is pretty amazing but
anyway we we amended that in
so it this is some Porten it's
it's basically puts us in line
with neighboring states Arizona
the.
Senator online poverty is the
one who asked for this
legislation.
Mr president yes.
Thank you.
Madam president I yield he is
just a quick question you
mentioned homestead exemptions
and so forth and then your
presentation I believe something
to that effect and you said it
does New Mexico's homestead
exemption
Work and did you change anything
and what what you propose to
thank you Mr president I point
know what I think I need my
experts.
As hard as it is to ask for help
it I I don't want to cause any
grief I just wanted to know did
you change anything the
homestead exemptions for New
the bill the homestead deal.
Then I guess I need to hear your
experts thoughts on that
Center lawn poverty as as my
expert.
I see no objections the sergeant
of arms please escort expert on
to the floor.
raises a from so if specific to
New Mexico from sixty thousand
to two hundred thousand.
Okay I I assume based on your
expert witness madam president
that it was gonna make it better
thank you senator thank you
Senator Pirtle.
And thank you madam president
with the senator yield.
Madam president I yield yield
has passed unanimously say in
like the last four years madam
president you madam president
senator I really hesitate to
bring up that comparison I just
And and thank you madam
president thank you senator
sitting on Judiciary I've I've
found quite a few bills that
make it over that either passed
unanimous or come over and once
freaking out and then we take a
simple bill madam president the
supposed to just fly through
Judiciary and next thing we know
it's just a a small portion of
I do appreciate madam president
senators the the work you're
doing here as costs rise and
things rise we must increase
these I think that's just kind
of standard practice at this
our duty as the upper chamber
thank you madam president thank
you Sir further debate on Senate
bill two sixteen.
thousand so that was my mistake
and that was at the request of
the bankers and that was in ****
and madam president also if
there it's goes up to three
be a hundred fifty thousand
rather than the.
Would be three hundred seven
hundred fifty.
Thank you unplug me but no
which.
Senator Wirth I don't
particularly like that grand on
your face.
No matter present we do so much
this thanks to Senator for
bringing this forth this was
something that was needed thank
you thank you.
So did it Center print design
I move that the Senate bill two
sixteen as amended do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate the role records show
that the roll this thing called
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Diamond voting no.
And present point of order.
Senator Bob.
Senator Padilla pressure for you
let me do this madam president
but unanimous consent excuse
senator Hamblen inTaos return to
the chamber.
I think we're in the middle of
voting.
Search committee voting no.
Senate Senator o'neill thank you
madam president and members.
Thank you.
placing Senate bill three eighty
nine on final passage has been
taken to that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution Senator Maestas to
shrinking the public body of
public members from twenty five
to eleven and.
And that striking a rule making
authority from the division in
light of a.
Seeing none.
Senator Maestas to close.
Thank you very much madam
president I move that Senate
Except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president Ms consent to skew
Senator Hamblen inTaos return to
the chamber.
Seeing no objection we will do
I to thirty six in the
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate bill three eighty nine as
to the past to send.
house bill seven is twice
amended that'll be Senator
Duhigg.
Senator do.
Thank you madam president house
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Thank you madam president so
house bill seven is a bill that
insures the everyone in New
Mexico has access to what can
often be lifesaving health care
I'm here to make sure that that
my cable grow up in a world
where he can be comfortable
navigating spaces at at school
raised here in New Mexico and
I've had many instances of
needing to access reproductive
health care from birth control
was born through to hysterectomy
that I had just about a year and
a half ago.
And all of this was a central
care madam president's my well
being and it allowed me to to to
And then present as a mother I
know that my child is navigating
his identity in a lot of ways
from being the class clown in
school to be a ferocious nine
step mom.
And I want to make sure that as
he's navigating his identity
going forward he and every child
in New Mexico have access to
whatever care they need
is before us today.
So what this bill does.
Is.
It gives some I'm just gonna
walk very quickly through the
public body or horn engineer
individual working on behalf of
our within the scope of
authority and that public body
can't discriminate against any
it cannot restrict or interfere
with a person's ability to
access our provide reproductive
health care or gender for me
health care within the medical
standard of care.
or refrain from acting during
the pregnancy based on potential
actual or perceived effects on
the pregnancy.
Are present also make sure that
a public body.
checker board of access to
health care throughout the
state.
Then present one of the the
items that was added through the
process because as this bill has
making clear that this is not an
insurance mandate that making
clear that any any provider or
or insurer or.
has senator serve on does often
says if our laws don't have
consequences for people
violating them they are
meaningless so we also have
Finally
an important point about this
bill is that this is dealing
only with claims against public
Seven.
will yield Senator do you yield
yes madam president thank you
very much Mr president just as
I'm looking through the bill.
that standard of care with that
you mentioned that providers
that currently do not
perform those particular
nothing in this bill requires
anyone to do anything that is
already outside of their scope
of practice so if there are
providers who are not providing
this care already they would not
Actually yes it takes care of
women of course that deliver
babies and I in our pregnant the
Madam presence Senator now know
that provider would not be in
violation of this law all this
law does is it says that a
public body can't block access
property in my community and I'm
approached by an individual or
group of people that would like
to establish a facility in my
community and and I decided that
I really do not want to sell
Thank you we do have an
amendment.
Senator share.
The reader all right.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seven as twice
amended amendment sponsored by
the word peri natal came so the
problem with that word is that
means after birth so we're
talking in this particular case
abortion that is also not
women's health care that is
infanticide now there's been
talk so the twenty eight days
It is a living human being.
Breathing.
Blood flowing through the veins.
Seven days or twenty eight days.
not talking about abortion after
the fact so that's all those
those madam president I stand
for questions.
really talking about a situation
that that I I experienced
personally so I I have a high
risk pregnancy
we both required some pretty
intensive care legislative peri
natal Kerr that's what we're
talking about here so and this
it's necessary for the well
being of families is certainly
was necessary for the well being
of money
so madam president this is an
unfriendly amendment.
means the period surrounding
birth so it involves weeks
before during and after birth
and it's a term used inclusively
trouble before during or after
the birth this is all involved
all involve care surrounding the
act birth that's what it means
it does not mean anything having
Seeing none Senator share to
close.
So.
Madam president.
The attorney.
Said seven days after birth.
Now I understand what high risk
births are my daughter was born
It was born prematurely.
That was years after might
decades after my daughter was
born.
personally understand that.
No to terrifying times.
Terrifying times.
I do tell people that my
daughter.
Save my life.
On some level it still lives
which is why stand here and
fight because well my wife won't
let me fight physically anymore.
If I keep doing what I am doing.
By today's standards a little
crazy.
But that was because adrenaline
was my drug of choice.
clearly needed.
A lot of medical attention.
So we don't need it by.
We know that this word was used
in California.
California they use the same
word and now we're saying well
that's not really the word
that's not the way we need it
that's the word and it's in
there on purpose.
My dictionary says twenty says
after birth.
I know why it's there we all
know why it's there.
Why we would consider
infanticide.
days.
That's why California talks
about it using that word
because of my need for
adrenaline.
I'm fighting here today.
Because of my need to protect.
They need love.
Every day.
for sixty days and I'll do it
without recycling a tie.
I don't have sixty grandchildren
but I do have more than sixty
times.
He was also premature.
But he did not require the same
level of care.
I volunteered to fight for this
country of all into to fight for
the people of this country.
Because I cannot fathom.
I will probably get it wrong
because.
I don't.
The beginning of wisdom is the
fear of god.
If we do not think god will be
offended.
With that.
Madam president I now move
Senate floor amendment number
one.
Senator is we are voting on
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seven as twice
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt votes yes Senator
Burr Center Burt votes yes
center Campos Senator Campos
do heck no etcetera do hate both
snow Center guy F. us yes ma'am
center guy because votes yes
into a consolidated no Senator
no Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hemphill votes no center Hickey
Senator Hickey votes no center
no Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan both CS Center
Lopes's.
Center my Estes.
Senator Neville center Neville
both CS Center o'neill.
Center o'neill votes no center
to the Pino.
Senator Pinto votes no center
part all.
Senator Pirtle both CS Center
pope Center pope both snow
Senator smitteez votes yes
Center Sedillo bass no and
request to explain my vote
Senator Dale Lopez both
scenarios center share.
Senator those votes NO Center
step onyx Centers defined
experts know Senator Steinborn.
I thought of thirteen in the
Thank you madam president I just
rise to say how disappointing
and potentially offensive it is
to hear of an amendment
the bill president then I don't
think we call each other liars
on the floor I did law has not
called on news center share
madam president Senator Duhigg I
forth from the ACLU Marshall
Martinez from quality New Mexico
and Aaron Armstrong who is an
attorney.
Seeing no objection the sergeant
chamber.
No objection we will do so.
Present we sent a native San for
amendment one to house bill
seven as twice then other reader
to right.
amendment.
Then present body this is just
really easy fix for me it on
page one it adds to the title.
Of which is new second chapter
twenty four and MSAs nineteen
seventy a knack to to read.
Ultrasound required for
reproduction Health Care
Thank you senator first we'll go
to the bill sponsor senator to
him thank you madam president
this is an unfriendly amendment
that forced medical intervention
Senator share.
Thank you madam president.
I know that we don't want to
know.
As long as we don't know what
we're killing then it doesn't
hurt as bad.
But if we know where it hurts
and madam president I feel
terrible.
had abortions feel like they
were forced into it.
By the man.
We've not we've not help
curreny.
As we talk about all the time.
I've seen in my own children my
grandchildren and hard to
picture through the belly.
I've known women I know women.
Who had abortions.
Because she didn't think she
was.
She didn't think it was a baby.
Was a clump of cells.
It is a baby it is a little
human baby.
From the very beginning.
And why would we want to hide
Makes sense to me.
I'm here once again I know what
the votes going to be to be
Decided this in a in a caucus
meeting somewhere.
Not on this side for sure.
And I don't understand that at
all.
I don't understand that at all
this is very simple it doesn't
hurt it's not intrusive doesn't
Other debate on the amendment
Senator Korea hello thank you
madam president I just wanted to
add to the discussion that it's
decisions that women make and
these are not decisions that are
made lightly it's a dangerous to
women it's dangerous to health
care providers to insinuate that
their patients need without
government interference thank
you madam president.
Thank you other debate on the
amendment.
government interference so the
reason for the amendment is
eighty percent of women who have
an ultrasound prior to an
abortion will carry the Tiant
the women reported boarding to
make others happy seventy three
point eight disagree that their
decision.
Was saved because my daughter
came to us to ask for help.
If we chose to allow the
abortion and not to help her
president centers it looks like
we get to choice right now and I
and I go back to a government
now and I would like to know
that at least someone in this
chamber and we do have on the
side that are infants on the
other side the truly believe.
amendment thank you.
So Senator you have to close on
the amendment.
dialogue as you I moves and for
member number one to health I
moved Center foreman.
Let me try this again I move
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seven has
twice amended.
We will have a roll call vote
terror clerk will call the roll.
Senator Burt both CS Center
Campos Senator Campos votes no
centers of this Senator bought
this votes no Senator Diamond
votes no center requests.
Senator Griggs both CS Center
Hamlin no Center Hamlin both
Ivey Soto.
Senator meal center army of
votes no center Kernan.
Senator Kernan both CS centered
Centerman yes.
Senator Neville center Neville
both CS Center o'neill.
Center o'neill votes no center
to the Pino.
Center pandemic about snow
Center Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle both CS Center
pope Center pope votes no center
center city a Lopez no Senator
data Lopez both snow Center
share.
Center share both CS Center
Shendo.
Senator Steinborn votes no
center Stuart no Senator Stewart
both snow Center Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
has failed to pass the Senate.
We have another amendment the
reader to read.
Senator meetings to move house
amendment.
Thank you madam president like
to move Senate foreman number
see we we do have some
exceptions built in
there are three of them it says
do not otherwise have a duty
missing is reasons of
conscience.
And
madam president so this this
ammendment.
Due to reasons of conscience.
Now what we're usually told.
Madam president is that
And now what are we doing we're
coming back six in the bill.
Because the federal lawsuit.
So I'm I'm trying to avoid
for the three exceptions that
are in the bill already but it
adds a fourth and that would
that would the just be clear
that we're going to accept a
first of all in the bill there's
language already that says there
there's no affirmative duty for
anyone to do anything under this
bill all this bill does is
When something is already true
we don't put it in law because
if we keep doing that pretty
soon people are going to be
going to interpret that to mean
their conscience that is covered
in our New Mexico administrative
code sixteen point ten point
eight point nine for medical
ethics
Of the church amendments to
forty two USC three hundred A.
dash seven coats snow amendment
public health service act
consolidated appropriations act
to hunt twenty ten PL one one
one dash one one seven and that
is a one twenty three stat
not have to.
Provide a service that it goes
against their conscience I.
Is now the danger of putting
that language in here is that
So madam president this is not a
friendly amendment.
Thank you further debate on the
amendment.
The Santo he'll for question to
deal Senator to have is that to
you then the amendment sponsor
then Senator Schmedes do you
yield yes I yield then present.
what this is going to do yes but
can you give me any specifics on
the reason for your amendment
and what it will do to us.
officers acts and you know Haydn
church in all this well this is
different this is high then we
can all agree this is subject to
litigation and and all all all
nurse whether specialize
radiographer where if you're
specialized physician.
Now what if you're the only
person in your county etcetera.
think of a lot of of prosecutors
that would say well you
interfere with that person's
ability to access because you
were the only person.
different opportunities to
explain that but that's the
problem is that yes there there
is a lot of case law there and
there's some federal law that
that gives a lot of conscience
those were all presented to the
Senate when we develop the
assisted suicide legislation
we're redoing we're going back
and fixing it because it wasn't
good enough.
It wasn't good enough.
by the gender firming model
you know hasn't been course
there's just a lawsuit just
filed against cause permanent in
California want to see how that
one goes but but that that's
that's really where it's at is
federal statute has not been
litigated and and finally I'm
just the the proof is in the
pudding why why do we have a
governor's bill that is adding
conscience protections back into
specific reasons which I don't
think I need to get into but I
don't see any harm in adding
conscience protections
to allude to is the act
lawsuit that we have an and I
appreciate you for looking over
Present center do you have any
response to the and madam
president and I would just just
say this this is once again as
our staff chairman often says we
Can inflict in someone else's
rights when there's a.
Disagreement there we have to
learn to live with each other.
someone else's belief what we
have to work that out we really
do.
And so this.
All all this amendment does is
it is a peacemaking effort so we
Madam presence thank you we saw
really good bipartisan bill
yesterday and I appreciate your
opportunity in trying to to
the sponsor of the amendment
care to yield.
You yell Center suite X. yes
madam president I yield thank
you madam president thank you
senator I'm wondering with this
that we've been talking about
this entire session.
madam president senator this
exception only pertains to the
reproductive and gender
Of Madam presence Senator I'll
I'll direct you to the
to the amendment says the
Thank you madam president
Senator so what I'm concerned
about with this amendment is
that what this is allowing is
for somebody's religious beliefs
Who may need foremost at some
point when I'm going through
menopause I'm worried that this
amendment would prevent somebody
from providing me the care that
That really should be a
protected class as well so thank
you madam president that's all I
have.
Sir further debate on the
amendment.
body opportunity
we are in active litigation in a
very very similar issue.
We are correcting that with a
governor's bill.
Giving us a chance to not repeat
the mistakes that we seem to be.
Making I understand that some
with that and so with that madam
president I'd like to move
Senate foreman number one to
house bill seven as twice
amended.
Yes we are on the Senate floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven is twice amended to
your seats if you wish to vote
Senator Steinborn voting no
Senator said of on this voting
no Senator pope.
Voting no Senator Ortiz penal
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no
Senator Maestas voting no.
Senator Pinto voting no Senator
Senator had a meal voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no Senator
Senator souls voting no Senator
Stefanics voting no Senator
Padilla.
number one to house bill seven
has failed to pass the Senate
Senator Schmedes remembers thank
you.
raised their hand will start
with Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam president and
question certificate do you
yield yes madam president she
yells thank you madam president
and senator.
I've been listening to.
reproductive health access look
like across New Mexico
madam president and senator.
Employment ordinances and laws
and policies that would block
access.
Thank you madam president and
senator that that's concerning
to me that's why I like HB seven
abortion health care even though
it's legal in our state.
So madam president Senator so we
I maybe in in one of these
locals where I accesses is is
do you have enough money to be
able to to get to where you're
going you have to drive three
hours to get there
then based on what you have to
to pay for a hotel you need to
pay for meals all the time
you're also paying for health
care you're also losing wages
because you're not their work
although.
I don't know what the interplay
Thank you madam president thank
you Senator all the more so
it's.
Thank you madam chair I have not
Vague the vagueness of the bill
Madam president in a situation
where an eight year old is
So madam chair Senator at what
age at what age would be
consider or that would be it
would be the accepting the
Madam presence Senator I think
probably anytime some from given
the totality of the
circumstances and especially
eighteen are they reporting it
or just eight.
Madam president Senator at
eighteen that is no longer a
minor.
question madam president Senator
under our current law at fifteen
there is there is not an
obligation to to report to the
simply trying to understand what
it is we're doing today that we
didn't already do since I've
been here Senator and and I
appreciate you saying well we're
just strengthening the is
abortion laws to make sure that
this comes to the gender
affirming care that we have in
here it's the it's the abortion
access reproductive access to
and and you know Mortimore
depression at the age the the
the absence of an age
requirement here is concerning
to me I will continue to read
Thank you madam chair.
I I want to stand in very strong
support of the bill although we
But protecting.
The gender.
Identity of an individual.
when we talk about gender and
sex and so forth those of us who
are.
In our sixties seventies
eighties we came out of a
but so much has changed.
And.
I know this through direct
experience I have been on a
journey with might.
Daughter.
gender or whatever it's about
what they experienced in the
time.
They're experiencing it and the
validity of that for them and
For issue for those who are
trans gender or whatever they're
experiencing and for those of us
who are older think about your
psychological awful pressure
some of the leading even to
suicide think about them think
discrimination so I just want to
thank the sponsors of the bill
as it certainly something very
personal to me and as I often
experience of.
Transgender or whatever
experience individuals going
through and the awful potential
Thank you senator next we'll
hear from senator how to meal
thank you madam president I
don't know if that many people
know but before I came to the
Senate I served on the Rio
a county commissioner that I A.
learns that we needed to
increase access to care and not
create barriers stories of
families who have to drive
hundreds of miles to receive
across the state of New Mexico
for care that is safe and legal
not madam president of the
county commissioner the stories
I heard from residents are the
decisions but families who need
to be supported in those times
of their life when decisions are
not easy to be made so as a
former commissioner and as a
Senator Sedillo opens.
Thank you madam president I rise
in strong support of this bill I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing it it's particularly
important right now because not
their body and and how they
of express themselves so this is
just such a great bill and I
really encourage all of my
colleagues to vote for it
Thank you madam president what
the sponsor yield to question
do you yield yes madam president
she yells thank you madam
president wonder if you could
Madam president Senator yes they
do
So first of all when when you
have an abortion ban it you're
gonna have less reproductive
for example we've seen these
abortion bans and and other
states and we have a lot of
patients coming here because
this is where they need to come
with that first and don't have
as much bandwidth and time to
deal with other preventive care
that they might otherwise be
providing.
know black women in our state
experience in maternal mortality
rate of four times higher than
the state's overall my turn
maternal mortality rate.
That might be shocking to some
there could be even be be denied
more on a full spectrum full
spectrum of reproductive health
care including abortion.
You know.
As.
You know my parents got divorced
in middle school I I was raised
by a strong woman that raised
five kids.
are you know I respect your
beliefs as well but we have to
trust women to make that choice
and so.
I fully support this legislation
future reproductive health care
our gender affirming care.
And that's important in our
state with what I mentioned
before there's already not the
access for many in our state.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Hamblen.
Thank thank you madam president
and and Senate body I don't need
the narrative that we're hearing
in this chamber because those
words can be incredibly
damaging.
So I knew in the second grade
that I was different there was
other's houses and there was
Susie her hair was just some
blind get her skin smelled like
the sun she was one of my first
was my first crush.
But also in the church that my
mother was very fond of it was
the Lutheran church.
hearing that rhetoric was so.
Then jump to when I turned
twelve years old my father died
of a sudden heart attack in my
mom's sister was sitting on the
stool that is still in the
living room of my mom's house
she said to me that all gays
should be put on an island and
note because they were the
reason why we had a range.
school where my mom sister was
like why don't you have a
boyfriend yet well I'm focusing
on school.
There's a reason why didn't have
a boyfriend because I don't want
a boyfriend.
She dressed up as prince for
Halloween she was very butcher
masculine in her presentation
she didn't care what anybody
said.
But I was grateful that cat.
And I was grateful at that time.
And then jump forward to
college.
I was in the doctor's office.
That New Mexico State University
Whether or not I thought I could
be pregnant and I said well that
would have to be Immaculate
Conception because no I had to
out myself to this nurse
practitioner.
And so I feel that we as public
leaders need to be really aware
of how powerful our words are
and what our intent is.
Deny our existence and right to
live our truth.
What happens is it ends up
forcing us to disconnect from
our families.
LGBTQ community is one of the
highest populations that
experiences homelessness
especially where you.
And it can even move folks do
To really consider our words in
the impact of those words
because when we did that I the
existence of a group of people
we are denying them of their
humanity and the right to live
their truth.
Thank you senator next we'll
hear from Senator Woods.
Thank you madam president.
And.
To tell you the truth.
You know I feel that you feel
bad about.
think the normal society is.
And.
But to tell you the truth I
don't believe you can legislate
to change people's minds.
or what what what happened and
simply the question answer was
it's a law that they could do
that.
So it to tell someone that today
Is a pretty hard thing to do
Madam chair.
We we can say that we can pass
it it's it's against the federal
law to discriminate right now.
particular law I've already got
all the baby doctors gone
promote community.
And they left a couple years
ago.
quit practicing in New Mexico
because they didn't want to be
forced to do abortion.
So when you tell me that we can
pass a law to change.
Someone's inner.
Compass.
There are.
I believe that I'm I think I
think maybe through time we talk
about we talk about segregation
we talk about the the people in
the south and how they shouldn't
But it's not perfect.
And I don't know when it will be
perfect.
Because there's a.
to have to vote against it but
calls.
Because.
I have lost doctors in my
community already.
From these kind of laws and I
of Clovis.
They passed the ordinance
because they feel strongly about
something that they wanted done
in their community.
And those count low city
commissioners was put in a heck
of a position.
To to speak to make some kind of
Is that what this laws about.
Is that how you how you feel
your moral compass is this how
you want to vote on this or is
How many times do we have to
tell someone model all this is
wrong.
Before they realize something
rural.
at Providence prize anybody.
But I don't want to vote for it
because RTC what it did to the
why in in Lubbock Texas because
there was nobody in Clovis to do
that service can you imagine
that.
Clovis New Mexico no baby
that it should be what this says
right here.
I should say.
We're gonna make sure there's a
doctor those services or in
Clovis New Mexico.
So until it says that.
I'm not that law thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator we have
amended amendment sponsored by
Crystal R. diamond.
Senator Diamond to move the
amendment.
Thank you madam president I move
trying just as hard as we can to
keep our daughters on the right
path to make sure we're
providing them protecting them
not just physically and
spiritually but also emotionally
is that in some areas they may
be I think cadenas quite
advanced in her communication
skills but admittedly I also
think maybe my youngest is is
shows signs of immaturity
age appropriate experiences as
they grow.
And that may differ you know not
necessarily based on age grounds
maturity level I don't I don't
know the right age to tell
Stella daughter she can get a
Curfews may differ based on a
child's maturity.
And at what age do we sit down
and discuss the dangers of of
realize that their minds are not
fully developed they lack the
maturity in the capacity to make
the right choices at certain
over time it's not an age but
maturity level here.
I think.
Currents as pre teens would
agree that that expression
preteen girls for goodness sake
we've hard for me to keep up
with what music is cool what
what what they like today in the
choices that they make today I'm
confident that in a year or even
outdated the fact.
Listening to some of the gun
bill debates this legislative
session there was an expert
witness who stated.
but not a not a day under
eighteen to they have the mental
capacity to handle firearms it
seems hypocritical in a gun
bill.
We can say that but when it
comes to.
Or is it thirteen years old in
which they have the mental
capacity to make that choice.
And I would say at any age under
eighteen.
I hope that the sponsors of the
bill will give careful
consideration to the ask on this
this ammendment is certainly is
this is only to make sure that
abortion should they decide
together that that is the best
course of action it does not
prevent access at all all it
does is to make sure that that
consideration to this single
amendment madam chair.
Thank you first will go to the
bill sponsor senator to have.
the books that would are
contrary to this hi this would
also be contrary to the
recommendations of the American
academy of pediatrics who poses
all parental consent legislation
would us center create Hemphill
yield.
Senator Craig Hemphill do you
yield madam president I yield.
Senator.
Thank you madam president
Senator do heck so as a mom of
four including a daughter who
will turn thirty in a couple
months I completely understand
To ensure the safety and well
being of miners that span the
long standing public policy here
in New Mexico to allow young
people to consent to
without involving parents or
guardians in the process it's
imperative that all young people
have access to health care when
most young people choose to
involve trusted adults in their
care.
As a school psychologist though
I spent twenty nine years in our
children not all students have
trusted.
Parents that they can depend on
to provide emotional support in
our children have the
opportunity to involve a parent
when it's possible or guardian
or other trusted member but we
thank you madam president thank
you further debate on the
amendment Senator Schmedes thank
you madam president with the
amendment sponsor please feel.
understanding your amendment you
would require parental.
The parental notification is a
printer consent for these
Services referred to in the
bill.
interesting with having two
teenage daughters it's it's one
of the.
The populations that have been
found to be systematically
for over use of social networks
social acceptability there for
this Jenner firming issue now
I'm not talking about abortion
here okay and from a Jennifer in
And
Of course they're they're really
referring to the the fact that.
At the Tavistock clinic in the
U. K. at the French clinics they
increase in the presentation of
teenage girls.
Please clinics.
And no one seems to really have
had a chance to study why that
president and and etcetera I
just like I said I I find it
interesting that the other
personal background in this.
would you say it's it's.
young our young daughters today
our young women today are far
greater than even when I was
just in high school the
influence of social media I will
impressionable but if you just
think about the impact that it
has to grown women were never
sent enough we're never wearing
the right clothes enough I mean
there's we're just trying to
keep up with an impossible task
case of mental capacity to know
that to know to be able to to to
suffer through to weed through
what is real and not just what
is real but what is important
and where we really should place
Thank you madam presence and and
and I I thank you for this
amendment has certainly so I'm
going to support it and I think
one of the other reasons what's
important is people being caught
on undercover videos now in New
And that's a major major problem
if the schools are gonna hide
this is stuff from parents and
keep things secret from parents
amendment or legislation to
involve the parents against a
predatory ideological
school and school employee.
they they do recommend involving
the parents on less and I quote
unless their involvement is
determined to be harmful to the
boxing out the parents doesn't
doesn't ideologically
You know health care provider
some kind of counselor.
They can say well I'm just
following the standards of care.
We what we're we're giving them
a false.
Standard of care that is
allowing a health care provider
Senator you as the mother you'd
determine you have a parental
rights to determine what is
beneficial or what is harmful
Keeping secrets.
And and now even in bedding into
the bill standards of care that
I gladly support this especially
with how dangerously the
standards of care being written
how aggressively they're
attacking our parental rights.
Thank you members.
children
Because I respect the privacy
but I have permission to share
the story.
One of my children was raped at
the age of sixteen.
care and and general from care.
Well I was very very grateful.
If they have the opportunity to
get the morning after pill.
And it was very very hard but I
will always always be grateful
for the opportunity to have this
kind of care.
Before they were ready so I you
know people ask me you are
adamant you're always raising
privacy well this is why and I'm
very pleased that they gave me
permission to tell the story
children have access to the
health care that they need to
minimize their suffering so I am
very strongly opposed to this
amendment thank you madam chair.
yeah I to stand in opposition to
this the issue really is to me
is that if every family.
problem about this
unfortunately.
It from my own work as a social
worker with many many families
over the years there are
mother will through the girl out
if she finds out that she is
pregnant there are families
where.
Siblings are allowed to have
parents and there's no
exceptions in this in this
ammendment I think is is is a
poly edition view of what the
did thank us is so important are
precisely the ones who would
never never have a problem with
their daughter coming to them
asking for it it's those other
Senator Diamond for for for you
know pointing out that the the
parental supports are really
important for any young woman
dealing with these issues but
president.
Thank you further debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none Senator Diamond to
close on the amendment thank you
madam president we heard and
debate that these decisions
at eight or nine or ten does not
have the emotional maturity.
To make a lifelong decision.
impact on them and I I I do find
that to be.
Quite hypocritical in today's
conversation oftentimes in
committees we blame our failed
backgrounds but the cause family
isn't here we blame that for the
failures in New Mexico continues
to see and yet when we have an
opportunity to build.
Madam president I move that
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seven is twice
amended that I ask for unanimous
consent to the record the rules
then called and all those
one to house bill seven as twice
amended to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
Senator PO voting no Senator
Ortiz C. panel voting no Senator
McKenna voting no Senator
Voting no Senator Hickey voting
no.
Senator Tallman voting no
Senator Gonzales voting no
no Senator Rodriguez voting no
Senator souls voting no Senator
Correa Hemphill voting no
Stewart voting no.
number one to house bill seven
has failed to pass the Senate
centered on thank you madam
president thank you back on
debate of the bill
with the sponsor of the bill
hill for a few questions Senator
Duhigg do you yield yes madam
president shields.
Then present body just had a few
consent laws that we have here
in New Mexico currently.
Madam presence Senator now.
part of the state and I'd ask
Miss in committee the other day
and and I'm wondering if yours
if there's anyone in your group
there that is considering what
Comstock Act.
Then Senator I understand that
the whole premise for a what's
happening southeast New Mexico
Centered Madam presence Senator
it it simply doesn't apply.
Madam presence Senator then I
bill because of us not by
abiding by federal statutes so
on.
All go on to a different subject
In center.
Madam president Senator I I
don't know off the top of my
head.
Madam presence Senator I show in
president etcetera and just
wondering to see if you guys
have made any estimates on if
your bill passes what this will
more impact on those out of
state numbers are the abortion
bans that we are seeing and and
other states.
Madam president and center that
currently without having
abortions in that state.
Madam president center I'm I'm
not familiar with.
What what clinics Texas asked.
if it was looked at as any other
consequences to women OBGYN see
the abortion ban has been put in
place.
Madam madam chair Senator I what
I will know is that this bill is
thoroughly but I I think that my
question was just on abortion
but madam president since I'm
not going to get a clear answer
on that I just wanted to make
remind the body that if you look
backwards of the Holocaust was
five to six million Jews and if
those numbers and factor right
eight to nine thousand New
was government corrected and I
just feel that it's really sad
that Mexico is taking a risk for
my question.
Senator two.
Then present if I may as a
Jewish person is really
offensive when folks tried out
the Holocaust to make a
political point thank you madam
president.
president and senator that we
have those type of numbers being
affected in our state with your
bill that is not a political
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seven as twice
Madam president I move the
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seven
displacement thank you senator
share to explain the amendment
so.
But if you go down to be it says
in any action brought pursuant
to section a of this section the
court shall reward a prevailing
plaintiff reasonable attorney
About that paragraph.
Madam president now if this is
an unfriendly amendment one
again as as senator serve on
does often says of our laws do
not have consequences they are
Directly stand up for their own
rights and not just depend on
the government to do it for them
as far as the attorney fee
provision.
their their attorney fees then
that would be a complete
abrogation of our American role
but if you look at that language
it says this is talking about
just if the plaintiff prevails
it's because we have a situation
where someone probably can't
afford it isn't gonna be able to
afford a lawyer they're not
wealthy they don't they're
probably they don't have.
This Public Enemy nominal
damages so if we want lawyers to
actually represent people to
defend their rights under this
law.
be able to stand up for
themselves and and to have
access to our courts and so this
ensures that no matter what your
The other debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none center share to
close on the amendment.
The chilling effect.
Of what this does and so here's
the here's the the problem.
Claiming to be that somebody can
be claimed to be aggrieved by
came.
Somehow now I have stepped in
front of.
This person.
I probably stepped in front of
them out of love and concern and
care.
And maybe I can't afford to
defense.
They have the Southern Poverty
whoever they are that sues
everybody in the world of the
And now I have to defend myself.
For the poor seventy year old
woman who's praying in front of
the questions clinic has to
Looking for somebody to be
offended so that the attorney
can can make a big case out of
it.
thousands of enforcers out
there.
Not just the law.
Not just the Attorney General or
the DA but thousands of in
Because somehow your grieve to.
I just think this is this is
The person who is going to be
the most effective the person
that is going to be.
The most financially burdened.
Simple questions out of love.
In out of care.
No I know will be told not
Praying for things it is out of
love it is out of concern.
In this right here is going to
be used.
about the woman they're there
because they care about the
child they're there because they
care about the child.
We're gonna sue you.
And now your finances are lost.
You will end up paying the fine
you'll end up paying a court
The chair of judiciary from the
chair of rules from the previous
chair of rules.
side just hold all of the reins
of power.
This is not what we need to be
doing at all.
To put that one little paragraph
in.
In any action brought pursuant
to section a of this section the
Very one sided.
Very very one sided.
We're gonna actively chill.
Maybe even this panel my jacket.
Someone may be aggrieved by this
Christian cross on my jacket.
And that's not chilling.
Madam president I can't believe
we're we're going today but I
know it's going to be.
And with hope that we are not
going down of the evil path here
that we can't get out of hoping.
That we can be.
record show that the role is
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands.
Centers we're voting on Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senator von yes votes no Senator
o'neill folks know Senator
penal but now.
Senator Maestas folks know
Senator McKenna boats now
Senator Gonzales folks know
Senator Hotmail it's not Senator
Duhigg.
No Senator Correa Hemphill votes
no Senator Wirth the
Senator Stefanics folks know
is twice and has failed to pass
the Senate we're back on debate
of the bill Senator Stefanics.
president I stand up to thank
the health care practitioners
that are taking care of
reproductive health as well as
opened their minds and their
learning levels and their skills
to this I wish to thank them
very much.
Thank you senator.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle to move the
movie moose informing the number
one to house bill seven as twice
amended Senator Pirtle to
explain the amendment.
referred to as the English rule
where the court shall.
Award prevailing plaintiff
plaintiff reasonable attorney
fees the only thing is this
this this is something that is
very common whenever these
sections are in legislation that
our body strikes these they're
not necessary and that stand for
questions.
And madam chair I'm sorry madam
president.
I wonder I think Senator Pirtle
maybe referring to some old
Senate Judiciary.
And madam president in the of
Page seven.
Subsection be under section
five.
The amendment we we just voted
on.
So we we have an amendment from
us.
Madam president I I believe his
went a little further struck
Right Senator Duhigg of sponsor
to respond to them and.
So madam president set of this
is unfriendly for the same
president can Mrs stepped out
would a would a the sponsor of
the bill please yield.
The sponsor of the bill are the
explanation of of why do you
object to it I I I miss the
stepped out with your
explanation on the last one so
if the you can be brief if you'd
like but if you could just
rights in court regardless of
their economic situation when we
do now a complete abrogation of
the American role that does have
a chilling effect when you say
fees if they prevail that does
not have a chilling effect
instead that just insures that
no matter what your economic
situation is you have the same
Judiciary as you well know and
I've never seen a move to change
it to this this language where
Pursue this on other bills.
Madam presence Senator I've
pursued this on many bells hi
that we have heard and Judiciary
in fact I think we've heard a
are similar to this that have
some ideological interests that
that is a attached to
The activity that goes on in
exceptions on bills that for
whatever reason I I don't I
don't see the rhyme or reason to
but we strike amounts not on the
other here we have it in of of
could could be essentially
attached to any single lawsuit
in the state of where the
plaintiff would would prevail so
I I just don't see no
Seeing none Senator Pirtle to
close on the amendment and thank
you madam president thank you
members of the body I think it's
important to point out it's not
the same amendment I I wish that
amendment would do but this is a
different amendment this is
something that is quite simple
quite common and just read
removing language that's not
would suffice just quite nice
madam president.
Senators we are voting on Senate
floor amendment number one to
house bill seven as twice
Senator Baca votes yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt both CS Center
for.
Senator Campos Senator Campos
both snow Center going guy
across yes ma'am center guy of
those votes yes into a
consolidated no Senator Gonzales
about snow Center graphics.
Hemphill votes no center Hickey
Senator Hickey votes no center
Ingle.
Senator Ingle vote CS Center
Ivey Soto Senator me ho Center
McKenna no Senator McKenna vote
no center Moores.
Centamin yes.
Center Padilla Senator B. eight
DF both snow Center Pinto.
Senator Pinto both
votes no center Steinborn
Senator Steinborn both snows
Center Stuart no Senator Stewart
both knows senator Tom in.
Buy photo thirteen in the
affirmative twenty four in the
negative Senate foreman at
Have another amendment.
The reader to re Senate floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as twice amended
house bill seven as minutes.
A search committee to explain
his amendment.
The members so this this bill or
committee and in the body that
Jenner firming Care is being
behind or being nice to someone
with generous Fauria
to support a person's gender
identity now if we if we look at
the new definition that's going
to be heard on the house or the
I'm what I'm proposing really
for sake of discussion.
is to get away from that kind of
what what what I consider a very
I'm gonna limit that you know at
least my comments to three
groups that have been
disproportionately harmed by
gender affirming care in the U.
K. this is and not just the U.
K. but Sweden Finland and
France.
on this and saying that miners
are no longer getting gender
firming care outside of the
clinical research setting.
Because there there's no
evidence for.
gender affirming care model.
So what what I'm proposing we do
is is instead of just saying
this only you only get the
protection that is offered in
this once again you to support
their gender identity which is
self perception.
What I'm what I'm saying is we
we strike that definition.
also done just saw drafting here
that's a that's a problem.
What a drafting error.
so I don't know how we're gonna
deal with the drafting airmen
present wondering if that's
going to affect how some people
vote on on the amendment but I I
think we should have the
discussion.
So this I would I would I was
waiting on this I have I have a
hand written amendments that we
dysphoria or gender incongruence
so that's going to affect
anyone's you know I think we're
for aids or something on on
being dangerous and
disproportionate harmful at the
largest transgender clinic in
the world which has now been
shut down because they found
that these people are being
disproportionate harm and they
what is a more wholistic
definition of the care that I
really think is the intent of of
the Sanchez it's it's but it's
it's a specific health care
model madam president and so
this would actually open it up
to anyone that has gender
dysphoria or gender incongruence
regardless of if the gender
Well first we'll go to Senator
do heck as the sponsor of the
bill center to it.
Madam president this is an
to seek a drink gender affirming
care is has gender dysphoria or
what gender affirming care is I
didn't referring care in some
situations might be using
someone's preferred pronouns or
preferred name on this is not
John as I in order to access
that
also noted that the definition
of gender affirming care that's
in this bill madam president it
was taken from other world World
president on a study of the
study that is not peer reviewed
and had a sample size of less
than a hundred people so this is
an unfriendly amendment.
Yes ma'am present I gladly yield
to my other member of the anti
caucus.
Senator Hickey heels thank you
madam chair
Whatever life what have you I
mean that's that's not the issue
here there isn't it isn't it
gender dysphoria.
it's hard for me to accept for a
definition for my daughter I
just can't get their wholistic.
here but even the kind of Paul
that in at.
Takes people's thinking as I
said we have we're learning have
to think in new ways in my last
that I find that again very
misleading and I want to thank
Senator Duhigg for pointing out
the obscurity of the study that
the.
anywhere and even peer reviewed
There is a just kind of give you
an example
some obscure board of people who
never were able to meet their
point.
Just a point and they have a
journal and this code peer
reviewed I mean so you can get
the the.
The the
R. P. the family practice
association I mean as we is as
in this about the general
standards of care are I think
we've got plenty of evidence in
this country that as we go on as
I say this journey we as a
country go on this journey we
nations especially not peer
review but I want to finish with
gender dysphoria and gender in
consequence I'm having an
thank you madam president
Very interesting comments.
Red herring logical fallacies
which I'm about to point out.
conservative Republican.
Why would I accept his words.
These are the words of the most
They're ahead of us not one
study not one conservative
person.
This is what the national board
comprehensive systematic review
of the evidence.
Not one paper not just the
Swedish evidence but the World
Not my words their official
medical body to the most
progressive nation in the
country I think you should
down last year.
Was it a review of one person
one doctor an ideologue.
fundamentally different service
model is needed which is more in
line with other pediatric
provision that's a direct quote
from the report once again from
Now let me let me go to the
definition okay now I I did have
a quick the.
Console with one of my favorite
tourney's.
And it actually is a simple.
Madam president.
With the NHS uses this language
okay.
this support all what what what
we all believe in this with NHS
and not not what I say this is
the NHS children and young
people with gender incongruence
or just for you.
sec accessing health services.
Hundred percent hundred percent
support that that's what the
bill did just with this I would
vote for it of course they do of
dysphoria not my words but by
the NHS and the National Board
health and wellness from Sweden
okay.
To treat gender dysphoric youth
prioritizes long term health.
So madam president what I'm
thinking of is I'm thinking back
to our marijuana discussion the
fact that the politicians we
couldn't restrain ourselves so
had to force with the forces so
who loses out.
The people with cancer anorexia
or whoever else.
We are in danger if we don't if
we keep legislating a specific
model that only applies to
supporting the gender identity
we're in danger of having no
standards of care for these
comorbidities okay.
So I will wrap this up I we we
talked a little bit about
teenage girls look at the
American academy of pediatrics
well look at the
the the protest was outside the
didn't get any media coverage
stop telling gable is their
her attacks on LGBT advocacy
groups in the U. K. she called
same sex attraction exclusionary
I mean she you know in in her
name is right there right there
this was probably should should
all give us chills.
The expert that came to
committee on this bill.
Informed us the physician
informed us that she'd been
disasters later identify as gay
either came in or or lesbian.
And I brought up the issue of
internalized homophobia.
And how this is become such an
issue.
up because it's not part of the
model because when someone when
let's say a person that will
later identify as gay.
In the end and the reason for
their supposed to gender
identity.
to be or or will identify
eventually as the data says not
not all but but most.
What happens well they're put
into this gender affirming care
biologically male they they come
in they say I identify as as a
woman.
Well.
What if the health care provider
says no.
identity as a woman I think you
have internalized homophobia but
at the end of let's say they see
them three times four times five
times six times seven times
however many consultations you
want to say at the end of that
This bill does not.
It does not provide any
protection to the the care that
Janet again gender identity is
self perception the last group
we've we've talked about teenage
girls were harmed in the in
Europe we talked about.
The game lesbian community once
was shut down had somewhere
between thirty five percent and
forty eight percent of people
either with diagnosed autism.
Or with symptoms of autism.
I'm not gonna get into the
details but they can fixate on
ideas so once again if they
present to the clinic and
they're there for two months
three months however long it is.
If the health care professionals
still says well I I I I just
don't support that once again
with dignity and respect I don't
not protected as the act is
written and so providing this
definition and this is in
conclusion madam president
providing this definition.
Kind of pushes back on that
gender identity and says no I
think it's this.
And includes everyone includes
the groups that have been
disproportionately harmed under
one to house bill seven as
amended.
do now pass and.
Last four roll call the.
In a roll call has been
requested.
The hands going up already we're
going to do a roll call the
clerk will call the roll.
Senator Burt Bennett both CS
Center Campos.
Senator Campos votes no centers
about this.
Senator Diamond.
consolidates no Senator Gonzales
votes no center requests.
Senator Griggs votes yes Center
Hamlin no Center Hamlin both
snow Center Hemphill.
Ivey Soto Senator our meal.
Senator media both snow Center
Kernan.
Senator Kernan both CS centered
Moores.
Center many of us.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville both CS Center
o'neill Center o'neill votes no
Senator Pinto votes no Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle both CS Center
pope Center pope both snow
Center rod Regus centre
Senator Sedillo Lopez both snow
Center share.
Center share both CS Center
Shendo.
Senator Shendo both snow Center
snow Center Stuart no Senator
Stewart both snow Center Tom in.
Etcetera Thomond both know
senator Wirth Senator Wirth both
In the affirmative twenty three
in the negative.
Seeing no for our reddit Senator
Great Lakes.
Thank you madam president I just
sponsor on page six of the of
our amendments in context.
we talk about at the very top on
a violation has occurred
Madam president and and Senator.
So so are just returning
generals and and dust are
already barred from presenting
that frivolous cases about this
reasonable because this is the
I spent a little a little time
in in Judiciary kind like kind
like spending the night in a in
a Holiday Inn express sometimes
you you think you know more than
you do but a couple of things
another word to we're gonna use
word that that is appropriate
relief and I guess when I when I
go to appropriately for what
other kind of relief would
When when I'm looking at that
those two things and then if
they come over and they're on
the next page as well
Asian and and and Senator it
used in their to be sure that it
does the things we we truly
wanted to do and when we use
those terms.
Language issues that need to be
addressed so madam president and
and center I'm not gonna.
In my room try to amend it I'm
not gonna try to do anything
there and meaning that we
probably have places else we
should have done better to show
madam president Senator
made that there are people that
believe that this is the right
approach and
I.
I don't but the you know I'm I'm
sure I'm gonna be in the
president I I rise and want to
just to you know give you some
thoughts then present on on this
bill and just where we had it in
the state in a state where we
approach and and waiting and
watching as the right answers a
rise and fall with those
examples taking what works and
what is proven to work and
a minute ago evidence based
decision making that could help
us yet we turn.
Into ourselves and to our
ideologies and and the.
where we headed and things like
morality and family building in
loving people and taking care of
each other in giving medical
We're lost that's where we are
we're lost.
Look we've done this session and
look for doing again.
is offended by these
propositions offended that you
could take a little girl little
boy my little girl.
My little boy.
and irreparable in some cases
harm to themselves.
And I understand what was said
reproductive and gender for me
health care is things like
pronouns and.
But that's not what it is we all
know that's not what it is that
is a thin veil words.
Words to hide something much
more horrific underneath.
I hope we have wisdom in our
decision making madam president.
And I hope that god has
forgiveness on us.
Well I called on to month thank
you madam president with the
Center.
doing
Madam president center I had
gotten an email and and I want
to get to the email in a minute
but do we have any numbers of
what your bill does it because
cost to the taxpayers and
present center.
Sir do Madam presence Senator I
I don't think there's any fiscal
impact to this bill.
portion and this doesn't even
cover the sixty billion this
given private Planned Parenthood
says what an average taxpayer
percent gives us an overall tax
rate of fourteen point two zero.
In the average salary bringing
At fourteen point two percent
this taxpayer would pay four
thousand six hundred ninety five
year and over the course of
their working lives say thirty
average income is actually fifty
six thousand five hundred
sixteen dollars less for the
nation and translates to eight
thousand two hundred fifty per
fifty eight per person in their
lifetime.
And we've so far boarded over
sixty million children in the
future taxpayers would chart
would be fourteen point five
trillion dollars.
And this is.
It would be of our national debt
is right now thirty one trillion
And I would say madam president
center this does cost the
taxpayer I yield.
Thank you madam president you
know.
The this this bill hay to HB
seven the the reproductive and
especially rural communities
where our families have
historically lacked access to
care.
And madam president.
binary individuals and the I
think it was Senator Woods who
who said we we can't legislate
to change people's minds then
president and I agree with him
on that.
us safe aren't able to use their
power to block access to
lifesaving care and discriminate
against New Mexicans and with
I ask for for roll call vote.
Senator sui on the passage of
house bill seven as twice mended
we've been ask for a roll call
Senator Brandt votes no Senator
Burt.
Senator Burt both snows Center
Campos Senator Campos votes no
Senator about this Senator
close no ma'am center geico's
votes no Center Gonzalez yes
center Gonzales votes yes
integrates.
Ingle.
Senator Ingle votes no center
Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio center army of
votes yes Senator Kernan.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna both
CS Center Mars Center manuals.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville both snow Center
Center Padilla center video vote
CS Center Pinto.
Senator Pinto both CS Center
pearl.
Senator Pirtle no center pole.
smitteez Center smitteez votes
NO Senator DL Lopes's yes
centers video Lopez both CS
Center share center share votes
Stefanics Senator Stefanics mo
CS Centers time born Senator
Steinborn votes yes inner Stuart
yes Senator Stewart votes yes
affirmative fifteen and the
negative house bill seven is
twice amended has duly passed
the Senate.
Senator do that thank you madam
president thank you members
from the governor the reader to
read.
Send you Senate executive
message number seven the
honorable Mimi Stewart president
submit to the Senate rules
committee the following
nominations for appointment
Robert Lewis of several junior
as a member of the New Mexico
highlands university board of
New Mexico board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and concluding on
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight and Rebecca L.
Anderson as a member of the New
shall serve and have all duties
responsibilities and authority
of their offices during the time
prior to the final action taken
by the Senate respectfully
I thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from house
seeing no objection or on
messages from the house the
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three fifty seven
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
sixty two as amended by the
clerk.
The messages from the house will
be entered into the journal I
fail to say that the
appointments from the governor
are referred to the rules
committee.
report seeing no objection or on
the order of business committee
reports three to read madam
president your conservation
committee to whom has been
chairwoman.
Senator Stefanics madam
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the general reflect they
Bill to sixty eight do pass as
amended.
Respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman Senator Stefanics
it committee report is adopted
Senator Wirth.
I thank you madam president Ms
consent we go about our business
introduction of legislation
seeing no objection were on that
House joint resolution six
introduced by Representative
Alcon.
For the military and Veterans
Affairs Committee a joint
resolution proposing an
widows and widowers house joint
resolution six house joint
resolution six have been read
twice by title is ordered
by representatives Garrett and
G. Andrés Romero for the
legislative education study
committee and act relating to
public school finance creating
more than one hundred fifty five
days for a four day school week
defining instructional hours and
professional hours repealing the
referred to the Senate finance
committee house bill one thirty.
House bill one thirty four
introduced by Representative
Christine Trujillo and others
thirty four house bill one
thirty four have been read twice
by title is ordered referred to
the Senate Education Committee
thanks to Senate health and
act relating to property
requiring notice of the filing
of liens with the property owner
house bill one seventy nine
house bill one seventy nine
Brian Bach and others for the
legislative education study
committee an act relating to
public education increasing the
address at risk index increasing
nine house bill one ninety nine
have been read twice by title is
ordered referred to the Senate
finance committee house bill one
ninety nine.
and acting the firefighter and
emergency service provider peer
support act allowing state local
and regional public fire
agencies to create peer support
fifty seven house bill two fifty
seven have been read twice by
title is ordered referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee house
bill two fifty seven.
marketing division of the
tourism department specifying
duties amending the section of
the economic development
corporation act making
House Bill three eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to
identification cards removing
read twice by title is ordered
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
house bill three eighty nine.
practice act revising
requirements for certification
as an engineer intern revising
licensure requirements for
professional engineers and
means revising the exemption for
the incidental practice of
engineering and surveying
extending the termination date
of the state board of licensure
House Bill for eleven a spell
for eleven have been read twice
by title is ordered referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee house bill
four eleven.
trust fund which shall make
angle distributions to the state
road fund for certain projects
prioritized by the department of
transportation making an
House bill four forty nine
introduced by Representative
Allison and others and act
relating to economic development
Four forty nine hundred twice by
title is ordered referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee house
bill four forty nine.
broadband amending sections of
the connect New Mexico act
transferring the implementation
of the grant program from the
connecting Mexico counsel to the
office of Bradburn broadband
Bill to sixty two.
House government election in
Indian Affairs Committee
House Bill to sixty two.
House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
and remind drivers to look twice
for motorcycles allowing for a
cessation of issuance of special
license plates under certain
circumstances house
House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty seven have been
read twice by title is ordered
referred to the Senate tax
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three fifty seven
and act relating to criminal
workforce capacity building fund
providing funding for the
recruitment and retention of law
enforcement officers detention
officers public defenders and
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to three fifty
seven.
We're on that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president members I have to
change from Senate Indian rural
affairs committee to Senate
Judiciary Committee and that we
change the sponsor from Senator
Baca to Senator Pirtle the title
of the proposed substitute is
secretary of state requiring the
secretary of state to promulgate
rules repealing sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
relating to marriage licensing
and community property creating
seven nine point one I ask
unanimous consent that we make
the change in committee and the
Sanchez.
Seeing no objection.
Senate bill five twenty four the
change from Senate Judiciary
Committee to Senate tax business
and transportation committee and
then to Senate Judiciary
Committee so two referrals and
act to change the limitation of
recovery for claims against
outpatient health care
facilities updating definitions
of the substitute to two numbers
time for committee chairs to
make their announcements will be
an eleven o'clock tomorrow.
Thanks Senator Diamond thank you
it passed in addition eight
committee with amendments to
strip the appropriation the
Senate finance chair is not in
here but he we I had visited
with him about it I would be
all yielding just rise to
support the request to refer we
did strip strip off the
appropriation last evening on
the CYFD ombudsman and with the
that bill out of finance and it
will come to the floor I
believe.
Right any other announcements
Senator souls.
fluid than they've been in one
make sure everybody has an
opportunity to read through the
bills that are on the agenda for
tomorrow nine o'clock thank you.
You just call me madam speaker
kind of interesting madam
president in a long afternoon
just so much better.
in room three twenty one and we
will do be doing confirmations
of regents.
Other announcements and
miscellaneous business.
couple of minutes so it only
take one so it is is you know
our basic rules for Mason's here
we have our own special rules
but but masons are basic rules
in section one twenty one it's
use indecent or profane language
and.
I've been trying very hard to
emotional for most of us.
One where the other two
motional.
They're challenging and how do
But we don't need to call each
other liars on the floor.
You can't challenge the motives
for the vote of anyone else on
the floor.
Senate race it up some and I
bring that forward.
For that one reason thank you
madam president thank you
senator share it feels like
chair I just heard from the
chairman of the Senate finance
committee he's out in behind
some curtains and I'm not sure
where he's out not our space but
is called so the Senate finance
committee members are again
you're going to be meeting this
How do we know that you have the
chair of the Senate finance
would you be here would you let
me do my best George when you
know some a Tatian please.
reach him and I can't look at
him he's got it all figured out.
Thank you and we're set track
twin no spoilers I'm so I'm
Okay dokey he's a little too
short and he is Torrez Mr okay
any other announcements for
miscellaneous.
Thank you madam president did
for me these are tough emotional
issues and I think Senator I
appreciate you sharing the the
president unanimous consent the
Senate stand in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
