copper and we have gold and
responsible for ensuring that
health and safety of those mine
workers is our state mine
inspector, which is uh Mr. Chris
Hefner. He is responsible for
minor safety, conducting
inspections, investigating
accidents and providing training
and so I would like to now turn
it over to Mr. Heffner for a
brief introduction of himself,
um, and if you have any
questions, we'll stand for that
after the introductions.
Uh, thank you. My name's Chris
Hefner. I've been the state line
inspector for the last 4 years.
The before that I was the
associate state mine inspector,
which is one of the things I
would like to address in a few
moments. What we do primarily is
train the miners across the
state. We do do accident
investigations.
But initially, I'd like to
address one of the things that's
happened over the last 4 years.
There was previously no way for
an individual in the absence of
a state mine inspector to take
over those responsibilities. So
in the last 4 years, we've been
able to get a rules changed and
changed the name of what was
previously the associate state
mine inspectors, so we now have
an official deputy state mine
inspector. So in the case of my
death or absence, someone can't
continue the responsibilities.
To me, that's one of the most
important things.
In the last 4 years, we trained
approximately 1500 miners every
year, which is around 20 to 35%
of all the miners in this state.
We have mines in the northwest,
the coal districts. We've got 2
copper, 2 coal mines up there in
Navajo, uh, Peabody Coal
actually has two minds at this
point if they're opening
Southwest is a copper district,
as we well know.
Report back Moran.
Southeast to Potash.
two companies, mosaic and
intrepid.
Major.
Prod producer in the United
States and in the central part
of the state, we have Perlite
and humate, so there's a lot of
different products that we are
not in charge of, but certainly
do monitor.
And train their personnel.
And in every
Area that I'm looking at in
front of me, all of you have
aggregate operations. So we will
visit those at least once or
twice a year to train and help
those in operations out.
Um,
we've had one mine closure in
the last 4 years, the
underground mine in Farmington,
which was sent on underground.
The loss of employment for that
area, there's no question about
that.
We do approximately 15 to 20
compliance inspections per year.
That's by the Constitution, we
have to do that if an operator
asks us to come in, then we do.
We go in and inspect their
operation.
Um, we also get an MMSA grant,
which has been interesting this
year.
And that uh there was some
compliance issues that needed to
be dealt with. Turns out that
we're not affected since we are
primarily public safety and
public health.
So we won't be coming under the
current administrations purview
at this point.
Are there any questions?
So what we're gonna do right now
is before we go to questions
from the committee, there is
somebody who signed up in your
support that we want to hear
from. And joining us via Zoom is
Mr. John Purcell, the from the
Mining Safety Board. Good
morning, John. You have 2.5
minutes.
Yeah, good morning.
Yeah, this is John Purcell, and
I'm the chair of this of New
Mexico Mine Safety Board, and
just in short, I wholeheartedly
support Chris and endorse him
for reconfirmation. I've known
him for a number of years. I've
worked with them. I think he's a
great asset to the state and has
been a
Um, a, a great mind inspector.
But again, uh, I, I
have put out a a a little blurb
right up. Uh, I don't want to go
over that right now, but in
short, uh, I urge the rules
committee to unanimously confirm
Chris as the New Mexico State
mine inspector. Thank you. Thank
you, John, and we also received
your email in support of the
confirmation. So John not only
joined via Zoom, he also sent an
email. And so now I'm gonna go
to members of the audience. How
many in the committee room by a
show of hands are in.
favor of the reappointment of
this country.
one. How about online?
One line.
OK, so 2 in the committee room.
Thank you, Senator Munoz.
And what about any in opposition
in the committee room.
Not in opposition. What about
online?
Not online. We'll now entertain
questions from the committee.
Andres.
Mr. Maner Senator Heffner, I
appreciate this, uh, just a few
questions. I see you've got 24
years experience. I appreciate
that. Uh, so I worked my day job
is from Mars and sons'
construction company out of
Lincoln County. We've got one
crusher in Artesia, and one in
Homs, uh, and I was trying to
find out on staffing, how are
you on staffing for people going
around to check. I, I like the
public safety aspect. I don't
know we've ever used you for
training. We pay.
er and train our guys, but I'm
just wondering how it is. I know
a lot of the
Entities say that they don't
have staffing things makes it
really hard for them to get by
every facility all the time,
just wondering how your.
Just
Currently we have 2 trainers.
They stay very busy, generally
they are gone to somewhere in
the state every
Every week.
So there's a lot of travel
involved in terms of your
company, we used to train at one
point uh probably 1015 years
ago, there was a management
change and uh some purchases in
that area at that time, that
changed. I don't know exactly
why.
But um
We did train new companies at
one point.
And
If
And, and if you would like that,
we would certainly be more than
happy to get you on the
schedule.
Thank you,
Mr. Senator,
this happened. I think what came
to us is, uh, easiest state for
us to shut down Saturday and
Sundays, and so I don't know, do
you employees work weekends Mr.
chair and center.
We do that by, Senator.
OK. Thank you for that and my
last question, Mr. Senator and
Mr. Hefner is, uh, how's your
interactions with Amhar federal
level, uh, we seem to get a lot
of, um,
Inspections, uh,
One time we'll have a guy from
Arkansas or Alabama, and, and
he's looking just electrical,
the next guy comes from Texas
and he's looking for, um, um,
gears and, and issues, uh, it
seems like they all have
specifics, but uh we keep
getting dinged.
But the guy that was there a
month ago.
can bring up this highlight.
Because this guy's expertise is
on one subject, I just wondered
if you had, uh, if the other
mines around the state were
having similar problems or
sometimes I feel like we're
targeted, but just wanted to see
how that interaction with them
show was was turnsenator, every
mind has that problem.
Empha's relatively short-staffed
at this time, so they're
bringing in people from the east
coast all around the country to
do inspections in the state. One
of the problems with that is
that a lot of the East Coast
inspectors are really accustomed
to coal mines. Coal mines have a
slightly different set of
regulations, but they want to
apply them to the metal
non-metal mines, which is what
you are.
So.
It causes problems. There's no
question about that.
Uh
They also are running very
short-staffed, as I said, so a
lot of their inspectors are new.
In some cases they've actually
never worked in a mine.
That makes it even more
difficult. Isha's regulations
are not clear-cut like Osha,
Osha might say a rails 36 inches
high, and she would say,
High enough that you can't fall
over it, something like that.
And it makes it very difficult
for you to comply.
Appreciate that um his turn.
Uh, center, uh, we had an open
gear.
About 12 ft high. I got dinged
on it, so I called him and told
him the only way I can put my
arm in there cause I'm falling
out of the sky after jumping for
a plane.
It still got ding for it, but
it's one of those things goes
back to your, your right, you
know, what's hanging up, but uh
I appreciate it. I, I appreciate
what you guys do when you do
come around and you guys are
open and honest about it, so I
just
I just wanted to visit with you
on those.
Two topics I want to make sure,
uh,
Later in life would be good to
have more than 2 trainers, but
it's just one of those things we
want to support you today.
You shouldn't have gotten a
citation for exposed gear at 12
ft. It's a 7 ft rule.
Thank you.
Thank you
Senator Du.
Mr. Chair, I move that we
advance Chris Hefner or to the
full Senate for confirmation as
uh for for reappointment as a
state mine inspector. Thank you
for that motion and before I
take a vote, I do have a
question from Senator Stephanic.
I'm sorry, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, that I was late and
senator. Um, did you address,
uh, gas emissions that might be
in the, in the mines.
My question really is about the
sugar um role.
cover that in terms of the
safety of the workers.
When you're speaking of gas
emissions.
Well, I lived in an area and
went to school in an area with a
lot of coal mines.
And um and even down, I lived in
Madrid or Madrid for 10 years
too, with a lot of leftover flag
cos like, but
I'm, I'm worried about the
workers.
And um any gas emissions that
are coming through the uh
I don't know, mining, maybe the,
the slits or the vents in the
mind.
There are no underground coal
mines in this state at this
time.
When there were, then the
ventilation plans were approved
by the federal government and
and we would, would go in and
monitor that as well, but that's
not existing at this point.
There is, there are some methane
emissions out of.
Of the open pit coal mines, but
there's so much ventilation that
it doesn't represent a problem,
however,
In any confined spaces they do
have to monitor the gasses to
make sure that no explosion
hazard exists.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. So no further
questions, there has been a
motion to move you forward for a
full Senate confirmation, and
I'm not gonna ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stephanniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Doig.
With the voted 9 in favor of
your reappointment. You'll be
moving forward for a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Congratulations. Thank you sir.
Thank you
We're gonna move to the next
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Gina Marie
Dempsey, um, to the Gypsy to the
Department of Health, and I'm
sorry for murdering your name.
Delay,
delay.
That's a nice name you can call
me Jaramillo, and I'll get your
name right to De Blasi. Good to
see you this morning. Good
morning, Senator Munoz. Good
morning.
Glad to be here, uh, chair
Jarillo.
I'll take it.
I deserved that this morning,
um, I'm here for Eugenie de
Blasio, Jeanie De Blasi, who has
been nominated by the Governor
for the cabinet Secretary,
Department of Health, a native
New Mexican for 30 years, and
experience in working in the
healthcare industry began her
career in the accounting and
finance department of Saint
Joseph's Health Care System,
which is now Loveless.
After working for the hospital
operations.
And local healthcare facilities,
uh, she moved on to a program
known as Pace, uh, all-inclusive
health care for the elderly.
has served as the chief
operating officer for a national
provider for the National
Provider Pace. She has oversight
of multi-state operations when
she's doing that, dealing with
budgets and proxy in the $400
million range.
Some of you may know Gina is the
governor's policy advisor.
hard working for the governor in
June of 2022 and focused on
improving their access to our
healthcare and assisting
constituents in navigating the
complex healthcare delivery
system. You led the efforts last
year in establishing ther
Healthcare Delivery Fund.
It was last year or 2 years ago.
Cheers, Bill.
And uh has worked to support
rural hospitals.
I, I will tell you, it's just my
personal stories. Gina is one of
those persons that's real quiet.
Then once you get to know her, I
mean, she becomes your friend
and and she always shoots it
straight to you, and always
tries to figure out how to
handle something when we're
going through the troubles in
Gallup.
And we're still going through
the troubles. She really helped
me navigate some of that stuff.
So she'd watch the financial
side and how they're spending
the money and and knew how to
navigate that and she really led
me in the direction and I'm
really honored to present her.
Um, Gina has become my friend. I
trust her, I rely on her for
healthcare answers and for that,
no, turn it over to Gina.
Thank you. Good morning, um, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, uh, thank you for
your time and the opportunity to
sit before you here today. Thank
you to the governor for her
trust in nominating me for
cabinet Secretary of the
Department of Health.
Thank you, Senator Munoz, for
your early support in today's
sponsorship.
The day the governor named me as
interim cabinet secretary,
Senator Munoz called me and
offered his support and stated
he'd be happy to sponsor me for
the confirmation.
I naively
thanked him and told them thank
you, but this is interim.
Well, here I am before you today
seeking your support.
Um, I'm a proud native New
Mexican. I was raised in the
Ridgecrest area of Albuquerque
and graduated from Highland High
School in 1982.
In 1984, I married the
neighborhood boy.
Steve and I will celebrate 41
years of marriage this year.
My parents instilled in me a
deep commitment to families,
service, and a strong work
ethic, which are values that
have guided me throughout my
life.
My strongest supporters have
been my husband and my family.
My husband Steve, my mom, Joanne
Muller, and my sister Valerie
Mays are here today with me.
And I also know that my father
looks down on me providing his
support.
My husband's support for my work
is without question.
For 12 years, I was on at least
2 planes a week.
And only home in Albuquerque on
weekends.
Blind and on Friday evenings and
leaving again every Monday
morning.
My sister is my best friend and
my confidant.
I'm a proud big sister.
She is achieved much, her
biggest success is being a
wonderful mother to twins, Jacob
and Alyssa, who have grown to
become amazing, wonderful.
Young adults who are finishing
up their first year in college.
Well Steve and I were not
blessed with children, Jacob and
Elissa are loved, like a wrong.
My parents sacrificed much, much
to support us, and we're always
available to provide a helping
hand to family and friends.
And my mother continues to
support others, volunteers at a,
at a, a nursing facility in
Albuquerque and teaches
pickleba to individuals in the
criminal justice system.
Um, Mom, thank you for your
love, your support, and setting
an example and sharing your time
and energy to so many.
As stated earlier by Senator
Munoz. My career in healthcare
began working in accounting at
the Saint Joseph Healthcare
System, now known as Loveless.
This role provided me in an
invaluable experience in
accounting, budgeting and
financial analysis and allowed
me to collaborate closely with
financial and operational
leaders who supported my
professional growth in
healthcare operations.
I was tapped to operate a new
program developed by Saint
Joseph in 2001, known as the
Program of all-inclusive Care
for the elderly or otherwise
pace.
The program is an
interdisciplinary team approach
that provides comprehensive
medical and social services to
eligible seniors still living in
the community who met the
state's criteria for nursing
home placement.
And in 2002,
Saint Joseph's was sold to
Ardent and was merged with
Loveless.
At that time, peace was required
to maintain it's not for profit
status.
And Catholic Health initiatives
maintained ownership and knowing
that Catholic Health
initiatives, uh, may close the
program. I decided to stay on
and sought other sponsorship, so
I was worried about the 185
seniors that the program was
serving at the time in the
roughly 100 staff that were
employed there.
So I stayed, uh, working within
pace, and I was able to find a a
successful uh sponsor that uh
operated a large uh program out
of Denver, Colorado, and under
my leadership also achieved
federal provider type
recognition for the program in
2003.
In 2010, I then became a chief
operating officer for the
National Program of
all-inclusive care for the
elderly provider.
In this capacity, I managed
multi-state operations with
budgets totaling approximately
400 million spearheading program
expansions launching startups
and overseeing the integration
of mergers and acquisitions.
Also under my purview were low
income tax credit affordable
housing properties for seniors,
home health programs, and
comprehensive care coordination.
After that, in 2002, I joined
the governor's office as health
policy advisor.
I have focused on improving
access to care for New Mexicans
and assisting constituent
navigate the complex healthcare
delivery system. I've led the
legislative effort and worked
alongside Senator Stephanics in
establishing the rural
healthcare delivery fund, which
is allocated initially 80
million, um, in its initial
funding to support 52 expansion
programs across New New Mexico,
uh, reaching nearly 24,000
individuals in 2004.
Um, I, I wanna thank the
governor's office and her team.
They're a great, wonderful group
of individuals that work day in
and day out to support New
Mexicans, and I have learned so
much working with them alongside
them and also working alongside
you all as the legislature.
Um, I've been serving as the
depart in the Department of
Health since November 21st of
last year, I'm extremely
impressed by the team's
professionalism and commitment,
particularly as a department is
responding uh now recently to
the measles outbreak in eastern
New Mexico and immediate action
relating to the investigations
of Honta virus here in Santa Fe.
My vision for the Department of
Health is really to focus on the
7 facilities that we operate
across the state, increasing
census, improving quality and
instilling a sense of revenue
cycle management for those
programs.
Um, also want to see their
public health office and offices
that we have, we operate 56 of
those, ensure that they are in
access point for New Mexicans
within their communities, um,
and to identify immediate needs
to improve that level of
community health.
And as legislation is making its
way through uh this year's
session of the Department of
Health is, um, want to establish
an extremely tight carra program
that supports substance exposed
newborns and their families, um,
in collaboration with our sister
agencies at the healthcare
authority um early childhood and
education department and the
children, youth and family, with
over 30 years of experience in
the healthcare industry. I have
honed a deep understanding
finding of the complexities
faced by healthcare
organizations, consumers, and
vulnerable populations. My
career reflects a strong ability
to lead and mentor teams while
developing and executing
strategic plans. It is a
privilege and honor to serve the
people of New Mexico and to lead
a dedicated team at the Do
Mexico Department of Health with
the with a history dating back
to 1919, Senator Block, um, when
the state Board of Health held
its first meeting created.
Created the division of public
health nursing under um Governor
Lorizzallo at the time.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. And we do
have 2 people that signed up, 3
people who signed up and
organized support of your
appointment, and I'm gonna ask
Doctor Michael Richards to come
up and carry Armijo, and
although I've stated your names,
if you'll restate it for the
record, and then I'll go to one
who's on Zoom, which is Janice
Torres. Good morning, Doctor
Richards. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Michael
Richards, the executive vice
president of the UNM Health
Sciences Center, and it is my
privilege and honor to speak and
strong
support of Miss Gina de Blasio's
nomination as secretary of the
New Mexico Department of Health.
I've had the opportunity to
witness Miss de Blasi's
leadership firsthand. I can
confidently say that she is the
right person to lead our state's
health department at this
critical time. Mr. Bosley brings
over 30 years of experience in
public health and healthcare
administration policy and
operations, experience that
spans both the public and
private sectors. She's been
instrumental in shaping
healthcare.
Policy in New Mexico as the
trusted advisor to Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham, where
she played a key role in helping
establish the thought leadership
around the healthcare authority,
the rural Health Care Delivery
Fund and the New Mexico Health
Care Access Act.
These initiatives demonstrate
her deep commitment to ensuring
that all New Mexicans,
regardless of where they live,
have access to high quality
healthcare and public health.
However, Mr. Blasi's not just a
policy expert. She's an
accomplished administrator. She
understands the complexities of
healthcare finance, delivery,
regulation, and I believe that
she approaches these challenges
with a solution oriented
mindset. Her leadership during
her tenure as interim secretary
has already demonstrated her.
ability to navigate the
department with steadiness and
division and vision. I offer up
my strongest support for this,
and I appreciate the opportunity
to support Mr. Blasio.
Thank you.
Uh, excuse me, uh, good morning,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Carrie Armijo, secretary of the
Healthcare Authority, and I'm
here to express my strongest
support for the confirmation of
Gina De Blasio as secretary of
the Department of Health. Uh,
Gina is one of the most
brilliant people I know, and she
has a consistent calm and
analytical leadership style that
is both rare and incredibly
effective. I have seen often how
Gina is able to quietly and
humbly bring people together to
successfully accomplish.
things that truly seemed
impossible at first. Over the
past two years, Gina has become
one of my closest colleagues and
advisors, and I consider her a
friend and mentor. Gina is the
brilliant mind behind our some
of our state's most impactful
health care initiatives,
including the Rural Healthcare
Delivery Fund, the healthcare
delivery and Access Act to
support our rural hospitals and
the creation of the healthcare
authority. I'm completely
confident in Gina's ability to
lead the Department of Health,
and I look forward to working
closely.
with her to solve New Mexico's
most intractable healthcare
problems together in her new
role as secretary. Thank you.
Thank you so much. I'm gonna go
online to Janice Torres.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Janice
Torres and I'm the president of
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
New Mexico, and I have had the
distinct privilege of knowing
Gina De Blasi for the past 25
years, and I've had the
opportunity to work with her in
various capacities throughout
the years and have seen
firsthand the type of person and
leader she is. Gina exemplifies
the characteristics of a true
servant.
leader who is always looking to
make a difference in the lives
of those she serves as the chief
operating officer for Innovate,
the largest provider of the
program for all-inclusive care
of the elderly. Gina worked to
ensure compassionate care was
delivered to all the
participants while striving to
maintain their quality of life
and dignity in their own homes.
Gina has spent her career in
healthcare, giving her a deep
knowledge of the many aspects of
health care, and as a native New
Mexican, she has a deep
knowledge and love for New
Mexico. I believe this knowledge
coupled with Gina's core values
and beliefs make her the perfect
person to lead the Department of
Health for the state of New
Mexico. Since Gina has come to
serve this administration 3
years ago. She has never wavered
from her core values or or
beliefs. I asked Gina not too
long ago.
Why, why do you want to do this?
What drives you? And her
response was quite simple. I
really want to make a
difference. With that, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, I urge you to
support Gina De Blasi's
confirmation as secretary of the
Department of Health. Mil
gracias.
I'm gonna go now to members in
the committee room by a show of
hands how many of you are in
support of this company.
That was the last guy
that the whole room. You even
have Mariana doing two hands up.
She's trying to vote twice.
Thank you for that. Any online?
One online and I'm gonna ask
anyone in opposition of the
country in the committee room.
No, what about online?
No? OK. We're gonna now
entertain questions from the
committee, and I'm going to
start with Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Mr. Bosley, thank you for coming
by the office and um and
I enjoyed the conversation.
Uh, one topic that I believe
needs to be expounded on with.
The group and those who are
listening is the stresses on
rural hospitals. Yet I talked
about that a little bit if you
would, would you, would you?
address that or give us your
opinion or you think that how
we're gonna solve this problem.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, thank you for that
question. Yes, um, when I came
to the governor's office almost
3 years ago. Uh, that was the
biggest issue that I was hearing
about. I was being reached out
by rural hospitals, uh,
extremely concerned that they
weren't, uh, they, they may have
to shut their doors, um, I
worked closely with the governor
of the healthcare authority, and
Doctor Mike Richards and um one
of the, the stressors for
the hospital is really coming
out of the pandemic, and then a
lack of workforce where they're
having to pay higher rates for
agency, uh, nurses and
healthcare workers.
Um, knowing that there was a new
CMS rule where we could leverage
providers assessment and obtain
federal match, so we worked last
year to uh implement um the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act, which provides financial
support, uh,
For all hospitals, but a
substantial share with the rural
hospitals will pay 19% of the
assessment, but received 42% of
the benefit. It'll make a huge
difference for hospitals and and
move them towards uh their
viability.
chair.
I think I called you madam chair
if I did.
You owe me one. I'm sorry. Um,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Bozzi, thank you
for that. I think, you know,
healthcare in general in New
Mexico has had multiple
stresses, and you and I both
discussed many of those.
Um, one that I
On private institutions, we have
in Carlsbad, the the cart
facility that
You know, supplies a, a
wonderful
Much needed need.
The meaning in the community.
And I would just ask you as you
go through your tenure that you
help us watch out after those.
And let us know as legislators
what we can do to help support
those they have, they've got
multiple stresses and, and their
ones that
Um
We need to make sure that, and
there's some others around the
state besides that one, but we
need to really pay attention to
those and make sure that those
special needs are met in the
most effective way. I look
forward to supporting you. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, and Senator Munoz and
Gina, I'm uh really proud to
support Mr. Blasi in this
position. I know somebody else
will ask about Kara, so I'm
gonna move to other questions. I
have 2 questions. I would like
to know how the um Department of
Health and the healthcare as uh
authority are interacting.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chairssoner
Stephanic interacting daily, um,
you know, as you know, when we
created the healthcare
authority, we've moved the
division of Health Improvement
from Department of Health to the
Healthcare Authority along with
the um uh developmental
disability program, uh, with
that being said, the
interactions that we, that we
have with the healthcare
authority. I'll give you an
example, um,
I've spoken to Secretary R Miho
in that we have in the
individuals living out the rest
of their lives, in my opinion
and inappropriate settings.
We've got some individuals that
are on long-term psychotropic,
psychotropic medications at the
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute, um, in the adult
psychiatric unit, they could
probably be better served in a
long-term care facility.
However, because they must
maintain on their
long term psychotropic
medications, uh, they would
receive a tag against a nursing
facility for doing that, so
we're committed to working
together to try and figure this
out, institute some best
practices, failed to demonstrate
that this is the best place for
individuals to live out the rest
of their life versus in a in an
acute psychiatric hospital, as
well as many sometimes in um
hospitals themselves and acute
care hospitals where they're
taking up a bed.
Um, because it's not a safe
discharge and there's not an
appropriate setting for them to
discharge to. So I'll be working
with the healthcare authority on
that. Um, lots of conversations,
uh, go on. We operate the um
developmental disability campus
in Los Luna, um, the DDSD
program that moved to the
healthcare authority, um, you
know, has oversight and does
visits, we'll work together to,
to receive that feedback,
understand some of those
challenges and ensuring that
We're meeting the needs of those
that we're servicing on that
campus.
Thank you. And uh within your
department within Department of
Health, what areas
Do you think need to be shored
up or need extra support right
now.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Stephanics, um, facilities.
We're really looking at what we
can do to increase the census in
some of our facilities, the uh
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute relatively flows full,
so is uh the Los Linas campus.
We have opportunity, um, within
our, uh, Fort Baird, uh, long
term care facility, uh, uh,
Roswell operations with the
medical rehab unit and chemical
dependency unit and with the
great need that we have for
behavioral health services and
substance abuse treatment, um,
The uh turquoise loss facility
that we have in at the Gateway
Center. So we're working with
the administrators of those
facilities increased census,
additionally improve the quality
of care, as I stated earlier,
and really focused on the
revenue cycle management so that
we're not coming back to the
legislature um requesting
additional supplementals for
those facilities.
Thank you very much and thank
you very much for stepping up to
the plate.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
wanna thank you all for taking
on these huge roles. I see 4
secretaries in the audience and
this year I'm working more with
secretaries, uh, so I agree with
you that the governor has put
together an amazing team. We
just have to make sure that
Senator Munnoz doesn't yell at
them.
Glad you're friends, at least he
doesn't yell at you, right?
So, um, I do have a serious
question though. Uh, I, I know
that
The governor's executive orders
when she began really asked her
agencies to work together on uh
mitigating or adapting to
climate change, what's happening
in New Mexico. So, and senator
Stefaniks and somebody from the
house has been trying for, I
think 3 years uh to pass a bill
to help your department in
particular, uh with uh
responding to the public health
needs around this. So, um,
I wonder if you could just
comment about how the Department
of Health is addressing these uh
environmental and climate
related public health needs.
Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Stewart, thank you for the
question. Yes, um, we have, we
We have a group of dedicated
epidemiologists that are, that
are working on um
The climate issues facing the
state of New Mexico, uh, we work
collaboratively with the local
public bodies and other
communities looking at the
effects, um, whether it's
instituting a response to, you
know, the floods that we saw in
Roswell Department of Health
with boots on the ground there
to support that as well as the
fires that that we've
experienced in New Mexico
recently. Additionally, working
with our uh sister agencies,
particularly
the um aging and long-term
services department on, um, you
know, any cooling centers that
might be needed or ensuring that
the uh any seniors that are
challenged with heat when it
when it gets too cold, um, you
know, Department of Health is
there to provide that support as
well. Um, the epidemiology team
definitely uh completes their
surveillance and their supports,
and I believe there's um if I'm
not mistaken, I know that
there's a, uh, either it's in
house Bill 2, there was a bill.
It's um wanting to provide some
additional support for the
Department of Health to increase
the staffing there.
Uh, well, great. Thank you for
that answer. So glad the finance
committee is stepping up to the
plate.
Um,
so, um, can you talk a little
bit more.
About the what we're doing about
the measles issue in the
southeastern part of the state.
Sure, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
um, Senator Stewart, absolutely,
uh, we, the, uh, Department of
Health, the epidemiology group
through the public health
offices as well, moved quick to
action. I can happy to report
that since the outbreak, there
have been over 9000 vaccines
that have been administered
across the state, um, the
epidemiology team did the uh
contact tracing, um, and you
know, I think now we're up to
33.
This is an eastern New Mexico,
um, not all of those have been
confirmed through uh positive
testing, but through the
contract tracing and um
knowledge and notification that
they were actually did have
symptoms and contracted measles
but have gone through those, um,
you know, that's what we're,
we're, we're boots on the ground
working collaboratively with the
community, community's been
great when their response and uh
an instituted um some uh
vaccination efforts uh.
our public health offices
Fantastic. Thank you for that.
So my last question is, for
those of us who uh
A long time ago, got that
measles vaccination as kids. I
think you had to do it twice,
uh, or should we be worried?
Should we be going out, getting
new vaccines, you know, it's,
we're all in this sort of health
soup
state, so are you all gonna have
uh
that.
Suggestions as to who ought to
be looking at that.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Stewart, uh, yes, and uh thank
you to the um the scientists and
the professionals at the
department of because I asked
the same question of them, and,
you know, if you, if you've been
fully vaccinated, you've got a
95 97% immunity, so you're
covered. No need for boosters.
Um, so that's, that's the first
and foremost important response
to to measles, um, those that
have contracted the measles.
What we're seeing is they were
unvaccinated.
Um, the Department of Health
also did a public service
announcement, um, related to
measles and uh Doctor Miranda
Durham, who's sitting here today
in support, um, it was the face
of that public service
announcement and we're putting
out uh notifications and working
within communities and, and
through our public health
offices as well.
OK, that's wonderful answer.
Thank you for that. You know, up
here, we're in a different
world, so I, I don't haven't
heard any PSAs cause I'm not at
home relaxing and watching the
nightly news, so, uh, good to
hear that. Thank you so much.
And again, I so appreciate your
willingness to do this job,
these secretary jobs are so
difficult, so thank you.
Mr. Chair, thank you, Senator,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Senator Munoz, for
sponsoring and um.
Thank you Gina for stepping up
and uh I want to say congrats to
You and I think your family's
here, your husband is where?
And your mother is where? And
sister.
And it's weird that there's a
space between your husband and
your mother and sister.
I hope there's nothing going on
there.
Father-in-law, OK. All right.
Um, a couple of things.
I I heard uh a question
regarding uh facilities around
the state.
And, um, but one of the things I
wanna, uh, just ask you about in
your resume is on your
questionnaire, um, are you still
the owner of Crossbeam
Development.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
Senator Block, yes, and Mr.
Chair, what, what is that?
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, it's a development
company actually my husband, um,
operates, we've got some
commercial properties, um, that,
you know, we've renovated and
leased. OK, perfect. Thank you.
um, Mr. Chair, I, I just didn't
know if it was related to
healthcare or not. It sounds
like it's not so perfect, um,
appreciate that a lot.
One of the things, um, Mr.
Chair, and um Gina that I get a
complaint on.
From workers at hospitals is
traveling healthcare providers,
they come here because of a
shortage of nurses and doctors
and PAs, and they're making a
lot more money than the New
Mexican uh healthcare workers
that are here.
Um, how do we, how do we, um,
Compensate
How do we mitigate that is
really the question because I, I
think that we got to be
producing a lot more nurses,
docs, and PAs.
Um, and we have to also have
some incentives for them to stay
here and work here.
Uh, what are your thoughts on
the pay for travel people
getting paid more than uh our
New Mexican healthcare workers.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, agreed. I've heard those
same complaints as well from um
the uh local nurses, uh, working
within the hospitals. I think,
you know, the pandemic really
changed a lot. Uh, we saw a lot
of nurses leaving the workforce,
um, because of the strain that
that put on them, and so, you
know, there was an opportunity
for agency nurses to come in
and, and the facilities with the
amount of volume that they have
really need to have that level
of support.
In order to provide that care.
Um, you know, there's a lot that
the state has done and continues
to do in order to support the
healthcare, uh, uh,
professionals, uh, we, when I,
uh, started in the governor's
office, I believe the budget was
$2.5 million for the health
professional loan repayment
program, um, now it's upwards of
$15 million. We saw that uh only
like 42 healthcare professionals
were supported initially and now
I think it's upwards of over
700.
Um, there was an expansion at
the College of Nursing to push
through more nursing graduates.
We've seen the benefit of that
within our, our local
communities and within the local
hospitals and you know, Doctor
Richards under his leadership,
you may have already heard, is
working on um a new um medical
school within the health
sciences Center will be able to
graduate more, um, a medical
students, uh, here in New
Mexico. Additionally, um,
there's been
expansion of general um of the
GME, um, particularly for
psychiatry, so we've really
grown, um, that field, um, in
New Mexico as well. There's a
lot of work being done in order
to provide and support the
healthcare workforce in New
Mexico and, and thank you to you
all, uh, the legislature and uh
er Munoz uh for that support in
the budget because it goes a
long way in order to improve
quality of care across the
state.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Gina. What type of uh
recruitment activities does your
department do, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Block, uh,
Department of Health, um, you
know, same recruitment efforts
that we do across all state
agencies, however, I think that
we've got a a a long term, uh,
team, uh, within the Department
of Health who know many
individuals and as a matter of
fact, people who have left the
department are now seeking to
come back.
Um, so we're really happy about
that, um, and we are, there's
been a new, um.
We've brought over some uh
social workers from CYFDs to uh
support the care program, and
we're looking at uh the current
social work team that we have
within uh the Department of
Health because there seems to be
some pay down paybound disparity
in order to ensure that we're
able to uh retain those social
workers working within the
within the department.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and Gina, are
there, are there formal
processes for recruitment in
your department or not, Mr.
Chair, um.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
yes, absolutely there is.
Perfect. Um.
One of the things that we have
seen here.
In New Mexico, some of the bills
that have come by, you know,
medical malpractice, um, Mr.
Chair and Gina and
Um, patient privacy, um,
electronic records of
healthcare.
Um, I, I believe they're
critical because when people
travel, they get hurt or
whatever the doctor provider can
pull those up very quickly and
and get the history of the
patient.
Um, I assume that
Electronic records are important
to you in the healthcare uh
department.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, yes.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Gina, I, I would assume that
transparency in those records is
important for patient safety.
So the doctor knows.
The whole picture of that
particular patient, whether if
they're incapacitated or not, so
they can um
have a better informed decisions
on the care they need.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, uh, yes, for the most
part, there are some protections
currently for behavioral health
services.
It's, it's across the country.
OK. Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair. Um.
Because when, when patients are
on certain medications.
Um, I would hope that the
provider who does not know the
history of that patient,
understands the entire history
and what medications that
patient is on so they can
Uh, make better informed
decisions. I think you would
agree with that, correct?
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, yes. Thank you.
Um, lastly,
Just a couple of things here,
uh, Mr. Chair, and, um, Gina,
I'd like to talk about
how your department does uh
maybe interacts with any
economic development regarding
pushing medical technology
companies to come to New Mexico.
Do you have any formal
activities where you're
coordinating with um uh the New
Mexico economic development
department to
showcase our attractiveness for
medical, uh, technologies.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Bloch, the one that I
can think of is that, um, and
actually I did this well in the
governor's office, not
necessarily a Department of
Health, but um there's a group
in um southern New Mexico that's
called electronic caregiver.
That is really taken off, and I
think it was um
Uh, has been identified as one
of the fastest growing companies
in the in the country for for
health care, um, and so, you
know, we've been working with
them to try and advance and
support uh their efforts and
support family caregivers and
even uh facility caregivers in
um in uh providing uh supports
and services to to patients
across the state. Um, is there a
formal, um, push within the
Department of Health from
Economic development
perspective, uh, Senator Block,
I, I don't know of one. OK. All
right. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you, Gina. Um,
It looks like you spent a fair
amount of time in Colorado and
Broomfield.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Back, yes.
Well, you know, uh, in this
room, it seems like, Mr. Chair,
everything goes to Espinola. Um,
but I'll tell you that's my
wife's hometown, so, um,
Yeah, that, that helps me out in
my boat.
Um, lastly, uh, Mr. Chair and
Gina.
I, I think Senator Townsend
might have asked you, but tell
me where the where the where the
big gaps are in the healthcare
department.
That, um, obviously increased a
lot of risk to New Mexican
healthcare, and what can we do
to
mitigate or eliminate those
gaps.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Block, as I stated it,
you know, the initial focus is
really gonna be on the
facilities, however, you know,
there's chronic diseases that
are that are uh based in New
Mexico. We've got diabetes and
um obesity and, and the
Department of Health partners
with local communities and the
um the tribes uh pueblos and
nations as well, and we're
really pushing on preventative
efforts. Additionally, with
behavioral health services, a
lot of the work that we've been
doing.
Um, in, um, McKinley County,
we've seen a drop in the number
of deaths related to alcoholism,
so, you know, I, I, I think it's
all of the above. I think, you
know, when you think about
behavioral health and the amount
of addiction that, you know,
we're seeing in New Mexico and
across the country, um, the
legislature did a really great
job in this session and really
pushing through the the
behavioral health package that's
gonna provide a lot of support
to New Mexicans and I think
would go a long way in
improving.
The overall health in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Gina, because behavioral health
substance abuse, uh, diabetes.
Uh, lack of providers. I mean,
those, you, you're going into.
Good luck.
Um, you got a very, very tough
job, but I will say I think you
are uh the right woman for the
job. I think you're gonna do a
great job and um I look forward
to working with you here in the
Senate, and I, you got a
solid sponsor there as well, so.
Congrats to you. I'm sure it's
going to be unanimous vote, it
should be, and uh congrats to
you and your family, and I hope
they can, um,
Kind of get together a little
bit and erase that gap there
between them.
But I look forward to supporting
you on the floor. Thank you,
ma'am. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Munoz. Uh, Mr. Blast,
you'd be hard pressed to find
someone who's not more excited
than I am to see a different
face in this role. I don't think
you have any shoes to fill.
We're going from like flip flops
to stilettos with you. So I want
to I want to wish you well. I
will tell you that I am happy to
see the collaboration between
your agency already and CYFD,
um, not, not just, um, not, not
just on CYFDA.
issues, but specifically and,
and on the Kira issue, I think
we're in good hands with the two
of you guys collaborating. My
ask would be is to make sure
that you guys put systems in
place that long after the two of
you are gone, that collaboration
remains and that we don't go
back to the operation and
management in silos, and so I
recognized that um we're in good
hands right now. Just make sure
that when, when you leave that
we can continue on to to put the
best interest of New Mexico's
kids first. And I also just want
to recognize the
Huge responsibility that the
legislator has put on your
department when it comes to
mental health and addressing the
crisis in New Mexico. Um, I wish
you well and I hope you know
that both sides of the aisle,
and I hope both sides of the
chambers are here to support you
and to make sure that we put New
Mexicans' health first and, um,
you know, just wish you well. I
think that we have a good
appointment. I wish you'd come
along much, much sooner, but
you're here today, so that's
good. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and just elaborating on what
Senator Brantley was saying.
Thank you so much for your
commitment to everything the
department is working on. Um,
but I would like to ask you to
elaborate just a little bit
further on how GOH is going to
work on the care program with
CYFD.
briefly.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Bergman's, uh, yes, so, um, we
already are collaborating. The
Department of Health has a daily
meetings currently discussing
care at the end of each day at 4
o'clock, uh, we'll be working
closely together to stand up a
program to ensure that uh we're
setting a good path forward for
the substance disposed newborns
and their families and supports.
It's gonna take not just take
CYFD.
in the Department of Health to
work closely together, but also
the healthcare authority, um,
and, uh, early childhood and
education department as well,
uh, so you can count on us to do
that. We'll be uh pushing
through the world making rather
quickly as well, um, you know,
hoping this legislation gets
passed and and puts us on a path
forward to do that.
Thank you very much, that's all.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Duhe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Senator, secretary, um,
So yes, I, I joined the others
and, and thanking you for taking
on this role, um, I have a
couple of questions.
Uh, I have, I have expressed to
you before that, uh,
frustrations with, with the
behavioral Health Institute. Um,
particularly when someone is
civilly committed to that
institute, and then there's a
very long delay in picking them
up and getting them there. Uh,
sometimes so long that it eats
up a significant chunk of the
amount of time they've been
committed for. So they don't end
up actually getting the
treatment that we have taken
their liberty away to get and
instead they just kind of
in, um, at UNM Psy.
Um, which I don't think.
I
is right. Uh, and so I
understand that there's, there's
going to be in, and then I've
seen the data in the, in the
competency context.
That, that people are being
picked up in an average of 15
days, but outside of the
competency context, I have
heard.
Um, you, people not being picked
up for, for close to a month,
uh, when maybe they've been
committed for 30 days.
Um, so what will the department
be doing to make sure that
people who are are civilly
committed, especially since that
is something that we've been
looking at this, this session
and, and revising those
definitions, I think with the
intention that more people who
would need civil commitment
would get it. What is the
Department of Health doing to
make sure that they are are
picked up in a timely manner and
actually get the treatment that
they are being committed for.
Mr. Cha Chahi, uh, thank you for
that question. I've, uh, yes,
you've expressed that to me.
I've had a conversation with
Doctor Shields at um Behavioral
Health Institute. I've asked him
to pull together some data so we
can look to see how long, and
there will be working with those
jurisdictions to try and um, you
know, we'll schedule meetings,
happy to to meet with uh UNM
psych as well to really
understand what those challenges
are and uh to invite you if you
want to to those meetings.
to be sure that we're doing all
that we can to ensure that
people are getting their needs
met sooner rather than later. I
stand with you that I don't
think anyone should be waiting
uh to to receive the necessary
services, particularly if
they're spending, you know, most
of their time waiting for
placement at at the facility,
and we need to get them, uh, you
know, the treatment that they
need sooner rather than later.
Thank you, and yes, I would like
to, to go to those meetings. Um,
We talked a little bit about
the, I was thinking about this
SB 17 from last year, but the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act. And I was trying to find
Senator.
Uh, uh, this summer, you all had
a presentation in LFC, um, that
talked about what's
The implementation of that act
because when we passed that last
year, uh, it was sold to us as,
as this is for our rural
hospitals. This is to support
our rural hospitals. Um,
But what we have seen, the, the
outcome be is that the folks who
are getting the most money from
that. Presbyterian, uh, and
ardent, um, uh, uh, loveless,
which is owned by Ardent. Um,
and so,
And and I understand this is
because they are, they are
serving a a higher uh volume of,
of Medicaid patients and, and
that is what it's based on, but
I don't think that any of us
when passing that, thought that
we were going to be giving,
giving this massive financial
boost to the folks who probably
need at least in our state, as
opposed to a struggling rural
hospitals. And so, and there's,
there's really no other than a
requirement.
They are, I think there was a
requirement that 75% of what
they got be used, um,
For our operations here, but
there is 25% of this money that
uh that there's no transparency
whatsoever about how it is being
used. And if that is, whether
that is going directly into the
pockets of, of out of state
companies, uh, in this, in the
case of Ardent, um, so would you
support uh legislation to bring
some transparency to how those
funds are being used so that we
know as as policymakers.
Where that money is going when
we, when we
Implement legislation, uh, like
this in the future.
And, and now, and, and the
legislation we've already
implemented, uh, that we, so
that we know how that money is
being used.
Mr. Chair, um,
Chair Doig. I, um, so the 75%
was a requirement that we put in
the statute last year and then
just to just to step back a
little bit about the the act
itself. Um, it was a way for us
to get the necessary funding to
the rural hospitals to prevent
closure, and this was an avenue
and that the feds had put out
that allowed us to do that.
Otherwise we weren't sure there
was any other way to do that
other than to
back to the legislature and say
we need all this state general
fund money to do that. The
healthcare delivery and Access
Act is an assessment on
hospitals that they put forward
that then uh we, the healthcare
authority gets a federal match
and then it gets redistri
redistributed, the urban
hospitals, uh, um, it's it's the
uh rural hospitals pay 19% of
that assessment and get 42% of
that benefit.
Uh, that was a way for us to
ensure that we wouldn't have the
hospital closures across across
the state, um, as it relates to
the 25% and why we settled on
that 75%, the 25% was that
there's lots of con contracts
and other services that you know
that they may have national
agreements with that we, we had
to provide them the avenue such
that they could, they could be
able to spend those dollars to
do that in order.
operate those facilities, so
that's why, that's why we
settled on 75% with those
hospitals. They wanted to ensure
that that the majority of that
funding stated New Mexico
supported the local operations,
um, went towards the workforce,
um, as well, and um so that's
that was the reason behind that.
You're asking if I would support
legislation on that 25%, um, a
senator, and I think I'd have to
really look at what it was that
we were trying.
to do if it's just a reporting
of where that 25% was going, you
know, certainly would be happy
to look at that.
And, and yes, and so secretary,
yes, I, I, I, I'm not suggesting
that we
We roll back what we did in that
bill, but I am, I do think that
the state should know.
How that money is being used. So
how does, and, and how, how are
we making sure that that 75% is
being used for for what it's
supposed to be used for.
What kind of enforcement is in
place to ensure that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
uh Chadu Hi,
that's uh comes through the
healthcare authority through an
audit that happens in the
reporting that's happening
within the healthcare authority.
OK. Great. Thank you.
Um
You were asked by uh Senator
Block about about recruitment,
healthcare provider recruitment,
uh, after this, we are hearing
House Bill 15, which deals with,
uh, what is it? Healthcare
strategic recruitment program.
What is, is the Department of
Health's position on that bill?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Do, could
you enlighten me on the on the
details of that cause I don't
remember that bill by its
number.
Sure, so this is creating, and
this is within the uh the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, creating a
recruitment program, essentially
a headhunter program the brand.
It look, you're nodding so I
think, I think I, you're, you're
remembering that. Go ahead.
Yes, uh, uh, Chaig, yes,
absolutely we are, we are
supportive of that and it's
looking at bringing foreign
trained.
Um, providers into New Mexico if
I'm remembering the the right uh
bill.
No, sorry, wrong bill. I don't
think that this is, this is
looking, looking at at uh at uh
uh recruitment for people who,
who have uh been trained here,
uh, to stay here and serve here.
Um, er do Hi, yes, we are
supportive of that.
Thank you.
Um
So, uh, I know you and I have
worked together on Senate Bill
14, which dealt with oversight.
For uh over consolidation of, of
hospitals. Uh, we are, we have
the highest percentage of
private equity-owned hospitals
in the nation here in New
Mexico, um, and we have seen the
effects of that with increased
pricing, it increased prices to,
to patients and a decrease in
quality. Um,
Of healthcare.
That bill died in the Senate
Judiciary Committee. So what is
the Department of Health going
to be doing if, if there is not
legislation put in place to
provide for oversight. Uh, we
are one of the only states in
the nation that has no oversight
whatsoever of these
transactions. What is the
Department of Health going to be
doing to ensure that I
That healthcare in New Mexico is
protected and preserved when
these transactions occur.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Chair Du Hi,
um, so.
The health care authority within
the division of Health
Improvement has some uh
requirements for change of
ownership, otherwise known as
Chow. Um, I've had conversations
with Secretary R Miho and um you
know, our ability to look, go
back and look at those
regulations and rules to see if
there is something additional
that we could do as it relates
to oversight, whether we had a
bill or not. I think that we
definitely have opportunity
there as well. Uh, the division
of health improvement.
as well, there's a patient bill
of rights, uh, that's at the
federal level that the division
health improvement if we get any
complaints or from patients or
or anyone within the community
where they go in and they pro
they uh complete an
investigation and complete a
survey within the within those
facilities. So there are avenues
that we can do, um, through the
healthcare authority and the
division of Health Improvement
to hold uh those facilities
accountable to
um
You know, from a quality
perspective, however, I do
believe we need something in
statute for a review and
oversight of any mergers or
acquisitions of our facilities
and to protect uh those New
Mexico assets for sure.
Thank you. And, and, and the
Department of Health, you
license.
Hospitals, correct,
Mr. Chair, Senator Duhig, no, we
do not. The healthcare authority
does within the division of
Health Improvement.
OK, I was confused about that
because I was just looking back
at that SB 17, and it was
talking about hospitals that the
Department of Health license.
And so, I know there are some
specialty state hospitals, uh,
but has that when we did the
change with HCA did all hospital
licensing changed to HCA Mr.
Chair, Senator Duhe, yes. OK,
thank you.
Bye.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
I just have a couple of comments
before I ask the will of the
committee. I just want to thank
you for your commitment to rural
New Mexicans and looking at
barriers for low income and
uninsured populations. My, uh,
part of my county is really
dependent on your solutions and
working with them for
healthcare, and I wanted to
personally thank you for that
because I know your commitment
to not just my district, but
rural districts throughout the
entire state in rural New
Mexicans, especially those who
are uninsured, um, thank you.
for that. And with that, what is
the will of the committee,
Senators.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, I moved the appointment
of Gina Marie de Blasi to the
Secretary of the Department of
Health.
There has been a motion to move
you forward for a full Senate
confirmation. I'm going to ask
for a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, yes.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 9 in favor, you
will be moving forward to a full
Senate confirmation later this
morning. Thank you and thank
you, Senator Munoz.
I'll be handing the gavel back
to our Madam Chairwoman for the
remainder of the agenda.
And as, as folks are leaving the
room, if you could please take
your conversations outside so
that we could move on with our
work, uh, representative Anaya,
come on up for HB 15.
Go ahead, representative.
Alright. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I'm glad to be on the Senate
side, um, and that conversation
set us up pretty well, uh, for
this bill as well. Um, so, Madam
Chair, committee members, thank
you so much for hearing House
Bill 15. This is the strategic
healthcare worker recruitment
program that the chair spoke
about, uh, just a few minutes
ago. Um, and Madam Chair
committee members, um, does not
recruit foreign-trained, uh,
healthcare providers, but we are
trying to attract back.
Those of our healthcare workers
that have gone out of state.
So research shows that um we are
able to retain healthcare
workers that are actually
trained and or here from New
Mexico, uh, better than in any
other sort of healthcare worker.
Um, so, Madam Chair, committee
members, what this does is a
couple of things. It is a
headhunter slash concierge
program, if you will, and, uh,
essentially, uh, it is the first
of its kind in the nation, which
I'm very proud about.
Um, the first part of this, uh,
recruitment program uses
information from our own
institutions of higher
education, um, and it uses our
alumni data.
And um we go after those who uh
have backgrounds in healthcare,
we call them up instead of
waiting for them to come to us,
we call them up and one of the
difficulties, Madam Chair, and
uh, committee members is that we
have actually done a really good
job in passing a lot of
recruitment incentives. So I'm
thinking about the tax
incentives that we've passed
throughout the years and
thinking about um loan
repayment. I'm also thinking
about larger things like
childcare.
Um, so, one of the difficulties
is our uh
Healthcare providers that are
looking for these types of
incentives, kind of don't know
where to go.
And so their house in a lot of
different departments. So Madam
Chair and committee members,
what this program will do, um,
is essentially walk them through
the process. We'll call them up
and say, hey, here are all the
jobs we have for you. Here are
all the incentive programs that
we have passed throughout the
years, we wanted to come back
home.
And Madam chair uh not
representative senators, um,
what we'll do after that, if, if
they're like, you know what,
I've been wanting to come home.
I'm from Braton. I'm from
wherever salud, um, what we'll
do is through the Department of
Workforce Solutions, um, we will
open up a file for them and
we'll start walking them through
the process. Another one of the
barriers that we know to uh
recruiting healthcare providers
here, uh, is also the licensing
and credentialing process. We
have a lot of healthcare
providers.
one of my constituents in
particular that I'm thinking of.
She's a social worker, she
cannot get through um the
licensing process right now. And
so what we would do is open up a
file for them and essentially
hold their hand through the
process and be their advocates,
um, to the administration as
well. We would make sure that
there aren't any sorts of
technicalities that are holding
them back. And then once they
get through that process as
well, we start connecting them,
um, with, uh, housing, we start
connecting their partners with
any sort of job.
That's been another barrier, is,
uh, jobs for their partners and
uh the childcare incentive
programs we've passed and the
list goes on. Um, so, um, Madam
Chair, senators, this is, this
has been funded in our budget
already. um, I would just really
like the parameters to come
along with it. And so with that,
um, I will stand for questions.
I have my expert witness with
me, Secretary Naier from the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, and we're here to
answer any questions.
Thank you, secretary. Did you
want to say anything?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee in 2003, we put
together the statewide plan for
the workforce innovation and
Opportunity Act. We went across
the state and gathered input and
in really all of your
communities. And one stat that
really stuck out everywhere we
went was that between 2010 and
2022, New Mexico had a negative
net migration to the tune of
30,000 individuals, and since
2010, nearly 20
1000 more workers left the
state, then arrived. And so this
led us to developing a specific
goal within the plan to attract
out of state workers to New
Mexico and improve retention of
New Mexicans within the state,
particularly in rural
communities. So attracting out
of state talent, boomerangs has
been a goal of economic
development strategies for a
long time, um, but it's never
been a goal within the workforce
system itself.
Uh, so this program also fits
within the high priority sector,
of course, of healthcare
including behavioral health.
Alignment with the Weowa State
plan means that all Weowa
titles, so that includes local
workforce development boards,
adult education, uh, vocational
rehabilitation and the senior
employment programs have
committed to furthering these
goals and promoting these
priority sectors, um, but none
of this work is funded. Um, we
are 89% federally funded and uh
none of it is dedicated to
actually implementing the sector
strategies that we are required
to um develop. So this program
was really designed with a
strong understanding of the
existing workforce system.
And it will allow us to
integrate all the existing
resources of the department,
including career consultants,
veterans employment
representatives and other
professionals in the workforce
system to accomplish its goals.
I'm happy to answer any
questions. Thank you. Thank you.
We had 2 people signed up to
speak and support, um,
Christopher Papaleo. I don't see
here see online, and Dana Gray,
who I believe is online.
All right. Uh, Ms. Gray, go
ahead for up to 3 minutes.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, executive
director of Desert States
Physical Therapy Network,
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. We'd like to thank
Representative Anaya for
introducing this piece of
legislation.
Network clinics continue to find
recruitment a challenge, and we
appreciate any efforts made to
bring qualified providers back
to our state. This is a great
way to compile information about
tax credits incentives, and job
openings for potential
candidates. We stand in support
of House Bill 15 and urge your
support as well. Thank you.
Thank you. We didn't have anyone
sign up in opposition, so I'll
go two members of the committee.
Southern Townsend and Raley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Representative.
There seems to be
Many industries in New Mexico
that are
leading
Help us.
voice.
Your bill looks.
Only at one.
My only one, and why do we need
a special bill.
For something that workforce
solutions.
I thought I already did.
Thank you for asking that
question, uh, this that
question, uh, Madam Chair and
senator, um, because we also had
the same question on the house
side. And um
Madam Chair and senator, one of
the reasons I wanted this to be
housed in the Department of
Workforce Solutions, um, was
because if this program is
successful, I would really like
to expand it. Um, we have
workers across the state, as you
stated, um, where we're short.
And so the first place that I
actually think of is education,
um, and so I was asked that in
the house, why I didn't put this
in the healthcare authority, um,
and that is the reason why Madam
Chair and Senator, um,
Uh, would you repeat the second
part of your question?
Yeah, why only this one? I mean,
that is.
That is the role of Workforce
Solutions to help place
One of the rows of of workforce
solutions is is to help place
people.
Across industries that require
help. Thank you. Uh, thank you
for restating that. Um, and
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I
actually called up the NCSL, the
National Council of State
Legislators and said, hey, is
anybody doing this? And they
said, this is the first program
of its kind in the nation. Um,
and so, Madam Chair and senator,
um, I, I'm not sure if, uh,
workforce, uh, solutions
anywhere across the nation is
doing something like this, where
there's an active recruitment.
I know a lot of folks, um, you
know, uh, go to healthcare
recruitment fairs, and they sort
of wait for people to come to
them, but, uh, in this day and
time, you gotta have a gimmick
and um Madam Charan Senator, I
would hope that we're actively
recruiting our own folks back to
New Mexico instead of instead of
a scattershot approach.
Well, I appreciate that
representative, uh, Madam Chair.
One of the, one of, and this is
not throw rocks at Workforce
solutions, so I don't take it
that one of the complaints that
I hear from employers across
many industries.
Uh, in my district is, they
can't get anybody at workforce
Solutions to answer the phone.
And my question is, do you, is
can they
Take on this responsibility when
I think they still have a lot of
people.
Uh, working, um, away from the
office, 1 and, and 2.
Just seems like they're loaded
up with everybody else that's
out there looking for employees
today, maybe. Sure, I'll turn
that to my x-ray.
Uh, Na chair Senator Townsend,
uh, specifically in your area, I
think you represent Carlsbad, is
that correct, Senator Eddie and
O'Tero, yeah, we, we had, we had
some acute staffing shortages in
Edd and Otero County at one
point we were sharing staff
between Artesia and Carlsbad,
and, and it was a really shame
because those are two
communities where we are so
engaged with the community and I
know the businesses so well, our
local teams, um, I think at one
point we weren't even open 5.
a week in Carlsbad, uh, part of
when we relaunched the field
offices as American job centers
was really doubling down on
making sure we could fund those
positions and be able to open
those offices full time again,
and I believe we have. So
hopefully we've addressed that
issue, um, very recently, as in
in 2025. Uh, that said, I mean,
part of the challenge is for us,
in addition to hiring challenges
is funding challenges. So we
routinely maintain about a 20%
funding.
uh unfunded vacancy rate,
meaning that um our federal
dollars have stayed flat,
despite all of the um mandated
salary increases, which of
course we want our our employees
to receive, but we never get
compensated for that. And so
we've experienced essentially a
$6 million budget cut in the
past 3 fiscal years, because,
um, we never got any more money
to um increase our staffing and
so bills like this that give us
an opportunity to increase that
staffing, not just for the
benefit of the specific initi.
initiative, but also then
freeing up time from our
existing career counselors to
work on other industries are are
really gonna help with exactly
the problem that you're talking
about.
Madam chair uh representative.
expert. I'm sorry, I didn't
catch your name.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend Serita Nayer, I'm the
workforce secretary.
Um
Madam Secretary Representative.
Be
Other than the $2 million that's
within this bill for funding.
Are any of these any of these
businesses.
Healthcare institutions. Are
they going to pay a fee and in
order to help you cover the cost
or, or to grow the effort.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, no,
and I think that's the beauty of
this program as well is that um
we're actually alleviating a lot
of work from, um, folks who are
seeking healthcare providers,
um, one of the um one of the
things that I found as I was
traveling with and alongside um
LHHS uh prior to session is I
actually asked a lot of the
folks in HR programs who are in
charge of recruitment in
particular, um, either for rural
hospital.
s or even urban hospitals.
People just seem really
overwhelmed at the moment. Um, I
also UNM is in my district,
Presbyterians in my district.
And I spoke with them as well
and um one of the interesting
things that I found is that um a
lot of folks who are doing the
recruitment don't necessarily
know all of the incentives that
we're passing.
Um, we hope that this
information gets down to them,
but it doesn't always. And so I
know um all of the healthcare,
uh, providers and institutions
that I spoke to were incredibly
supportive, um, of this
initiative, uh, in order to help
relieve some of the burden right
now of um actively recruiting,
uh, healthcare workers.
Well, Madam, um,
representative Madam Secretary,
I hear loud and clear the the
need within healthcare. I, I, I
get that.
I will tell you that there are a
lot of other industries out
there that are also in need.
And I have to be concerned about
giving you
The new directive that's gonna
take away.
From a group that's already in
need.
And, and so I, I have that.
I'll, I'll continue to listen to
the rest of, of the
Debate, but
I, uh
That is a concern and, and in my
area, in my district of the
ability of workforce solutions
to execute based on.
Historical performance is a
concern, so thank you, um,
representative. Nice to have
you. Thank you, ma'am, sure.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
welcome Representative and
secretary. Um, I recognize that
this is a bipartisan effort. We
have um rule Republican
Representative Jennifer Jones,
more importantly, she's a nurse.
And in visiting with her, uh,
she, she clearly states that we,
you know, have a healthcare
workforce crisis, and I don't
disagree with that.
I think in any effort that we
can go out there and
strategically and aggressively
try to recruit uh work, uh,
healthcare graduates from New
Mexico and bring them into the
workforce as necessary. You
mentioned kind of the, the
breaks in the, the link, right?
We have kinks in our link when
we seem to be operating in
silos. I'll go back in my
district and you mentioned
several incentive programs that
we have, the people on the
ground still are completely
unaware of. And so if this
somehow gets the pipelines and
the information out there, I'm
happy.
to support this effort. Um, I, I
think we all need to, to, I
don't disagree that there's
workforce shortages in many,
many, many different industries
and we perhaps will need to
mirror um very aggressive
campaigns to to fill those
vacancies like this, but let's
see, I know that it's already
funded in the budget and let's
see what we can get. I hope, I
wish you success and I hope that
we get a lot of healthcare
workers out of this. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
But thank you, Madam Chair.
Thanks for the creative look at
this. This is a very creative
program. I like it.
I will tell you that I think
there are going to be some pools
of people that will want to come
back and they're being fired
from their federal jobs. I've
heard from the
of the environment, no, inner,
but they have one attorney
opening, and they've had 15
applications and they're all
from federal workers that were
fired. So, I appreciate your
comment, Secretary Naer about
come and get unemployment from
us. I appreciated that. Um, but
that's just a pool of people um
that you should look at. Uh, the
latest word is that there's
gonna be 1300 firings from the
Department of Education.
I hope that's not true, uh, but
anyway, don't, don't forget
those piles of people that, many
of whom probably are from New
Mexico. I really like the focus
on New Mexico train. Uh, so, uh,
so I hope you're really
successful. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Soonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
welcome to the committee, Senate
or representative and uh
secretary.
Um, how will this money, I see
that you have money in House
Bill 2.
For this program, how will this
money be coordinated with the
efforts of Jerry Harrison's
group.
The health
Resources group.
That recruits doctors and
healthcare professionals.
Um, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Senator, for asking that
question. I will say Derry
Harrison's group was actually
part of the inspiration, um, I
had watched the LADS Committee,
um, but one of the um issues
that I think we kept running
into during the interim
committee was that it just
wasn't big enough. Um, it, you
know, it was doing a really good
job and um it just wasn't
expansive enough. And so, Madam
Chair and Senator, um, the
impetus behind this.
was to make sure that um we also
had some sort of um control and
responsibility um within the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, um, but Madam Chair
and Senator, I would happily,
um, you know, as this move
forward, um, recommend and work
alongside Secretary Naier, um,
to make sure that we're
aligning, uh, those incentives
and those initiatives. So men
chair or Mr. Chair, I support
this, um, but I do think that uh
workforce
solutions needs to coordinate so
that there's not overlap or that
they can do some of the
services, etc. We have an
existing group.
So, uh, let's see how
I know some of this initiative
is new, but let's see how I can
Intertwined. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Representative
Madam Secretary, uh just a
couple of questions. So, Madam
Secretary, if I understood.
Uh, and I know, uh, Senator
Brandtley was talking about
appropriation in the budget, but
did I understand you that your
budget's been flat from the
federal side for 6 years. Is
that correct?
Uh, madam, madam chair, uh,
Senator Gallegos, it's been more
or less flat for the past 3
fiscal years, um, and that is
due to just a lot of times we're
just still sitting on a
continuing resolution, so, um,
we're anticipating cuts if the
federal government is able to
pass a budget.
think that and turn
uh representative.
And Madam Secretary, um,
My concern then, so, uh, years
back.
Um
Probably a few years for you got
here, but, uh, but I'm chairing
and center and or representative
secretary, uh, I gave some
capital to, uh, myself and uh
Senator Schmmeti to help Eastern
New Mexico with trying to fill a
void.
And
And I understand that the
educational
Part of this, but I was gonna
ask is and, and I, I didn't see
anything about discussions on
like the opportunity
scholarship. It was said earlier
that we want to keep our people
here in the state.
The opportunity scholarship
doesn't do that.
Uh, they are able, I, I voted
against it because I think we
should have 3 to 5 years of
instinct use because our
investment, uh, since that
doesn't do that, man chair
representative in um Secretary,
how are you gonna obligate them
once you go into this program on
finding them and helping them
come in to
Uh, your process. How are we
gonna incentivize them to stay.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you for that question. Um, I
know that as we were passing
different types of incentive
programs, I think about the loan
forgiveness in particular, we
are adding parameters to those
incentive programs where we're
saying, OK, we'll pay back X
amount of your loan if you stay
this many years, we'll pay back
more if you stay an even longer
period of years. And so, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, this
will help fill a gap right now
that we have in terms of even
getting folks here. And then
when it comes to the actual
incentive programs themselves,
um, each of those have their own
parameters, Madam Chair.
And turned, I guess I would have
appreciated that approach when
we're doing free education for
all.
Because they don't have any
obligation to us. I do have a
question though, Madam Chair and
Representative is currently um
thinking through the healthcare
recruit recruitment programs.
What are, what are we doing and
what have been the results so
far.
And repsy.
Um,
Madam Chair, I, I would just
like some clarification on the
question, um, because this is a
brand new recruitment program.
I can also pass to my ex right
now. Uh, not in chair, uh,
Senator Gallego, so right now,
as I mentioned at the top of uh
the presentation, healthcare and
uh behavioral health is a
priority sector for us. Um, what
that means is that when, um, you
know, most of our system is
reactive. So of course, people
come into our office because
they're looking for a job or we
go out to them because they've
lost their job. And then we try
to recruit them into whatever
job needs their skills and cred
s but especially our high
priority sectors. And so we've
had, we've been able to use that
system to do a few successful
things, for example, with the
displaced um mind and uh power
plant workers up in the San Juan
County, uh, where we have the
energy transition Act displaced
worker Fund, and we um have done
a lot of matchmaking and held a
business roundtable and some
recruitment fairs with the San
Juan Regional Medical Center AMI
Kids, some of the groups up
there, healthcare.
groups to say to folks who
wouldn't maybe necessarily
expect a coal miner to go into
an allied healthcare profession,
but actually they told us over
and over again in those areas.
What I need is a worker who's
gonna come to work every day and
what we tell them is our our
coal miner workforce may not
have the existing skills and
credentials, but they've come to
a lot harder job than this every
day. And so, um, you know, in
those areas where we're doing
our reactive work, we are moving
people towards the healthcare
field, uh, but this
would be unique in the sense
that it gives us the ability and
the mandate to do that proactive
outreach to people who no longer
live in this state.
Thanks for that man Sharon
and then, uh, my last question
is RLD in the process of this?
Have they've been consulted? Do
they, uh, just through the
regulatory and licensing
department that they had any
input in this.
And.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Gallegos, uh, we were, we work
closely with RLD, the hospital
uh hospital association but also
the um medical board and the
nursing board and actually our
first conversations were around
the other bill that that
Secretary de Blasio was talking
about, um, that has to do with
licensing of foreign trained
doctors, but in that context, we
talked to them as well. They
understand the need to expedite
the licensing program, I think
this body has worked with them
for many years, uh, to try to
get that uh Doctor Richards is
very committed to that on the
medical.
board and so uh we have a strong
partnership with them for the
piece that uh Representative
Anaya talked about, which is
making sure that people aren't
getting held up in their
certifications.
Madam Chair and Representative
will tell you still on the edge
on this, uh, listening to
Senator Townsend on why only
this group give me severe
heartburn, but I'll listen to
the debate and see where we go
from there. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
I don't have anyone else on the
list or block. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you,
Representative. Thank you,
Secretary.
Uh, just, just a few questions
in the bill, and if I miss
something at the beginning, I
apologize if you gotta repeat it
for me. So.
Um
It says here on page 2, starting
on, on B, the healthcare
strategic recruitment program.
Is created in the department for
your definition there.
So we just had the secret of
soon to be secretary of the
Department of Health come in
here and, and she said they
already do some formal
recruiting in that department.
Um
So I'm trying to understand if
this is more of an integration.
piece to it, or are we having
some overlap? Are we gonna pull
some things from the Department
of Health or Healthcare
authority or other areas that
are already doing this.
Formally or informally.
Um
And we're looking for like a
single belly button that's going
to be doing this.
Uh, thank you. uh, Madam Chair
and Senator, I'm really glad I
sat in on that conversation
because I was listening to it,
um, but I, yeah, um, but, um,
I'm really glad you raised this
question. Um, I believe when the
secretary was talking about um
recruitment efforts. She was
talking within her own
department. It seemed as if uh
that were the case. And so, uh,
Madam Chair and senator, this is
not recruiting within the
department. It is recruiting for
Active healthcare workers in
institutions, meaning, uh,
private institutions, public
institutions, uh, not just, uh,
doctors and nurses, but also
behavioral health providers,
counselors, the, the entire
spectrum of healthcare workers,
and so, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator, I believe there are two
different, uh,
not types of workforce, but the
target placement is different.
OK.
Appreciate that. So, um, madam,
Madam Chair, and um
Representative Senator, it
It says here in the next
paragraph below and see and and
trying to understand like why we
targeted specifically.
Uh, graduated in the last 10
years from New Mexico
post-secondary educational
institution and a degree of
certifying granting.
Educational program and
healthcare shortage field and
does not currently work in
healthcare.
So are these like retirees or
people that separated from these
particular positions that you're
trying to recruit back.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, it may
actually be a little bit of the
opposite, so we needed to put
some parameters on it, um, this
way, as you see, there's a, a
collection of data collection
also I'm involved in this bill,
but we needed to put some
parameters to say, who are the
most likely folks to come back.
And so, um, we targeted
graduates from our own
institutions who have graduated
within the last 10 years. And so
these are fairly new, um,
perhaps younger, um, healthcare
workers, and we really wanted to
incentivize that type of
recruitment, especially because
we have so many incentive
programs that are really geared
toward these, uh, younger
healthcare workers. So as I said
before, um, the childcare
incentives that we've passed,
the loan forgiveness programs
that we've passed, um, we're
really setting a good stage for
folks to be able to come back.
Um, the second, uh, uh, number 2
on that list does not currently
work in healthcare in the state.
Um, this was actually a
point raised by the hospital
association. Um, we worked with
them on some of this language,
and they said, how can we be
sure we're not recruiting away
from people who are in, like,
let's say, uh,
Presbyterian, and they're being
recruited to Gila.
And so we wanted to be sure that
we were excluding people, so
we're not essentially poaching
from one institution to another.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representatives. So
is there
Is there some type of like
database of
You know, because I guess what
I'm saying is, it'd be
interesting to look at some of
the bordering states of those
people that are
have left the healthcare
industry for whatever reason
that are still young enough to
come back and we zip them
through to get a license and
bring them here for in
incentivize them somehow. Are
are you guys not looking at our,
our border states at all?
Um, Madam chair and senator, um,
this is, um, geared toward, um,
all of our uh recent graduates
who are out of state. And so
that is uh why we excluded in
state.
So that would include border.
Like maybe I misunderstood that,
uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Black, I think the border states
would be the ideal target of
this program. Uh, I was in the
Hobbs visiting their state of
the art nursing facility, really
amazing at New Mexico Junior
College and talking to the head
of that about how many people
end up working right across the
line in Texas. Those are exactly
the demographic that is is
targeted by this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. And there's a
reason why there's so many
healthcare people working in
Texas.
It's just the laws are better in
Texas than they are here.
Um, on page 3, it says, just the
last two things here. Page 3
says on uh D, the program shall
assist recruitment efforts of
New Mexico communities.
Healthcare facilities, health
care practices for healthcare
shortage fields. Can I assume
that means where this particular
office is
is reaching out uh across the
state saying, OK, um, rust, what
do you need?
Um, some clinic in
Coro, what do you need? Is, is
that, is that uh the intent of
that? That's correct. Thank you.
Uh, lastly, Madam Chair, and,
and um representative secretary
on
Echo E.
It says the departmentall report
annually, and it has all these
Things which I think is good
information, by the way.
Um, analysis of the collected
data, number of grads.
number of successful applicants.
number of hires
Uh, reason an applicant may or
may not want to apply for the
program, that's kind of nice to
know, number of days from
recruitment to job placement,
that's critical.
Um
Obstacles
But what I don't, I don't see
goals. I don't see like, hey,
we're cause I just saw something
like we're short, 3000 something
nurses.
You know, I don't see a goal as,
hey, one year from the time we
implement this, we want to be
2500 nurses down.
So we know we know that we're
doing well. We want to see these
numbers drop because I think you
have to have a baseline.
Of the shortage on PAs, docs.
Nurses, nurse practitioners.
Um, maybe even specialists or
radiologists and neurologists,
because I can tell you in
urology.
There's only about 15
urologists.
In the Albuquerque metro area.
That's bad. Durango, 39,000.
Um, people there, they have 8
urologists.
So I, I would really like to see
some, some type of something in
here, and if it gets fixed, I'll
support it on the floor, but I,
I'd like to see this broken on
to goals. Hey, this is where
we're short. Here's our baseline
for
March 2025, here's where we want
to be in March 2026 because
you're not gonna obviously fill
the gap in one year. You're just
not gonna do it, but it lets the
legislature know and the public
know.
Uh, how are you doing? You
should be taking credit for some
of those successes, and, and I
don't think you're doing that in
here, and I think it needs to be
um amended and I'd be more than
happy to help you with that or
support that when he gets on the
floor, but if there's no goals,
what, why, what are we doing?
So, go ahead.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Senator, um, I will say one
thing and then I'll pass to my
expert as well. We do have
baseline data, um, the UNM has a
uh healthcare workforce report
that we can initially start
working from, but I will, um,
uh, pass to my expert.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Black,
uh, everything we do in our
department is, is very
goal-oriented. We have an
economic research and analysis
bureau that provides all the
data for the annual healthcare
workforce, um, report. And so,
I, I think the reason that the
goals may not be in this bill
right now is that some of the
landscape that is required by
this bill is going to be
necessary to understand exactly
that baseline that you're
talking about, um, but certainly
as the program uh progresses,
part of that annual report would
be the result.
um, an example of when we do
this already is in the
infrastructure um workforce
initiative that was mandated by
the governor's executive order,
um, we just put out the first,
it's just a stub your report,
but there we had a goal to um
increase the number of
infrastructure and uh climate
ready workers by 2000 and, and
that report is very transparent
about which programs I've done
what and how many people and
what exactly what industries
they're in, so, um, that is uh
definitely gonna be our approach
to this.
Yeah, uh, uh, secretary, Madam
Secretary, I, I, I'm, I'm a
numbers guy in, in my line of
work, it's, you gotta be
documenting everything. You got
to show your baseline, you gotta
show your milestones, and you
gotta, you gotta hit those so we
know that we're trending in the
right way. I, I, I don't see it
here. I, I, I hope maybe we can
chat after you can go back and
get this amended before it goes
on the floor, but um,
I, I just don't want to throw
money at it and have no metrics.
And that's what I see, so thank
you so much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I don't have anyone
else on the list. Um, uh,
I just want to say, uh,
So I had a constituent earlier
this session in the session.
Call me up and she is a, was a,
is a psychologist who had been
practicing in California, was
from New Mexico, have been
practicing there, has had moved
back here.
Had been offered a job at UNM.
And could not get her licensing
done because they wanted
Signed statements from her, the
people who had supervised her.
30 years before.
Who, who had had one of them had
had passed away. One of them now
had dementia. She didn't feel
comfortable asking them to sign
something that they didn't
understand what they were
signing.
She'd been practicing for 30
years. She is exactly the kind
of provider we want to come
here, uh, and, and I made a call
to RLD that cleared it up, but
without that.
This great provider who wanted
to serve our state, uh, was
going to wait indefinitely to be
able to do so because of
uh, a silly hiccup that, and
that's exactly the kind of stuff
that I see this bill as as
helping to clear those hiccups
and, and get folks, get the kind
of people we want working here
to work. So thank you for
bringing this.
Uh, so,
Madam Chair, move it to pass.
We're on motion for do pass, uh,
let's do a rojavo.
Senator Bergman's
Senator Block.
No.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami.
Senator Doig.
Yes, and with 6 in favor, you
have a dopants.
The committee, um, we have
already rolled SB 841, uh, I'd
like us to
Be, be a little late to floor
and see if we can get this done.
Representative, uh, Senator
Stewart would has to leave.
So, would you rather be rolled?
OK.
