We're just waiting for our
sponsor tend to get yours here
will get your.
Good intentions are not.
All.
All.
That.
Yes.
The whole.
That
The staff.
Well.
Yeah and.
Yes.
So.
That started just.
Supporters and opponents as we.
The
board center slices reasons so
you start with confirmation over
to.
Thank you madam chair just so
you can.
Maybe be reminded if you haven't
gone out to our rules.
Page we've come up with some
rules to help well a little bit
easier and the reminder Senator
CENIC's twenty minutes will be
drafted for both Senator the
sponsor to introduce conferee.
Include those.
The presentation from the
country have that public comment
in support as organized by the
conferee if there is no
organized support by the company
will lead to ten minutes for
those who oppose and ten minutes
for those who support not
organize remember those of you
watching methadone and those of
you in here you'll be given one
moment and so that way we can
make sure that the process flow
smoothly we get to hear from
everyone this morning before we
head out to the floor thank you
so much for joining us this
morning thank you senator to
hate for having over the gavel
we're gonna start this morning
with the appointment of Mr Wade
posed for the department of
finance administration Senator
no sufficient funds are it is
absent Senators Matix we'll be
introducing you good morning and
thank you for joining us.
Good morning Mr chair madam
chair and members of the
committee it's my pleasure to
introduce Mister Wayne Propst I
always approached but he
creating you know I'm trying to
get the correct credit
pronunciation I had the pleasure
of meeting Mr props in when I
was the director of risk
management at the General
Services Department he worked
for the legislative finance
committee at that time and he
was assigned to my department as
the analyst and his job was to
come in and look at every number
and be very critical of the job
that we were doing because we
were managing millions and
millions of dollars for the
state of New Mexico for the
employees under health current
health care all the state
agencies etcetera he is held
several very important jobs in
the state of New Mexico I think
he is extremely well prepared
for this position he is gone
through the legislative side
he's gone to the executive side
and at this time I think he will
do a good job in his position
because we all will be
contacting him with our issues
yes this is specially in local
government division and programs
in the state agencies it's an
important job that he is being
nominated for so at that time at
this time also to stop for him
to introduce himself thank you
senator.
Good morning Mr chairman it's
nice to see you a good morning
members of the committee my name
is Wayne Propst I am the cabinet
secretary designate for the
department of finance and
administration.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it's an honor of a
lifetime.
For you today thank you for your
time I'm grateful for it.
Mr chairman I I want to thank a
few people who have helped me to
get here today and.
Without whom I wouldn't be here
today start off by thanking the
governor for the honor of
pointing me to this position.
He was eighteen years ago this
April that then secretary of
health Lujan Grisham.
Gave me my first opportunity in
state government as the director
of policy and planning for the
department of health.
Mr chairman I know that DFA is a
big deal it's an important HSD I
would argue and maybe the most
important agency in state
government and I am truly
humbled and honored by the
governor's trust in me in a
pointing me to this position and
I I do want to express my
gratitude for that for that
faced
in may.
Thank you to Senator Stefanics
for for stepping and we have
known each other for a long time
I have tremendous respect for
her and will the work that she
has done since she moved on from
risk management and as as.
Joined this body as a senator I
do want to acknowledge the
senator Munoz and thank him for
his willingness to service my
sponsor part of believe it was
ten years ago two thousand
thirteen session that I worked
with senator Munoz for the first
time on a bill Senate bill
twenty seven pension reform.
As you all know there are few
issues that you'll face over the
course of their careers in the
Senate that are more.
Difficult than pension reform of
pension reform could be a career
ender senator senator Munoz was
a young Senator at that time but
I was impressed by the courage
she showed in stepping up and
supporting and they won't
sponsor Senate bill twenty
seven.
he has become a friend and I
appreciate greatly is friendship
and is an honor to have him as
my Senate sponsor.
I'd be remiss Mr chairman
members the committee if I
didn't acknowledge the education
I received at eastern New Mexico
university and university of New
Mexico.
hi could not have received
better education anywhere else
in the country.
I would also be remiss Mr
chairman I didn't recognize the
colleagues I've had over the
years at Department health
legislative finance committee
retiree health care of forty the
public employees retirement
association and the public
regulation commission.
I often joke but it's not really
a joke Mr chairman of that the
college that I work with have
done all the work and I've
gotten all of the credit but I
work with incredibly talented
people throughout my career but
again have I would not be here
without their support the
friendship of state government
works.
Does.
A positive about state
government because of the
experiences I've had on my
career and the colleagues that
I've worked with.
Mr Chairman
The beautiful.
Small farms on the banks of the
North Fork of the senator revert
my mother and father in law Dr
James Dr John and Elizabeth
cultural are are tuned in I
think watching today.
That was four years ago that I
sat in this room with
extraordinary pride.
As a beautiful daughter appeared
before this committee for her
confirmation.
Another price today is only
slightly less than it was four
years.
One of thank them for their love
and support.
The small town in.
Northeastern.
The end of this gentleman.
My soon to be eighty eight year
old mother.
I think is also tuning in this
morning.
Mr Chairman I think was in the
late eighties or early nineties
there is a very popular book.
With the title something along
the lines of everything I needed
to learn in life I learned in
kindergarten.
I never read the book because I
don't think you need to get much
past that title to understand
what the message it was trying
to send.
Mr Chairman everything I've
learned in life.
Needed to learn in life I
learned from my mother.
Single parent family.
A small town called how would be
on a.
It's only claim to fame is its
was home at one point to last
all male military school in the
country a school that I was
threatened to be sent to on more
than one occasion.
The only industry enough part of
Indiana are farming.
I walked the cornfields in the
summer.
I pumped gas at the local gas
station.
Which is still the best job I've
ever had.
What a school course to small
public schools.
Receive an excellent education
in those public schools.
For my mother I learned the
value of education.
Value of an honest day's work
for an honest day's pay.
Your faith.
And perhaps most important.
But in god's eyes for all the.
But I know better than anybody
else.
I
thank her for her love of course
her courage meant for support.
Show the courage and
perseverance.
And.
All the lessons are learned from
my mom I hope I will bring to
this job.
Bye Mr chairman.
I was your four years ago as
well and Sir was before this
committee.
Remember she her bonding with
Senator Lopez.
Over their shared experiences
young women.
Learning parliamentary
procedure.
How that affected both of their
lives and let them in part at
least to a life of public
service.
I've watched her grow under
current rules more closely than
normal perhaps because of the
pandemic.
She working at our.
Dining room table.
Me working in the backyard.
The office the front porch.
Mr chairman mark if I'm half as
good a secretary she has been
for the state of New Mexico I
think I will have done.
Just I.
I
thank her for her love.
Support.
She knows.
To my sunshine.
My only passionate.
Mr Chairman if confirmed for
this position.
I promise that I will to the
best of my ability.
Work to ensure that the
department of finance
administration as a self safe
healthy respectful place for the
employees who work there they
deserve nothing less.
I committed I will be fair open
and honest with you regardless
of party.
But I will try to remember to
the best of my abilities to do
something that former
Representative lucky for all
advised me many many years ago
when I took over retiree health
care of forty.
To make DF a model agency in the
state.
That is my commitment Mr
chairman to do to the Senate for
the honor of being considered
for this position I'm happy to
answer questions or discuss any
issues that you have thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr props
for that part felt introduction
thank you so much for that I'm
not gonna go to members of the
audience who are in attendance
with us this morning is there
anybody here in support of the
coppery and I've seen in the
hands of three so if you can
line up.
Come to the front table I'm
gonna ask you to introduce
yourself before you give your
comments for the record.
Thank you Sir.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity going to be half of
a time with the education
department for but I'm here my
personal capacity getting ready
for the bill I thought it would
briefly just mentioned to build
off of senators to panic story.
With us two thousand and eight
and replacing it with the
legislative finance committee
and since that time I've had the
good fortune an opportunity to
learn a great deal from him
about his leadership ability his
capacity for the being able to
manage a crisis situations which
I think will serve him well in
this new position and I look
forward to all the right things
that he will get done with the
with the legislature thank you
for the next four years thank
you for those comments if you
can give us your first and last
name for the record please thank
you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Charlie Marcus I'm a registered
lobbyist for number of entities
I've had the privilege of
working with Mr props.
and I learned unlawful offer.
He was consistently friendly way
that dealt with them.
He was professional above all.
Even the person he did not let
things get to own personally
dealt with the subjectively.
and he was steadfast in
accomplishing what he set out to
accomplish.
I've never met anybody that is
sold well organized.
Of the works as hard as he does
he's up early in the morning.
And works till late hours of the
night.
And if government was filled
with these kinds of people would
get a lot more done.
So I I fully support.
His
appointment.
And I urge you to please support
him and that thank you very much
thank you for your comments.
Madam chair and Deborah Condit
registered lobbyists for several
compliance here and then coming
up here for a number of the
person half and haven't seen
Wayne roam the halls and in
committee rooms that you know
weighing in and secretary props
are both dear friends of mine
and I have I can't think of
anybody better to run DFA then
when process and I'm sure it's
probably really uncomfortable
with all of these glowing
remarks is getting right now but
we're we're so lucky to have him
here in New Mexico and I hope
you all consider him and vote
for is confirmation
you know he's just one of those
guys in the world was falling
apart you'd be steady Eddie
you'd be like okay let's how do
we get out of this you know and
he doesn't get frayed over
issues that come up so I'm so
glad to see him is in this
position and to call him friend
and I hope you all support in
this country thank you thank you
for your comments now I'm gonna
go to those are there any other
room in opposition of the
company.
Saying that I'm gonna turn
towards zoom do we have anyone
on zoom who is in favor or in
support of the country who would
like to speak Senator now has
identified themselves speaking
on behalf of this country very
good so I'm gonna take that as
both leaders support or
opposition and so with that I'm
gonna go with questions and
comments of the committee and I
want to start with Senator
Moores Mr wants to what senator
Wirth.
Our offices are.
Sponsorship or actually I'm not.
But I.
It is.
Part of the thank you senator
senator Morris I was.
Los.
This is your.
This is just way thank you so
much do you have for someone who
was ten years ago which is or we
offer to the.
The reforms on plans.
For our that is here
but the the governor for his
user phone numbers loss solar on
issues of the report
more so are before.
For you it is
Please with this.
The others are here in the
household.
I.
So.
Of course.
This is for sectors of.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator McKenna.
Thank you vice chairman Hotmail
and good morning fellow members
and good morning to you Mr props
What a resume you have so
impressive
something that really jumped out
on me because I think some
any of us who can live abroad
it's incredible Education and
I'm curious could you share with
us.
What you learned at the when you
were at the Republic of Mexico
bond is it.
and is there anything any
perspectives from that
experience those two years that
you still remember to this day
and perhaps using in your own
life thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for the question I was
remiss in my opening remarks to
acknowledge the profound impact
that my time in Africa had on my
life and it was found that lasts
until today will last until the
last month our life.
Yes
there's there's one one story I
will tell try to make a brief
but you're referring to my time
as a Peace Corps volunteers
Republican gov on.
There's a day I'll never forget
when your Peace Corps volunteer
and that's today that they drop
you off at your village and
drive away.
You've been with a group of all
the volunteers for a couple of
months you've gone through
language training together
you've gone through training for
whatever program you're in
together but there comes that
moment when I drive you up to
your village in a pickup truck
in a lot of the things from the
back of a pickup truck and as I
said drive way and you look
around here in a small village
in Africa you don't have running
water you don't have
electricity.
Everybody is looking at you the
kids are coming and running from
June rummaging through
everything that you have.
and you ask yourself what did I
get myself into.
But you know that you just have
to continue on and that is a day
that has prepared me for every
challenge I've had since then
for the first day that I walked
into the retiree health care
authorities for the first day I
walked in the public employees
retirement association on the
first day I walked in the public
regulation commission on the
first day I walked in to DFA.
Taught me to take a deep breath.
to look around.
To realize of less your for the
experience that you're gonna
have and I'll close Mr chairman
and senator by saying with
regard to my peace corps service
I think virtually all of these
were volunteers will say this
you join the Peace Corps because
you think you have something to
give you leave the Peace Corps
realizing you receive much more
thank you again so that is one
of my experiences from my time
in office.
And thank you vice chairman
thank you Mr props that was
wonderful thank you senator
Senator Ortiz the payment.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chairman in that
way it's great to see you here
and and join the others in New
thank you for being willing to
step up and tackle this the
responsibility which I agree
with you is probably the most
pivotal our job in state
government making sure that the
money's good get out when
they're supposed to and don't
get out and they're not supposed
to and I wanted to to to also
comment on this kind it's a
comment about your.
Your calmness and I think it the
it'll be tried but it's been
tried for another seven and
it'll stand you in good stead
sure.
The one thing I wanted to bring
up Mr chairman is the.
The the the work that your staff
is been doing during the
interview with a group of us
that have been working on how to
repeal and replace the anti
donation clause.
it's it's a troublesome aspect
of state government in these
times today because times have
changed radically since the days
of the of the constitution being
written and and that clause
being included in it and many
states have had to struggle with
that and I just want to thank
your staff for for their
willingness to to help us
because it it's it's it's all
too easy for somebody to say oh
that's against yet to go nation
because we just can't do that
you can't send government money
to president but to find ways to
make it work better because
local governments are are are
feeling the brunt of this right
now we allocate money to local
governments to then pass through
to nonprofits but there's no way
local government gets.
The percentages for
administrative costs or any
reimbursement at all for the
work they've put in they're
expected to the phone maintain
whatever buildings are
constructed there's a lot of
awkward things about the
nonprofit the anti donation
clause and and I just I I've
just been impressed with the
fact the staff local government
division and and from other
administrators in your office
and
have have with local governments
and some of the non profits and
finding a way to to to to fix
this to make it much more
workable and so we
We've got to constitutional
amendments gonna be proposed
issue another one hopefully
it'll clean up some of the
language but also make it easier
to function and I wondered if
you if you have any comments
about that if you if you've been
brought up to date on of those
efforts as they made by your
staff.
Mr chairman of the committee and
and Senator Ortiz Y. Pino it's
nice to see you thank you for
those kind of comments a lot
coming from you I am aware of
the work the staff has been
doing I can't say I'm in anyway
and expert on on all the what
they have been discussing with
you for the anti donation clause
I would agree with you on a high
level though Senator that.
At one point in time it may have
made sense but things that
radically changed as you
indicated and I think it is it
is now something that is not
protecting against bad things
but perhaps preventing good
things from happening so I would
certainly encourage staff to
continue those conversations
with you and the Senate and
house and and hope that we can
find a a past better Path
forward so that would that's
sort of where I Mr thank you
thank you Mr chairman that the
that's when we come thank you
senator before I go on to any
other comments of the committee
I want to ask the Senate sponsor
center would be so if you'd like
state few words on behalf I can
say three words really quickly
right trust in takers integrity
and honesty and that's what
you're gonna get with the
secretary thank you I am going
to raise by all this morning and
I did a Google search and I know
you got married in two thousand
ten in Wayne's pretty quiet guy
in in it's interesting how we
build relationships in
government right because in
politics to build very few
friends right.
And as a freshman legislator you
walk in the building and also in
your city and pension
investments in these cases we
got to fix this billion dollar
problem and you're like really
I'm never gonna get reelected
again so.
And but I trusted him right.
Any never led me astray he was
honest with everybody in
everything he did and he's
always looking out for the state
of integrity right and you can
very state that very few very
few people in your life and I
think that's important it's
important we have friends like
this point is that we have
people in government like this
and it's important to us to the
legislature and so thank you
George.
Right.
I'm sorry can be math.
Thank you senator I'm not gonna
head over to center part of.
Mr chair and little to Senator
Ortiz **** point on the
anti donation if only there was
a Republican senator that try to
fix that three or four times
last session you know maybe we
could yeah I know I was trying
to hijack your bill but the
point well taken across both
party lines that there is some
work that needs to be done there
but I just want to congratulate
the governor on
Putting forward the secretary
that I think across party lines
we all trust as senator Munoz
said and just wanna give you
major Propst on your still a
resume I can't be the only one
that has meant mispronounce your
name in my head for the last ten
years so you know I learned
something today but I just want
to thank the governor and thank
you for for willingness to do
this is a super important job
the money is is key to almost
everything we do in New Mexico
so I think we all have a lot of
trust and faith that we're gonna
get it right or at least be as
fair as possible so thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator before I
handed back over to our chairman
I'd like to say a few words I
have the honor of meeting Mr
Propst yesterday and we spoke
for a few minutes which quickly
turned into how our backgrounds
are very similar humble
beginnings to learn how to work
hard from families that may not
have had much but gave us so
much love and support that made
us the man we are today and so
if you're a leader who leads
with our and I appreciate that
so much and so the one thing
that you said during your
presentation was something I
love to hear the chief of staff
what I am helping with
performance evaluations and
managers give credit to those
they work with those are
definitely people you want in
your corner and I think the
three words that senator again
of trust honesty integrity
definitely do something up and
that's just a few minutes I
mentioned I want to just give it
one last comment is you'll have
my support but it's nice to have
Deborah Condit with us who's my
college cheer teammates so we
both shared.
The data you have to to partner.
So I have to make sure I've been
to the for profit so under two
million and I'm happy about this
appointment and I'm not gonna
hand it over to Senator.
Mr Chairman since you are both
on the cheer team we actually
made up some shirts so so.
The other truly.
Can take you thank you Mr.
We'll have you where those on
the floor today do is his final
confirmation you never know I
might.
This is the error.
The for that emissions.
When you not only each other to
all both looks like about I
always.
Your ability to get along with
people feel all right.
You're in the job it is shrewdly
needed skill and knowledge of
New Mexico government and
knowledge of people and go DFA
is the final frontier facial.
Your your health questions the
former chairman sometimes you
can't do as much as you can
because.
We have too many people on board
or both from more more.
I think we have to order
understand about the retirement
of the state of New Mexico the
regression.
Constitution
to pay that with one and all.
That's why you always have to be
careful what you do discuss our
retirement short best in the
country if you really are.
Okay last year the.
Anyway it is it's something that
I think you've done a tremendous
job with very will follow when
will I be off.
Certainly that much support and
I'm glad I found Jim Trujillo
shopping hauls if you put him on
the end users no we're not
making the pandemic.
Your body weight in the chair
fine it's not.
Thank you so much and I would I
would point out that your
graduation.
With
I
remember.
Getting.
City and.
Word.
James all over everything and I
the same last with them all.
Never done anything wrong in
your life.
The Georgian structure thank you
so much for this job and thank
your lovely wife issues.
She's going to have to
sometimes.
What happened all that.
The pictures thank you thank you
senator any other comments
before I defer to our chairman.
Right.
It.
You know
Figure out scheduling
confirmations said really want
the perception that I really
want to be self someone to
everyone really supports and
there's not controversy around
and I think you can see from all
the committee today you are most
definitely that.
So I thank you so much for your
service I hope that working in
DFA can someday live up to the
the local gas station that was.
I.
Thank you for your service and
sure the point has two games at
the next morning.
Committee chair thank you
chairman Senator back Mr chair
you made for us I'm ready for
approval of this
so we have a motion for the past
of the second and second by
Senator Stewart if I can have a
roll call this.
Yes Mr chairman the.
Senator Baca yes Senator right
yes and yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is excuse Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
and to our.
Is excuse.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator okay to see Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator how to meal yes Senator
had a meal yes incentive to do
it yes Senator Duhigg yes you
have nine yes and to excuse.
Very good with the vote to nine
who want to see you move forward
we're excited to see you on the
Senate floor if we can get
everything written up by this
morning before we leave the
floor we will then introduce you
in the Senate chamber so
congratulations it's an honor to
know you Sir and I know that
your eighty eight year old
mother listing in Indiana Act is
keeping with pride can read.
Mr.
make sure there's no the
districts and junior money more.
Actually Senator Senator Ninos
do you want a real quickly do
the bills.
Really quick I think it's
Senator Wirth Senator.
We're gonna make a slight
modification to the agenda as
senator Munoz is here that will
start this week hearing about
Senate bill one ninety two
additional appropriations and
I'm gonna have that over to
chairwoman state over the
question is.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
and members Senate bill one
ninety two is the junior bill
there is disclosure language in
section eighteen and that's why
we're in Senate rules today and
and discloses whose
appropriating the money and
where it's going it's the same
thing that we're doing with
capital outlay and so that
people contract consumer money
spent in that's the short of it.
Estimate all spending and will
get built as we move along.
Yeah stand for questions
mention.
any support for this we can
organise any.
We're not gonna help session.
Stagers.
Senator ability majors I'm the
executive director New Mexico
foundation for open government
we believe that any effort at
transparency is a good effort
and we support the senator's
bill transparency round
government spending increases
public trust and make some more
responsive and accountable it
makes it more responsive and
accountable to the public making
New Mexico's
Budget process transparent in
this process from transparent
will help improve historically
low trusting government at the
foundation we do support this
and I know that senator McNeill
said some of his colleagues have
been working very hard on this
and if you have any questions
for us because.
Anyone else in the room.
Everyone knows.
Hi anyone in opposition.
One.
All right well I do that.
All right.
Looking for do you have to get
to work seconded by Senator
Hermio any questions from
committee.
So besides thank you so it's the
disclosure what else does are we
doing with this bill we don't
need to have the money for the
disclosure.
Senator one me move this bill
long and we we got an agreement
is here today then we'll load
the bill with the junior money
and where they're appropriate
and then it will then it'll last
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino gave his
money.
But this is a thousand dollars
appropriation.
Six million.
Two thousand and Mr chairman in
and senator everybody.
As a different.
Correct.
And it was.
Six point four.
And it's looking like it's gonna
be pretty close to the state
maybe a little bit more and so
we had this in the special
session when we came back to the
special session the governor the
exact requested that we have
transparency on the bill and so
as we move the junior bill long
and we have that agreement and
Committee this language in the
bill thank you madam chair thank
you senator so when we look at
the budgeting is is this is the
are the numbers derived I know
this is get in the weeds a
little bit for here but madam
chair are the numbers to to rate
as a percentage of the overall
budget.
madam chair and senator no
they're not we we the numbers
that you're seeing here just
place holders okay and as we
drafting appropriation bill we
Ali and have to have language in
dollar amounts and then as we
move along so they get the right
referrals this bill was sent to
to rules because thing which we
do not judge junior on a
percentage of the entire budget
because we it's hard to figure
out where it's going to be plus
capital right and so we're we're
doing everything in cash this
year since we're so rich and so
it's hard to turn determine what
percentage in your should be or
what percentage capital should
be over a year and even with
years of the bond we're always
looking at the bonding company
say what is our rating gonna be
how's it looking so we're not
getting hit with the bond.
Decrease bond rating decreases
with four in percentages are
hard to do in the.
Nine million dollar budget thank
you thank you madam chair and I
just the reason that it struck
me as soon as you had a
mentioned earlier that it would
be just a little bit more than
last year budget is
significantly higher than it has
been so I would expect it to be
significantly higher than what
it was last year that's all just
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator of you know I I always
had concern with.
This and it has a lot to do with
being against government being
opened with my my concern is
what what will eventually happen
is a lot of members may
appropriate based upon how it's
gonna look as opposed to you
know what bona fide needs are
I've never appropriate money to
go home and take claim that a
look what I did because this is
always been taxpayer money so I
do have some concern with that
hopefully it's up to each
individual legislator not to try
to use this money as reelection
money to Hey look at me I pay
for the fireworks show in my
district and it's flashy and fun
hopefully will still continue to
use this as a direct funding for
for much needed services which
is what's been used for in the
past so I I hope it's gonna be
up to each legislator to
continue to do that and not try
to use this to to gain attention
and popularity for the
reelection thank you.
Other questions.
I and I'll just say for for the
the public benefit who might be
not be looking at the separate
provision of what it does for
all the junior.
Legislators do it will create us
a searchable list on the
legislative website where those
can be looked at
will be published after the
governor has either sign the
bill or the deadline has passed
for side.
we have a motion pending.
So you would call the roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator but yes
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Lopez is excuse
Senator McKenna yes Senator
mechanic yes Senator Moores is
excuse.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for yes Senator Pirtle
yes Senator Stefano yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes yes I'm
here yes incentive to do it yes
some to do it yes we have nine
yes and to excuse you have to
pass thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
I apologize for being late it's
worth help me up.
We're gonna switch back now to
confirmations with that I will
hand it the vice chair of the
commission thank you madam
chairwoman Senator Wirth thank
you for joining us this morning
and just missed Center it easily
if you can please join the
center of the table.
We have been appointed to the
environmental improvement board
and we'll start off point
comments from senator Wirth.
Good morning madam chair and.
Mr vice chair it's good to see
you all and I am delighted here
this morning to presents
just Sandra Ely for confirmation
to the environmental improvement
for the environment improvement
for isn't critical regulatory
agency that's responsible for
implementing rules and
regulations a whole string of of
the oversight over the loss that
the environment department deals
with which are very complex and
so this four of seven members
is responsible for implementing
those rules and regulations and
this morning I think you will
see from this Elise resume that
you could not get a person who
is more qualified to serve on
this board given her extensive
background with the environment
departments with Santa Fe County
and really working for a a a
career in state government and
exactly the type the areas in
arenas that she will be
appointed to
I I did see I got a hold this
against a little bit that you
graduate from the university of
California Berkeley so it's the
Stanford guy and may have caused
a little bit of heartburn but
that's okay.
But really again starting xi.
A master's at the university of
Oregon environmental studies and
then I think you'll see a just a
variety of.
Kind of supervisory positions at
the environment department which
ended in may of twenty twenty
two when she was overseeing the
environmental health occupation
health and safety air quality
radiation control bureaus
responsible for staff of two
hundred and ninety folks and a
budget of thirty million dollars
I've worked with her for many
years since I've been in the
legislature on a variety of
bills including we worked
extensively on the stringency
bill involving air quality
control giving air quality
control regulations to the
Department they could be more
stringent than federal law so
again I think this is someone
who is an excellence nomination
and I very much appreciate her
willingness to do this
kind of at the back end of a
career and with that ideal to
Miss Universe and comments.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee is really a
privilege to be with you this
morning as noted by leader were
if I have been working in the
field of environmental
protection in New Mexico for
over twenty five years and it
has been an honor to do that
work to feel like I'm making a
difference for the state
imported citizens.
This ethic of environmental
protection also comes from my
parents it's interesting when
people get up here we go back to
our history and how we got here
and where are our values come
from friend Rosie Lee taught me
to appreciate a clean and
healthy environment and the
importance of public service.
Now that I am retired from state
and local government I am
grateful for the opportunity
should you find it to not.
We move away from environmental
protection Ingle cold Turkey in
retirement that have the
opportunity to continue to serve
the public and help the
environment in New Mexico this
is an important regulatory
position as noted by leader were
J. deal with ocean matters
radiation protection solid waste
liquid waste air quality and I
feel my experience puts me in a
unique position to address those
matters as a member of the board
as well as my experience in the
regulatory arena.
understanding how rules are made
and knowing the businesses in
the state that are subject to
these rules anyways if you look
favorably upon me during this
nomination process great we look
forward to working further with
the board and thank you and I
now stand for questions thank
you so much before we go to
questions I want to ask if
there's anybody in the rules is
in support of the conferees
would like to speak.
And I say to the ticket please
come up to the desk and will be
reminded to state your first and
last name for the record thank
you.
Thank you good morning chairman
members of the committee my name
is Douglas medical check on
amber registered lobbyist for
conservation voters New Mexico
conservation voters urges you to
support this appointment I
personally have dealt with this
committee for many years who in
to assist the state environment
department and I've always found
her to be very thorough very
knowledgeable
and very fair in terms of
dealing with the issues that I
brought to our she specifically
has a great deal of expertise in
issues that come before the
environmental improvement board
as senator Wirth pointed out her
experience and knowledge
include air quality issues and
this
solid waste issues and
the occupational health and
safety as well as climate change
she will do a terrific job at
the environmental improvement
board we urge you to support
this nomination thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
Thank you senator.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's
Phoebe swing up and I have the
honor to serve as the New Mexico
environmental improvement board
chair and so member easily or
hopefully will be member easily
if confirmed already has
participated in some of the
meetings that we've had and one
thing I wanted to share with the
committee today is I've I've
learned to so much serving in
and on the board there's so many
issues is a variety of
regulatory issues interaction
with the public interaction with
the New Mexico environment
department of that I've learned
through this process so one I
want to thank the committee for
also supporting when I came here
seeking the nomination and
seeking to serve on the board
but with that one thing that I
wanted to share is it's a lot of
homework there's a lot of issues
that come before the board and
one thing that I've been honored
and blessed to serve on the
board is our members do the
homework and so Mr easily fits
right in because she's was well
read on all the issues on some
of the initial meeting she
participated in and also having
worked with her for that from as
a board chair on some issues
that came from enemy do I knew
that she presented herself well
it was well you know did her
homework answered all our
questions so she does bring that
wealth of experience in that
attention to detail to the board
which again we have so many
issues that come to the board
and the devil's in the details
so I do support this nomination
and I appreciate the time that
vice chair in the committee has
a lot of me too share my.
Thoughts on this nomination
thank you so much thank you so
much.
Is there anybody in the room and
opposition of the country.
Thing that we do have secretary
James can capture that secretary
James Kenney yes so who's
willing to make some comments
and support cabinet secretaries
can.
Yes good morning on chairman and
members of the committee can you
hear me OK.
This.
We can hear you.
Excellent thank you again thank
you to the committee and for
allowing me to make some
comments on behalf of Center
easily
Thank you Senator workers
supporting her nomination as
well as you know from twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty two
Senator Wirth Eugene Sanders
served as the environment all
protection division director
here in our department serving
over many of our gross in taxes
are departure we now have two
division directors that are
handling a portfolio of the
chief previously have
including air air quality
climate radiation OSHA new
program septic system programs
attention up and the curve ball
that hit when Center and I are
working together twenty twenty
was of course the pandemic where
we had no way I and you have no
Our own sort of leadership and
intuition to figure things out
as we went.
And
I have to say that Xander was
instrumental in helping she are
COVID response that in the
proudly stand behind in in the
way we caps hundreds of
thousands of businesses open
if there are options program so
Senators instrumental in that
and I think that speaks to her
leadership skills and to be in
an unstructured environment Act
handling a lot of information at
once and served reducing it to a
point where we can make some
decisions are got a server on
the idea as well
one thing that wasn't mentioned
in Senator street she's Center
items okay that I mentioned you
orders.
Prior to your public service and
I think that again is a lot of
credibility to her background
And and shows that she's always
been in some degree of public
service
but one thing that I'll mention
in addition that I think will
really help the idea is that
winner in center time in the
environment department shoes
very insistent that we always
heard from communities so we
went from farms into Carlsbad on
the ozone role
and we heard from community
members and that was the
question again these are
replacement of was on board now
is get out don't be in Santa Fe
listen to communities and I
think for somebody serving on
the idea it's exceptionally
important to take all the data
in from across the state an
integrated good decisions for
the state so with that I do that
recommends sanity and
The only reason I went is that
if I thought I could get it back
at the apartment part.
Alright so fully supports
Sanders appointed to the thank
you chairman and members of the
committee thank you for your
comments cabinet secretary been
informed buyers of operator that
there's no one else online in
support do you have anybody
online in opposition of the
country.
Thing that we're gonna have to
questions or comments from the
committee starting with senator
Morris followed by Senator
Stefanics thank you Mr chair
thank you senator thank you
Senator for your years of
service and continuing want to
serve couple two lines a
question I think.
That I have is a notice Mr chair
madam chair staff do we know who
she is are centered you know who
are you replacing on the board
we usually get like a list of
it's been appointed who was
replaced on madam chair members
of the committee there too board
members recently stepped down
board member Kate's and the
gentleman from Sapporo correct
And then that we're doing that
member do all yes thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator thank
you center so I noticed on your
resume we're going on this is
that you have currently
extensive public service
experience outside of when you
were nurse.
Do you have any private
experience or job creation or
but small business experience
that isn't on your resume well
my members of the committee
chairman all my experiences
listed on the committee on my
resume I do not have any other
experience other than working in
well Senator services on
reservations I mean I grated
prunes in California.
I worked with salmon up in
Alaska.
Worked at Danny's at mid night
trying to get from.
That prior to nursing nothing
really much to speak of.
I can go through my college jobs
also
so sicher experiences always
been more as a regulator roughly
tell me how you plan to make
sure you're putting New Mexico
businesses and small businesses
and make sure your ballots to
that because it is a much
different mindset chairman
members of the committee the
environment improvement act and
their quality control act
mandates that that environmental
improvement board consider the
economic impacts of the
regulations before so that's not
just a feeling the board should
do it it's a requirement that
the board has to consider that
the other piece of it is my
experience in the environment
department has made me.
Pretty familiar with the number
of the industry that we regulate
I've been out in the oil and gas
field a lot I know what a new
automatic looks like so I know
what to do high looks like I
mean it's the one of the
facilities that are the types of
facilities that we regulate very
much so I'm fairly comfortable
with that I've also been
pressures an asphalt plant so
I'm because of that experience I
think I understand the mechanics
of the the industry and and then
as a board member I would expect
I expect seen industries come
forward with their standing of
the impacts and potential rules
and permits so because of the
regulatory requirements and
because of statutory
requirements in the regulations
I've been
have the privilege to enforce
create I feel like I have a
decent understanding of business
but not personally from a
business perspective okay Mister
Senator central thank you for
that answer I just encourage you
to try to keep the special small
businesses large corporations
have fancy expensive lawyers
that they're able to hire in
Santa Fe but small businesses
don't so just try to you know
it's a different perspective
when you try to run a small
business like hours of Senator
per eagles or something like
that that it is to deal with
large corporations or dealing
with the power of the government
in federal or state so try to
keep that in mind as we move
forward four director are small
mom and pop small businesses
struggling struggling in New
Mexico that you try to keep
their interest in mind also such
as to be advocates and
everything else and to go
through to madam chair I think
that same conversation when
you're confirmed
secondly just looking at your
financial disclosures
the statute says you can not.
I'm getting old.
driving significant portion of
their income subjects pure for
or anyone who appears before the
board on issues related to the
federal clean air act quality
control.
Control act now you do disclose
that husband is an environmental
lawyer with various doesn't
disclose plans course with
environment of energy law on so
thank you for schools in that
chair Senator and so can you
tell me does he.
Thank you have a financial
interest in any of his clients
as he having any wires that
appear before your board for
state agencies that we need to
disclose for transparency and
then if so how are you going to
handle those conflicts in any
potential conflicts in the
future the chairman members of
the committee
When I fill this out my husband
was retired.
so I'm surprised that I didn't
put on there that he is used to
work for western resource
advocates he retired from work
from that organization this past
year so he no longer receives
any financial benefit from W. R.
A. hello he does he did do a
contract that's right he did
have a contract through twenty
twenty two but that contract is
expired it says I'm sure Mr
chair Senator says what law
practice or consulting
operations for your husband and
that is a realist M. as an
environmental energy loss so has
he had any cases or to see
Representative had broken from
this quarter of the state
agencies that it is currently
have something is that something
that's currently could be
pending under appeal or anything
like that chairman members of
the committee.
Ten years ago you had a.
something in front of the board
but I don't recall that he's had
anything in front of the
environmental improvement board
sent.
Thank you for that transfer
service chair Senator
and he's retired now so I don't
see anything coming up so we do
how would you handle it if state
holds off out of retirement and
sites for one last tilt at the
windmills.
So I want to clarify he no
longer works as an employee for
western resource advocates he
did pick up a contract with
western resource advocates a
small contract through the end
of twenty twenty two that
contract is no longer in place
we were he to do that again I
would have to recuse myself
under the governmental conduct
act if my spouse is making.
Office or financially benefiting
from an organization in front of
the board Mr chair Senator
center thank you for that I
appreciate that question thank
you senator Senator Stefanics
followed by Senator Ingle.
Thank you
Lizzie Lee of.
During your time with the county
working on off of what that
experience was a forty year
Madam so is there anything
experience of that you were
bringing to this job from here.
Experience during that one which
has been contentious long time
serving insiders chairman
members of the committee thank
you Senator Stefanics for that
question I think one of the
greatest budget was of that
experience was being able to
work more closely with the
tribal communities we met
frequently with the published in
the Pulaski basin and I I
learned a lot from them and from
their interests
and I also it just reinforced
the importance of community
outreach there's a lot of
misinformation on and then out
in the community and I felt like
one of the best things I could
do is not try to persuade
anybody one way or the other
whether they should support or
not support the settlement the
legislative interjected
information about what the
settlement may and so which is
why I held weekly office hours
in the basin.
At the Santa Fe county office of
people wouldn't have to travel
all the way into Santa Fe for
that and made certain that was
known and held multiple public
meetings to provide people with
that information I think maybe
it made a difference I don't
know it sure made a difference
in my mind are elevated the
importance of community
engagement and working closely
with the tribe's.
Thank you very much thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Ingle.
Chairman.
And thank you for that job.
Or the job.
Working with labor.
But.
to questions.
With your knowledge of
culture very.
Like that
chairman members of the
committee Senator Ingle I was
raised in northern California in
a very rural part of the state
amongst the rice fields.
Dairymen.
Orange groves and olive so very
conservative very agricultural
very rural so that's most of my
knowledge of it just comes first
hand growing up within that
community
so I have a sense of.
Who the people maybe
but as far as the technical
expertise on.
Impacts of Derry to groundwater
all I know is what I've been
told I haven't worked in that
field before so I can't say that
I have the technical knowledge.
That sort of issue would not
come in front of the
environmental improvement board
that sort of issue would go
before the water quality control
commission if there's a
regulation addressing
dairy and groundwater
contamination.
Well actually not sure missing
armed group or all the sessions.
Strictly when there's a big
pile of rain I appreciate to
seven inches also noted with
Graham you're overflowing
our bodies in a panic.
The the the.
At the department through more
mature while they had hearing
for television.
Of the sixty big dairies are
huge years three to seven
thousand caption things like
that the new year.
They're huge part of our.
It didn't look real good for for
a while and it wasn't their
fault.
And I think we should sometimes
Don't realize how important
something is an agriculture are
something should happen that you
can't help.
And then you get five or six
inches of rain to three hours
there's no reason things happen.
And the certain incentives you
have flooding and and I recall
true have washing and things
like that stuff that neighbors
know reduction should have
something like that.
and I know it took time drug
that people in our district and
other districts are near money
you'll have people bill huge
homes out within about a half a
mile of a very new Starscream
bloody murder smiles are.
And your own pressure issues
wrong.
And member on selection and the
he helped and one done in Lee
County were there too from the
million dollar houses built
within a half mile of this area
they were writing about the fly
you should we should build from
there.
The end of it and it wasn't a
very small came in and just have
that.
But the you know just things a
lot of agriculture the
unfortunately very few people of
all age of.
And the coach's chair years
noting little farmers anymore.
They're all wrong.
And that's unfortunate but
that's what stretch what
happened in the in the
agriculture economy I first
started farming diesel was seven
cents a gallon perform the
phone is over four dollars now.
It does eliminate lots of things
but anyway I appreciate your
ability to serve on this board
and.
Sometimes I think the board had
no we had a lot of problem areas
they came down and yes very much
testimony and mission down some
of the video camera.
The person their environmental
Department should okay talking
the camera for five minutes.
In that I thought was extremely
poorly done.
Working in
anything to do with but let's be
sure we we do pay attention.
You know lots of lots of things
that we really do when you talk
about ruining somebody's whole
business with changed rule we
need to make sure.
Thank you thank you senator and
representative about one more
thing sure sure this just
looking through a.
Some reason for everything and
that is a.
Alright here from universal
investigation services give me a
report on her credit.
For.
Think that you should be in.
In the morning figure enough
you're fine there's nothing
wrong.
You session charge this much and
you have made it yes.
I don't.
I apologize addition to should
no more than two as much.
I hope we can get that workers.
Virtual get services.
Thank you for that companies
that keep that look into that
thank you thank you senator
Senator.
Thank you Mr vice chair.
At I just want to thank you
Senator for being willing to
basically continue to keep doing
what you've been doing different
but still you know so you you
quit your day job because I
kind of like us to do the work
it's just not going to get paid
for.
Yeah welcome to our.
I've just always found you so
easy to work with so
knowledgeable so I'm really
thrilled that you're willing to
do this I I've long admired C.
B. on that for a minute or so
much I put err on another for
keeping her busy so I just thank
you for your willingness to do
this project.
Thank you senator any other
comments or questions Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you for for coming for today I I
do appreciate your you would be
willing to serve on these boards
you know I always see a lot of
times are thankless and and I
you know I just want to point
out a few things in your you
obviously have a lot of
experience in environmental
matters and the and essentially
you were through with Santa Fe
County utilities I I read a
little bit about that month
settlement agreement and the
water usage and Mr chair and and
I see that you were instrumental
in that the only part that
concerns me I guess is and I'm
just going to call some
attention to it and I do plan on
supporting your confirmation
today is is just
I would hope that going forward
and not to say you have it but
that you keep in mind some of
the industry business out there
on your experiences related more
to toward utility and and
towards regulation which is a
great thing in a voice we need
but I always make that point
having been a small business
then my my entire life
essentially a working your
farmers and ranchers and and all
the of all the mining and and
the explore to the industry that
we have in the state you know a
lot of those people are just as
Santo Domingo said are small
businesses trying to get by and
the regulations sometimes in the
state become overwhelming of
where we don't have these
branches within our company's Mr
chair that can handle the
legalese of it you know it's
it's small possum daughter lot
of times and so I just wanted to
point that out I hope hopefully
going forward you'll you'll be
able to remember some of those
people and again not to say that
you have not and the I
appreciate your time today and I
do plan on supporting you thank
you thank you senator the other
common questions what's the will
the committee.
I would just move with the to
pass some Senator products.
Second by Ingle to make have a
roll call vote.
Yes Senator Baca yes Senator
Baca a yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Ingle yes Senator Lopez
six two Senator McKenna yes
Senator mechanic yes Senator
Moores yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excuse Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart yes we were
kind of you yes Senator had a
meal yes and senator do the.
Yes Senator Duhigg yes you have
nine yes into excuse.
Thank you so much those nine yes
you are being.
If we could get the committee
report done up before we leave
the Senate floor today we will
be having you in the Senate
chamber thank you so much for
joining us connected to the
last.
To the last item on the agenda
in regards to the conferees if I
can have Mr Jason ball believe
please come up this is the
appointment and for the there
were.
thank you Mr chair I am honored
to again present
secretary so we for
reappointment as cabinet
secretary of the department of
public affairs
He was recently confirmed a year
ago unanimously by the state
Senate's and since that time I
have heard nothing but positive
things about his service in this
capacity which I think is really
a continuation of a pretty
extraordinary career in public
safety you've got the resume in
front of you I could go through
all the different things prior
being cabinet secretary but I
just want to read one thing on
page three that really jumped
out at me and I just gonna read
as a patrol officer and sergeant
he is the recipient of state
department awards in over forty
letters intercity because a
Preciado shin from the Rio
Rancho police department and
other governmental agencies more
than twenty letters of praise by
the citizens of Rio Rancho was
serving as a patrol officer
humble recipient appear
insubordinate recognition awards
and again it just and when I
read that it just to me
indicates the type of individual
this is and so again I'm not
going to go back through we did
this a year ago but I'm honored
to present so secretary Boeing
and if you want to say a few
words.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today I want to start
off with just thanking the
governor I was appointed to this
position in August of twenty one
not only for the appointment
I've been very appreciative of
all the support that she is
giving a DPS as a whole and I
often say whatever I've asked
for and received and the the
challenges that we have with law
enforcement things that are
needed to make us effective she
has been supportive of the PS
and so I really support her
supporting me and I would like
to think from the sponsor for
his guidance membership last
year center about a year ago
going through the same thing
again for reconfirmation today
and one bank this committee last
year I received unanimous vote
here also on the Senate floor
something I certainly don't take
for granted noted in have to go
to with that way necessarily and
so I don't take it for granted I
recognize that I have to earn
your vote again and continuously
so as I service the cabinet
secretaries I really do
appreciate that and I want to
thank all of you for that madam
chair with your permission I
just want to thank my family for
just a moment as I often do and
those like this I was in college
my mother who's passed away many
years ago but I never forget her
on days that are important to me
and this is certainly one of
those days I think my father
stepfather Communities he's been
there my entire life is been
mentoring he has been my father
my real father he's in surgery
today my prayers are with him as
he's going through through that
make sure the poster my older
brother and my wife to reserves
here today she just retired from
the Albuquerque police
department this year she's
reminding me often that
No she wants to travel which is
about a stop decisions gonna
start doing it without any and
so I I do have some stuff to
estimated times
our son Devin who's currently in
school my extended family who is
also in law enforcement very
supportive and that the team is
sitting behind everybody here
from DPS they don't have to be
here today and I chose to be
here and supports are really
appreciate that so last year of
confirmation
since that time since my
appointment is about a year and
a half and I thought might be
important to kind is reflected
what my goals were last year can
we accomplish all that really
quickly I don't have time of
course to go through all the
details but I can certainly
answer any questions that you
wish would last year when I came
on you might remember that one
of my goals was really kind
reflecting on the claim against
law enforcement and working with
you to really elevate the
platform of law enforcement our
professionalism and making sure
that we find the continuous
professional growth for law
enforcement services and also
the can stay ahead of the
expectations of the community
and to make sure that you know
we we provide service to the
community deserves and expects
and so today I'm kind of pleased
to highlight some of those
things I'm gonna be real brief
because I know we're limited on
time bill will showcase kind of
two things on the New Mexico
state police side New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy side because
policing is so important and so
some of the sketches that we had
both here during confirmation of
and also.
Some of the centers on that
before that the concern is
really about Services and
Amherst Center Lopez remembering
mentioning persons with
disabilities and and people that
have as an example to matic
brain brain injury and triggers
that may be caused by law
enforcement arriving on scene so
we want to make sure that we
just New Mexico state police and
for those that were trained in
New Mexico offers MCAD prepare
for that and so we have really
increased our C. I. T. certified
officers within the New Mexico
state police and what I sat here
last year we were only a ten
percent of advanced training
that space forty hours the C. I.
T. and this is not legislatively
mandated trainings training that
we're doing above and beyond and
so today we're happy to report
that we're at thirty three
percent this July will be at
sixty six percent by the end the
year we hope to be at a hundred
percent crisis intervention
training and again this is not a
requirement this is a goal of
ours along with that we have
enrolled in a program called
able which is a by Stander ship
course which was created and
distributed by Georgetown
University and we had to go
through some steps in order to
become part of this program
we're happy to report that only
three hundred fourteen agencies
nationwide are participating in
this program and what it does is
it teaches law enforcement to
successfully intervene
regardless of the position
within the chain of command so
regardless of what your ranking
is it is pretty much training
our officers to prevent harm to
create a law enforcement culture
peer intervention and and so we
find that to be so important as
well and so the chief of police
had to submit a letter in which
he pledged to uphold these
values in this program called
people and we have since train a
hundred nine officers in that
space we've also have people
that are certified instructors
in those officers will continue
to to mentor and train
additional officers and our our
department of this as well so we
will really provide the de
escalation and duty intervene is
very important we think
integrated those.
Thanks into our policies in the
department as well to make sure
that we're prepared in that
space to deal with people with
disabilities behavior health
issues and all those things I
know speaking with the senator
Ortiz Pino is worried about
morale of of our of our
department and we have
implemented a wellness program
an application within our
department to make sure that not
only the officers of the spouses
and families of at all those who
are serving have the services
necessary to be mentally well
also so this hand held access
this application provides
self assessment tools for peer
support instructions will be of
and your mapping of of that it
therapist for issues and and and
that lawful below for some
officers may have and it helps
them and give them the tools
necessary to deal with anger
issues with alcohol things IT
behavioral health all the things
and challenges that law
enforcement officers C. as well
so we've we've certainly stepped
up in that area as well to make
sure that officer wellness is at
the forefront of our mind no
kind of summarize here for the
New Mexico on for for some
Academy itself
I was very open and honest about
the New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy and the services not
necessarily being on par where
it should be we talked a little
bit about that here rules
committee and what I did as well
following that is after we had a
leadership change sent out of an
open letter to all of law
enforcement leadership
acknowledging the shortcomings
of New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy and promising to turn
that around I think it's very
important that when you do have
a shortcoming organization just
openly acknowledge that for so
the people understand that we we
expect more of ourselves and
attended Livermore and so we set
up on that journey and we're
happy to report they were
previous previously seen about a
fifty percent Bacon see right at
the Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy sixty percent within the
instructor cadre alone we are
now seventy four percent staffed
and that includes the expansion
positions that we got the last
legislative session we had a
traditional position so with
those K. eight additional
positions and the bases that we
have right now seventy four
percent staff and we're on the
right trajectory to make sure
that we can deliver the services
to law enforcement that we need
to and so that's very important
in New Mexico one step that we
have taken and was make sure
that we re classified spoke the
instructors the position
themselves so that we can draw
the proper experience to help
teach law enforcement those
skills necessary to be out there
functioning in the world today
and what's required of in
addition to what I mention this
New Mexico state police are on
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
side we have also implemented
free training we want to be
looked at as a space where you
only get basic training from the
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy and we're now providing
free advanced training to anyone
who wants to come to Santa Fe
it's been expensive I will say
it's it's you know one thing to
help that I can continue but we
have provided to all of New
Mexico Law Enforcement filling
the auditorium fair and
impartial policing internal
affairs and ethics force the
escalation techniques instructor
the development class and crisis
intervention they.
again as well to deal with
mental health awareness so I
want to just highlight those
things for me because I know
here in rules committee some of
those questions came up and I
want to demonstrate to you that
made progress in that space not
only during the and Emily around
but also make sure that our
officers in New Mexico properly
trained through the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy and and
also inclusive course of the New
Mexico state police so as I as I
can finish my opening statement
I often get the distinction of
of being in front of a committee
or stand in front of a lectern
or whatever and sometimes
getting credit the in the day
it's really the people of the PS
that make this are organization
what it is we we have an amazing
group of people some of those
representative here in the room
today behind me I learned a lot
from them each and every day and
I couldn't be more pleased with
the people that I have and they
have certainly contributes my
professional and personal growth
up to this point and so I I want
to disclose which signals you
because I get to sit here within
the day they're the ones that do
all the hard work and so with
that manager.
Thank you cabinet secretary
we're not gonna go to those of
the rules is there anybody in
the room in support of the
country reconfirmation.
If you'd like to speak if you
could please come up to the desk
senator Wirth will hand over the
microphone as a reminder if you
could state your first and last
name for the record.
As a reminder since there is
several of you and we do need to
be on the floor if you can keep
your comments to at least a
minute certainly.
Good morning.
Okay thank you
my name is Benjamin Baker and I
am honored to support I was here
last year when we had a similar
conversation and impact report
to this committee that I have a
years worth of data since the
last time we spoke I'm here to
let you know that I serve as the
deputy a DPS have been the
interim director of the law
enforcement academy was
mentioned by the secretary.
The observation the evidence
that I've seen on the way I'm
being let something that I think
it's important to share with you
this morning integrity humility
are the words that I would use
to characterize my boss grateful
for the work you put in last
year in his selection and
confirmation I'm grateful for
the work we hear gather today
and I adamantly support three
confirmation of secretary but we
thank you for your time and your
attention thank you so much for
coming.
It also doesn't support like to.
Your giving the directions to
Sir.
Very much madam chair members of
the committee Tim Johnson
obviously with the state police
I'll be very brief and that the
we were very fortunate to have
secretary Bali has our leader
the trajectory of not only the
PS but state police has been on
an upward trend since he got
here his outside vision was very
much needed by me in our
organization and I'm here in
strong support of him so thank
you thank you for your comments
anyone else in the act you can
come up with.
Hi
good.
Good can you hear me.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Nate corn
and I'm here in vigorous support
of taste in Bali for
reappointment to the as cabinet
secretary I've known Jason for
over twenty five years and I've
always found him to be unique in
terms of being a law enforcement
officer the things I found so
unique about him is his passion
for law enforcement not only for
law enforcement it's also for
the community that they serve I
listen to the to the list of all
the items that he's done as a
result of center the questions
from the last time and you can
see what I'm talking about how
he embraces everything he likes
change he likes to make things
better but the thing that gets
me about him is that the
community loves and that's
because he loves to the
community and I'll tell you
story I I hate to make this
sound like I'm a I'm a case and
a groupie but I've I've actually
been to everyone his his
promotions and and the reason I
go there is because I've always
seen him that's part of
something that's great and I
have to tell you promotions for
those of you that aren't
familiar are usually attended by
a few family members couple
friends and then maybe a squad
member but in Mr Bo is simple at
every turn that he was promoted
from sergeant to lieutenant
captain deputy chief they were
members of the community the
Cayman regale them because as
you heard about all the letters
of commendation all the
appreciation he's just been very
much lauded he's he's involved
with the community cares about
people and not only that staff
members would come because he
was trying to people and they
appreciated that and of course
officers both the subordinates
and the people that he worked
for we're very happy with them
and applauded him at his
retirement party there was a
mass of hundreds of people and
they included city government
they included the community they
clear cleated court staff
everybody that's had a contact
with them has a different
viewpoint.
It's all very well taken as as
Mister maker so thank you for
letting me speak to I can't it.
Thank you my at any greater
support for a gentleman the
committee come the next step
continuing as the secretary of
of the public safety thank you
thank you for your comments
anybody else of intended to one
the because we have the coverage
we do have three B. as though
and I'm gonna start off first
with sour Committee if you can't
admit yourself.
And if you could keep your
comments to a minute.
You are.
Members of the I will certainly
try to my comments to anymore
all the time but when I was in
somebody like this is always but
I want to thank you for your
opportunity five million dollars
affirmation of these phones we
appointed as a cabinet
secretaries of the state.
I first met nine point four
began his career with the
Mexicans farm I need to know is
those yes that is motivated
slides following the school.
With the resort condo was very
packages and that naturally
usually follows yes session lows
and integrity and a lot of
questions.
Working together is active both
friends in fact I consider the
through the other.
As a matter of fact if my mother
was here today to protect the
justice not to disclose and the.
This is probably.
No.
In over thirty years law
enforcement what I've learned is
that you cannot teach your
character no need to have the
character New Mexico and this is
what we has the character has
work ethic yes personal life
character and that was **** like
this on the internet are
absolutely approach that has
been follow and several
important.
Yes it is and everything that.
You know what your run on over
thirty years
I would need to have access to
our public safety is committed
to the New Mexico department for
twenty seven years that's
incredible this leadership like
I mentioned earlier the natural
and I believe it is prudent and
disabilities Representative tire
career thank you so with that
I'm gonna move to the next to
thank you for your comments I'm
gonna head to US marshal Sonia
Jarvis.
If you could give yourself.
Try.
Thank you so.
Yes ma'am chairman Mr vice
chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to express our
support of the retention of
Secretary yes DPS secretary
quickly as a matter background
United States Marshall service
works in partnership with more
than a hundred state local
federal law enforcement agencies
in New Mexico our bread and
butter mission is to support the
federal judiciary we're the
caretakers of anywhere between
two to three thousand of federal
detainees here in New Mexico but
on a daily basis UCS most as the
fugitive hunters out in the
community working to suppress
filing crime and I can tell you
that our biggest partner
throughout New Mexico in in all
of our thirty three counties New
Mexico state police led by
secretary brewing along with
chief Johnson and all the
wonderful state police employees
that we see you see the and in
the in the room today we work
with GPS at all levels from the
state laboratory to the grants
management bureau but most
mostly as I said earlier the New
Mexico state police earlier you
talked about morale and you know
the the the biggest indicator of
great ground organization is the
here and there there hasn't been
a better secretary department of
public safety to very long time
to do so
he's methodical in his in his
actions his responses he is a
member New Mexico high to with
with all the rest of us here in
New Mexico we we are able to
bring millions of dollars into
the state of New Mexico to
support drug addiction and drug
suppression we know that that
drugs are are drivers of violent
crime in New Mexico know that
the New Mexico DTS under Jason's
leadership is it is a big leader
in with all of the other
partners in law enforcement
thank you we.
Reset is commitment to public
safety he's intentional and he's
a great leaders on behalf of our
service here in New Mexico we we
recommend the retention of
Secretary Boeing thank you so
much for those comments so
there's nobody else on so so I
mean I'm gonna have to the
committee do we have any
questions or comments from
anyone Senator McKenna.
Thank you by
and thank you secretary well we
I really enjoyed our
conversation yesterday I learned
a lot about
the breadth of your
responsibility and I think what
is so amazing that we've read
about on your resume is you've
already had a law enforcement
career and yet you still want to
give more to the state that you
love and so I just want to ask
your wife we just need a little.
But it's just it's remarkable
all the comments that we've
heard today and
We stand here I spoke to support
you as you move forward so thank
you.
Thank you senator Senator Moores
thank you Mr chair I just would
like to tell you just Marshall
that was Senator Hermio that cut
you off not the rest of us.
Just make sure she understands
that and I believe Mr chair
your in your uniform ostomy here
weren't used to must be nice
being cities so congratulations
and hopefully in four years you
might get him back
I just want to thank you of
agriculture stations on the
masco on it right now
I really appreciate your
leadership our conversations
last year and your integrity
across to this office and very
challenging times can you tell
us where we are as far as
recruitment we're running at
full speed and talk about a
little bit about the the senator
we've had and what else we could
do to help my district and some
of the rest of us and Bernalillo
county sense
we always surface and some
critical challenges in our state
so we can talk about your role
in fighting what we're faced
experience in Berlin county and
also recruitment is and what
what what's going on with the
record file folks.
Mr chairman members of the
committee certainly we we're
we're on up hill
It's going a favor say we're is
still somewhat of up hill battle
being people who want to join
law enforcement right it's not
just as tracking people's was
twenty years ago but I think
we're sitting in a better space
than we were about a year ago at
the New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy itself training for the
all of.
New Mexico we've seen definitely
an uptick in that space we're
really happy to report that
starting even this month we have
the largest kadam class that we
have seen in in recent years
probably a pre pandemic numbers
and so we are starting a sixty
five I believe it is this this
week for all of New Mexico on
the New Mexico state police side
we are almost at full strength
again actually that as we bring
people and we always have
retirements but that is looking
a lot better and so between
The New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy that we brought into our
satellite academies and at the
Mesilla person can hear in Santa
Fe and the state police the
numbers for last year we brought
on five hundred and fifty five
graduates licensees within the
state New Mexico hundred twelve
of those were dispatchers and so
that's another space where
questions been hurting so we've
been successful in bringing on a
public safety tell communicators
been successful in bringing
people back into law enforcement
again we're still a little bit
of an up hill battle as far as
you know I think everybody's
understaffed we're still in
space we're gonna stealing from
our own and what I mean by that
is that we take people from one
agency in this point push into
another so we need definitely
recruiting tools recruit from
out of state but we're in a
better space today than they
would certainly have been do I
think we need to do better there
are absolutely I think we need
to continue with support for law
enforcement I think we need to
continue to make sure that we
all and I just from this wall
for CENIC and everyone continues
to encourage people to want to
do this profession so I do think
it's looking certainly a lot
better I I again I think turning
the NMAA around we have seen an
increase of people of being sent
to the medical enforcement
counties will and I will say
that under Ben's leadership we
have trained and and the rest of
people that only a we have train
more people in Santa Fe that all
the satellites so academies
combined two very happy to
report that would definitely
looks it's local battle but it
depends one swing in our favor.
Mr chair secretary Senator
secretary
I appreciate what you're doing
and then you're you're you're is
the more spectacular this year
than it has been in the past
what if you have a Mr secretary
and also the difficult question
but your your your profession
now we're we're recruit
nationally to national
professional profession you
mentioned that we're still in a
lot from within and what kind of
moves between APS right we do
and state police from or Los
crucis wherever
what do we need to do as far as
recruitment to get cops a lot of
time specially with AB de we're
hearing that they go to round
rock or you know they're moving
to Texas or somewhere else what
do we have to do to actually
make the New Mexico more
attractive not just a please but
if you do you know what else to
get cops before coming back to
New Mexico.
Should question the Mister
chairman Senator members of the
committee I believe first of all
I think we need to continue to
invest in the people have
experience here within the state
a return to work would really
help we have a lot of people
have experienced that certainly
could come up and want to come
back to law enforcement they're
not able to and so that
experiences leaving the state we
have people that retire from law
enforcement they want to
contribute maybe I don't want to
the gum health on a driving a
black and white but there's
other jobs that they might
want to do or or some may want
to work the streets were not
allowing that currently so
what's happening is people that
still want to work for and we
need to work or leaving the
state in order to to take their
experience in a law enforcement
services and provided to another
state I think that's the number
one challenges look to retain
and invest in the people that we
have here that still want to
work currently not allowing that
the only way to continue within
law enforcement in New Mexico is
to seek out a job there tribal
entity travel agency and so when
you go to travel agency can
continue to work and so they see
certain to the benefits of it
but within the rest of the state
we are not just forced out of
state is concerned I believe
that we could look hopefully at
at taking people's pension from
out of state and hopefully
rolling that into Paris that's
well beyond of my skills and
expertise to see how that would
work but the part of the
challenge of getting people with
experience into the status you
have an officer that's working
States got ten years experience
maybe he's willing to move this
person has to start at year zero
again joining law enforcement
Mexico they we can pay them or
they can roll over their their
retirement contributions from
other state into our pair
program so that not only do we
bring in the state with
experience for law enforcement
they're not starting over at
zero again either and then at
the end of the day we need to
just make it attractive for law
enforcement thing within the
Mexico we need to be
competitively with our with our
south where salaries need to be
competitive of other states have
more revenue and and typically
pay a little more so sometimes
it's a hard sell to want to get
a to want to get people to the
state simply for what we pay
with a long.
Last year the legislature very
generous for the New Mexico
state police other agencies are
responding as well and kind in
trying to increase their salary
we realize that some of the
smaller agencies it's difficult
for them sometimes to be
competitive in that space.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair thank you senator Wirth
and thank you secretary of just
give up the good work work and I
really appreciate your
responsiveness in your entire
team's response of this in the
last year thank you thank you
any other comments or questions
Senator Baca.
Just a motion if you're ready Mr
chair before we go of that
motion centered.
Senator secretary I just want to
say thank you for your service
is great to hear you call us
this is just a year ago.
Thank you and say listen to
Johnson for due process thank
you.
That second Senator Baca motion
thank you madam chairwoman so
there's been a motion and a
second by Canaveral come.
Yes vice chairman and it Senator
Baca yes.
Yes and yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is excuse ME two
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris yes senator
Morris yes Senator Ortiz yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excused
Senator Stefanics Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
how to meal yes senator Harding
Hermio yes and senator do
you have not into excuse very
ninety S. congratulations.
Committee report can be read in.
Before we leave the floor will
ensure that your the Senate
chamber for a full Senate
