Senator Diamond.
Etcetera do heck.
Center guy across.
Senator Hickey here Senator
Ingle
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator meal.
Senator Kernan.
The gentleman yes.
Senator Neville.
Center o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Etcetera etcetera yes.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Padilla Lopes's.
Center share.
Senator Stewart.
Center Thomas.
Senator Wirth.
Center was.
senators to the chamber we're
needing a quorum.
Baptist Church here in Santa Fe.
That's a hearing center for the
pledge of allegiance.
To be led today by senator bill
Burt the pledge of allegiance
and Spanish to be that today by
Thank you for having me invite
all to join me in prayer to the
god of the Bible and join me in
the lord's prayer and if that's
not your thing I'm glad you're
here to I'm so thankful for the
have a church while here in
Santa Fe you are welcome at
First Baptist church on Sunday
mornings or Wednesday nights you
Santa Fe inns know us as the
camel church for our live
co lead that group and would
love to talk to more for
interested in coming.
Here huh backache two twenty as
we pray.
But the lord is in his holy
Lord Jesus you are the image of
the invisible god the first born
of all creation.
For by you all things were
created in heaven on earth
you all things hold together
you're the head of the body the
church.
Lord Jesus we recognize you are
the king of kings and asked that
you would bless all in this
faithfulness and self control.
The your sacrificial love even
teaching us to love our enemies
great and foremost commandment
second is like it we should love
our neighbor as our self on
these two commandments depend
the whole law and the profits.
your image precious in your site
we see such great potential and
beauty and humanity.
We also confess and lament that
We need your help thank you so
much for offering yourself on
the cross to be that help that
all who believe in you would not
perish but have everlasting
life.
trust in you.
So in this amazing love we ask
your blessing today in great
help in throughout the session
you who taught us to pray say
as it is in heaven and give us
this day our daily bread and
forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive those who trespass
against us and lead us not into
Ladies and gentlemen of the
Senate staff and honor guest
please face the flag on the
Dyess in join me in the salute
for which it stands one nation
under god indivisible with
liberty and justice for all.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
turn over term majority floor
leader to take us to our next
order of business Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president good
morning and thank you senior
beautiful prayer breakfast this
morning had some words shared by
of the archbishop and just a
number of different leaders and
it just made me again and
so I thank you very much for
being here some announcements to
the members financial reports
are due at the secretary of
state's office next Tuesday
cables for the Senate iPads and
I guess some of those have been
leaving the chamber I've been
asked just remind members they
training session this afternoon
at two o'clock in the Senate
chamber
again.
we do have a couple of memorials
and certificates that we're
gonna do today and I would ask
objection it is so ordered thank
you Mr president that'll be
Senator fan X. and she'll have
six gas I guess up on the
rostrum for that that memorial
to in today's a good example we
have for that we'll talk about
two of them will be read that's
the first one of the second
that'll be read today is a
McKinley county day at the
legislature we're not gonna read
that today but Senator when you
know certainly we'll talk about
a Gallup McKinley day and
place out on today's calendar.
I see no objections center more
eleven will be taken off the
president's table when we placed
on today's calendar Mr president
that's one we're not gonna read
chamber in terms of events
Gallup McKinley county day
committee is hosting a provided
dinner and gala at lop asada
AM until two PM.
the economic development
corporation of Lee County is
hosting an evening with Lee
County at Eldorado hotel and spa
PM by invitation the independent
insurance agents in New Mexico
are hosting the I. L. A. N. M.
legislative reception at the
society of women engineers are
providing lunch for the senators
representatives and both staffs
at noon in the hallway outside
the house lands a lunch tomorrow
there as usual had great
breakfast with you with the
prayer breakfast thank you I
just wanted to excess units
consent to excuse Senators
Steinborn and do have this
morning I have a few other
So Mister president I have the
honor of meeting this young lady
this morning in the rotunda her
day and also to help us advocate
for free universal meals in all
public schools here in New
Mexico and the committee please
welcome GrowCo to the New Mexico
to remember to enjoy and really
appreciate some of the really
neat things that we get to do
here I have to say this young
lady Mr president gonna be
wildly successful in life kids
thank you very much Mr president
I have another group I'd like to
recognize also but can we give
her one more hand.
And you might want to check out
the slippers Senator Wirth yes
if you could borrow them or
appreciate your indulging
because there's really kind of
tough days appear extreme highs
and extreme lows and this is
what what it's really all about
and this is what we're really
doing up here so thank you very
we please give them a hand Mr
president.
And you may see the Mister
president in your office and all
of our offices down here thank
gallery whenever we're
introducing guests for
presenting bills are we always
make sure that we are facing to
the president's table just want
to thank everyone for being here
with that we'll go ahead and
Proceed thank you Mr president
first of all I want to thank
every student educator parent
grandparent everyone who stood
with Senator by the and I in
what it means for kids who might
need a little extra on their
tray because that might be their
last meal I myself had free
breakfast and lunch provided at
school and it was amazing to
talk about the Espanola pathway
village which is a program of
the Espanola pathway shelter
that the trend is transitional
housing at serving primarily
individuals experiencing
purchased two properties one a
strip mall in Espanola which is
home to the homeless shelter and
several businesses all
nonprofits who pay rent to
owns a motel with the capacity
to house fourteen individuals
currently transitioning from
homelessness into housing and
all these individuals are
working within the community we
Alamos National Laboratory and
one as a grant writer in
training now I am excited the
everybody in the Senate can help
me welcome Hank use of the Santa
homelessness Christian Madrid as
violent the chief executive.
Officer Matteo piece you know in
rural property manager rob of
the hill a senior case manager
which was featured in the seven
hundred club breaking the
addictions believing in people
who can turn their lives around
ladies and gentlemen if they can
volunteered his time to build
literally the for shelter and
this morning as we talked I told
him how amazing is it that years
time Los Alamos National
Laboratory is in the Senate
district I Los Alamos National
Laboratory would like to invite
every senator and of course you
Mr president to join in the
legislative breakfast with
at one hundred north what a loop
is street right here in Santa Fe
and then to give them a
conference center thank you so
much Mister president thank you
for everything thank you so much
Senator have more welcome to
you Mr president and thank you
to members which means Santa Fe
recovery center is a nonprofit
care twelve substance use
disorder program based in Santa
Fe New Mexico since two thousand
they offer medically managed
detoxification residential
treatment regular and intensive
outpatient treatment and
recovery housing alumni support
lasting recovery they have
facilities both in Santa Fe N.
in Gallup.
And I cannot say enough about
how in our area we are trying to
I have Courtney my nose
marketing and communications
manager Lisa R. V. so H. R.
operations supervisor Martian
And thank you for joining me.
because this is the first time I
am introducing her as a senator
And a sister.
So it's very special day for us
Lars manually to what the office
of the liaison to Congress
woman to just a Leger Fernandez
and it is a very essential to
have those communications for my
high school together and
graduated
and and our families know each
other for years and years her
file her father was also one of
the leaders in our area a long
And on your desk you found a
couple of things and I know
Senator my nose has his card to
touch to and well and I think
by much of the staff here and
those that have been here and
collected them over the years
and here's another one to add to
your collection so thank you for
We do have further
announcements.
Senator where Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
guests today for autism day
stays like this that remind me
why I decided to serve our state
I've had a very emotional
morning meeting with people here
us some legislation to assist
with that and it's been a really
rewarding morning just to have
children here in the round house
so that's very nice and I am so
developmental disability council
and I'm so grateful to have him
for my district are your
district as all hell all
Mr president please stand and be
recognized by the Senate's
welcome.
Thank you Mr president thank you
announcement hearing objects are
proceed Senator some of you may
remember about a year ago I
stood up in the announcer my
step granddaughters applied to
To medical schools in Virginia
it plus a U. N. M. she decided
to.
Attend the U. M. medical school.
And of the family is so proud of
her she's so it should make a
wonderful doctors has a great
Mexico and she will be you are
adding to.
Help reduce that's George thank
you very much Mr president thank
you so much Senator AUMENT.
guess no objection proceed
Senator I am joined today by my
family this is my step mom
Marcia right I retired from the
New Mexico department of
agriculture and also my dad
told me he is supportive of me
going into politics but doesn't
ever want me to become a
politician so please help me
welcome I guess.
I
see no further notice I'll turn
to our Senate majority floor
leader to take us to our next
order of business senator Wirth
will be read center when you
just agree to not have the
certificates read so we're first
going to do Senate memorial
seven food and farms day that
senators to fan X. and Campos
Karia Hemphill with that Mr
president's unanimous consent we
go to that order of Business
third reading of legislation and
I would be able to Senators
defects for southern oriel south
we're in that order business
be not printed not referred to
committee and that it be read
for the third time in full
preparatory to its final passage
and I would ask that the reader
read.
See no objections.
Food and farms day in the Senate
in celebration of community food
and farm initiatives toward
ending hunger and strengthening
the statewide food system
while emphasizing that everyone
in New Mexico should have access
to fresh local healthy and
nutritious food and whereas New
Mexico Food and farms they
farmers markets Clovis in part
as farmers markets Margie
plumber be the sewing change
award for organizations engaged
in creating sustainable food
award for outstanding leadership
in farming or ranching bitty
baby foods LLC merry and Zach
been.
for outstanding leadership in
land stewardship re unity
resources farm Giuliana and to
Mexico grown and raised products
from farmers and ranchers now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico the January twenty six
foods food system and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the governing board chair of the
New Mexico food and agriculture
how we Morales president and
sherry do Lujan chief clerk New
Mexico state Senate.
I think a reader for reading
important it is for our children
and our seniors to receive fresh
fruits and vegetables in the
school system and there are many
working together to make this
happen in our state and the
movie has grown over the past
several years NCSL has a hunger
president after we finish of
passage of the Memorial which I
hope you can sign on to since is
just a Senate memorial we do
have some up food and hunger
Senator Stefanics for your hard
work when it really comes to
dealing so that we can replicate
hunger here in New Mexico I want
are vegetables that are going to
be home grown we want to get in
the schools who want to get into
our senior citizen centers we
want to ensure over the next
several years but as we deal
key for all of us is let's work
together let's ensure that this
is going to be one of our.
Number one priorities as we do
move forward we are going to do
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Stefanics so Mister president
I'm not sure if any other
members have any comments about
this if.
Senator FedEx there was some of
those that would like to chime
in on the east internet access
so we are debate a senator
Morris seven we have Senate
Scratchy thank you so much I I
fully support center memorial
seven senators to panics and
Senator Campos for the time that
I've been here been just
gigantic champions of food and
they want to know about know
more about this topic we had a
great event this morning in in
the rotunda Mr president and we
did talk about the universal
free meals program which has a
farmers and ranchers to bring
their their products to the
table and all of our schools and
so I just want to thank centers
to fenics and Senator Campos for
pushing so hard for this thank
you Mr president thank you
chatting back here thank you
very much Mr president and I
want to stand in support also
sent a Morial seven thank you
both senators for your
sponsorship but.
food.
And I believe what work is being
done through many of the
organizations that participate
here today with New Mexico Food
of us do now with them Helga
Garza a critical to the network
and all of the work that they do
is phenomenal is an organization
that goes from northern New
Mexico all the way down to Los
your own and as I always say
Mister president we are people
of the earth.
Scientifically we are because of
the minerals the staff that make
up both you know the land we
Of what you have grown so it's a
business endeavor Mr president
members of the Senate is
phenomenal and celebrating I
I apologize I yeah.
I apologize for that that you
want to speak on that.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chair.
The one percent the gross of
food.
For everybody else.
And the.
Mexico that that's been our
life.
Sacrificing their time.
So that you may eat.
And I speak a just a moment
about a calf Mr president.
A starchy.
And they can go out there and
Graeser it and turn it into a
protein that I say is mighty
tasty it might be good for you.
represent an many people in the
these chamber Representative
we are happy to do that for you
We thank you for the the
memorial center for about two
Senator Campos of the thought my
thoughts today are the many guys
Thank you senator was we do have
further debate.
With Senator on this.
Thank you Mr president I really
wanna appreciate the Sanchez I
of our one of our largest funds
alongside the Rio Grande river
down your mesquite that which is
there center diamonds home I
went down there to encourage her
to join the conversation some
I'm outing her a little bit here
of the farmers and I represent
many of my district average age
of most farmers in New Mexico
today is in the late fifties
early sixties it is there's a
generational change that's
acknowledge that's happening and
prepare for that a little bit.
I would get a chance like most
of you with my colleagues to to
speak to groups college groups
student groups and all that and
many backgrounds we see
presidents from the first night
of black American president
receive presidents and we we
tell young people you can grow
up to be present United States I
was just talking to my good
You can't go to college and say
I want to be a farmer you can't
start without.
The the heritage really the
family the commitments in
connection I I I never see it I
anything but I I really don't
think you grew up to be a former
in that maybe narrow minded of
me to think that way but I think
it's it's more to say that
you're you're raised to be a
years when I grew up we were
truly farmers we run in farmers
were less farmers were tomato
farmers the reality is very few
those crops are grown.
There anymore.
the decisions we made here in
Santa Fe.
And we change that economy to
that increasingly alfalfa cotton
And and the highly were crops
are increasingly now of imported
from South America Central
America the these are all things
that we need to really think
about the big picture when we
talk about farms and food
When you couldn't get toilet
paper.
Dear if you remember sending
family members to go see if you
can score a.
shelves walk in the supermarkets
and seeing that whole file
empty.
Now imagine for just a moment a
future where you walk down those
aisles and there's not food.
represent in crystals that no
one knows is very well they used
to be full of Jerry's my
district used to have nine
varies along interstate many
toilet paper on the shelves were
empty and imagine what will
happen if you walk through those
aisles and there's no food.
For when food becomes so
expensive.
Cheaper foods.
Let's quality.
More processed foods.
I want to live with the thought
that this is an incredible
Better use of fertilizers
insecticides are safer for all
of us we can be a leader in the
country on food security and I
talk about spaceport we
subsidize that business.
There's a lot of things
marijuana we we talk about that
very exciting big big thing have
big thing we subsidize all these
credit not not farmers are gonna
leave this state the pecan
farmers are going to be the
state worry rooted here.
And the true economic
opportunities our state are
right in front of us.
have further debate we'll have
Senator Sedillo Lopez followed
by Senator Diamond followed by
Senator many us and Center
Gonzales Senator Sedillo Lopez.
you know I come from a farming
family and their five kids in
only my brother remains in
farming but I do have good news
for us for Senator serve on this
and is growing organic produce
so that's
things it can happen I agree
with you it's rare but it is it
can happen I think it's really
important that when we pass
farmers themselves I had a I had
a chance to meet with farmers
it's almost been a year now and
I was really really moved by the
practices that have been working
for generations and they know
how to raise food they know how
to raise crops and so it's very
important that we always
that are worked on to help us
increase in support the food
that is grown in our in our
state thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Lopez.
America but you can't grow up to
be a farmer point well taken you
can't grow up to be a farmer
it's feeding more than just your
own family fair enough and so
family that is in the gallery
from Deming the gross our onions
in our chili we even think my
fiance Tom Brantley and the
Gallic gallery for growth you
know ranching and growing the
cattle that we all we all enjoy
impact on these few farmers and
ranchers that remain and the
votes that we take to increase
regulations to restrict their
impact on small business we
often forget the farmer and
rancher in the question and the
reality is that they remain
probably the most sensitive to
before us and perhaps farmers
and ranchers in the impact that
would have to them we often
forget is to keep them in mind
this legislative session into to
phone a friend to phone a farmer
further debate we have senator
Munoz.
Thank you Mr president I and I
think Senator Monessen pretty
well and and if if people
realize this during the COVID
how quickly the shelves got
move off to another industry
because the money's not there
support entire family more
farming is more innovative today
than you you've ever seen before
more technology driven with
kept up with farming but we
haven't kept up with our farmers
in in making those commitments
to water.
No water no food.
No water no cattle.
man and when you take your
cattle to market and they're
sold here selling at a lower
price and then you see the
increase in beef this year was
what four hundred percent in
center words if he's paying
that the farmers ranchers are
making the majority of the money
and not the middle man that the
processes are making four
percent increases well ranchers
still figured out how to buy
important at this memorial
really talk about.
What's happening in the shelves
in the grocery store eighties a
dollar in a.
Right.
bread you are but that's the
difference in the economy and
and where's the margins being
made they're not being made by
the former the guy that's
working every day at six o'clock
or midnight turning on their
As we made by middle by middle
men and and we need to get
somehow figure out how we get
them farmers equality more money
into there's into their system
Senator ones I just had one call
question for him is not there
walked around but Center mon
diss farming food a nickname is
Mr green jeans thank you Mr
president.
Thank you yes we do have further
debate with Senator Gonzales.
is the room a very very strong
initiative and the when I was
with the public school so I
brought this so.
Quite a few years back and I
to have all our own the natural
in our own race still vegetables
and fruits in our schools but
all members some very hello
we're at seven point eight eight
billion in population.
And it's predicted them to
empty shells so we talked about
seeing no the demand the need
it's coming.
And that one of the things that
it was just mentioned by Senator
Madam this is a what an
K. twelve and also continue to
our higher education that
addresses a scope and sequence
curriculum to teach our own
students our own children you
back that we had an excellent
presentation on water and the
lady the presented to us you
know set of.
the question is how much do you
want to pay for it and this is
what will happen the same thing
with food you know we really
need to bring some real strong
to address this and what a way
to start our session with
something so important thank you
thank you Seneal as.
Si no further debate Senator
center for the debate.
Senator CENIC's close Mr
president I'd like to thank
every member who cares about
food and hunger in our state
young farmers in our state and
no doubt the water issue is so
critical to everything that we
do in this industry I too have
found my local source of beef
Mr president I move the Senate
memorial seven do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate at all forty two members
in the lieutenant governor be
Thank you Mr president and I
know that I and others have
might have some food and farm
advocates workers to recognize
for stewarding native lands if
she's here if you could please
stand.
Pam Matthews First Nations
development institute then the
Vasquez Jonathan Vazquez and
Lauren Gonzalez could we please
welcome and thank them here in
the chamber.
Mr president I'm not sure if
there's any other for of
legislators with food advocates
here.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president I wanted
development institute is a
nonprofit based out of Longmont
Colorado of in the chair of of
that of of of institute for
cost of a living in Colorado and
we want to lose good people and
so we've expanded our operations
in Albuquerque to reach to our
that are here representing there
are First Nations development
institute so thank you again for
being here.
Thank you passionate I'll.
Senate memorial eleven autism
day Senator Lopez I thank you
very much Mr president I now
move that Senate memorial eleven
be not printed not refer to
Mr president if the reader could
read we'll have the reader to
read.
Senate memorial of then a
memorial declaring Jenny twenty
twenty six twenty twenty three
interaction skills and whereas
in twenty eighteen the federal
centers for disease control and
prevention reported that one in
every forty four children is
educational and economic levels
and whereas autism is a lifelong
condition that presents
challenges to education
employment housing and community
autism end of whereas early
intervention evidence based
practices and proven support
systems greatly improve the
outcomes and reduce the lifelong
costs of care of individuals
technologies and cultures made
by people with autism and
whereas the many professionals
families advocates and
volunteers working to promote a
it resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that January
twenty six twenty twenty three
be declared autism day in the
Senate and be it further
City of Santa Fe Senator Linda
M. Lopez Senator sire.
Correa Hemphill.
president and thank you reader I
now move that Senate memorial
eleven be put on its final
passage and is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
New Mexico and of course Mr
president many of you already
know it hits close to home with
my son Lorenzo.
my bestest teacher has been my
wonderful families many
wonderful advocates across the
state and across this country
who are constantly looking for
ways as to how we can improve
are aware of how autism is not a
disability but actually the gift
and that's the way that I
approach is Mr president as we
progress later I do have some
president and thank you to
senator Linda Lopez for giving
me the honor to sponsor this
with her as a mother of a child
with the autism and their
families I have to go through
and it stays like this that
brings awareness.
That really makes a difference
supports and modifications that
they may need to have a good
quality of life so it's just an
Centers we're debating Center
more eleven anyone wishing to
speak.
Senator Rodriguez thank you
madam Mr president I to us stand
in strong support of this too
Thank you yes we if we don't
keep us aware that's up we're
never going to make a meaningful
change and improvement in
people's lives and so those of
us that have dealt with this
thank you to the sponsor thank
you senator there yes we do have
further debate Senator of the I
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to excuse senator
Senator Lopez to close I thank
you very much and thank you
fellow senators for your
comments Mr president and I I
now move that Senate memorial
Fortythree members of the Senate
including our lieutenant
governor to be shown as voting
in favor thank you Senator Lopez
Thank you Mr president and I'd
like to introduce some of my
guests who are here with me on
the floor and I will start on
move over I have to begin with
serves as the secretary of
elevate the spectrum and she
also served as a secretary at
the developmental disabilities
council.
And he is a small business owner
and the owns Josiah's baked
goods he is from Los Lunas New
and then we also have Joel Davis
who is vice president of elevate
the spectrum he also serves as
chair of the developmental
them for what they do in our
communities Mr president.
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president Ms
consent ago that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
going to be read but he's gonna
explain them and I think you
have some guests ideals cinnamon
yes.
Thank you yield to the senator
us we are announcements
twenty six and so with that I
want talk a little bit out
Gallup I mean us in the
legislature we had the oldest
event in the state's history
with the hundred year of the
brochure about Gallup and needs
and I'll be guys look at it real
quick if you look at that little
train right there I'm gonna give
you a little history Gallup if
you look at that little train
back in the city let's go to
Gallup right because they have
to get paid and so that's
Gallup hello gals name
originated there's so much
history about Gallup I think
Hispanics and and and everything
and a lot of immigrants a lot of
immigrant families move to
Gallup and they're coal mining
with the Italians and and that
were in the gather are
Asian people of Japanese people
and try to put him interment
camps Gallup told the federal
government no we're not gonna do
that with with our Japanese
Americans and so we're not gonna
allow you to take them from our
who passed away this year as sad
but she was ninety years old and
lived a great life and and
served our country very well
with dignity and honor and
taught me a lot of life lessons
about the training and how we
did that this weekend I don't
know why I got the engine on
Billy the kid's stories and and
how about the train tracks and
went from down south to the
grants in the changes used to
stop and change
get fuel or you get the cold and
and do steam engines and make
those transfers lot of is still
they're all done through the
right way and so that's when the
grace to histories Gallup but as
we grow up in Gallup and in and
I grew up my whole life there
and I want to talk about the
first honoree he could be here
with us today because you have
knew him as probably in diapers
and and he worked for my dad is
in the city when my dad was a
more name became a city manager
but in the nineteen sixty seven
and seventy he was a city
Paul really letter community is
as you move forward in a vision
about education.
he led a strong group of people
convinced a a local car dealer
there too given fifty two acres
Somehow he was easy you graduate
he partnered with you and and
and and got the ball rolling in
and got you Gallup started
I sold a few damn.
And he's employed in the city
Gallup I know it's been a rotary
club for thirty one years
because I've been there maybe
twenty now and and has almost
knows and is always glad to see
and you can always reach out to
him our policy here with us
today and but he's not and so as
a honor Paul McCollum I would
ask the body to to
we move forward and we'll hold
applause to get the next one.
There are other honoree is
doctor bell language in I don't
money in the economy and it was
just everywhere in the more in
the in the governor got together
and agreed about locking down
the committee but that comment
affected native Americans harder
Navajo Nation but I know one
family and not all of them were
from COVID but they're all kind
of from COVID because they could
get to the hospital they can get
thousand dollars a barrel costs
for one family it's integrated
through their the doctor Wangler
is an M. D. in in Gallup and and
you'll see all to see in in in
and everything and what what how
hard she worked to save our
community.
And how much she cared about our
community and how much she cared
and I never seen her waiver.
I never seen her scared and
never seen a person a medical
director with what was happening
the pandemic not be scared
they weren't in fear the COVID
shots came in in Val organize
that very well in the community
and it did everything she could
their that was doing physicians
training or I forget center
thank you remind me when when
they come out of medical school
and then the then they go to a
ciation system and and got those
positions in the Gallup
but time changes and things
happen and and she moves on and.
the hospital in and things
happened and they moved on and
everybody went their separate
ways but she didn't abandon us.
You know what she did she came
guess who got kept everything
together to come a little while
to figure it out and now I know
that they went from a zero
is the poor people are getting
served again they're getting
medical attention they're
getting the referrals on the
Austal class that none of that
exists anymore because people
health caring Gallup in Gallup
New Mexico.
And a lot of those doctors are
not getting paid they're
volunteers from IHS from around
they didn't ban in our community
as a strong mother as a strong
leader she has a great childhood
I see with there all the time
and she's a loving mother and
cares a lot for that child but
poor or rural areas and you're
not ever going to get that
accomplished no ma'am much money
we get it she did it with no
money and that's determination
state honoring.
you you'll see on your on your
desk there is a little trained
everybody got us Akorn beating
and necklace and and you do know
that resemblance the male and
talk about the quality in native
American and there's no greater
symbol in Gallup McKinley county
their native Americans right.
So tonight everybody is invited
and that we're having Gallup
data lop asada I believe it
starts at six o'clock this
evening come they're gonna have
a band enjoy talked to a few
people from Gallup get some
need to understand Los Alamos
and Espanola for center our meal
present name for me and I also
understand you to understand
where Senator Hamblen in Los
crucis and what's happening
tonight so thank you.
Thank you centerman test centres
were no nonsense miscellaneous.
Anyone wishing to make another
announcement.
aware today is a today you'll
see some language and dollar
amounts for junior bill we have
an agreement with the executive
up from last year and so as we
move forward please follow those
guidelines
You make sure we get those back
in a timely order.
there is a certification sheet
we want to make sure that the
money gets spent so if you
appropriate money to Gallup New
Mexico to by police department
junior money what happen is is
also the money would show up in
the city and they say well we
know where this came from and we
don't know what they want to do
with that and they don't they
can do anything with it so we're
junior bill that you'll see so
as you appropriate money your
name will be tied to that dollar
amount and where he's going and
what it's for.
to use this correctly we all
want to go home and say you know
Mr chair don't pull me over I
got your new car today.
That's alright a couple outlay
in in but they need.
but I'll let you know the dating
in keep you.
In the form of of who she hasn't
turned in their forms and how
we're going not calling out so
junior funding and so on as we
move forward that'll all happen
please don't go to the executive
requesting additional junior
money we split this a third a
third a third with the exact and
time period so at center me I
think you would call me my
nickname now on them about done
for the day we are canceling
Senate finance lower
announcements because because we
have some trains today we're not
and tomorrow morning if we'll
talk about who wants to go or
can go but it's if we're gonna
do something to a body we should
know what we're doing to make
sure that we're doing it
correctly and and that's that's
yes we are on that.
Order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Stefanics
thank you Mr president your
Senate conservation committee
will meet next Tuesday and today
watch for it on the agenda we've
been apprised by the sponsors
Senator Griggs said he might
have a committee subs substitute
for the bill so Senate bill
See no further announcements
I'll turn it over to majority
floor leader worth two tickets
to the next order of business
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and thence referred to
committee reports that they be
acted upon with one motion and
the and to as act fund
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
To pass as amended the indenture
referred to tax business and
transportation committee.
Respectfully submitted Joseph
So we have a motion to adopt the
committee report Judiciary
Committee report.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those of us name.
The reader to read this
president your health and public
affairs committee to whom has
been referred Senate bill thirty
five has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
and that we vote on them with
one motion and the journal
reflect they were acted upon
individually.
Senate bill seventy five to pass
and that's referred to tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill eighty do
president Senator is we have a
motion to adopt.
The Senate health public affairs
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
Your four letter words to take a
star next order of business
thank you Mr president in amex
that we go that our business
introduction of legislation or
in that order business
Senate bill eighteen introduced
by Senator Sedillo Lopez and act
relating to domestic affairs
renaming the file family
nineteen seventy eight Senate
bill eighteen Senate bill
eighteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee then
and act relating to notorious
notarial acts amending the
revised uniform law on notarial
acts defining automatic material
officers and judicial officers
refuse to perform notarial acts
providing for material acts to
be performed by material
officers and others authorized
clarifying official stamp
requirements providing
requirements for a certificate
of material acts amending
continuing legal education
credit requirements making
a notarial officer.
Senate bill two forty six.
Senate bill two forty six having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate health Public Affairs
Representative Castellano and
Act related to licensing adding
and clarifying definitions of
provisions of the uniform
licensing act clarifying
dates for actions related to
hearings and decisions allowing
for some reason spent in a
license or appropriations of a
license providing requirements
for implementation and
health public affairs committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two forty seven.
Senate bill two forty eight
designating a district judge or
other probate judge judge when a
probate judge has recused or
been disqualified providing for
clerks of the probate court and
one certain cases are
transferred to District Court
aligning the terms of probate
judges statewide repealing out
of date probate court statutes
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two forty eight Senate bill two
forty nine introduced by Senator
Gonzalez and act relating to
motor vehicles and acting new
two forty nine Senate bill two
forty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
increasing the amount of death
benefits to the surviving spouse
or children of a firefighter
killed in the line of duty
Senate bill two fifty Senate
bill two fifty having been read
introduced by Senator Hamblen an
act related to metropolitan
metropolitan redevelopment
providing for the dedication of
a portion of an increase in
certain property tax revenue
government issued bonds payable
for local option is state gross
receipts tax revenues and
removing authority to issue
bonds payable from per property
tax revenue removing a
contractors allowing a local
government to delegate to a
metropolitan redevelopment
agency the power to approve
loans grants and leases of no
bill two fifty one Senate bill
two fifty one having been read
twice by title is ordered print
referred to the Senate
transportation business tax
committee then Senate finance
and act relating to law
enforcement and acting the law
enforcement officer procedures
act regulating the use of
physical force by law
enforcement officers
bread to prevent stop and
investigate retaliatory action
requiring use of force policies
and training by all law
providing for the inspection act
law enforcement misconduct
investigations requiring
reporting of officer involved
injuries or deaths amending the
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill two fifty
two.
special fuel consisting of
budget vegetable oil or animal
fat Senate bill two fifty three
Senate bill two fifty three
having been read twice by title
introduced by senators renewable
and couples and act relating to
license fees amending game and
fish licensing fees providing a
discount for residents and
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill two fifty
four Senate bill two fifty five
environmental model modification
service and durable medical
equipment providers that render
services to Medicaid patients
committee thence Senate finance
Senate bill two fifty five
Senate bill two fifty six
introduced by senators Ivy Soto
Stefanics how to meal Hamblen
medical practice act
professional psych psychologist
Act counseling and therapy
practice act and social work
practice act to make the
Senate bill two fifty six Senate
bill two fifty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two fifty
Apartment for the office of
military based planning and
support to provide support for a
readiness and environment
protection integration agreement
with the county conservation
fund pertaining to approximately
fifty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate conservation committee
Vance Senate finance committee
Senate bill two fifty seven.
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for San Miguel
County to provide library and
community service for rural
areas of the county Senate bill
finance committee Senate bill
two fifty eight.
Senate bill two fifty nine
introduced by senators so the
Lopez Tom and and Pinto and act
indexing the rates to inflation
distributing a portion of the
revenue from the tax to a new
alcohol harms of the alleviation
syntax Committee vents Senate
finance committee Senate bill
two fifty nine Senate bill two
sixty introduced by Senator
Lopez and others and act
relating to disabilities
mental health and developmental
developmental disabilities code
repealing section twenty four
dash one dash five point four
sixty having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
public affairs committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill two sixty Senate
of individuals living with
amount trophic lateral sclerosis
and their care care group givers
and municipalities Senate bill
two sixty one Senate bill two
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two sixty one.
Thank you for for reading those.
Dr Stewart worth to take a star
next order of business.
Wirth thank you Mr president so
that is it for today on the
floor will be back tomorrow at
eleven o'clock for committee
chamber we all need to do that
this afternoon so I know Center
Shendo as announcement there may
be a Senator Munoz I think as an
announcement as well.
cancel this afternoon's hearing
was move everything rolled
everything over to next Tuesday
it's almost one o'clock in a we
have a mentor media to a to so
mostly the bills that were
rolled over from Wednesday
Center diamonds bill and it
probably will will put her up a
little bit she indicated she
needed to be out of the building
Hemphill Mr president the Senate
rules committee will be meeting
tomorrow probably at nine AM in
room with three twenty one we'll
be hearing from a few countries
and will also be listening to a
put the subcommittee of Keefer
capital outlay together that
consists of Senator Rodriguez
Senator Gonzales and we're going
to add Senator Woods to that
And Senator Shendo he's an
honorary member of Senate
finance so he's he's in tax so
they're gonna work on the
capitol as we start together
capitol move forward we're gonna
Thanks seven yes any further
announcements.
Scene and senator Wirth thank
you Mr president thank you
members thank you staff with
