Branding a state in the United
States. She's taken on the lead
of
Aging and long term services.
and even in her short time in
the department has been
instrumental in helping us in
Riri. But county as we're
working on fighting and getting
our nursing home back in the
county, and as you know, our
county lost our nursing home
four years ago, our residents
can't make it into Santa Fe or
Los Alamos because of the high
price.
And they're moving off into Rio
Rancho, where we're losing them,
The Cabinet secretary designate
has served as being a great
adviser to us in the room by
county and how we can keep our
residents in our county so that
they stay connected to community
because of her love of helping
new Mexicans. She's the perfect
fit for this job, and I'm going
to yield to her so she can make
some room. Thank you, Senator,
Madam Chair members of the
committee.
I'm Jen Paul Schrier, Cabinet
secretary designate of the aging
and Long Term Services
Department, and I am truly
honored to be considered today
for confirmation.
Most of you know me from my time
as Cabinet secretary of tourism,
and I bet you're asking why I
decided to switch over to a new
agency to a new industry. Um, I
truly did love the time I had of
growing the tourism economy for
New Mexico and I'm grateful that
I lead the industry through the
pandemic.
The true highlight of my career,
even though it was so incredibly
difficult.
Um New Mexico had one of the
fastest tourism economic
recoveries in the world.
It was the we were the first in
the nation to deploy the U. S.
Travel exchange.
New Mexico. True was identified
as the gold standard by U. S
Travel Association.
We celebrated 10 years of New
Mexico True as a state brand and
100 years of New Mexico
magazine, which is the longest
standing state ran magazine in
the country.
And in 2022. New Mexico set
economic impact record for
tourism and all time record
direct visitor spending record
of 8.3 billion, which surpassed
2021 by 1.1 billion. Um, but
really, for me being able to
make the transition over to this
particular agency
Um, for aging and long term
services is the trust and faith
that I had in the Tourism
Department team and its
leadership that made me
ultimately feel confident to
move forward into another
capacity.
I never thought I'd end up here
at aging in long term services
Department but reflecting on the
past couple of years, my current
life circumstances I can see
that this job pick during the
pandemic. I was very involved in
a lot of the crisis,
collaboration and communication
across all of the different
departments.
For the pandemic. Specifically,
older adults were highly
affected by Covid 19.
And I worked across the O h
aging, a long term services and
several other agencies to help
with crisis communication.
During the wildfires. I did the
same
My past work experience. Um,
Many don't know that I am from
California. But my my work in
California was much more broad
and tourism and economic
development. I worked in the
think tank space and I worked
across a region very similar to
new Mexico, Um in the Central
Valley, which is a rural area
and looking at different
strategies from water technology
to something that was really
considered, um
Innovative and kind of crazy at
the time, which was telehealth.
Um, And so we were able to
deploy that and in rural
California, which was fantastic.
Um, so I've worked in several
different spaces.
But what I absolutely love is
looking at ecosystems and really
looking at industry of how we
fix complex problems. How do we
help an industry grow and expand
to meet the needs of the
residents?
And then third. My family is
what really, I think, um, got me
to a place where When I was
offered this position, it just
felt like the right next thing
for my life and my career.
Um, I'm a sandwich generation,
So I have a four and a six year
old and I have elderly parents.
And my dad 20 years ago, had a
stroke and my mom was recently
diagnosed with dementia, So I'm
taking care of little ones. And
I'm taking care of my my my
parents at this time.
And about two years ago is when
my mom was diagnosed with
dementia, and I called aging in
Long term Services department
because I didn't know how to
navigate the system.
And I really learned that the
importance of this particular
agency to support new Mexicans
navigate that the the different
phases of life is so critical.
And so I am just very excited to
be able to step in because when
I was navigating what to do and
how to help my mom how to help
my dad with respite with
caregiving. I got furious
because it shouldn't be this
hard to figure out how to
support the people you love.
And so my my real goal in this
position is to make sure that
every single program is
optimized. Every single
technology is updated every
single opportunity to
communicate to residents about
what kind of resources and
support programs are out. There
are easily obtained.
I don't care if people are from
rural New Mexico, travel
communities or urban areas,
everyone should have the
resources and support they need
to be able to age in place with
dignity.
So I want to talk a little bit
about what I've been doing for
the last six months. I came in
in August.
And, um, really had a high
point. Um Esperanza Lucero,
Who's here today? She's our
director of the Adult Protective
Services department was, um,
being awarded nationally by the
National Adult Protective
Services Association. She's the
first new Mexican to receive
this honor since 2007 and she
was specifically recognized
because she has shifted the the
Adult Protective Services
program to not just be reactive.
But to do to help with wrap
around services to do
intervention and prevention. So
that way we're giving there were
wrapping those resources around
people that are needing it and
connecting them into our
agencies. So that way we're a
resource for them along their
journey.
Also, while um, coming in for
the long term care on Bussmann
program.
Which was really fantastic to
understand is that currently
we're outperforming 59% of the
programs nationwide when it
comes to nursing facility
visitation.
83% as it relates to living
facility visitation, so that
means we're visiting our
Different facilities more often
than the national average, which
is great.
However, I don't believe it's
enough because we know that
tragic things will happen, and
we need to make sure that we
have ombudsman attending and
visiting these different
facilities, building
relationships and making sure
that these residents are safe.
And so we have put together a
plan of how we're going to get
to visiting these facilities on
a weekly basis.
And I'm very excited that we
have recruited 21 New ombudsman
volunteers and will be holding
our first class of training them
to get them certified here in
the spring.
We've restructured and
professionalize the agency with
both the executive and lfc
support.
We've identified a Medicaid
reimbursement delay causing
diversions and, um, and
inability to be able to hire up
fully so we've worked out a
temporary solution with LFC and
we are working with HST to to
minimize that moving forward.
The office of Indian Elder
affairs and we've increased the
amount of money going to tribes
and the partnerships we have
there. We continue to build.
We've also reduce the
administrative burden for our
tribal governments by 50% are
aging network. We're currently
analyzing our current delivery
systems really building out and
expanding those services that
are needed throughout the state.
And we're really looking at. How
do we continue to increase in
Bring people back to our senior
centers? Um, Some people were
very reluctant during the
pandemic to come back and and
participate in our senior
centers.
And our attendance is back up.
thanks to Denise King and on her
team.
We brought the conference on
aging back. It was the first
time it's been in person since
the pandemic. It was a 45th
annual conference and we had
over 700 attendees. We had 18
watch parties across the state,
so seniors participating
remotely and their senior
centers and we also had eight
tribes and pueblos participate.
We had 71 resource exhibitors
and 21 percenters. It was truly
a special occasion.
We're doing some of the
important work that doesn't
really get seen, but it's
updating all of our policies
within the agency and making
sure we're not only in
compliance, but those policies
are set up to support our team.
A lot of our staff that are
social workers out in the field.
It's tough work.
And they need that support and
we need to make sure that our
policies support them. So that
way, um, we don't have burnout,
and they had the time and
support they need.
We're rebuilding our capital
Outlay program.
We launched New Mexico, which is
one of the governor's
initiatives to really look at
filling the gap of caregiving
services, where we're training
people and then also recruiting
people to become caregivers in
different counties. And right
now, this program is in 13
counties in New Mexico.
We also held senior day, which
was last week.
And we we had over 350 seniors
that participated. We had an
international speaker.
Um, and the breakfast that we
had over at Eldorado really was
about how How do people live
longer and and have a better
quality of life?
And so it was. The concept was
Really focused on the decisions
that you make as an individual
to be able to live longer and
healthier. And so after
After the breakfast event. We
had plans. We had Busses to take
all the seniors down to the
capital to advocate for for the
different, Um, the different
legislation and and items here
at the Capitol, But the seniors
decided. Hey, you know what we
should walk?
Because that is what you do if
you want to live longer, and so
it was wonderful to see the
inspiration that the event had
for the seniors and how excited
they were to participate and
make healthy decisions.
So as I wrap up, I just want
again Say that I am
And more than happy to go into
more details about what my plan
is for this fiscal year. What my
plans are for
The rest of this calendar year.
Um, but really, I wanted to
conclude with my vision for this
agency.
I want to build a high
functioning team, an agency that
is known as a national gold
standard of how a state
government can maximize federal,
state and local resources and
collaborate with non profits and
other community partners.
To modernize the system for the
modern senior.
By deploying quality direct
services in every corner of our
state. Our elders may age with
dignity and within their chosen
community.
So when I move on in three
years, I will feel just as
confident that the leadership
programs that technology and the
systems we build here at aging.
A long term services are just as
sustainable.
As the ones that I left at the
Tourism department.
Thank you for the opportunity to
share my passion with you today,
Madam Chair members of the
committee I stand. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Secretary.
Um you have a 10 people signed
up to speak in support.
Because we have a pretty long
agenda today. I'm going to ask
the folks keep your comments to
a minute or less. Please was,
uh, Antoinette Hill.
Ah!
Test test.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. I am
Antoinette V. Hill, deputy
secretary at the aging and Long
Term Services department.
Formerly deputy secretary with
Genscher at the Tourism
Department. I am joined today by
my fellow deputy. Also Sarah
Jacobs, and my very talented and
experienced team that I would
like to ask to. Please stand up.
Thank you, Uh, some of us. Some
of them have been with the
agency for quite some time.
And some of them have joined our
team recently as we came on
board now in the fall.
Deputy Secretary Jacobs and I
have the privilege to serve
alongside Jen as her deputies.
To marshal the efforts of the
team and the staff's talents to
foster unity for the agency's
strategic goals that Jen has put
in place.
As I continue to join her on our
journey of state government and
being servant leaders.
I know Jen is often touted as
having an ambitious agenda.
She does, but it's always with
the North Star.
She believes strongly in
accountability, and by that I
mean being in line with
organizational values.
And executing the line in that
organization's visions. Thank
you so much, Deputy
Thank you. W Romero.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the Senate Rules
Committee. I'm Debbie Romero,
former defense secretary and
anonymous you region right now,
so I haven't given up public
service yet.
Um, I want to take this up.
Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you.
I'm here to support the
appointment of miss Rare as a
Cabinet secretary for aging.
I first met her in 2018 during
transition when she was then
designated for Tourism
department.
She had just flown in leaving
her baby boy and husband in
California to come serve the
state of New Mexico.
They followed shortly after and
have made Santa Fe their home.
My first impression was wow.
She came into the budget meeting
asking all the right questions
and absorbing the process like a
sponge.
My observation is that she is
not just concerned about the
agency she is serving.
She wants to see all agencies
succeed, and this was evident
during the pandemic and fires.
She has a strong, compassionate
leader and a diplomat. She
fights hard for constituents.
She will be a strong advocate
for seniors. I humbly ask for
her support.
What do you say? Hopeful? Hookah
is sausage. Cool. Melissa
Sanchez, Akademik. Oh, go away.
Come it also to Melissa Sanchez.
I'm from a common Laguna
pueblos. Good morning, madam
Chair members of the committee.
I am the UM, Office of Indian
elder affairs director within
the aging and Long Term Services
department.
And I'm honored to be here to
support the appointment of
Cabinet Secretary Gen. Schreier
have been a part of her team
since 20 21st as executive
director for the Intertribal
Ceremonial office. Second is
tribal development coordinator
and tribal liaison for New
Mexico Tourism Department and
now in my current position,
I've been on the unique path
throughout my career from an
artist producer, Cultural
advocate ambassador with the
priority always to be a service
and duty to my people, Native
American and indigenous peoples.
I mentioned this because I feel
strongly about contributing to
Native American indigenous
perspectives, bringing native in
American indigenous perspectives
to the table.
Often our voices are not heard
understood her valued Secretary
Schreiner listens, understands
values and initiates inclusivity
of New Mexico Native American
kind of conversation
contributions, and this has been
a strong factor in my time here
on her team. Thank you so much
looking forward to continuing to
collaborative building of
relationships from within.
On behalf of New Mexico tribes
across our agencies and to
advocate on behalf of our
cherished native elders.
Their caregivers and tribal
Elder care facilities. Thank
you.
Augusta Farley.
Hi. Good morning. Thank you for
having me a my name is Augusta
Farley. Thank you for having me
here today. I live in the South
Valley in Albuquerque.
I'm
Delighted that I'm here at this
ceremony.
To welcome in. Ah
Mystery earlier.
And I am an ombudsman for the
program. I've been there for a
year, and I'm delighted that we
are recognizing the volunteers
at the Ombudsman program.
And that's very special to us as
volunteers to be recognized for
the work we do and promoting the
well being of the residents in
the facilities. I've been there
for about a year and I started
because I wanted to know more
about what my life was going to
be like in the future.
And at the same time a friend of
mine fell back east and broke
her hip and ended up in the
system, and I, too, found it
very difficult to try to figure
out the system and my sister and
I were frantically trying to
figure out how she was going to
get out of the nursing home.
Hopefully, she was in her mid
nineties and go back home, which
he wanted to do which we didn't
advise. But I've learned that
you don't argue with an Irish
woman who is very determined to
do what she wants to do More
than what I have learned from
myself.
I have become part of a
community a very caring people
that include the residents, the
facility staff, fellow ombudsman
and a host of experts in the
field of long term care. Thank
you, Miss Farley. Thank you.
Adrian Smith.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Adrian Smith.
I'm with the New Mexico
Caregivers Coalition and we
advocate for paid professional
caregivers as well as the more
than 400,000.
Uh, caregivers of family members
who work with or without pay.
Ah! I first met Kevin. It
Secretary designate Schreier. Um
less than a year ago. Just last
year, I can tell you that she
opened not only open her door to
us, but followed up on every
single thing that we talked
about. I don't know the last
time that that happened,
actually, Thank you. Um, next,
she cares for people. She cares
for her staff, as you heard
about Denise King Esperanza
Lucero or people that we work
with now on a regular basis.
She looks for expertise. She
nods and looks for expertise
from her staff to help guide her
and making the best decisions
possible.
Um
I have found her to be a person
of integrity in every way. Uh,
she's able to stand up programs
like she spoke about New Mexico,
which is now already in 13
counties. And these are the
hardest among the hardest to
serve counties. They're not in
the typical locations in our
state. Thank you, Miss Smith.
Neil Segarra.
Good morning, Madam Chairman.
members. Um my name is Nelson
and I'm the director for the non
Metro Area Agency on aging. I
met the secretary and Roy, New
Mexico in the middle of the Roy
Senior Center.
She didn't know that morning
that she was about to walk into
an ambush. You had 30 to 35
seniors there that were a little
upset because of program was
coming to an end. She handled
that situation with poise,
Grace.
And determination to make sure
that that program continued.
She answered every question
everyone had and I was
thoroughly impressed. It's no
secret. Over the past few years,
there's been a little rocky nous
between our agency and agent
long term, But I'm here to
testify to you. All that feeling
is no longer there. I C A T a
team that is she has put
together that has
Going to collaborate with
everyone worked together and
were together going to
accomplish everything that our
seniors deserves. So thank you
very much.
Thank you, Secretary of Sato's
Good morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the Committee. Thank
you very much for allowing me to
come back here today. Um, I am
honored to be here in standing
in front of you in total support
of Secretary Designate General.
I first met her in 2018 also
during transition.
And I've had the opportunity to
work with her since 2019 and
I've personally seen how she
inspires and guides others
towards success. If there is one
thing I want to tell you all
about Jen, it's that she
executes big ideas that have
lasting positive impacts on New
Mexico.
I had a lot to talk about, but
one minute wasn't much, so I'm
going to skip over some of the
stuff that people have already
said about her and the amazing
impression that she left in 2022
with the 8 billion billions of
dollars that were brought into
New Mexico. But in her time
leading agents aging, she has
already shown her big ideas can
be used anywhere. Jen's Blue
Zone bound initiative puts New
Mexico first in the country to
create longer and healthier
lives.
Using aging friendly communities
and resources.
She does not think small. Her
big ideas are rooted in what
best serves all new Mexicans and
this advocacy for seniors is
crucial as our aging population
faces unique challenges.
Jen's plans will address health
Jen's plans will address
healthcare needs social
inclusion, combatting loneliness
and promoting mental health. I
know she will advocate for
affordable housing and ensure
transportation and legal,
further contributing to a
holistic approach and enabling
our seniors to age in place not
only with dignity but also with
comfort.
I am confident our seniors will
be respected under her
leadership.
Jen is a great leader who leads
with purpose in powering her
team to achieve collective goals
As an advocate for seniors. I
strongly thank you. Thank you,
Secretary and we're gonna end
with Secretary Cerda.
Thank you. Good morning, Um Rick
Easterners Secretary Department
of Transportation.
Um like with Jen and her
personal circumstances with her
parents I've shared with her,
um, that I know all too well,
what it is to have
Relative Diane home before they
were able to access services
from aging Long term department.
And even though it took her four
weeks to pass, we never once
received the call backs and the
follow ups that we needed to get
her the help.
That we eventually gave to her
in her final days.
And so it's near and dear to me
that somebody be there that
quite frankly, for lack of a
better word.
She doesn't do anything that
isn't going to look good in the
end.
And if it isn't going to look
good, and it probably wasn't a
good idea to begin with. So I
thank her for taking on this
responsibility. It's important.
A lot of people. Unfortunately.
Who don't receive the service
that they deserve.
Don't stick around and talk
about it. And so I hope that you
support her as she
In a positive way for so many.
Thank you.
Thank you, secretary. Uh, but
would anyone in the audience
like to raise their hands in
Thank you and I apologize to I
know there's other secretaries
in the room who I'm sure are
here to here to speak on their
colleagues. Behalf. Um, I've
rolled over a bunch of bills a
bunch of times and
I want to be sure that that we
get to them. We did not have
anyone sign up in opposition.
Would anyone like to raise their
hand to indicate opposition?
Seeing then we'll go to members
of the committee, Senator Morris
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
appreciate stipulate that all
secretaries or Jen, thank you.
You've always been with us and
you and I think
Thank you, Senator RTZ Pinot
Thank you, Madam. Chairman and
Senator had amigo. Thank you for
sponsoring Secretary designate.
Sure. I really enjoyed our
conversation the other day when
we had a chance to visit
But but I wanted to ask you
several questions about what you
just presented because I'm
fascinated. Um
In the short time you've been at
that department you've really
come up with some great
innovations. Um, how did you get
23
Volunteers for your ombudsman.
Melon share members of the
committee Senator. Thank you for
that question.
When we had the conference on
aging, we celebrated our current
ombudsman, volunteers and we had
a presentation in an award
ceremony and I really started
talking about the critical
importance of having enough
ombudsman across our state to
make sure that we had on
Bussmann in the in the different
facilities, developing
relationships and I did a call
to action and I just really
asked the seniors in the
audience to
Please think about this might be
where you you end up.
Can you help me part of the
solution and we had over 50
people, um, sign up being
interested to become, um,
Ombudsman. Um, it is a big
commitment. Um, it's a lot of
education. There's a lot of
legal factors around being an
ombudsman. It's a deep
responsibility. Um, so about 21
decided to move forward.
The ones that were not able to
commit to that high level of,
um, volunteerism. We actually
connected them to other
volunteer opportunities because
we didn't want to lose those
different volunteers. Um, we
have intentions of getting to
300 ombudsman.
We have a ways to go. Um, but
that was one big call, um and
asking people to sign up and
we're gonna be doing more.
Madam chairman that that sounds
like a wonderful approach is the
idea that each
Facility would have its own
ombudsman. Is that the way that
the design Um madam chair
members of the Committee
senator? Essentially yes,
because we want to make sure
that the residents in the
facility? No, the ombudsman.
You know what they look like
They know their name. They I
mean, there's no personally, um,
the nuances and then also the
family members that come and
visit No, the ombudsman as well.
Um, so that's really important.
And the other thing that was
brought up the other day, which
I thought was just so smart. Um,
one of our employees, our team
members Jennifer Jones brought
up. You know a lot of these
folks. There's the phone number
for the ombudsman to call but a
lot of people and facilities
don't have a phone.
And so for them to call the
ombudsman, they're going to have
to tell the facility staff and
that might be
Too much might be a barrier.
So we're being very creative on
how we we solved that. Um, but
we we do know if we have it on
Bussmann that's designated to
each make a big difference.
Madam chairman. Thank you that
that's senator not to interrupt.
Apparently, the sound on the
Webcast is not good folks don't
mind just bringing their their
microphones little closer to
them. You know, this is
shocking. You
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. And
so, uh, Secretary designate
share I wanted to ask about, uh,
something else that that you're
doing that I really fascinated
with, And that is your New
Mexico.
Which is a
The theft of the name, but
that's alright. We still a good
idea of tell me about that,
because this is one of the big
issues that we have around the
state and that is how do we find
enough trained, prepared
caregivers, or are people that
need that kind of pure madam
chair members of the committee
Senator, I would love to take
credit for the idea. But it was
my boss, so the governor came up
with the concept of New Mexico
And truly a lot of it is, um, a
lot of the reasoning behind it.
Is because there are many
families that don't qualify for
Medicaid that are under under
that threshold, but you have
family members taking care.
Of their loved ones. Justice
Diane was talking about earlier
with the New Mexico Caregivers
of coalition and so with this
program, not only do we educate
and provide training on how to
be the best caregiver, but then
also we do vetting and we pay
those folks to be able to care
for the people they love.
So it's a stipend based program.
But then if you think about it,
we're also generating a new
workforce. And so while this is
just started, it was a pilot
program for this year. We are in
those 13 counties. And, um,
hopefully, um, for FY 25. Our
budget will be increased so we
can expand the program.
Madam chairman, I would hope
that
During the interim when the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee is holding
its hearings around the state
that we would have a chance to
present on both of those
programs to the committee
because I think those are great
ideas and I really large,
especially for bringing up the
whole notion. My wife and I
fascinated to watch that series
on Netflix.
And
That you brought the man that
put that together to speak about
it simple steps that can be
taken that help people's health
and well being.
And your use of volunteers is
exactly what's what he alludes
to when he talks about
The way you expand people's life
spending is by making sure that
they stay active and involved
and contributing.
To the good of the whole
community so that that brilliant
vote for your confirmation.
Thank you.
Thank you Other members of the
committee.
What's the will of the
committee?
All right. We have a motion for
a do pass. Let's go ahead and
take a roll Call Vote. Senator
Baca. Senator Bubka is excused,
Senator Lopez. Senator Lopez is
Excuse Senator McKenna. Yes,
Senator Mitt McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Morris Senator Moore's
votes. Yes, Senator Neighbor.
Senator Nibert votes yes, and
her Ortiz de Pino, senator or
cheesy Pino votes? Yes, senator
Petals excused.
Center Stefan IX is excused,
Senator Stewart Yes, Senator
Stewart votes Yes, Senator Harm
me. Oh, yes, Senator. Hermia
votes? Yes, N iter do hig Yes,
Senator. Do Hig votes? Yes.
Unanimous? Yes, I will see you
on the Senate floor later on
this morning. Thank you so much.
Alright. And if folks could just
as you're leaving the room kind
of keep it down so we can get on
with our business. Senator
Stein, born
We are hearing S J. R two.
Go ahead, Senator.
Okay, folks, If you can, please
keep it down as your senator, go
ahead.
Okay. Good morning, Madam Chair
Committee here to present Senate
joint resolution. Two concepts.
Some of you have heard
Maybe most of you have heard
before, but I think it's
definitely an idea whose time
has come.
The simple explanation of the
bill. Madam Chair committee is
this is a joint resolution to
amend the New Mexico
Constitution to, um
Create nominating commissions
for each of our higher education
institutions enumerated in
section 12 of the Constitution.
To, um, basically that interview
that and then recommended the
governor qualified good
candidates to be university
regions, the governor would
still get to make this election
as she has the power to do now.
The Senate would still confirm
those nominees. So the third
element we're adding is to
create a nominating commission.
That would be determined after
If the voters approved this
amendment, we would come back
and actually define exactly the
composition of those
commissions.
But that there would be a
commission that would interview
good kids. This is exactly what
we do for our judgeships. This
is now what we may be doing for
appellate judges and what we do
for our PRC commissioners.
And it's just It's just time,
ma'am chair colleagues, um with
the importance of higher
education that we put the very
best people running those
schools, they can bring ideas to
the table experience.
And, uh,
I can help advance her state in
advance our kids futures so that
I'm really honored to have some
great co sponsors, and maybe I
could have them say a word or
two. Thank you, madam Chair
Members of the committee or
regions have an extraordinary
responsibility, Hiring and
firing. Um, university
presidents, setting policy and
funding priorities for the
university and we hope these
decisions are made with the best
interest of the students in our
state of New Mexico in mind.
So this is especially important
because of the generational
trauma and poverty that's
plagued our state for
generations, and I really
believe that if we had
nominating committees, we'd have
a better opportunity to ask
those questions and have a more
more diverse process.
For, um, establishing those
policies that the people of New
Mexico depend on.
Thank you, Madam Chair I've been
working with Senator Steinberg
on this for a number of years on
trying to improve process of
The border regions around our
universities. I prefer actually
one bigger border regions, but
that's never politically flown.
I think this is a good step
allows us to be players in the
process because it would
establish, um, the nominee
commission by law, and I think
that's something that is very
important for us to do, And this
is not an indictment on any
current border region forward.
We have some great regions. We
spend a lot of time.
Very little money. In fact, no
money. Somebody, um, really
passionately fighting for their
universities, but a lot often if
you've been around this building
a lot of times has become a
political issue with border
regions, and it's become too
partisan sometimes haven't said.
I do applaud this governor for
at least creating a process for
evaluating his administration's
haven't done.
But she has recognized that we
needed a process in what she has
done with her nominees, and we
would like to actually be more
robust process established by
law. So that future governors,
um have to follow something. And
of course I law in the future,
So I do applaud the governor for
starting that this process
because it's a lot of times the
previous administration was
about a well
Away from this. I mean, you look
at you and them. I think it's
about $7 Billion.06 6 to $7
billion budget Right now it's a
huge economic driver in the
state and acquire is such an
important thing. And although I
do really applaud the current,
um, border regions, I strong, I
really applaud the senators for
bringing this forward again.
Me. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, we don't have anyone signed
up and support We do. What?
anyone in the audience like to
raise their hand to indicate
support.
We do have one person signed up
in opposition who I believe is
on
Kim, If you can hear me, please
go ahead.
Yes, I can. I can hear you.
Thank you.
Um
Bye. Thank you, madam Chair and
sponsors of the bill. Um I am
are standing in opposition to
this resolution, and I speak
from the perspective of and
currently in my fifth year as a
regent at the University of New
Mexico serving as Regent chair,
though I'm not here on behalf of
institution, I'm speaking as a
citizen. I also spent seven
years on the New Mexico Board of
Finance, which gave me a unique
perspective on higher ed and our
opportunities and challenges.
I'm opposing this bill for two
reasons. One is a tactical
reason. I think it creates an
unnecessary complexity and level
of, you know, bureaucratic
process in the appointment of
regions, which are part time
volunteers very different from
judges, which are, you know,
full time appointments. Um, but
it it creates a you know
potential delays when there are
vacancies in regions and timing
issues.
So
I really feel like there's
already a constitutional check
and balance, which the Senate
has, where bison consent of
regions and I would not like to
see an additional bureaucratic
process put in place. Um my
deeper concern is actually that
this resolution amend our
Constitution, which I think we
About this resolution that as I
reflect on the challenges that I
see, um in higher, Ed, I feel
like this, um
Hmm. Maybe something that
Actually, it's not helpful at
all. Or if it is helpful. It's
incremental, and it doesn't
address where I think we
actually do have an opportunity
to think about structural
improvements for good governance
and higher education.
So my real fear is that this, um
constitutional amendment
apologizing in the airport? Um
will
Um, be a distraction in some
ways from the structural issues
that we are not addressing in
the state, and I'll give you a
brief example. I was just on a
webinar a few days ago where,
Um, Arizona, the regions of
Arizona, which have a system
wide border regions, where is
rolling out its strategic new
initiative on dealing with
health care, workforce training,
and they were able to optimize
Their process across the entire
system, where each institution
focuses on what it is uniquely
good at. We do not have the
opportunity to really have that
type of governance structure in
place at the moment, and so I
would, um, ask the good senators
who I know are passionate about
higher ed as I am. I've spent
thousands of volunteer hours in
this role.
To, um um, partner with with me
and other regions on how do we
really address the real issue,
and I think we do have quality
checks and balances for regional
equipment. Thank you. Region
Chair, Madam chair. Thank you.
Members of the committee.
Senator. I don't know who went
first senator and I've written
all of us under our Tuesday
Pena.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators. Um
Number one was the University of
New Mexico. I'm chair, Senator.
They're not excluded. They're
listed in a separate section of
the bill. The reason for that
is, um, is a little unique
because they have seven regions.
And all the other universities
have five.
And so it's broken down in the
Constitution on page
Do not believe that's where you
and M is.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators, um, with respect to
the nominating committee itself
of the bill, Um
How do you see that unfolding?
How do you see who's going to
Appoint the nomination
Commission committee. And how do
you see that unfolding Because
you're basically authorizing us
as legislative body by law to
create that process, So yeah.
What? What is your vision for
that? I would assume that you
have some sort of vision.
Indeed, indeed. Uh, Madam Chair
Senator Well,
I have thought about this.
Through the years we've had
different iterations. Um
I think traditionally, we would
probably have Legislative
council.
Maybe the governor, others
leadership recommending some
candidates, But I think we can
also so that probably would be
the recommending entity now who
would be on the nominating
committee would be a broader, I
think more inspired list of
people that could include
members of the community members
of academia.
Um
And so you'd actually have some
people from the field.
Involved and not just
People without those
backgrounds.
But as you mentioned, we would
define that.
Set of bargain down the
constitution with minutia.
Um, Madam Sharon Senators, would
you
Anticipate that the nominating
committee be composed of people
who have some
Knowledge or ties to the
institution. Or would they just
be simply?
Lack of better word political
appointees that that, uh
Uh, they appoint.
To fill that role.
Church senator, That would be my
desire. Absolutely. And do you,
Madam Chair and Senator, Do you
foresee a nominating committee
for
Each separate appointment or do
you foresee a nominating
committee that would serve the
whole state and every
institution for nominations that
would come before it?
This piece of legislation, Madam
Chair Senator says that for each
school, there will be one.
So you're anticipating
different? Uh, not me.
Committees by by school. Yeah.
Um
Madam chair and senators, I I
happen to be honest nominating
committee, not for a region but
to select the success. General
Grizzle at the institute. I'm
happy to do that, but, uh, I
I am concerned sometimes when we
see, uh, the process where
That are being nominated.
That have no, uh, connection or
no.
Prior.
Understanding of the
institution, and I think
sometimes we we need some of
that connection. And so I
I guess philosophically. I
support this idea. I wish we had
more flesh on the law that you
anticipate dropping, but I
realized we have to then have
the discussion about that. But
Thank you for bringing this
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just wanted to. I think
there's broad agreement on that
feeling. And I heard from one
school this session. That said,
Hey, you know, we're a little
different.
Um, and we hope that process
would be recognizing our
uniqueness. We felt that way and
lost created state, So I think
that would be our embedded local
knowledge to do a region.
Senator TCP now.
Thank you, madam Chairman and
and Senator Senators.
Um, I
I just I'm not sure that this
isn't a solution in search of a
problem.
And and I don't understand.
What
What would be improved by this
because you still would have
somehow the governor would be
Or somebody is going to be
coming up with the nominating
committee and all the issues
somebody's got to apply to the
mean the advantage of having the
executive
Do this is the executive is
recruiting constantly and
people I think would go to the
executive with requests to serve
or the executive would reach out
to them for request to serve, so
you're still going to have the
executive
Referring people to the
nominating committee. I just
don't see the nominating
committee, you know, putting ads
in the paper circulating. I just
think it's complicated by the
solution to anything. So if you
could explain why you think this
is needed, Madam Chair, Senator,
I gladly would. Um, I've been
here for three governors now.
And I first started working this
under the first governor of of
my party.
And what we saw was we saw
people almost exclusively from
the donor political class
selected these jobs.
We then saw the same thing with
the last governor.
To, um and we've been proposing
these ideas of nominating
committee during this governor
and I saw that, um they had a
little committee wasn't the
perfect like group of nominating
committee, but they actually had
a committee. Suddenly, for the
first time we saw
Community leaders organizers,
people who are not part of the
donor class.
Come up from the bottom. We saw
bottom up process that I would
submit people never would be on
the radar of the governor.
Um, necessarily, maybe a broader
group of people that got
involved. It was on their radar,
but it's just, there's just
improves the quality of these
Picks.
And if the governor has some
pics great, send them to the
committee. But it's just an
interview process just like you
would want to have for any job.
In America and, um and it we've
seen, it does improve the
quality of the appointments, and
I think it frankly helps the
governor because
You know?
Not a lot of people can get into
the governor's office and know
how to do that.
And so, um, this is a this farms
that out to a broader group of
people, including a pick that he
or she may what to be on a
region.
And then recommends the best of
the best up to him.
So I think it'll we've seen
firsthand interviewing casting a
wider net improves the quality
to have been around this
building for three governors
Three different or to this. I
will remind you there in the
last administration where it's a
very controversial and disparage
my party. But what Senator Um
Stein born said, is that often
especially larger universities,
it is to push money you donated.
And quite frankly, we have some
very heated confirmations during
that administration for that
very reason. If you recall, I
think that could have been
avoided. I'm not gonna say that
they didn't love and passionate
about the university. You and I
are passionate about, but I
think some of that could have
been avoided. And I think that
resonated through very more low
morale and certain departments
around the universe.
And so that's the problem. I
have seen this side of the aisle
and we know and I do think that
this governor has done a better
job with that nominating
commission. But I only think
that's happening anymore. I'm
not sure I think she started out
with doing it. Um, I'm not sure
quite frankly, if it's still
here, you think back to the
number of ministrations you've
been in this building for and
seeing how political some of
those border regions have been
mollify that a bit.
And get some not saying any
border region have region hasn't
been passionate, disparaging and
that, but I do think it sets a
process that's a little less. Um
Of course.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
Are there. Do you expect?
Madam chair.
Mhm as we know those of us that
have ever been to a school board
meeting.
Or those who have ever been
around academia. There's so much
path. Um, I think you will see
an incredible amount of interest
in serving as a region being
given that opportunity to serve.
Your local higher education
school. So, um, I think the
short answer is yes, I believe
baseball. I think people who
love their universities and
would love TCP no and myself
would love to be on the U. N MP
Regardless, But I'll speak for
you, Senator. I did have some
saying what should happen.
Just and and were dominating the
conversation. I'm sorry,
Senator.
Well, I'm just, um, I'm I know
this shopping ahead, but I would
expect it to be easy.
Muddy
Thank you very much. That's all
I have manager.
Thank you Other members of the
committee.
Uh, senators. The one thing I
was thinking is
On your your page for
You say no more than 50% shall
be of the same political party.
I was gonna offer an amendment
adding language that that we
frequently do, and it says
cannot have changed their, uh,
political affiliation within the
last three years. But
I'm not going to, because as I'm
looking at this that
That same language about
Just not the same political
party.
Is already in our constitution,
and I think it would be a little
odd to have
This language added on just for
this specific section, But that
is something that I hope is in.
If if this does pass that that
would be in any enabling
legislation to stay so that
people can game the system to
get around.
What's the will of the
committee?
And we're we have emotion. Let's
do a roll call vote.
Senator Baca. Senator Baca is
excuse Senator Lopez. No,
Senator Lopez votes. No. Senator
McKenna. Yes, Senator McKenna
votes. Yes, Senator Morris
Senator Morris votes? Yes,
Senator. Nibert, Senator.
Neighbor votes Yes, Senator or
TZ Pinot.
No, and I'll explain my blue
senator TZ Pinot votes. No.
Senator Pirtle is excuse.
Senator Stefan IX, Senator
Stefan IX votes. Yes, Senator
Stewart? Yes, Senator Stewart
votes? Yes, Senator Army. Oh,
yes. Senators. Her mule votes.
Yes, Senator Doig? Yes, Senator.
Do his votes. Yes. You have a do
password? Seven s senator or
TCP? No to explain is about
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
and I just wanted to
I explained that I was, I think,
swayed by the the testimony of
Regent Kim Sanchez radio.
Ah!
That's all right. Senator
Gonzalez? Yeah, XJR five.
Go ahead, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. If you
wouldn't mind bringing the micro
close to you, these mikes are
terrible.
Thank you, Um, Senator Senate
Joint Resolution five.
Madam chair and members, um
First, maybe just giving you a
little bit of some during the
interim committee with, um
I park Oh, this has been a
discussion has been or or a few
years and, uh, where we are, you
know, but also seeing this as a
very important
Because of a number of members
that it effects
And this would amend article 20
of the Constitution of New
Mexico by adding a new section.
To prohibit the expenditures or
encumbrance of the trust fund
created for public employees.
Retirees healthcare for any
purpose except for the soul.
And exclusive benefit of the
trust of beneficiaries providing
for the administration of the
trust fund and affirming certain
property rights.
Uh, Madam Chair members, some
Health care act was created in
1990.
And that's of December 31st of
2023. The trust fund has about
1.4. I'm sorry. $1.34 billion
Currently membership for the
retirees is 48,520.
And then total membership of
66,004 06. As of January. 1st of
20 of
2024 active participating.
Contributing is 93,595 sf June
30th of 2023 Active employees
contribute to the plan is over
300 entities.
Um, statutory language for the
retiree Healthcare Under section
10-7 c dash 15 retiree health
care.
Fund contribution states.
As a condition of employment for
participating employees of an
employer.
That chooses to become a
participating employer.
After January 1st 1998 so
contribute to the fund, an
amount that is determined to be
appropriated by the board each
month. Participating employers
shall deduct the contribution
from the participating
employees Salary and shall remit
is to the board as provided by
the procedures that the board
May require
Oh,
Madam chair, remembers some
Um, I do have a
Our executive here that is going
to add a little bit more to
this.
But also
Within a similar to the pension
requirements. Gas P
Is performed and determined to
be
44.16 funded in 19.
In 2023, which is improvement
from 33.33% in 2022.
And 25.
0.39 in 2021.
So it does meet the compliance
it is showing an effort in the
much more improvement to the
sounds of the fun with that I
will yield to my expert up and
we have all Mr Neal.
Coffin, Madam chair members of
the committee person I like to
think of sponsor Senator
Gonzalez for bringing forth this
resolution. I just wanted to
provide a little bit more. I
guess history in regards to this
trust fund. Um, as was stated
back in 1990. When this was
created. There was no pre
material funding there. So we
have something that has been
through the hard work of our
board. It's been through the
membership.
Of not only the employees who
have been participating and
contributing to this program,
but also the employers. This has
been an achievement that over
the years has continued to grow
and to get us to that $1.34
billion, as Senator Gonzalez
stated.
I'm looking over that time just
looking back to 2007. We were at
about 122 Million expected not
to be solvent in 2014. We have
continued to show since that
time we've made that improvement
and we continue to make that
improvement. So we're really
looking to do is make sure that
we are protecting those funds
that have been contributed
By our public servants. Uh, you
know, every pay period. Have
them come out there. Check as
well as those employers And that
money goes into this fund to
really ensure that this program
is also around for future
retirees. As was stated there's
over 93,000 current individuals
who are contributing to this
program, who will be expecting a
benefit in the future from this,
and so this
This fund is going to help
enable and ensure that we do
this. But in addition to helping
those employees and protecting
it, it also helps our employers.
Um as stated before for the guys
be. There is some studies that
we've got to do similar to the
pensions for other post
employment benefits. Um and that
is really taking a look at what
those liabilities are, as we
continue to build on this trust
fund, it actually helps our
employers
It reduces the liability that
they have to report on their
financial statements that could
potentially affect their
yielding bonds.
Um, so it's It's really helps
with that aspect as well. Um, it
is a tool that's used for us in
making sure that we look at our
solvency before. Like I said, we
were, you know, maybe at seven
years we're now beyond those 30
years and our solvency. Um,
looking at the Gatsby, it's
projecting us through at least
the June 30th of 2070. So it's
really pushing it out there
based on that study as a tool
that we use
We know as far as our employers
as far as the liabilities, we
continue to be the continue to
see those reduced looking at the
state it's currently based on
2022 was 551 million. That's a
reduction from previous years
city of Albuquerque, 157.
Million as part of their
liabilities. We know that a PS
264 million, like, uh, screws,
public schools.
Also seeing as far as the
reduction, which is about 75
million in their liabilities, so
this really helps to ensure as
we grow this particular fund,
not only ensuring the future,
but it's helping our employers
to have to report these
liabilities. Um, one of the
other things, too, is this is
important legislation that we're
asking because it to be able to
bring it before the people and
giving them an opportunity to
weigh in and vote on this.
Um, And if passed, it would
protect this trust fund and
ensuring that the many public
servants who have dedicated
their careers to government and
entities who have been making
these contributions to the
program, everything expectation
of having the retiree health
care benefit program available
to them would be there when they
need it. Thanks, committee and I
do stand for any additional
questions.
Great. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator. We did not have anyone
sign up and support or
opposition on this bill. If
anyone in the audience would
like to raise their hand to
indicate support, please do so.
Anyone would like to raise their
hand to indicate opposition.
Please do so.
And I'll just remind folks again
and check the procedures of the
rules Committee for first light.
If you want to make public, um
All right. Did I already? Yes.
Members of the committee and
Senator Library. Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman and Senator.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. I recently met with Mr
Ron. True Hill retired from N M.
D O T with concerns when it
comes to retirement in the state
of New Mexico, And so you're
absolutely right. One of the
major themes of that
conversation was ensuring that
we protect benefits of retirees.
Because they're expecting this
benefit upon upon retirement,
And so it's not a question,
Madam chairwoman. I just wanted
to thank you for this bill. Mr.
Trujillo spoke up on behalf of
the number of state employees
who were in support of your
bill. Senator Gonzalez and I
promised them I would make that
comment. Thank you, madam
Chairwoman.
Thank you, Senator Artisan Pino.
Thank you, madam Chairman and
Senator. Uh
Is the point of this bill, too.
Is that is the reason this bill
is being a this constitutional
amendment.
Is being advanced Fear of the
retirees over the Healthcare
Authority Act. Madam Chair,
Senator Ortiz a piano. I don't
necessarily believe that isn't
fair of the Healthcare Authority
Act. I believe it based on the
statements that's been made
based on Healthcare Authority
Act that they are expecting to
drive additional savings
through. Um you know the the
joint procurement and and, uh,
you know, really trying to
improve healthcare in New
Mexico. I actually think that's
only going to help us to one
build our trust fund and how
Continue to stabilize this fund,
so I don't think it's in a
reaction to it. Um, but this is
just something that as far as
overtime this bond has built up,
you know, looking back, you
know, back to 2007 You know, 100
and 22 billion was great, but it
probably wasn't a large number
and not knowing if we'd be
solvent.
To where we are today at 1.34
billion and expecting additional
growth. We just want to make
sure that this stays with the
governance of our board who
represents broad stakeholders. I
mean they represent from the
counties to the cities to the
states, all these different
entities and really ensuring
that this trust fund is being
utilized for the beneficiaries.
Who have contributed to this
fund, and I think that's really
what this resolution is doing
and what we're looking to
protect. The Constitution is
making sure that that is staying
with them and having a voice to
make sure it's protected similar
to how the pension systems were.
I believe back in 98 when it
passed to protect their funds as
well.
And Madam Chairman and Senator
Mr Keefer. Uh,
Are we going to expect similar
Constitutional amendments or
The state employees and for the
educational room employees and
for the A. P s employees who are
covered by state health benefit
plans. I mean, what makes the
retiree plan any different from
the others that the state
supports with Madam Chair said
that 30 TCP? No, thank you for
that question of one of the
things that's different for us
is we're not a pay as you go
system. Would you look at the
state you look at a P s or a lot
of other institutions that I
worked at you and haven't seen
him a lot of them. You know, you
pay your premiums, and that's
what you're using to pay Those
claims. At that point we do.
The same thing somewhere with
our retirees. They make premiums
to help cover those claims
costs.
But what's different here is
this is coming out of our
payroll. This is coming out of
our paychecks, 1% and 2% that
employer pays as part of our
compensation a little bit more
far enhanced retirees. What
they're doing is they're pre
paying for this benefit so that
pre payment is really what's
going into this to trust to
really ensure the longevity and
making sure that it's down the
road. It's available to them, so
it is very different than a lot
of those other programs because
of the fact that it is pretty.
It is prepaid through active
workers before they actually
start to utilize.
Is it?
And madam was chairman and
Senator Gonzalez and Mr Crawford
is
Is this really belong in the
Constitution?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator TZ
Pinot. Um I'm not a legal person
by any means, but based on the
fact that I think you know
members such as myself who have
been contributing to this we
want just to ensure that this is
protected. You know, we've been
investing in this benefit
investing in this trust fund,
and I think it just wanting to
ensure that there's a
protections that are available,
and I don't think that our
benefit is any different than so
much of the pensions where they
wanted to really protected and
insure it.
When they passed this into the
Constitution. You know, we've
been very much closely, you
know, compared to him as far as
how we do fund this. We do have
some different funding
arrangements, but as far as
those contributions from
payroll, it works very similar,
and we want to ensure that we're
protecting it for the members
who participate in this
Member met him chairman and
senator and Mr Keefer did the
has there been any raid on the
fund in the past? I mean, you re
protecting ourselves against
possible future danger, or have
you actually had some experience
with this fund was not
protected.
Well, madam.
Um and final question, Madam
Madam Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez. What was the vote in
the iPod committee on this?
Was it unanimous? Or was it a
split vote, Madam chair? Uh,
forties Pinot. I believe it's a
split vote, and I apologize. I
believe it was 5 to 4. But I
won't quote myself on that. But
thank you. Thank you very much,
madam Chairman pointed to say
Secretary Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Neighbor.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Senator, Um
Just to be clear. There's no
public money going,
Madam Chair, Senator Cyber, Um
as far as our funding sources,
we do have five funding sources.
Um, so one of them is one of the
ones we've been talking about,
which is the employee employer
contributions. That's the
percentage that myself and my
employer contribute to it. We do
have the premiums that are
retirees.
Uh, pay into this. We do have
the tax distribution fund. We do
have miscellaneous income. So
what we receive from being a
Medicare part D exit plan. There
is some federal dollars that we
get, which is something that's
also unique to our program
That's separate from a lot of
active plans because we do offer
Medicare that we get that money.
And then just our interest
income. So we have those five
different sources. Now, of
course, you know, A lot of
statements are made about the
employer contributions as some
of that dollars that the
employers received does come
maybe from the General fund,
which in turn is you know paid
on behalf for those employees,
So in some cases, they do state
that it is probably indirect if
we look at page one line 23
Cells from any source
whatsoever.
And then page two lines. Six
Trust fund shall never be used.
So my concern is that if there
are public money is going in
there
And we're now saying that those
funds will never be used for any
other purpose as the
Senator or TCP? No, uh, I
believe was was stating.
There may come a need and we did
it within my tenure in this in
this legislature first year we
had to
Every dollar we could to keep
government afloat and
If I read this correctly,
It's saying that the entire
Amount.
And all the funds from any
source even funds that state
government or
Federal government or whatever
put in this
I understand protecting what the
employee puts in.
I don't have any problem in
protecting their
Contributions.
But the other monies that go
into this I'm not sure we should
put a
Prohibition that this place is
on that that we can never
Never
Go back and claw back those
funds even if it's necessary to
sustain the functioning of
government, and that's a big
concern.
Um
Madam chair and and senator on
Page two.
Line 17 and 18.
The board. If I read this
correctly, has full control over
those and
I don't know much about this
board. I know maybe a little
more about the public employees
retirement stuff, and they're
I don't know much about this
board. I know maybe a little
more about the public employees,
retirement stuff and their board
and the investments that they
they make.
And I've always had some concern
that the people who are
Charged with making
Uh, decisions involving
literally billions of dollars.
Many of them don't have. Maybe
none of them have
Background training. What have
you experience too?
Engage in the investment aspects
of of that money. Uh, you know,
and so I'm concerned about the
exclusive power and authority
that the Constitution
Seems to me that
We
Have created some systems for
failure because we don't have
Requirements that these people
have the experience, uh, that's
necessary to deal with.
Particularly those large sums of
money, So I just saw those two
things out. I'm sure Thank you,
Senator. Senator Phonics.
Thank you. Members of the
committee.
I have a couple of questions.
Um, I was looking at the
analysis to
And it was talking about
The Bartlett versus Cameron
case.
Help that a cola?
Is not a property right? Would
this constitutional amendments
Make a caller property, right?
If, or is there a cola in this
in this context or that is that
just true for petrol, Madam.
Madam chairman. No, there's not
a cola associated with this. Um
this is is
Essentially the the funds, as I
described before, I will say
over the last 1112 years we have
made requests to increase
increase employee and employer
contributions that,
unfortunately not been
successful in passing
legislation. Um, but that is
something that is still at the
approval of the Legislature. As
far as how we set those
Percentages, So I know when some
of the question comes up about
this funding, even in statute
does talk about this fun to that
It has to be used for our
beneficiaries. So the
Constitution protection is just
strictly towards this trust fund
as it relates to Page two. Line
number six when we're describing
that back in 2016, I do recall
yes. When the legislator did
take action, and they reduce
some of our funding sources that
did what that did, you know,
create a setback. I think over
$300 million are board was able
to bounce back and, you know,
kind of
Recover from it and continue to
put us on a trajectory where we
are today at 44%, you know,
funded status.
Um as well as probably one of
the top 15, maybe even higher
within the US as far as having a
funded status as it relates to
open benefits,
So I'm also I'm looking at
article 20.
Section 22 of our Constitution,
which it looks like this was
largely
Is largely, uh, mimicking.
But
There's different language.
And I'm wondering why so
Let's see here.
Says, Uh, Legislature shall not
enact any law that alters the
funding formula for retiree
health care plan unless the
Legislature preserves benefits
and provides adequate funding.
Um it's a little bit different.
And and section article 20
section 22 says the Legislature
shall not enact any law that
increases the benefits paid by
the system in any manner or
changes the funding formula for
retirement plan unless adequate
funding.
Provided there's There's this
prohibition on increasing
benefits.
In section 22 that is not and in
your proposed amendment. Why,
Madam chair? Another great
question. Um, You're right.
right? As far as you know how
this constitution was drafted.
It was very similarly drafted to
that article, which is for the
pension systems, which is why
you'll see a lot of the
notations as regards to the
Public Employees Retirement
system. Being updated to the
employees, Uh, retiree health
care system.
Now as it relates to paragraph C
on that particular sentence,
where it is stating about
increasing the benefits Once
again, we are a little bit
different than the pension
systems. You know the pension
systems who are actually paying
out of their funds specifically
to the employees we did not feel
is exactly the same terminology
or language that we would use
for benefits.
Um So really, what we're looking
at is ensuring the program, the
benefits and really just that
that funding form of formula to
help ensure that you know, as
the employees are contributing.
everybody's contributing that
we're still able to offer these
benefits. But we didn't feel
that increase was appropriate
statement of how it's covered.
We understand that there's the,
uh different acts that are past
that you know, will require us
to cover benefits. Um, so it did
really mirror completely because
of the fact there is those
differences.
Okay, That makes sense. Thank
you.
Other members of the committee,
Senator Stewart Man trying to
Other members of the committee.
Senator Stewart Mantra do pass.
Alright, We're on emotion for do
pass. Let's do a rock over
center Baca. Senator Baca is
excuse. Senator Lopez.
Yes, Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Moore's Senator Morris votes no
Senator. Neighbor, Senator
Nyberg. Votes knows Senator or G
p No senator or GDP. No votes.
No Senator Pirtle is excused.
Senator Stefan IX, Senator
Stefanik votes? No. Senator
Stewart. Yes, Senator Stewart
votes Yes, Senator. Hard meal
army about Yes, Senator. Do Hig.
Yes, Senator. Do big boats. Yes.
Another 5 to 4 Vote you have to
do pass editor. Thank you, Madam
Chair members. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, Senator
Tallman.
Uh, SJM one
Senator Go ahead.
Senator Thomann if you can push
here
Oh, so I turned it out. Good
morning. Members of the
committee. Thank you for
scheduling this
Here to talk about Senate Joint
Memorial one
Um
Thanks for
Scheduling this and
This is extremely important
issue.
Uh,
And why is that?
Because we are United States is
falling behind the rest of the
Modern industrials world of
respect to infrastructure.
Um
Used to be the envy of the
world. 30 40 50 years ago no
longer
Used to be number in the top
five. Now we're ranked about
number 20.
I was in Europe this summer.
And I'm here to tell you when
you come back to United States,
it looks like we're a third
world country.
The high speed 15,000 miles of
high speed train.
And they have this roads are
much better condition.
And I've been to China twice in
the last 20 years. They got
25,000 miles of high speed rail
people don't realize.
How advanced their
infrastructure is where the
bridges and the airports, the
roads, the high speed trains. If
we can't move goods and services
fast
We're not going to be
competitive with the rest of the
world.
China spends 8% of their GMP and
infrastructure. Europe spends 5%
United States spends 2.5%. In
other words, China spends three
times more the GMP on
infrastructure. China's
Europe spends twice as much as
the United States.
Um
The Biden bill familiar with
that that he signed as the
president signed in November of
21.
As far short of what we need all
the experts
Say that we need 5 to $7
Trillion that bill dividing bill
was only $1 Trillion, and half
of that.
Was just a re appropriation, so
it's really only a half a
billion half a trillion dollars
in new money.
Just to give you an example in
New Mexico.
But there's actually 13 major
categories in the Biden bill.
Half of those cattle were
getting no money in half of
those categories. No money for
electric grid.
We have. Well, incidentally, you
haven't. Uh,
Mark Strand. He he was invited
to the White House last year, so
he's bringing a message straight
from the White House to us.
Thank you for being here, Mark.
Thank you so
Half the categories. We're not
even getting any money when the
potential for, uh
For renewable energy and no
money to help move all that
energy.
Um, water. Remember the state
engineer quit December of 21 any
publicly stated reason he quit
was because he didn't have the
resources.
He said he needed $2 billion for
water infrastructure.
And the Biden bill. There's only
$350,000 million, which is 1/6
of what we need Broadband.
Two years ago.
What? It was stated that we
needed to billion dollars in
order to provide broadband
everybody in the state. That
figure has gone up.
$3 billion because
We're only getting $100 million.
In the Biden bill was just a
trickle of what we need. You
know, there's you'll see
headlines.
In a paper saying we got they
got a $1 million grant.
From the federal government for
broadband. Well, it's uh
It's nothing
Compared to what we need.
No money for high speed rail.
I've seen maps where the first
route western Mississippi for
high speed rail would go through
New Mexico.
No money for that.
We are getting a lot of money,
maybe an inordinate amount of
money for roads and bridges. I
asked my lobbyist friends who
have been working with for three
years and his bill. Why is that?
Why are we getting a
disproportionate amount of money
on roads and bridges when we
have so many other needs?
He says. That's because the auto
manufacturers and the highway
contractors have a
Undue amount of influence.
Uh um.
So
The beauty of this program.
Instead it there's no doesn't
increase taxes, and there's no
Um, no increase in debt.
And, um
So
The
The reason for that is because
The way it's structured.
Is that the infrastructure
banquet exchange existing United
States Department of Treasury
debt for preferred stock.
And it would pay interest of 2%
2% points about the United
States. Department of Treasury
yield to investors, with all
transactions being federally
insured.
And and it would be model and
previous banks, which have
helped to build much of the
United States. Infrastructure,
Believe it or not, this idea was
invented by Alexander Hamilton's
And it's actually this national
infrastructure bank has
mentioned in the play. Um
Hamilton's
They? They used it after the
revolutionary more to
reconstruct infrastructure,
Lincoln used it ever heard
Lincoln did because he was dead.
But after the Civil war, the
United States use it to refer
reconstruction and an FDR use it
to finance much of the much of
the new deal.
Um
So
Um
The, uh I have a sheet here is
put out by your New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce.
And they list the 10 most
important issues.
That are used by businesses to
select sites.
And number one is
infrastructure.
Number two is a availability of
skilled labor number three is
Labor costs number four is
quality of life, Some things
like education and crime, and
number five is construction
costs and you have to get down
to number six before they even
mentioned taxes. So
Infrastructure, according to the
Chamber of Commerce is the
number one
Most important issue that site
selection used to decide where
they're going to locate.
Um, business.
So
And roughly half to state
legislatures have passed similar
resolutions endorsing this bill.
And also there's been normal.
Numerous national
Organizations have endorsed this
bill. Some of them are listed on
the back of the hand out, and
it's just a sampling. There's
many more
And, um
Over the last three years. I
have spearheaded the op ed
Pieces in the journal
One of which contained literally
20 signatures have never seen
before or since adjourned to
allow that many signatures are
out that piece. We have two
members sitting here who signed
it.
Head up did does, uh,
Senators, Delfonics and
That
That bed piece.
So I've been involved in
literally dozens of nationals
sponsored a resolution at the
National Council state
legislatures this summer.
On this issue.
So
I turned to my good friend Mark.
Would you like to make a few
comments?
Thank you so much for having me
My name is Mark Strand. I am a
journeyman lineman.
I have worked on the power grid
for 30 years. I've done
everything from street lights up
to 345,000 volts in a stainless
steel suit and the transmission
line. It has been an incredible
and wonderful career. Give you
that right off the bat. The
reason I support this is I
support the green energy. I see
the renewables. I see what's
happening and I see what's
coming in our grid.
When our grid was first formed.
It was designed to have power
plants in one location and move
that power from that location
down to the city's. Now we're
changing that we're looking at
these wind farms and solar farms
and we're trying to get this
power back and forth that's
gonna put in a mainstream strain
on our grid.
There's a lot more power being
transmitted back and forth than
ever before.
When I first started, I remember
60 AMP. Meters on meat on
houses. Now we're up to 300 AMP
Meter Basis on houses, the load
has done nothing but increase
with the availability and the
new cars that are coming out the
E V s. We're going to put that
much more strain on our grid to
make sure that we get that power
moved around.
It's important to have funding
in order to supply that this
bill does that it provides the
funding to rebuild our grid to
help grow it. What else does
that mean? That means we get
more apprentices out there We
get more workers to me. When
you're working on a power grid.
You need to make sure that that
man is or women is completely
trained that they understand.
Because we don't get second
chances in our jobs. We get one
shot to do it, and that's it.
You go to ground. You don't see
your family anymore.
We want that We need to make
sure that we promote good
training in these fields these
jobs and that's what this bill
does is. It makes sure that the
work is done by union labor
where they've had at least a
four year apprenticeship to make
sure that they understand the
dangers the risk and they
understand what they're doing
out there.
It also promotes Davis Bacon
wages. I mean, we want to make
sure that these projects are
money is going to a career, not
just a simple job that comes and
goes something that's going to
support the family.
The community and everybody
else.
It has
Project labor agreements to
ensure that it is done by
individuals that know what
they're doing to make sure you
have a workforce that builds it
and build it right the first
time. And the other thing that I
promote out of this bill is it
has by American everything in it
needs to come from here. I'm
tired of seeing our money go
overseas. I want to see it. Stay
here.
Stay within America. It's our
money. It should help promote
us. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We had one person
sign up and support ALF al Fecha
tardy.
I don't know if she is online.
Alright, good. She she She's
online. Yeah, Yes. Thank you
very much.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman. Uh, my name is Alfa
Commute Tardy. I'm a
macroeconomist with the
Coalition for National
Infrastructure Bank, and I
support this resolution because
I had a hand in actually
drafting the US bill so that it
will build all of our nation's
infrastructure in every single
district in the country. There's
adequate.
Funding for everything. And in
addition, it will really reboot
and reboost our economy re sure
manufacturing as Mark Strand has
has mentioned and build out
infrastructure critical
infrastructure in New Mexico,
Um, nothing more is needed than
more water supplies in the
state. A bolstered electric
grid. Um, um, availability of
better transportation. It's a
very low density state. We want
to get broadband added to every
single area.
And there's lots and lots that
can be done by this bank,
including moving water around
building the electric grid
building transmission lines,
building affordable housing and
making sure that all your roads
and bridges are up to snuff.
And, um we can really create
lots of great paying jobs in the
state for the residents of New
Mexico. Thank you very much.
Thank you, but anyone in the
audience like to raise their
hand to indicate support
All right. We have one person
sign up in opposition. Carter
Bundy. If you would come up to
the table and use the
microphone, so focus online can
hear.
This work Great. Thanks, madam
Chair members of the committee.
Carter Bundy with halfs me. Um,
we want to thank Senator
Tollman. And of course, my
brother, Mark Strand for
supporting infrastructure. We
agree with everything they've
said, And with Ms McCarty about
the importance of
infrastructure, it's absolutely
vital. Unfortunately, we believe
that this bill is fatally
flipped, not this resolution.
The bill in Washington, D. C is
fatally flawed and we've brought
this up with Ms McCarty. Um and
they've talked about taking out,
but it absolutely hasn't
happened yet. So in section 205
d one
Listening criteria, it says in
cases where infrastructure is
publicly or privately owned, a
preference for projects and it
lists several, but then says
that leverage private financing,
including public private
partnerships, or where companies
can show that the additional
capital could not be obtained
from commercial sources.
There is a huge movement of foot
in this country and only takes a
quick Google of black rock and
global infrastructure partners.
There's a huge movement for the
hedge funds and Wall Street in
this country to acquire public
infrastructure and make billions
of dollars off of consumers. And
even though there's some
construction protections in the
bill
There are absolutely no
protections when it comes to
operations and maintenance.
Um
BlackRock just acquired global
investment partners, and their
goal is to take over as many
water utilities, wastewater
facilities roads, etcetera as
they can because it becomes very
profitable once they have that
monopoly. Um I'll just give you
a quick example. If I may, Madam
chair in Chicago in February,
2009, an entity called Chicago
parking meters.
Paid the city of Chicago $2
billion for a 75 year concession
agreement for their 36,000
parking meters.
They were cooped that money in
the first five years because
what happens for those of us who
have been lucky enough to be in
Chicago in the summer is every
time there's a parade, and they
ain't given Saturday or Sunday
in Chicago, there's 15 or the
city of Chicago has to write a
massive multi $100,000 check to
Morgen Stanley.
Morgan Stanley from Wall Street,
who owns those parking meters.
Because they lost the right to
use it. Same thing for the city
of Denver. Denver's attorneys
Chicago's attorneys can get
taken by these people. This is
not going to be good for New
Mexico. They're professionals in
London, Hong Kong L, a New York
who do nothing but make sure
they can extract maximum profits
on the backs of consumers and
the workers who do the
operations and maintenance. Not
my good friends who do
necessarily the construction.
They're going to be taken care
of, But this is a bad deal for
Americans. We do support
infrastructure.
But we hope that you will not
support this memorial and we do
thank Senator Tommy for drawing
attention to the need for
infrastructure. Thank you.
Can I respond to that? Uh, well,
Senator, let's why don't we go
ahead and get on the on the
bill, and then I respond in the
course of that discussion. Was
there anyone in the audience who
want to raise their hand to
indicate opposition?
Right. See none. Members of
Senate or TCP? No.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
thank you, senator for bringing
this forward.
Um, I think you know you've done
a great deal of work on this. Uh
and you alone among us, I think
has been willing to sit through
the innumerable national
conference calls on
I think that your your
resolution calling for support
at the congressional level.
Your memorial calling for
Supported to congressional level
for this is still valid. I mean,
who knows the the amendments
that might be placed on it in
during this progress through the
legislative process in
Washington it very well might
might have some flaws currently,
that that that, Carter Bundy
pointed out, but those could be
those can be amended out. And I
think
I think the overall purpose of
this to try to deal with our
infrastructure need in a very
creative way away that we've
used during wartime and and and
another times when we really
needed to come up with a lot of
cash fast for massive public
expenditures.
That is still a valid concept.
And so I will support your
resolution, Senator. Thank you
for bringing it forward.
Other members of the committee.
No.
Well and and Senator, Uh
If you want. Did you want to
respond to Mr totally against?
Uh, public private partnership
If I thought this bill had
anything to do with the
supporting it
S me is the only union opposing
this. Think about that. And why
are they
There.
Because they eat
They? There's um
They want to do everything.
By the budget.
Dad.
And they're not not going to. So
this is the beauty of this bill
is it doesn't increase the debt
and it doesn't increase taxes.
They asked me wants to control
the projects.
Um
There's no money in so they
They don't want anything built
That doesn't benefit them. What
a selfish attitude. I want to
put effect to maturity back on.
Um, she she was a senior
economist at the International
Monetary Fund.
Um, she was treated like an
ambassador.
She was driven to meetings with
the presence of countries in a
limousine. She's she wrote this
bill. I want to put it back on
and she's gonna refute what we
just heard from him. And and
Senator. I think we're about to
get to a motion on your
memorial. So I think you should
probably, uh,
For four. Hold off on that,
okay?
But Senator Phonics. Thank you,
Madam Chair if you're right
All right. We have a motion for
the past. Let's do a roll Call
vote, Senator Buck up is excuse.
Senator Lopez. Senator Lopez
votes? Yes, Senator McKenna. No
center. McKenna votes. No
Senator Moore's Senator Morris
votes. No Senator. Now, Robert
is excused.
Senator or TCP? No. Yes, Senator
or TCP. No votes. Yes, Senator
Pirtle is excused.
Senator Stefan IX, Senators.
Stefan Expose. Yes, Senator
Stewart is excused.
Senator Harm EO past. I'm just
kidding. Yes, yes, Senator.
Harmony A. But yes, Senator. Do
Hick. Yes, Senator. Do big
boats. Yes, Yes. In favor. You
have a do pass, Senator.
Thanks.
Senator or it Easy
Madam chairman and members of
the committee representative
Eleanor Chavez may be joining
us she's putting on another one
of her bills in a house
committee. At this point, she's
the co sponsor and is sponsoring
it in the house. She and I are
the as far as I know, the only
two members of the Legislature
that have actually worked for
the FDA in the past.
She, as I am, is a social worker
and the the origin of this
Constitutional amendment was
over the summer.
When our interim legislative,
Health and Human Services
Committee
Build several days of hearings
on C Y F D and the problems that
it's facing.
Those hearings.
Produced lots and lots of
Examples of what's wrong.
And lots and lots of suggestions
for things at the at the what I
would call the micro level that
might lead to fixes.
Things like streamlining the
hiring process, um, giving
foster parents larger, uh,
monthly payments in return for
their services, lots and lots of
suggestions.
At the end of the summer, I was
still
Looking at the situation and
realizing that none of what
they've been suggested was
really up to the task.
Of reach, storing this
department to the level of
public support and confidence.
That it had in 2003.
When the federal consent decree
that had been in place for 20
years requiring low caseloads
train staff licensed staff.
Uh, foster care over oversight
through the civil citizens
review boards.
All of those were in place, and
the federal judge took a look at
it and said.
You've met every single
requirement that we placed on
you through this 20 year long
process of federal court
overview.
And they and they lifted the
consent decree.
At that point, the department
started declining immediately.
They stopped hiring only
licensed social workers.
They started reducing the
support they have given to the
civilian review boards. The
Citizen review boards
They started.
Um, cutting corners.
Caseloads grew
The training deteriorated.
And I think the big thing is
they decided around 2010 or
2012 in that period. I'm not
sure because it it was never
announced. It just started
happening.
That they would only serve the
families for whom they had gone
to court and been able to get
custody because they had
substantiated.
When we heard that in one of the
committee's
1012 years ago.
I was astounded because those
are precisely the families that
they were saying We won't serve
you because we didn't
substantiate abuse or neglect
were precisely the families.
That needed to be served.
We didn't know that if the
Legislature that they had
stopped doing what we had
thought was in the in the
Children's code and required
What became clear to me is that
Unless the department is
Functioning in the public
spotlight.
Things go bad too fast.
Too rapidly.
22
Steeply.
To really ever
Have the Legislature or the
public maintain any oversight of
it.
So when
My expert witness Senate of, uh,
senator former former dean of
the New Mexico State School of
social work. Alvin's Dr Alvin
Sally came to our committee this
summer and raised the
possibility of a of a commission
that would oversee the
department.
That kind of struck a chord
because I think that idea
Has the potential
To make sure that the public
oversight of what's going on in
C Y F D is kept clear.
And here's what I think that
this approach would do.
It would change the public's
perception, I think right now
the biggest problem the
department faces and it has
many. It doesn't have enough
workers. It's vacancy rate is
still well over 20%. They're
trying to deal with that, but as
soon as they hire the worker to
others leave out the back door.
It's a dilemma, and the reason
that's a dilemma is because the
public's perception of the
department is so negative.
That they're having trouble
getting people with any kind of
skill, background experience,
background credentials to work
for it.
The people that are able to hire
or largely, not the credential
people that they need to be able
to establish a professional
reputation.
The restore the public's
confidence, so the to feed into
each other until they have a
professional staff.
Confidence is going to say.
But they can't get the
professional staff because they
don't want to work for a
department with such low public
content. Second thing, I think
that this that this could do
Would be to
Reduce the turnover in the way
that the that the, um is that
representative Chavez. Great,
Good coming up represented. We
just started.
So I think, besides restoring
the public's confidence and
attracting more professionals to
work for the department
What it would do would be to
change the the pattern that
we've seen of every time it
administration changes we get a
series of C Y F D secretaries.
So that over for example, in the
last three years in the last two
years, we've had three
secretaries at C Y F. D.
Um, under the previous
governors. We've had similar
turnover in that position.
Each time there's a new
secretary.
And I think the total, uh I sat
down the other day and try to
identify all the previous
secretaries. It was something
like 13, 2nd 12 or 13
secretaries since the department
was founded every time that
secretary changes you have a
change in some other supportive
staff. You have new deputy
secretaries. New Division
directors come in.
And the department does not have
continuity does not have the
kind of stability
That the federal consent decree
oversight required it to have
As long as that federal judges
looking at it. The continuity
continued. Now you have new
leaders coming in, and they
don't have anything to guide
them into what changes are going
to be bad and what changes are
going to be for the for the
good, and so you have that fits
stops and starts a crazy quilt
of policies.
That just makes the public's
confidence, saying the final
thing that I think that that
they they
Commission overseeing the
The department would accomplish.
Would be
To end it would be to increase
transparency.
And it would end the perception
that when the department says we
can't talk about that, because
of our confidentiality
restrictions
That all it's doing is
protecting itself rather than
kids. That may not be true.
They may actually be not able to
speak about something in a given
case because of their protection
of Children and families.
But the public's perception is
they're just covering their
tails.
They're just not willing to fess
up to what they've done wrong.
And it's because their decisions
are all made in the Cabinet.
In the in it within the Cabinet
confines of the cabinet.
They're all made in on the
fourth floor. They're all made
outside of public scrutiny.
Commission and we, incidentally
we used to have a commission
when I first joined the
department.
In 1965.
As a child welfare worker in the
public Department of Public
Welfare. It was run by the
Public Welfare Commission.
Most of state government was run
by commissions.
The State highway Commission.
the state, UH, Public Education
Commission, the state health.
Those were all commissions. It
was Governor Apodaca, who right
as the no form of government
modeled on the federal
government.
But the public Welfare
Commission held meetings every
month. The Republic meetings,
the press went to the meetings.
The public was invited to the
meetings. People had time at the
on the agendas to speak up about
what's going on their perception
of what the problems were.
Their interest in making
changes in what was going on. It
was all a public discussion.
None of that goes on now.
The only time the Legislature
even knows what's going on is
when there's something on the
front page of the paper.
We have interim committee
meetings and we hear all the
results all the successes.
From all the departments, but
this one particularly and we
never hear what the problems
are.
Because who's going to go to
before and before the public and
and and
Reveal your dirty laundry.
Commission would have to a
commission would have to be
making its decisions in public.
Their monthly meetings would
have to be open to the press.
There would be
Participation of the public,
either in person or the
participation.
They could move the meetings
around the state to provide
greater access.
I think the commission would
solve the four big problems
facing this debate is not
professional enough.
And and and the proposal we're
making with professionalizing.
It would provide stability, not
the constant change in turnover.
It would provide an end to it
would provide transparency and
into the perception that it just
keeps all the decisions to
itself and only reveals the good
stuff.
And all those three things would
lead to the fourth thing, and
the biggest is
The total lack of confidence.
And with that, I'll ask my my co
sponsor to say a few words and
then our expert witness is
available to help us answer
questions. Um, thank you, Madam
chair. Thank you, Senator. Um, I
don't have much to add. Um, I
agree with what the senator has
said I am. I have my MSW.
Um and I actually worked for,
um, when it was under human
services, Child Protective
services.
From 81 to 91. I think
Um we were under the federal
consent decree at that point in
time, Madam chair.
Um and the department was able
to make some incredible
improvements. Um, I remember
that they were hiring more
social workers with sws at that
time. Um and we were able to get
some control over our caseloads
also, which is a big issue here.
Um, at this point in time.
I agree that we need more
transparency and we really need
to regain the public trust
again. Um, n c y f d. This is
one of the most important, um
Things that the state does looks
after our Children make sure
that they are not neglected or
abused, and we need to. Um and I
think this is the way that we
get back to Thank you. Dr.
Sally, did you want to
Yes, Madam Chair. Thank you very
much members of the committee.
This marks my 50th year in child
welfare.
Which when students used to tell
me they worked real hard on
their paper. You don't get an A,
but it's 50 years that I've
I have been working primarily in
this state, but I've considered
first cities.
One of the issues that continues
to come up is sustained
leadership.
We've worked in states and
developed fantastic. You don't
have the people competent
workforce to implement it. It
doesn't work.
I want to compliment the
Legislature in 19 Practice Act.
And it does two things and you
attorneys on this committee will
know better than I But my
attorney, friends tell me it
does work.
Protects title. You cannot call
yourself a social worker unless
you have it.
And it protects practice if you
are doing social work, you need
to be a license so short, much
of child welfare is social work.
And it's defined that way in the
ledges and the regulations under
our Real D.
The other things you all have
done really well is in the past
few years you've appropriate in
the governor signed.
And 70 Million Workforce. 50
million to produce 25 more
faculty, which should produce
500 more graduates.
So, yeah, an additional 20
million that you passed last
year. 15 million of that's out
for Stipe. Cost of their trainee
ships, Their internships and 5
million to help move
Someone from a licensed social
worker to a clinical or impact
is
Um, I've worked in the state and
as an expert witness, I handled
the seven named I went to the
party.
When the Joseph Hey, uh, Federal
Court order was dismissed and I
heard top staff say this is
great. We don't have to do this.
No, you do.
But that was the attitude. There
was no accountability and things
have come apart and I don't I'm
not gonna go into that. You You
all read the paper? I'm sure
I'm looking for solutions.
Um, whenever I've consulted
around the country and you from
And child welfare and almost
always comes back to leadership.
Unfortunately, we didn't do it
in this. We had Dr Corinne Wolf
leading us as she passed away
and she was, um we did not
sustain the quality over time,
and I'm not
Talking about individuals. I
just mean
The senators, right every time
you get a new secretary, the
first thing I hear is I'm gonna
do it my way.
And so the programs that take
years to build up to build up
the
Best practice goes out the
window.
Um
So I think it's critical that
this commission with six year
term that would overlap
governors and
Changes in administration and so
forth and provide that
stability.
And also putting in place
qualifications that would ensure
that expertise and hopefully is
carried on for many years.
Because without that sustained
leadership
No plan is gonna work. I'm happy
to answer any other questions
you might have.
Great. Thank you. We don't have
anyone signed up in support of
this bill. We do have two
secretaries signed up who wanted
to speak in opposition.
Ah, and before I go to you, does
anyone want to raise their hand
to indicate support?
Uh, Secretary
If you wouldn't mind using the
microphone.
Good morning again. My name is
Teresa Casado. So I am the
Cabinet Secretary for Children,
Youth and Families Department
and I want to thank you, Madam
chair and members of the
Commission for the opportunity
to speak before you this
morning. Um, I have had
conversations with Senator or TZ
pinot regarding my concerns on
this bill, Um, and so I believe
he's pretty well aware of the
concerns that I have
And I just want to make sure
that I can share those with all
of you. So I am a new secretary
to C Y F D and don't have the
child welfare experience. But I
truly believe that if I were
placed in a position to report
to a commission, it would make
my job so much more difficult
than it already is. I think we
can all recognize that there are
issues facing the department
lack of staff lack of qualified
staff.
With the credentials that
everybody believes that they
have. But I do believe that the
staff we have at C Y F D R
qualified to do the job that
they set out to do. I believe
maybe the department has lacked
in providing additional training
and giving them that clear path
forward that they need to be
able to move in the direction
that things are always changing.
Child welfare is not the same
that it was in the 19 sixties or
seventies or eighties or
nineties or even what it was
five years ago.
Oh,
Things change so rapidly and we
create. We have so much
diversity across the state that
we really have to look at what
needs to be done in each
community to do that.
And I couldn't do this job
without the partnership of my
sister agencies. The ability to
collaborate and coordinate and
just have conversations around
the table during Cabinet
meetings during retreats in
setting the strategic goals for
the administration and
understanding how do we all move
together in the same direction
to provide services? Not just
for those?
That are in the child welfare
system. But those families and
those individuals who are
attending our public schools or
who are receiving services
through early childhood or are
moving on through higher
education or looking for jobs in
Department of Workforce
Solutions. That collaboration is
essential for every Cabinet
secretary to be successful for
every department should be
successful and for the citizens
of our states to fill that
success and be successful.
I believe that each and every
one of you have child welfare.
At your heart. Everybody wants
to see us succeed in to do
better, But I can tell you just
from the conversations that I've
had with individuals in this
room.
Everybody has a different
approach on how to do that. I
don't think there are two people
in here that it agree 100% on
what needs to be done to fix
child welfare. And if I had to
say that
I was reporting to a commission
who had three members who had
three very 50 different views on
how to fix the system.
I, as an executive director
wouldn't know what direction to
take. Who do I take my direction
from?
And how do I try to leave the
department's when everybody has
a different view on how to get
there?
So I believe, although the
intent of this is good, I don't
know how it puts a leader in the
position to stay, and I think it
creates an opportunity for more
turnover at that level when
somebody becomes frustrated
because they can't move in the
direction of positivity.
I also don't know how just
enabling a commission changes
public perception. I believe the
perception and the trust that we
need to gain from the public is
by the hard work that we do in
changing a system around and
having more positive outcomes
for individuals.
I also want to say that with
respect to the Legislature, not
knowing what is going on at the
department. I host a brown bag
lunch in on the first Friday of
every month, and legislators are
invited to attend Give comments
or suggestions of what they want
to see. Um and I believe that
we're open every secretary to
really reporting out and giving
that information.
So I strongly urge you to
consider this recommendation and
how it really will affect those
of us on the ground, doing the
work every day, and I appreciate
your consideration. Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary. We also
have a secretary group Baginski.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. I definitely
stand in strong opposition to
this, with all due respect to
Senator Ortiz de Pino and
representative Chavez, this
administration has taken steps
from Day one to improve systems
for Children and families,
Whether it's our early childhood
education and care system that
was not where it needed to be.
Our health systems are schools.
All of those are the
When I said the other day as we
confirmed Secretary Cassatt owes
the systemic issues that come to
see why have these door or not
the just the systemic issues in
C Y F D there what's happening
in communities? Families can't
get access to healthcare in our
rural communities. They're
challenged. That's why the
governor has put that as a
priority.
Early childhood education and
care is not available to all
families across our state.
That's why she made that a
priority. That's what you all
have done as a legislature by
investing and passing the land
grant creating the early
childhood trust fund creating
the department. We are deeply
embedded with C Y F D across the
state. We sit at the Cabinet
with the health with the
education secretaries and we
work together to solve problems.
How does the commission create a
better public perception that is
a commission create
transparency? The Legislature is
the oversight body provides that
opportunity through hearings
through opportunities for us to
present challenges. And, uh and
what's going well, But I just
think that this at this time is
going to actually erode public
confidence. In what we have done
the steps we've taken in this
administration and now
Undersecretary Cassatt owes
To improve that professionalism
to improve the transparency to
work across the Cabinet and to
work on behalf of the Children
and families who when other
systems have failed when health
and public safety when we think
about C Y F D, the courts, the
public safety early childhood
public education, we're all part
of the child welfare system.
We're all part of making sure
that Children and families are
on track and have the support
So a commission separate and
outside of a cabinet that is
committed to this, I think will
not serve the people well, and
we'll make it more difficult for
us as a state to move forward in
the way that we want to strongly
urge you to not support this
bill, and, um, I was
Hand over the mic. Ok, Thank
you, Secretary. Would anyone
like to raise their hands to
indicate opposition?
That's all we had signed up to
to speak. Um alright, okay.
Members of the committee.
Madam Madam Chairman, would it
be possible to respond to some
of the Yeah, I think I think
that as with with Senator
Tallman
I think respond during the
discussion with the committee.
There's two phonics.
Thank you, madam Chair of
people.
Uh, thank you very much
Children.
I think that, um everyone knows
I don't know, but some of your
discussed in the past
I'm one where there was like.
Aside from the Children too
diluted.
It doesnt tries to help across
departments.
And, um
I'm just wondering.
Yep.
Some of what? You're striving
mission that would be reported
to and this would take some
reorganization in the statue
pollution.
But whether or not there might
be a, uh, mission to report
Senator I'm sorry to interrupt.
Apparently, you can't be heard
on the Webcast. You can move
your your mind closer, very
loud.
Okay?
Is this being picked up?
Somebody could respond. Okay, So
I'm wondering if a commission
that would be reported to buy
the existing
Um, agency on what is
Growing and that the commission
could be seen.
As a partner and a friend versus
a lawsuit.
Um, in a lawsuits have a lot of
reporting and, um, a lot of
threats hanging over them, but a
commission could be seen as a
working partner.
And so I'm just wondering if any
of you madam chair would like to
respond to that.
Madam chairman and and senators
to Phoenix. I think Dr Sally
said he would like to respond to
that He's done a lot of work
looking at how other states have
done this when we first proposed
this
I was under the impression I
think Senator by the A. It is
speech at the Social Summit this
last year brought this idea up.
And he said other states had
tried it anyhow. I thought other
states might have tried it. We
can't find any evidence that any
other state has tried this
particular approach, but there
are a number of states that have
tried things similar to what
you're suggesting. I'd like him
to respond.
Madam Chair is centers. Phonics?
Yes, Senator. TCP knows correct.
There are other states that have
tried this.
And I When I go around the
country, everybody says, child.
Well, I really don't care. I
just care about my home state,
but I looked at these
commissions and they come and
go. They do add more
bureaucracy.
They are quasi like a federal
court order, but they don't have
the strength so it gets from
That bill came up last year.
No, I guess it passed on his
veto.
Uh, that's one approach, but
that's kind of fixing things
after the bad things have
happened, What I'm trying to do
and all my career as prevention
prevention prevention. We have
the technology to prevent a lot
of what's going on or nip it in
the butt early on.
So, but I think a quasi
commission like that that I
haven't seen it work anywhere.
All that's really worked or
federal court orders. Washington
D. C was under one for 10 years.
Now they have the district is up
and running is probably the only
Functioning, in my opinion, well
child welfare system in the
country, But I agree with you. I
don't really think that's the
way to go.
Madam chair. I'm thinking that
if something were created within
the department
We would need to be creative. We
would need to
Step outside of, um
The sinking. That's something
wouldn't work.
I think there are so many, um,
retired.
Professionals.
That in our state that have had
experience with this department
that could actually be the
council of experts.
And I just would ask for us to
think creatively about this
problem. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Harm you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman And so
today is Native American Day in
the roundhouse and I represent
two pueblos. Okay winger and
Santa Clara Pueblo as well as
the hickory A nation and I'm
sure that my native American
brothers and sisters in the
committee room would also want
to know this question.
We're by any chance are tribes
pueblos and ordinations
consulted.
Send that once again, the
message that no matter how hard
working our new secretary is,
we're not gonna do anything.
We're just not We're gonna We're
gonna wait for somehow Magic to
occur in this department to get
fixed.
And
It's going to take a lot more
than that to restore public
confidence, no matter how hard
working. She is.
The next two years is not going
to be enough time to turn this
department perception. The
public's perception of this
department around unless we do
something dramatic.
That's the point of creating
this commission, something
dramatic that the voters would
have to approve. And if the
public says we want to do this
dramatic thing?
That by itself, I think begins
to restore the secretary would
still have two more years. This
thing wouldn't take effect until
implementing language came in
and a new build next year. Then
there would be that it wouldn't
take effect till July. The new
commission we're getting there
by the time this commission
actually took over the current
administration would be going
out the door and we'd be having
a new secretary anyhow.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. So
I heard that thank you so much.
That would be a new chapter in
two years is what I'm hearing
and this doesn't take away any
of the control. We have
currently of taking care of our
native brothers and sisters.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Purtell and
and And just before you start,
we usually have a hard stop at
1030 in here today, The
committees committee has been
pushed back so we have until
1045.
Please go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
I didn't know how it was going
to vote until Senator Morris
We have an amendment moment You
have it amateurish and and
senator at No, We don't have it
yet, So I think it's been passed
out now.
Yes, yes, presenters as well
And it was always explaining
them attracts. Yes, I see Two
Redistricting. Words would
change it from 3 to 5 members
include the minority floor
leader in the Senate and the
house and it was supposed to be
sent down. I apologize, Senator.
It sounds like we do not have
copies of your of the amendment.
That were sent down to the
committee.
I have one copy.
I think I think we're gonna need
more than that seminar. Yeah.
Ah, Senator, Senator Lopez, and
we'll come back to you, Senator.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um
I agree that something needs to
happen.
There needs to be a conversation
amongst many of us Lopez. I'm
sorry to interrupt if you could
please move your mic closer
closer to you. Make sure it gets
picked up online. Can't hear me
if Wow, was that if I do like my
other voice, let's shoot that
one. I know these. These
microphones are crazy. Anyway,
Madam Chair, the
Something needs to happen
organizationally within C Y F.
D.
And I mentioned some of this. I
think when these secretary was
here in front of committee a
couple days ago
Um this measure does offer an
option.
Um
But there's also another option.
Madam Chair this in this
committee is on the list to be
heard, and it's more of a task
force group of persons to sit
together.
And actually look at all the
data that is out there all the
studies that have been put
together and see if there's a
recommendation.
Um, that I think could
complement some of the movement
that the secretary is proposing,
but also to look and review. Um,
we need to review the mission
and and it's not just the
secretary, Madam chair of the
executive, but you need to be
inclusive of others and
stakeholders in the community.
It's not just the executive that
has control Yes, because they
make the decisions. But there
are need to be more stakeholders
at the table.
And I would hope that it also
have a conversation about that
here because I think it even
complements what Senator Ortiz
de Pino has in front of us
today. I just wanted to make
that statement. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator McKenna.
Okay, try this house that
Yeah, Text me if it's okay. I
didn't keep my head right here.
Okay. Don't Okay. Um, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And thank you,
Senator RTZ Pinot.
Um
C Y F D, um I like oops. I like
many new Mexicans.
Are
Torn up because of
The rampant abuse that some of
our Children are going through,
and I was leaning towards
supporting this.
Senate joint resolution.
Madam Chair and Senator.
However, really, what kicked in
for me is going back to my
organization development
tenants.
And that is with group dynamics
and a team building a team team
building.
It's so important.
That all the stakeholders, the
team members buy in and helped
create what they think will be a
remedy.
And so hearing the
The secretary say.
That she doesn't agree with it.
Um, that put up a big red flag
for me.
It may or may very well be madam
Chair and Senator.
That
The secretary will say to the
Legislature, the governor, you
know, I think
I think, Senator Pinto. Pardon
me, Senator or TCP knows idea
was good. I think we need to
revisit it.
But I think before that time it
would be
A burden.
On her and her team to try to
work with yet another.
Group
trying to right the ship.
And Madam chair and Senator, I
am in all of
What you have accomplished
Senator for New Mexico in your
years with C Y F D and the like.
And so in No way does my vote
reflect on that.
I think you're a hero to New
Mexico.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. Um, Senator
Morris, We have your amendment
now. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I don't want to
explain it again. Basically just
tracks with all Thank you,
Senator.
So is this, uh, friendly or
unfriendly?
Madam Chairman. Uh, first. Thank
you, Senator Morris for bringing
this forward. We discussed it
started the meeting.
I had originally left out any
mention of partisan politics in
this because I don't think it
has a role in this, But I also
understand that there is a
concern that if administrations
change and and one party has
control of all three of a point
of positions that there there
may be some
Um, resulting lack of confidence
in the commission so I would
consider this a friendly
amendment. I wish we didn't have
to consider partisan politics,
but I think the public would
And I think it's it's all right.
We can do it. In this instance,
the people named would still
have to be
Experienced in this field.
Child psychiatrists,
psychologists, social workers,
counselors specializing in
family development. Somebody
with a background in this field.
They couldn't just be
Republicans or Democrats, they
would still have to be
professionals.
They're very built. A lot of
them are our independence. As
you know, so that would be fine,
too. So I think this is a fine
amendment. We would and Senator
did you actually move it? And
I'm sorry, did not move it so
discussion on the amendment
Senator. Senator just wanted to
point out that yes, it makes
The person making the
appointment. It doesn't make
that partisan.
Um, you know, for just a little
bit little more input. Um, I I'm
sorry, but we end up with
qualified people, but it doesn't
necessarily
Other members of the committee
on the Amendment.
We have a friendly amendment. Is
there any objection to adopting
that amendment?
Seen none. That amendment is
adopted.
And we're back on the bill.
Members of the committee.
Okay?
Um, I'll make some comments and
then we'll take your motion.
Um
Senator. I'm I'm gonna I'm gonna
vote Yes on this today. Not
necessarily because I'm
convinced, um, because I don't
know what the right approach is
to be honest. Uh, but I think
this is an important discussion
and I think it should should
continue and I'm interested to
see
What the discussion committee.
Um, but I
I applaud you for trying to do
something.
Ah, but I also hear I hear with
the secretaries were saying, I
also hear that
The desire for for more input. I
whatever we do do, um, but with
that we're on a motion for do
pass. Let's go ahead and do a
roll call vote.
Senator Bubka is excused,
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna. No. Senator
McKenna votes No, Senator
Morris.
Senator Morris votes. Yes,
Senator Nibert Senator. Neighbor
votes Yes, Senator or TZ Pinot.
Yes, Senator or TCP. No votes.
Yes, Senator. Pirtle. Senator
Perdue votes. Yes, Senator
Stefan IX.
Senator Stepanek's votes. No,
Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart votes No senator
harm EO.
Excuse.
Senator Doig.
Yes, Senator. Do Hig votes. Yes,
Senator. You have a do pass. I'm
looking forward to discussing
this again.
Probably in a few days. Yes,
we'll look forward to judiciary
to thank you very much. Madam
Chairman and members of the
Committee for Very Good
discussion. Thank you.
And we're going to try to very
quickly get S J r 16 done.
Um, So, Madam Chair. Is there a
possibility also of Senate joint
Memorial to domestic murdered
Indigenous women's task force.
We have a hard stop at, uh at
1045.
But this goes real quick. And,
yeah,
Um And it's that thank you.
And senator. This one has been
rolled over before so
And Yeah, and and Senator Lopez
question, Senator before you get
started. I
I will go ahead and skip
Senator Lopez.
Oh, I will. I have committees
committee at 1045. I will skip
that to stay here to to get to
your memorial if if the other
members are. Thank you. Well,
thank you, madam Chair.
All right, Senator Novell.
Thank you, madam. Sure. Oh, this
is fairly simple Constitutional
Amendment proposal. It would
basically boil down to allowing
county commissions to set the
salary level. We don't control
how cities do their salaries. We
don't control how various boards
and so forth sake is you name
it. We don't control those
legislature has had the
authority to
Set the salary limits for county
officials. Since I guess 1912
I'm not sure when it was, but
anyway, they have done that
forever. Every few years, the
association or the New Mexico
counties now comes to the
Legislature and request
authorization to adjust wages.
We've gotten some distortion.
now, most of our department
heads and, uh, Deputy Secretary
Deputy
Officials all earned
considerably more than the
elected, So we're having trouble
in some counties of finding
qualified elected because the
confident people have been in
the office for a long period of
time. Don't want to take a big
cut and celery. My experts
joyous Parson, she's with
the executive director of the
Association of Counties or New
Mexico counties. I keep I was
president of the Association of
Counties Years ago. It's now
Changed its name several years
where former county commissioner
commissioners and neighbor
Senator Nibert Center are meals,
Senator Stefanik, So I think
that's it. We've got a lot of
former county officials here. I
think they understand the
situation. This would just allow
the counties to control
themselves. We don't have
runaway salaries in mayors and
so forth, so I don't think it
would cause any serious issues.
Mr Sparse in, give us a couple
of comments and we'll go
Thank you, madam Chair, members
of the committee Senator Neville
mentioned for the past 20 years
We have routinely come every
three or four years to the
Legislature and asked for an
increase in the cap. We have not
been successful in getting that
increase. Since 2018 in 2022,
the Legislature. Both houses
passed it unanimously and it was
pocket vetoed. This is an issue
that had not been previously
partisan. It's had great support
from both sides of the aisle. We
currently have 14 counties that
are at the cap.
And as the senator mentioned, we
have 27 deputies across all the
various lines of elected
officials that make sometimes as
much as 40 or 50,000, more than
the elected official. This makes
it very problematic for us to
have good candidates that are
willing to run and take that
kind of a pay cut. Um with that
This is a different approach.
This year. There are about 21
counties that don't have any
authority in the Legislature of
the county. I'm sorry, 21
states, um, where the counties
have complete control. Many
other states have a base but not
a
Perhaps so there is overwhelming
consideration for this
nationwide.
Um, the statute has always
allowed that the commission
ultimately makes the decision
based upon their budget, and
with that would stand for any
questions. Thank you. We did not
have anyone signed up for other
support or opposition on this
bill. Anyone would like to raise
their hands if anyone would like
to raise their hands indicate
opposition. Please do so.
Alright members of the
committee, Senator Morris, I
think about Jeremy just really
quickly. Um, um I supported
raising the salaries. I don't
support legislature giving up
its power. The legislative
branch is usually give up power
and never gain power. Any other
members of etcetera RTZ Penis
Madam chairman just to respond,
though, but it's really the
governor, then who vetoes
powerful legislature's action.
So I think this is a way for us
to exert our
Our power. This is what you're
saying.
This is too important to let
You know any kind of
Petty considerations Get in the
way of what's really needed for
good government. So I would I
would think that we really would
be flexing our muscles over this
and blocking the defense out of
the way permitting, you're
running back to plow straight
through love the analogy, Madam
chair, but we can also remove
the governor's pocket veto,
which
Senator Pirtle than Senator my
bird.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, as I read this
Is there anything preventing
them from raising the salary in
the term?
Madam Chair and Senator Pirtle.
Yes, currently in statute is
only for newly incoming. There's
no midterm increases, and there
is an equity requirement which
could be adjusted. If there
should pass the voters. We could
ensure that those would still be
in the statute and bring that
back to you. Nice pay raise, if
anything, I think what this is
going to potentially result in
as as it is now, whenever the
Legislature sets the cap.
Raise it to the cap. And they
said, Well, the Legislature, you
know, raised it. We're now it's
going to be a little bit harder
to do it locally. Um and you're
going to see even more
responsible. Less raises than
what you see now or smaller,
gets a lot harder to raise your
own.
Senator Nibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Yeah, of course. Um, I'm on the
bill and supported
The situation that exists now.
As stated.
There were many instances where
the elected official
I had to take a pay cut if they
were swapping deputy position
for the elected position, which
happens in many offices, I think
around the state when they get
elected, they actually took a
pay cut because they were making
more money as the deputy
And we're willing to do so. I
guess that's one argument, but
it really created an unfair
condition and
There are some counties that
We're trying to compete with
with
Folks bringing them in from in
our part of the world, Texas and
we couldn't compete with them
for for some of those positions,
so
I think it's good for the
county's They can be responsible
for it, but I do, um, echo the
comments made by Senator Pirtle.
The county commissioners are
going to be on the hot seat now.
Where before it was pretty easy
to just say, Oh, the Legislature
did that They're going to be on
the hot seat having to justify
why those pay raises are
necessary, particularly when
they're giving raises to
The commissioners themselves.
Thank you for bringing this
Senator Stefan IX.
Manicure. I moved to do pass.
All right. Uh, let's have a have
emotional have a rock all vote.
Senator Baca is excused, Senator
Lopez.
No. Senator Lopez votes No.
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Morris, senator Moat words with
no Senator. Nibert, Senator.
Neighbor votes? Yes, Senator or
TCP? No. Yes. TCP. No votes.
Yes, Center Pirtle. Senator
Perrault votes. Yes, Senator
Stefan IX.
Senator Stepanek's votes. Yes,
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
both. Yes, Senator. Harm EO is
excused.
Senator do, huh? Yes, Senator.
Doig votes? Yes, Yes. You have a
do passive. Thank you, Senator
Lopez, Senator Pinto pass on
this and we have sure we we We
have a being passed out now. But
if folks want to jump to a do
pass, then I will. I believe it
to the the sponsors Do pass,
Senator.
Yes. Alright. Questions. Joint
Memorial. We have a motion for
do pass. Uh, Is there any
objection to that motion?
Seeing then you have a due
passi. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you and
wonderful with that, Uh, Senate
rules is in recess zero.
