Good morning ladies come
morning.
When you're ready you can begin.
Thank you madam chair and
committee it's a great honor to
introduce Purcell is that to the
committee for the confirmation
to the water trust board
Priscilla Lysette is a native to
Silvercity she joined the
southwest New Mexico council of
governments in nineteen eighty
seven and she's been the
executive director since two
thousand and three she
represents our region on several
boards and commissions and she's
been recognized for her tireless
work to improve the quality of
life for residents in southwest
New Mexico several times
including later today so receive
another award she provides our
region with technical assistance
support for economic development
transportation housing water and
wastewater improvements and I
know I couldn't even do my job
without her support her health
and her expertise she's kind
compassionate well respected and
one of the hardest working
people I've ever had the honor
of knowing and the state of New
Mexico is truly lucky to have
her on the water trust board and
with that madam chair like to
turn it over to present for sale
a loose set of to say a few
words thank you.
Good morning madam chair madam
Mr vice chair and members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity I think if
there's one thing I want to say
to all of you I'm here today is
no thank you for the opportunity
I continue so my passion for the
residents of New Mexico to
strive for a better quality of
life for all areas in New Mexico
even the unserved and the
underserved and all people so
you can trust in my work that I
will continue to do and
Representative you well and just
know that my heart is passionate
about the things they do make
make sure that New Mexico is one
state that stands out above all
thank you thank you so much
Mister Serra is there anybody in
attendance who wants to speak in
favor of the conferees.
And those things range that this
wasn't organized comment about
to give you one minute each if
you can come up to the
microphone make sure you state
your first and last name for the
record and our madam chair will
time.
chair members the committee
Karen Canaday with the with my
supporting myself today I like
to covers a lot of friends but
someone who I can totally turn
to and count on to have the best
interests of New Mexico part I
often refer to her for expertise
and get helpful hints for her in
doing my job as well I couldn't
think of a better person to be
on the water board thank you
thank you for that if you could
personal care and Canaday thank
you can.
Joe Sheppard president western
New Mexico university pleasure
seeing all of you here and I
want to speak on behalf in favor
of of Priscilla when I get rid
arrived in Silvercity in two
thousand eleven she was one of
the stalwarts who took me under
her wing so to speak and mentor
me and what I've learned about
her she's highly ethical self
motivated full of integrity just
the right person for the water
board for university president
say this in under a minute it's
remarkable.
This is for your good morning
good morning.
This on this on.
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
I'm still in shock that he did
it less than a minute over there
but.
But.
Representative I go back to many
many years the that will mention
how many because will date are
Parcells but Priscilla anything
that happens in Grant County
regarding water.
She is right on top of that
guided us doing everything she
can to help Grant County.
Just as a quick example right
now the report back around is in
the middle of working with the
mayor's of the mining district
for water supply issues to
enhance the communities down
there.
And the first person we turned
to his Purcell of the guide us
through the process because
that's how good she is she does
the people she knows the
process she knows everything
that needs to be done so she
would be a great.
Continue to be a great addition
to the board so strongly
supporter.
I'm sorry twenty three of the
first madam miss that total Tony
Trujillo who were registered
lobbyists for a Freeport back
thank you.
Is anybody off of.
The person last.
Hi doctor members the committee
Mr chair my name's Rick Martinez
of the eight point three I'll be
right very brief Purcell and I
have worked together for the
last twenty years I also certain
washers port for years and I can
tell you I see no better
advocate for rural communities
in New Mexico and not just her
district but statewide so I just
a stone's I stand strongly in
support systems thank you thank
you so much is there anybody
else in favor of the comfort.
There's not okay anybody in the
audience who opposes this
country.
The line is there any soon and
opposition.
No there's not thank you for
that without noticeable go to
comments or questions of the
committee anyone any questions
or comments Senator Ortiz the
next order.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you secretary
Sorry for being willing to do
anything else if you're already.
Stepped into this probe Water is
of course one of the primary
challenges facing our state and
I wondered if you have any
comments about what you think
we legislators ought to be doing
to.
To respond to this challenge in
a more effective measures
matters and perhaps we have in
the past.
Sir madam chair Mr vice chair
members of the committee
absolutely thank you for the
question because I'm very
passionate about water no I got
my start without really knowing
a lot about water but if I was
to say if there's one thing that
I think that would be critically
important as we move forward to
meet our basic need is number
one having people that are
knowledgeable at the local level
it took me about fifteen years
to gain the knowledge of how
water systems work but also to
learn the separate funding
mechanisms that are available
and how the and how they
interconnect and I think the
challenge was when I started we
had federal dollars that were
being reverted back to the
national office and so that was
one of my goals early on was to
keep that from happening I can
say to this day we no longer
have that issue but it's a it's
a matter of how we begin to
learn those processes and how
they to connect and when we see
all this turnover and a lack of
capacity at the local level it's
really hard to be able to
educate them on those things
when they're only shortlived
right so we're seeing so much
turnover capacity so that's one
of the requests that I have is
really around increasing
capacity and then I think the
other thing that I'm seeing as I
move forward is that's kind of
really new to me is the fact
that the systems that have been
replaced when I started thirty
years ago are now up to be
replaced and some of those that
were placed ten years ago or no
longer lasting the useful life
so he thought might have been
thirty or forty years for system
is no longer the case and so
that we can continue to see more
and more need around water
systems and even waste water
systems and so that's just the
reality so I the one of the
criticality is and this is
something that I did speak to at
the role and economic
opportunities task force why it
is so important to have a crisis
fund so that when these things
happen we can take care take
care of it immediately and not
have to wait six months to a
year to make that happen so
Mister chairman just just to
follow up on that do we have
such a fun who we need to create
one.
So madam chair and Mr vice chair
members of the committee Senator
Hemphill already has a bill
that's being moved from four and
I but I I remember correctly
Senate bill twenty seven that is
actually going to allow us to do
that.
Mr chairman one other follow up
question you mentioned the need
for some of the local initial
domestics and the other local
community water systems.
To fully understand the
available read more ability and
how to access resources but one
of the things I hear anecdotally
is that the mutual domestic
particularly hard time getting
people who know how to operate
the systems and in a in a way
that doesn't run down the ten
years since we have training
programs in place for the.
They are yes so madam madam
chair Mister vice chair members
of the committee there are
several training programs that
are offered through New Mexico
Environment Department real
Canadian systems corporation and
I've got to say I couldn't do my
work without them because it's a
team effort I have an expertise
in funding for example R. C. AC
sometimes has expertise and the
funding on how we do rate
analysis and how to ensure that
stability of that system and
then we also have trainees to
requirement department to ensure
that these water operators are
being trained as well this also
has to do it there's an impact
right with the work force and
how we begin to train people at
the local level so that we have
these individuals who can
actually monitor the systems and
depending on where you are and
the naturally occurring
contaminants in the water
sometimes require a higher level
of certification so that in and
sometimes makes it difficult in
the rural areas and I think
training programs that can
encourage local people even from
high school level to begin that
process is one I think could be
really served in the most rural
and frontier communities.
Thank you Mr chairman that I
think Miss deserves answers
clearly indicated she's the
right person.
Thank you Sir Senator that.
Thank you Mr chair and I'm sorry
that I missed of the
introduction and presentation
but I've known you and your work
for many years and you have
always been very dedicated and
everything that you do I'm very
pleased that you are coming
forward to volunteer for a get
another position and I just hope
that you can continue to give to
the people of the state of New
Mexico so thank you very much
that's all Mr chair thank you
senator and I just want to also
say thank you before I head over
to the madam chair
wanted mystic the northern New
Mexico we're working on regional
leader and I'd love to meet with
one of these days so we can talk
about our plan and what your
thoughts are absolutely and with
that I'm gonna head over to our
madam chair.
And and Mrs are I just want to
say thank you for for everything
that you're doing I'd called you
months ago with the water
question and you were incredibly
helpful which I really
appreciated and I've long heard
Center Craighead bill singing
your praises so with that and.
Senator Moores is just transfer
center more as I was about to to
move moved to pass on the
recommendation for our our.
Maybe Senator Stewart was
but if you have any questions
before we do that this is Mrs R.
yes.
Or if
you.
Of
the state it's not really it to
pass move this conferee forward
for a vote in the Senate to pass
right at the center Stewart with
the second by Senator Stefanics
and if I can have a roll call.
The
chair Senator Baca if you
Senator Ingle is accused and
Senator Lopez is accused Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris yes Senator
Moores yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excuse Senator
Stefano yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator had a meal
yes Senator had a meal yes and
Senator Duhigg yes Senator Ortiz
yes you have seven yes so you
have it the fact that.
What we'll be doing is that the
reports come down of time will
be introducing you have a set up
for us if there's any questions
to your
position on this as pointed to
the water transport so if you
can join us we're hoping to get
those reports done on time but
thank you for joining us thank
you madam chair members of the
committee for your trust in me
and know that I will make you
proud thank you and and for all
the countries I think that we
are planning on hearing everyone
on the floor today so so
definitely do stick around here
and there thank you Mr column
Jones with is the Senate sponsor
Senator brother is yes it's a
reappointment to the western New
Mexico university board of
regents senator the biggest when
you're ready you can begin thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee
I am super thrilled to appear
before you to present a
gentleman who I am so proud of
he comes from the LESC of
village area his family born and
raise their and he is attending
western university now he
graduated with Santa Fe high in
two thousand twenty in the top
ten percent of the class and is
one of those individuals who
just gives and gives as soon as
the start of school he got
involved was helping in every
capacity that he could and for
the sake of time madam chairman
because I know we're short I'm
not going to go into great
detail but he is pursuing an
associate's degree in business
administration and a bachelor's
in general business he was
appointed in November of twenty
two and he will serve a two year
term if in fact this committee
recommends in the chamber of the
Senate confirms him so we just
look forward to him continuing
to serve he seems quite excited
and takes leadership roles what
ever capacity he's one of those
individuals thank you Trent one
of those individuals that is not
afraid to get his hands dirty
whoever they need him he goes
and so that's where he makes the
biggest difference and I will.
Defer to him if I may madam
chairman thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I would like to thank
you all for having me here today
to speak in front of you is huge
honor I also like to thank my
family who's here to support me
as well as my university
president Dr shepherd.
yeah it's been a huge honor to
serve so far as in terms of the
region and I look forward to
continuing to serve
hopefully and yes this is a huge
opportunity for me not only my
professional life but getting to
impact community while I'm at
western and it is a huge role
and I look for to taking on the
challenge of it and yes thank
you guys for your time.
Thank you so much I'm not gonna
go to members of the audience is
there anybody here in support of
this country.
See if you have if you can come
to the table at remember to
state your first and last name.
One minute and you will be
taxed.
Joe Sheppard president western
New Mexico university and I
speak in favor of this
particular candidate our
students and their student
leaders and Trent is one of
those rare type that even excel
above that I work with him
throughout the last couple of
meetings he's wise beyond his
years he's diligent he studious
and it would be a great pleasure
to have him as a boss.
Thank you so much.
And Dr secretary for faster
that.
That form part of.
Madam chair members the
committee Tony Trujillo from
Silver City of the Harvard of
the Hilo sometimes called
western New Mexico university is
extremely lucky to have the the
gentleman like this to services
to region down there has been
really effective is not quiet
but the he gets in there and
does what he has to do were very
fortunate to have him as our
student region of western and
since certainly endorses a
reappointment thank you.
One other half of the audience
you want to come up and speak.
Go to settle M. trans
grandfather and I just raise my
hand to say support and thank
you very much thank you.
Where did try to have one other
who's on so and if you can go
ahead and allow let's see here
Mary to at go ahead and speak.
Transmitter members of the
committee merry have to and if
thank you.
Good morning.
Chairman and senators thank you
for letting me speak by zoom I
really wish I were there in
person I'm Mary Poppins
I am the chair of the western
New Mexico university board of
regents one of the things that
we need from us intent is to not
just be a student region here
with the rest of the regents at
all times transaction present
for two meetings now and working
with us and he has easily
integrated into the board I
think he's going to be a slanted
region for us and I really
support his re appointment and
thank you for letting me speak
on his behalf thank you Mary is
there anybody else in support of
the of the would like to speak
there's not anyone in the room
and opposition of this
requirement.
Anyone on so in opposition
senator Munoz committee there's
not thank you so much with that
will not go to questions or
comments from the committee
senator Morris.
Thank you Mr thank you thank you
for your service thank you
so much for couple questions
we've been doing these
confirmations for number years
always pop up on this first up
looks like you're going to
graduate this semester
so I'm I'm I'm just make sure
you're not a grad right now
madam chair Senator reject
graduate madam chair members of
the committee I am due to
graduate in spring of twenty
twenty fourth my bachelors and
I'll continue at western for my
masters to still operate
sometimes would be getting news
our regions are or doctoral
students who are doing contracts
and grant work with universities
happened on some of the
the research institutions so
you're still kind of wrap this
important madam chair Senators
you are the voice of those
undergraduate job is to fight
for the summer Roger would be
around the board of regents of
politicos we were connected and
your job is to fight for those
on the ground so make sure you
students students are students
particularly graduate should
always keep their decisions on
what's best for them in mind as
you.
Hobnobbing with these people or
politically correct sometimes
Candie aunts barn but your voice
is just locals freshman coming
in like you were just a couple
years ago second thing that are
speaker my first concern is to
Mr chair Senator is you yeah and
I love Dr shepherd to sort out
fifty appreciate this you work
for him currently.
Madam chair yes so I previously
worked in the president's office
as a student worker but now as a
student region I technically as
possible we're very closely with
them.
Sanchez Mr chair.
Mr chair.
Madam chair Senator you did work
former no longer work for my
concern is.
You said you're very close with
them can you fire him.
Yeah and this is a real issue
with our we're all very fond of
Dr shepherd whose son you're now
his boss you're gonna have to
look at him into a different
sector is particularly what I
talked about earlier about you
being the voice of students if
something came up with and any
box in those personal
relationships are there it's
sometimes hard to look at.
The solution so if something
came up could you fire.
Madam chair so I would say as my
student worker position it was
more under meet the student
programs student life I was just
isn't in the office now in my
current position I do to give
very professionally I as well
very fun to drive shoppers but I
do understand the the importance
of my position and the
importance of his position how
we need to work together to
support the students and our
best way.
Again I would look at this
position very professionally and
if it came to that which I do
not see it.
As the board as a whole we would
all have to act to and
ingredients.
To provide up to separate but it
would not just be my decision it
would be the whole board as a
whole.
About service co chair of
September it's very important
you work out a concert for
Children fund you are a
constitutional officer but we
are there's only certain people
who are listed in the
constitution with certain
constitutional rights in the one
of.
in fact I make a point of sale
and all regions this you can not
be removed by us you could not
be removed by the governor once
you're looking for you can only
be removed by action of the
Supreme Court for incompetence
or malfeasance so sometimes are
regents throughout many
administrations or put under a
lot of pressure on to do certain
things your job is to fight for
those students to do what's
right and ignore the political
corrections text messages that
you market is you can not be
removed from office except for
by the Supreme Court for
refusing so keep that in mind as
you move forward and your hang
around market text messages from
our politicians including myself
for other people your job is to
fight for those students so keep
that in mind always Mr chair
madam chair Senator appreciate
you published.
Thank you senator Senator
Bennett.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for coming forward for this
position.
As a student my concern is the
amount of time that it takes to
be a regent and your studies
could you address that please.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
question this is a student life
is very busy as a region life is
very busy
but in the university I'm only
allowed to serve as a student
region so I do not work anywhere
on campus anymore I don't have
any of the top student region as
my main focus and my workload
with
with my studies I have learned
habits to balance that I used to
be an athlete for the school and
so I think I learned a lot of
really great tools on how to
handle my homework and class
time and yes student region is a
priority but at the end of that
is still in the student and I do
not miss class for meetings I I
balance both very well and it's
a.
Thank you Mr chair and I think
that the the point that Senator
Moores brought up about being in
a position of voting
Along with or with a different
opinion from your colleagues on
the region's board can be
difficult and so I do think it
takes an individual who can
identify what their values and
their views are and not be moved
along with the crowd.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you senator Senator Ortiz
the people.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator for reinforces a
nomination just a quick question
for you so you're no longer on
the football team you had to
leave that or are you still
going to be an athlete.
Madam chair I'm no longer on the
football team I give up football
to preserve pursue a
professional development.
And I think chairman senator
Morris a.
who frequently for a refers to
his time on the local football
offensive line item and alleges
that it didn't have any impact
on his mental capacity.
The.
About that but I I just have to.
Gradually to keeping your
priorities and and and strong
you know.
Right and and so thank you Mr
chairman of us all of us to
thank you so much any other
comments or questions etcetera
but can.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator Rodriguez and welcome Mr
Jones you know you had me when
you said I'm not gonna miss any
classes for meetings
It is so important at how
you've got your priorities right
and yet you still want to be a
leader and so congratulations
and really proud of your
initiative thank you.
Any other conflict.
Mr Jones I just want to say
thank you for wanting to take on
this role and responsibility
it's not an easy one but having
the voice of the student matters
because representation matters
and the best voice are those of
students who can voice what
their peers are thinking and can
work with regents for the
betterment of western New Mexico
university I want to thank you
for coming forward any other
questions Senator Stewart Mr
chairman of the two paths on the
nomination of Trent Jones for
region New Mexico western do
passed by Senator Stewart with
the second by Senator Stefanics
a roll call vote please.
Yes Mr chair Senator Baca yes
Senator Baca yes Senator Ingle
was excuse Senator Lopez.
Is excused Senator McKenna yes
Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Hermio yes and senator do hate
yes Senator Duhigg yes you have
nine yes to execute
congratulations you will be
seeing you on the set up for
this one thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank.
I'm not gonna call up and
thank you provided to small
business investment corporation
New York senator Sanchez Senator
Shendo.
Good morning.
The morning Mr chairman chair
and the members of the rules
committee it's an honor to be in
front of you
This is my first time on this
front of this the committee the
last rendition of this whole
structured so forces good to see
you try to imagine what you know
Senator Baca and Ingle look like
long hair in a subject that's
going to this I will with the
you know I'm trying to imagine
Baca doing this to this hearing
on.
it's really an honor and
pleasure to to present
and Beckett the as of.
On the eve of the small business
investment Corporation.
Is a very storage interesting
the life and career she was born
in the San Jose when he was two
orchards and no was referred to
Silicon Valley that time and
their work at home will state in
the with a bachelor of arts in
history of the lot of work
around archaeology but can you
for a little bit but most of our
experience has been a nonprofit
for profit work and the spend of
of four years in Zuni is
executive director of the issue
with publishing company so spend
some time in soon as well and
and probably the last twenty
years has been the project
manager for the mortgage finance
authority in Albuquerque and
then retired as the mortgage
lending operations director
forth our board of former
investments here in Santa Fe and
now lives in my district up in
Youngsville she lives off grid
so I'm gonna go visit her when
all hell breaks loose she's got
twenty four acres since she's
already I think a lot about five
acres aside from means with tell
me back here so this can be.
With that I I I think she with
her very experience in for
profit nonprofit work I think
you know and somebody that lives
out there in in in the Moonies
now I I think of her her
experience will then well to the
small investment corporation
because one of things of members
of the committee was always
trying to do is how do we
broaden our base and how do we
create jobs in rural areas and I
think her experience in young's
feel what's important to folks
in northern New Mexico also
inner self to have that
perspective so with that I'll
turn it back over to you Mr
chairman thank you senator the
attitude like to give a few
words sure
thank you madam chair and
senators
In addition to of other
interests I did spend almost
thirty years in some form of
finance primarily in residential
lending
it's given me the skills I
believe that are useful to the
small business investment
corporation as we work hard to
try and place funds in the hands
of the small businesses both
that
the ones that are just a dream
at the moment and the ones that
are trying to get ahead and
deliver more services to New
Mexicans
I do try to be the rural
Representative on our board of I
live on highway ninety six which
many of you may note doesn't
have a lot of economic
development going on on it so I
recognize the challenges that
many entrepreneurs experience in
wanting to start or develop a
small business and and I'm
especially grateful after having
worked for corporations savings
and loans retail banks
SBHC is very nimble and that's a
lot of fun and that was no more
apparent than during the COVID
win **** jumped up made things
easier for our lending partners
to continue to stay in business
and work with small business
businesses and also to find
funds through the PPP look a
program to New Mexicans which
saved a lot of jobs so it's an
honor for me to serve on the
board thank you so much thank
you so much for your remarks are
not going to members of the
audience is there anybody here.
Here in favor of this company if
you can have up to the
microphone and state your first
and last name for the record.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Russell Commons I am the
executive director and
investment adviser for the small
business investment corporation
for the SBIC I had the the the
honor and a pleasure working
with miss back over the past
year on our board of directors
she's very engaged very
intelligence and and has
tremendous background experience
that that fits very well with
that with our mission I also our
chairman and president Joseph
Patel could not be here today
he's provided a written letter
for the committee to be happy to
deliver and to be pre file just
I'll just read the last the last
two sentences here miss Beckett
has extensive lending background
experience which is invaluable
to the **** and for filling its
mission and I strongly recommend
confirmation of her to the board
of directors small business
investment corporation thank
you.
But eight hundred so discovery.
that
committee there's nobody on
doing forward and.
Anybody in the room in
opposition of the country.
Signals to questions and
comments of the committee and
representative the fact.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much for coming forward for
this position could you
Share with us your
knowledge or understanding of
the.
Because I governmental or
nonprofit status of this
organization sure well **** is
state chartered but then is a
nonprofit and of.
It receives funds through us
through the state through the
The tax tax flow into the
institution and then we worked
with like CDFI is in order to
place those funds out so we
don't have the staff per se Mr
Commons is actually a contract
employee to us so we we operate
as all volunteers in behalf of
the corporation and then and
then as stewards of the funds
received from the state.
Is that yes thank you I think
that of the reason I asked that
question Mr chair is that so we
might be talking during the
session about some other
creating some other investment
tools are funds that might be in
the similar state status is this
and we do have this in statute
and I just wanted to bring it to
the attention of our Committee
thank you very much again for
your offer for your service
thank you thank you senator
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm just curious what you're
doing on twenty four acres and.
And those.
Yes Senator Shendo implied what
was going on but well and I'll
be honest with you I I meant
Senator Shendo mention I lived
on the Zuni reservation for four
years
I also lived in southwestern
Colorado and I've lived in El
Dorado here outside of Santa Fe
I'm a Big Sky person and so of
the acreage that I have gives me
a view of pattern all around to
ghost ranch to mess all to and
so I I I view myself as an
incredibly fortunate person to
live in god's country with a
magnificent view I share the
mesa top with elk and deer for
your date bobcat in the number
of birds
and then I also like to think of
myself as an example of what's
possible to live off the grid
and not live modestly I mean I I
I don't have a large home but I
have a perfectly comfortable
home and so a lot of people come
to visit me to see what it's
like actually to live off the
grid so
I guess it was just one last
chance to live all by myself how
the wild.
So Mister chairman it's kind of
like here at the Georgia
o'keeffe of.
I don't know if Mrs keep would
agree thank you.
Thank you for all your work and
for continuing to want to serve
just thrilling to see that New
Mexicans that come before this
committee freebies confirmation
so thank you for your
willingness thank you so.
Thank you senator Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair in if I may
just
make a quick comment.
We used to have little.
Booklets of every board and kind
of what the responsibilities are
if they have the authority to
make policy make investments
things like that and I think of
you know feels like we're flying
blind right now without it kind
of trying to figure out what
what they do and what their
statutory responsibilities are
so if in the future we can get
healthy those for every
committee of of greatly
appreciate it thank you I do
have a question I ask this of
every conferee Mr chair Senator
Miss it.
Did you make any contributions
to the governor the governor's
packs for either either election
cycle.
I believe I did make a donation
yes to the governor.
And Mr chair this budget how
much for how much.
We don't recall that generally
speaking.
Donations are made to a
political candidates would range
from a hundred to two hundred
and fifty dollars.
And I think that I I just think
it's good to get that out for
the public to so the node we can
flush it out and figure out to
make sure there's not any
impropriety in so let's get out
of the public the you also
mentioned Mr chair
this big that that you're kind
of the rule voice on on the
committee of being from a rural
community myself
and growing up on a farm and
things I'm I'm just curious how
how long you've state lived in
the country with what would you
say I
then there eleven years.
Percent and.
Mr chair inspected do you have
any enterprises that that
include agriculture or
this is and don't have the
agriculture what I feel like I
can contribute to my community
besides volunteering for this
that and the other thing is
hiring local people to work
I do have actually twenty eight
acres M. I'm gonna be seventy
four years old in may so I can't
do everything by myself anymore
so what I tried good neighbor
who doesn't necessarily hire
everything from far away
and so through that I've built
relationships with neighbors who
I hope I contribute to their
well being.
Mr speaker I I appreciate that
answer
What can the council due to get
more investment outside of the
Rio Grande core door into our
more rural areas that's where I
think we're seeing a lot of
stress of of struggle a lot of
in a prices left the venue
specially my community here
recently how do we bring in
enterprise how do we bring in
and get small businesses
started.
Thank you to the aspen tire
State sure
the good news is in in re in the
last I don't know twelve
thirteen years of with the
Lenten thirty one counties in
the state of New Mexico the
****.
but I think there's always
opportunities to get the word
out more effectively remember
that we
Work with lending partners and
we and sent them to not just
land in the Rio Grande corridor
and we monitor that.
and you invest for some
materials of which we've
presented to other committees at
times but I would like to be
sure that we can provide you
with all the loans that we've
made county by county and you'll
be surprised I mean sure is
Bernalillo there yes the Santa
Fe there is Santa there yes but
to see the percentage of lending
in then many counties inside the
state
that we've helped facilitate L.
we are definitely.
Focused on making sure money
gets where it needs to go we
will just recently worked with
the new lending partner and we
had extensive conversations
about their need to offer SPI SB
a loans outside of the greater
metropolitan area of of the Rio
Grande quarter so there's
nothing about that that we're
going to stop doing we also
support finance New Mexico which
provides email
information out to show a
showcase our lending partners
and programs to help small
businesses get started so we've
also reached out to the reuse of
regional development Corp which
is focused on mora and real eva
and Los Alamos counties
to help them connect their small
businesses with our lending
partners so there's multiple
efforts to trying to get the
word out but it's it's it's
interesting you're just sure
everyone knows but you still
always have to keep working at
it.
Mr chair I I I appreciate that I
mean there's tons of money on
their workers from USDA or some
of these other entities how can
we capitalize on some of that
federal money and and do you try
to help.
Some of the small businesses.
Have been other sources of
funding well I'm a lot of them
start at a bank who
Who will then direct them to
various
entities like those small
business administration the
regional
Development units like at
northern New Mexico college
we made tane relationships with
those same entities
as far as the state I I would
say to you that it's incumbent
on all of us to try and make
sure that people are aware we
try to travel around the state
and visit areas to make sure
people here about things
we make sure our lending
partners hold training sessions
as well as
just making loans because for a
lot of the businesses it's how
to write a business plan it's
how do a higher appropriate
staff
how to recognize where to get
supplies
so I think it's it's it's
collaborative
of all of us.
Who are involved in economic
development doing our part to
make sure the word gets out.
And Mr I appreciate that we
should always spend the federal
dollars.
I don't want to leave those on
the table.
Thank you senator any other
questions or comments under our.
Senator thank you first of four
helping us
and and I don't really know.
What is council Senator thank
you to staff.
But it's not.
So you madam chair Senator is
that the council have rulemaking
authority or you just.
Dole out money the small.
New I would say I mean we have a
charter.
that
is
outlines what we're allowed to
do.
we have a restrictions as far as
You know types of investments we
made engage in I don't know if
you're aware but the
And secretaries chairs on our
board at automatically.
So we have that.
State connection
we make a report to the
legislature every year into the
state investment council every
year of that's available and
certainly could be provided to
any of you that that outlines
exactly what we've done.
We provide financial statements
annually
so there's a lot of oversight to
what we do so not sure so.
Expected you don't make rules
that will affect the operation
of small businesses to just
loaning money we work with
lending partners to lend to
small businesses.
It affects our.
Correct yeah and and that's what
I want to get to sometimes we
sometimes reports missions I
have rulemaking park that is we
want to make sure that we
understand that Madam Senator
you're you're the first person I
ever met from young's going out
related to.
Well it's very nice to me sorry
I don't know you all and your
urine in a small business loan
and I'm gonna use young as well
as an example probably.
For us in this room knows were
you know working on school.
Social problem recently brought
out with hands focus.
That
Click here to access.
Simple also so that's where my
family's from my grandma so
and growing up there's a lot of
small businesses grow data shop
are you in school correct my
great great aunts
Rick Ross St for Joe at bars and
restaurants and.
Post office were or the post
office was overall longer if
you're if you're in that neck of
the woods from Cuba to voters
voters the closest place to buy
anything because all those
businesses of what our have
operated hello to the shop
closed about five years ago I
guess some analysts you're the
one those further up the road on
what they're on the sports side
of the highway was closed
masamoto through the
still low enough for close one
so our emphasis up there we
thought we still have one of the
software with the all of us and
so talking about that it's one
thing to be growing up in Santa
Fe living in California's of the
four little out there but what
are you going to do to help
those families there to enter
into the middle class because I
can't do that without those
opportunities to create small
businesses in the for broadband
that's what I'm gonna do.
Raul transportation would be
really nice on highway ninety
six as well.
That we regulate focus way too
much and for back to families
graduated from modest means from
actually grown into the middle
class because of government over
regulation.
So it's one thing after hoc up
with broadband if you don't have
those sort of service and it
will be two point eight small
business is Dr bill doing their
because of the over regulation.
I wrote what that does it keeps
generational poverty included
special report for Zacks go
twenty deliveries a lot of money
to make money California Santa
Fe and then the majority the
beautiful because it is god's
country up there with the red
rocks of those maces are that to
me is my spiritual home.
But I can't afford to live there
and thankfully my grandmother
moved away from there he gave me
an opportunity visitation
background at George George
visiting you can't live there is
generational poverty it there
because it's not the ability to
start businesses and insurance
class.
And so I would encourage you to
take a look at that and it's
much more than just broadband is
whatever latest technology is
Madam chair Senator what I'm
looking at your resume is
credible to question your
credible nonprofit background
background but I don't see any
small business background my
mistake you want to look through
your resume have you ever owned
and run a small business before
you the only small business I've
run was the as you actually
publishing for the tribe.
So I'm
was government entity or not
from.
We actually was splendid as a
for profit entity by seven
generations of foundation and
then converted to a non profit
so it ran as a
generally as a for profit
business until like at the very
end converted to a non profit.
Representative profit.
We sold our books and whether or
not the person we defined that
is a profit profit omitted was
enough to keep as of during the
time I was with Zuni actually
publishing we published.
Three four five six so we were
able to do that
and whether or not the tribe has
continued to can the publishing
company I believe the answer is
no.
so much artistic purchased for
two or keep in mind too small
businesses are trying as I said
this is an opportunity to get
out of generational poverty
and our current need to.
You have.
There's no question about that
would not a background and how
hard it is to on a small or
medium sized simple.
So that those concerns
about the qualification for this
particular position you're also
probably will qualify for
management positions by were the
start of World War as a small
business owner is laughing
We'll have some of the
appointees so one of the.
Governor's office is four people
that really what it's like to
struggle The New Mexico students
small businesses know how hard
it is with the government over
regulation the state to actually
get out of action which part of
the that
Insurers states
you always think about that Mr
chair Senator.
On average in the service the
end of this criticism towards
you this is concerns I have on
the fourth of your resume this
program.
So thank you for all your
services for.
Want to go.
New Mexico.
Thank you for your comments.
Thank you so much of Madam
chairman.
Thank you and and I just wanted
to let members know we are
analyst is printing out the
statutory provisions that the
deal with this council so that
we can be looking at that as
well or do and that the next two
confirmations.
Senator let's council of email.
Yeah we're we're going to work
on getting that update thank you
for noting that thank you madam
chair I just want to say thank
you Senator Shendo niveau share
Rio Arriba county and
representation matters and so to
have a rural voice is very
important and so I like that
senator Morris that it's god's
country if you believe that we
require is that in that that
that I just want to say thank
you for serving and being the
voice for rural New Mexicans
what's the pleasure of the
committee Senator Stewart
manages to pass on and back at
this office.
We gotta do pass with the second
from centers the fact that I can
have a roll call vote.
Yes Mr chair Senator.
No Senator Paypen no Senator
Ingle was excuse.
I hope this thing yes Senator
yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator more.
Senator Moores no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Excuse.
Senator Pirtle help Senator.
Senator Stefanics yeah Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Hotmail yes Senator had a meal
yes and senator do the yes thank
you yes we have to fix yes.
Three no end to excuse thank you
so much congratulations and
we'll be seeing you later this
morning on the Senate floor
thank you thank you thank you
members of the committee thank
you senator.
Connect the call up Robert the
of these
whose appointment to the small
business investment corporation
I don't Senator Schmedes here.
There are.
Senator Schmedes has the next
to.
That's
a great plan if not we.
I agree.
How do you have to yes yes thank
you.
Will thank you Sir.
Thank you for stepping in.
Sure thank you bear with me one
moment.
Thank you Mr chair I present
Robert Joseph all the yes for
the small business investment
corporation Mr levy is is a
highland high school graduate he
has a bachelor of of a.
University studies and a master
of business administration.
He also has an impressive
resume.
In the banking and loan business
use senior vice president and
chief credit officer at the bank
of New Mexico and the executive
vice president chief credit
officer at sunrise being
available kirke in Albuquerque
New Mexico he has several other
other positions within landing
in and loans that make him well
qualified for this position with
that I would turn it over to Mr
ball the yes to reduce himself
to the committee Mr chair thank
you senator.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
members of the committee thanks
for the opportunity here.
I'm not a native New Mexican but
my ancestry as a group near
force live round the world came
back here in nineteen sixty six
to highland high school is he
said and my father brought us
here a.
He kept alive in me love the New
Mexico
He's half native Americans have
Latino.
This part Polish.
So with the but I am.
I went to U. N. M. and then went
to Dallas for five years job
opportunities were better out
there pay was better out there
but I also learned a lot in
Dallas because I want to come
back to one day and take what I
learned there back here I also
found an analysis of the
international department drew me
there.
Small business lending was my
forte I enjoyed dealing with
small business men and women and
all minorities loan to all sorts
of people I don't look at
anybody's ethnicity is a reason
for me to make a long this if
they're qualified and that's
what led me into
this community banking because
community banks deal small
business quite well
I will tell you that's one of
the things that I regret this
happened and banking is the
consolidation of the community
banks for better but I think we
still doing a good job in New
Mexico with that I think some of
the big banks that have come
here to help with that too and
hopefully continue to do that I
I was out of banking for three
years.
When First National Bank already
got bought by giant bank and I
decided to not want to work for
each I think I've done that for
the first five years as I went
to work as a controller for
CENIC counting firm as financial
advisors to small businesses
then as a controller of a
builder local builder developer.
They got drawn back into banking
but one of my former customers
and enjoyed that hi
I enjoy the fact too that I ran
into all sorts of people in
different environments a small
business that led me to joined
the enchanted land certified
development corporation which
does SB five oh four loans to
small business owner occupied I
did that over a decade ago and
when I retired five years ago
state on board and enjoyed doing
that
I think when Russ approach me to
come on the New Mexico SPSC.
That added to it another
opportunity also work within the
small business community.
I really thank him for that
opportunity.
They will be to use I
experienced in the past with
small businesses and finance as
well.
Madam chair.
Mr vice chairman members of the
committee if you have any
questions for me I'll be more
than happy to answer thank you
for that before you go to
questions or anybody in the
audience who's in favor of this
comfort if you can come up and
state your name.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Russell comments I'm the
executive director investment
visor for the small business
investment corporation DSP icing
I've had the opportunity to work
with Mr values over the past
year on our board and I highly
recommend him as a member of our
board of directors as before I
also have a letter from our
chairman and president Joseph
Patel and Mr Patel also highly
recommends Mr bell devious for
as a member of our board
directors thank you.
Budget we have one for that that
wishes but if the record can
show that there is one other in
support of the country is there
anyone on zoom.
No one in either supporter
opposition yes Sir right and
anybody in the audience in
opposition of the country.
The number of and go to
questions and comments to the
committee.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for.
Alter for this position I don't
want to get the same opportunity
Turn on my microphone of the the
you don't need any money to the
governor's campaign or any of
the governor's tax I did not.
And thank you very much in and
out Mr chair if I may
asking how how do we.
Get more investment outside of
the review Rio Grande quarter to
it's too small.
There's two ways that I've seen
in one is to organizations with
now the ideal CDC
Loves to do that
have brought many loans around
the state small towns
Albuquerque's a big as we all
know that on circuits the most
the FBI see is helpful in that
through the for cooperating
partners the money gets out
there I would would try and also
within the SP I see to to
promote that through another
organization just to get the
word out quite honestly I think
that you all in great position
whenever you talk to anybody
say.
Contact the deal CDC.
Contact somebody at this free I
see we don't make the direct
loans but we the people to have
because.
The people we deal with our for
profit we're a nonprofit they
wanna make loans to make money
off.
So what I did for a career got
to get paid back that but if you
do your job right you get paid
back of finance many people who
are small to begin with.
Ended up being bigger
millionaire than I'll ever be
but they they worked hard to
because small I found a small
business people.
Tend to work harder than those
in from the long range.
Personal opinion and experience.
And then Mister chair I I do
appreciate that scissors is
there something specifically we
can do to get
into these areas to to ensure
that the people are tapping into
these resources seventeen is
there something specific we can
do to ensure that we get the
word out to these people they
can tap into there's these
resources.
You know I I always think in
terms of person to person on do
doing stuff and as I mentioned
you all for and and your your
fellow of fellows and and ladies
in the in the house just as you
get an opportunity and you talk
to people just one sentence
mention our name and mentioned
ill CDC.
I find that.
People are reluctant to go on in
they have to hear something
about it they get a phone number
it's less intimidating to call
we had website they can go on
look at that just to get a start
quite honestly anybody have been
dealing with with you those
organizations it's just a matter
to go ahead and to deal with a
small business person who needs
help to see if they can help
them out and there's quite a few
different opportunities we have
was the rest about ten different
cooperating partners that we
deal with and so there's a lot
there some of which would bring
in money from out of state here
which we find to be very
valuable because that's what
I've always seen over the
decades.
New Mexico to help we want to go
to New Mexico for should because
you have some real quality
people there he got supportive
people willing to pay you back
I've seen people I met banking
started Texas Armstrong number
people were nutrition pandemic
but I hadn't seen that too much
of New Mexico we have it but not
and in in about.
Mr chair of
the previous
I do appreciate that you know
I'm I'm learning.
Quite a bit just by have an
conferees in front of me so I
think right now with coming out
of the the pandemic and the
closures for the governor and
and a lot of the issues that
that came with that I mean small
businesses are right at the
forefront of everybody's mind
and how do we.
We can't build them for people
but you know we can instead of a
hand out given my hand up and I
think right if we can do that as
much as possible special are
homegrown
you know we can we can create
some generational wealth and and
it won't start just overnight
but I think we start doing some
of those those things especially
our smaller rural communities
you know who knows what can
happen so I I appreciate you
coming in front of the committee
and all the others as as we
learn more about your
organization and and what we can
do to help.
Thank you senator Senator
Stefanics.
Thank you very much Mr chair
good morning could you share
with me what
Forward or future goal that this
organization might take fund I
mean based upon your financial
experience.
What can you envision for the.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
members committee with what I
see is doing is.
Contain contain two X..
Continue to expand the outreach
to small business community who
may be feeling that again
overwhelmed by the walmarts the
cosco's and the and the
the report lays of this world
it's tough for small businesses
to to get out ahead but they can
do it
what a one of my favorite
clients from way back when he
was a giant today but only one
restaurant at one time.
is a flying star they were used
to call double rainbow and I was
with them way back when they've
been very successful through
hard work and so always been my
pin is the harder it gets you
there
my sister worked for a nonprofit
up in Michigan called the
Kellogg foundation of at a model
of you've given then us.
I am a fish to eat and he lives
for a day you teach a man to
fish his survive for a lifetime
and I think that's one of the
good points about loans versus
grants because into it in a loan
rate that the one to do you know
you've accomplished something
you give somebody money I just
not big on that of in a was big
on landing just completed profit
in the banks that was at.
His because people learn to go
head to grow themselves and take
the responsibility
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Ortiz the
people.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator Mr yes I I.
Apologize because I had to run
up the present building of the
committee and and Mrs in the
earlier nominees a discussion in
years is this money versus money
from from the to invest well the
the the severance severance tax
fund believe it is is where the
big source come through we keep
kicking money back because we
operate
a surplus generally speaking we
were very low staffed affect us
kind of amazed at that when I
first got approach we want to
play he's a hard working guy but
they count on volunteers pick
people like myself like and like
the Josh to be coming up who are
experiencing use that to deal
with other people we've got the
Lente partnership provides the
biggest source of our money it's
not ours it's theirs but we put
money in almost if you're
familiar with banks and
participations we're a a bank
might want to be part of the
loan but they don't deal with
the customer we don't deal with
the customer either we deal with
the lender and they deal with
the customer but we and with
that we have an agreement with
them and how we get paid back
and all so we can put it back in
to do once again all point to
recycle the money doesn't go out
if those as a grant and it never
comes back those as a loan comes
back from somebody else yes and
and so thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that so so we also
have in the state investment
council a portion of the state's
permanent land grant fund that
is available for investing in
New Mexico.
Businesses do you have access to
that is that part of what you
could can you let that any of
that money was that done by
separate board for separate
purposes.
I think I might Representative
the week and Ruskin answered
better than me the we do it in
cooperation as part of maybe the
connection with the state
treasurer to go interact with
that but most most of what
What we've got today through the
prior folks in this thing if
created this money this come
back and gets reused and reused
yeah so
the fund is grown well so so
we're able to go ahead and tap
into that and buy more stuff
because hunger loan demand
inflation is driving up the
dollar amount of loans but so is
business activity and and and Mr
chairman the Mr voted yes do we
retain a share the owner and.
Become shareholders in the
businesses that are we're
borrowing from are there are
very far from us no.
We we we just as long that's it
you're gonna get this corrected
and they don't pay a direct us
they pay to the loan partner who
then pays us so it is just like
a **** big bank participations a
big bank they want to help of.
With with the bank the
participating banks still gets
paid through that bank and just
one last question Mr chairman
and is the is the of the number
of the.
Small businesses approaching you
all for loans growing or as an
flattened or even going back.
Well it again they don't protest
but their protests the other
partners right and so with the
other partners
We're seeing a grow we've had
least.
One new partner in the past
twelve months come into play to
bring upwards to uppers to
twenty five million dollars
eventually to loan in New
Mexico.
And I think the word is out that
New Mexico is not just a
backwater and when I came here
was a backwater everybody said
you leaving the country said I
got a passport so that you
believe that Backes but it but
they
so we're we're getting that the
the pandemic caused a big
increase for monies in the SBA
came to the forefront with loans
that helped out in the act.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
just appreciate the efforts at
diversifying new Mexico's
economy and they're going on so
many ways that this is one I I
just did not really focused on
the four of us here.
Thank you senator best about the
building yes if I think all of
us have been asked how the
beaches are in New Mexico and
the northern comments or
questions.
Senator Baca thank you Mr chair
I would move Senate rules
committee confirmation for
Robert G. Valdivia as to the
small business investment
corporation okay I have a due
process the affected by Senator
Lopez if I can have a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca yes Representative
yes for includes office thank
you for the yes Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris is excuse.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator I yes
Representative yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator had a new yes to have
more yes and senator do the yes
thank you to the yes you have
nine yes and to improve
congratulations Robert will be
seeing you later this morning on
the Senate floor thank you madam
chair Mister vice chair and
members of the committee.
Joshua Smith who's also been
appointed to the small business
the best rate possible once
again.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you for joining us with
respect.
Thank you for.
No.
Thank you senator oxygen but and
and although we have been making
such a good time please don't
don't feel the need to yes
Representative we have eleven to
get to the floor.
Very good thank you madam chair
madam chair may please the
committee approved present to
Senate rules Josh Willie Smith
from the small business
investment corporation.
Mr Smith has significant banking
background both in the mid size
banks and and even some larger
funds he has a B. S. in business
administration
of finance I'm sorry university
of Colorado at boulder and he's
a leadership award winner winter
western states school of banking
he has worked with Washington
federal First National Bank of
conundrum technologies JP Morgan
Oppenheimer and I will turn it
over to Mister Smith to tell
this tale tell you a little bit
more about himself thank you
thank you
Sorry.
Good morning madam chair Mister
chair members of the committee
chair Joshua Smith you're aware
senior vice president and
commercial division manager at
Washington federal bank have
nearly twenty five years of
experience in the financial
industry currently managing my
own portfolio of approximately
eight of eight hundred million
dollars.
I look forward to using my
experience to support the small
business investment corporation
initiatives investing in New
Mexico small businesses.
An additionally the father of
for school age children but you
can't tell from the grey hair
and I'm committed to building
Mexico's economy for future
generations I was instructed to
keep my comments short side.
Thank you hi and is there anyone
here in the the rumors here and
support of come on.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Russell
comments I'm the executive
director an investment adviser
for the small business
investment corporation and I'm
here in favor of Mr Joshua Smith
has a member of the board of
directors of the small business
investment corporation I also
have a letter from our chairman
and president Joseph Patel and
he also strongly recommends
confirmation of Mr Smith has a
member of the board of directors
thank you.
anyone else in the audience in
favor of the country anyone
online.
Chairman members of the
committee there's nobody on for
against.
Anyone in the audience who is
here in opposition to cough I
seen done we'll go to questions
from the committee Senator
Lopez.
Thank you very much.
One
of just because
this bill is passed by.
that has.
It was the additional I remember
good discussion we have.
It was a means to help this for
small businesses in our
communities right not just in
Albuquerque but it was really
Mexico.
As the partners like Aksyon New
Mexico last quarter we get MFA
also has they're one of the
partners with this of someone
with an elected.
Years and of course the loan
applications and stuff is that I
think they've done some work
over the years and.
I think COVID.
And maybe give a little more
instances of thousands of this
organization right so one of
those thank you.
Thank you other members of the
committee center molars thank
you madam chairman of college as
a result of the over education
so I missed the presentation the
last one you're here for our
first presentation and so could
you go over my concerns about
the rivers Center pearls
concerns about the role aspect
management of small business
aspect thank you know what my
concerns were and I haven't had
a chance to dive into your sort
of.
More knowledge is here manager
and in spite believe it's too
regulatory or other pressures
that are found by by small
businesses and I will speak to
that specifically but I will say
that the organizations that we
partner with for example Rehm
springs West provide financial
literacy and business plan
developments and other services
that helps small businesses
specifically and spend as this
is our own
I met Ortiz to develop their
business plan and support and
and building a business and that
to me is the best way to help
small businesses get out there
and make a profit and support
the families.
Chair Senator on.
Do you have.
I apologize for this prepared do
you have a small business
experience if you have any
experience in the world Mexico
so the first response already to
be consistent on the yes women
chair I actually smart and
started small business when I
was west for Colorado's a
construction clean up business
before I decided to come back to
finance after the birth of my
first child
I live in a somewhat rural
community of cedar crest I do
see the businesses come and go
and I also sort of the low
committee of the LCC with Mr
this and so we see loan
applications from small
businesses across New Mexico so
again I would like to say that
the SBHC partners with
organizations that support
businesses generally.
smaller sometimes medium sized
and we continue to push for
those organizations to lend more
in communities that are
underserved so for example we
recently brought in a company
called clearinghouse CDFI and
they focus on construction which
the end received by we're not
able to do so and generally if
you go to the website you'll see
that their investments are in
smaller towns in New Mexico.
So those are the are you have
run a small businesses.
You make part of your import put
on how we're treating small
business and your small business
owners I did make a little money
because I was the only employee
but yet to tell it's it the
manager it's a daunting task
getting insurance filing the
proper reports I getting
business licenses marketing
oneself is is difficult and I
wish I had the resources that
someone like during spring can
find.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sir thank you.
There any other questions
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for.
Would be willing to step up and.
This.
I
reading through the the the a
lot of Senator Senator Lopez to
the Senator can support.
So many years and it does look
it says you can make in their
May equity investments for
getting this.
That sounds like the the option
is been due to the supposedly do
that and just to verify the pin
it is so what madam chair I
think when a admit I've only
been on the of the board a year
or so but my understanding is
that we realize that our area of
expertise was not in investing
in small businesses and that we
decided to put it as an
organization and and built
partnerships with those that are
experts in investing in small
businesses such as stream to
bring clearinghouse CDFI west
loan fund.
For example.
Thank you.
Gentleman I I I totally
understand what that decision
that is that still keep thinking
back to.
Testimony we heard here several
years ago from New Mexico tech
or one of their professors
This the university basically.
Body into his invention and
they're still getting.
Something simple something
incredibly every day but from
various universities been
receiving payments from that
because they only they didn't
just make a loaned him to start
his own company the the thing
about a piece of the action and
the they receive in return many
many times more so and I fully
understand why that is because
for every one of those with if
you had if you can and you can
lose a.
A lot more than that but I I
would just hope that is some
point if if the right
opportunity this so four some
of the.
To jump on just because you have
the legal legal backing for the
so thank you.
Thank you is that our state no
more questions or comments to
the will of the committee.
About.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
Senate rules committee
confirmation for Josh Willie
Smith for the small business
investment corporation thank you
said about that I have a second
by Senator back.
If I can have a roll call vote.
Mr chair Senator Baca yes the
legislative yes entertain those
X..
With yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna yes then to make
a yes Senator Moores yes
Senator.
