Okay.
Good morning everyone.
All welcome to Senate rules
regarding open primaries state
today we are going to hear all
of the bills currently in the
Senate the dress over primaries
and we're we're going to do a
little experiment we're going to
hear all of them and then we're
gonna vote at the end of the
folks can hear the various
approaches before feel like
there is one approach in
particular I haven't already
voted on that one
also just J. R. one is is on
this agenda that was on there's
a roll over my understanding is
that seven years
and Stewart are still diligently
working on the committee said
they're going to be coming back
here with and so we won't be
hearing that yet
but with that let's go ahead and
get service and bill seventy
three Sen o'neill and Karan help
I'll.
Right.
Thank you madam chair.
And the bill for you Senate bill
seventy three bill that I
sponsored I think a decade ago
it's very to me is this is so
like simple right it's like do
we want people to vote in
primaries or not are we afraid
of what might happen if we have
a better turnout during
primaries my god the world will
end if independent suddenly come
in it's like change the verdict
hello no so I I tried to to to
the fact that turned out in our
last primary was a whopping
twenty five percent you all hold
the presses twenty five percent
okay all of you you know this
stuff I don't want to I think we
all have our opinions about this
issue it's not like it's like
suddenly appeared it's not like
I can produce some magic taught
talking you magic data point to
will change your mind it's real
basic okay I feel strongly that
we are a better democracy were
better state if people actually
vote in primaries if they're not
prevented to vote obviously the
independent voters are every my
goodness and and Colorado
they're more independent DTS is
in two states then and then the
two parties I mean part of this
comes to my experience back when
I was a swing Democrats back
when I had a Republican district
and was walking walking walking
and there were so many
independent voters and they
can't they can't vote in a
primary I know many people my
friends who are independents and
they are shut out of the process
it's not like they're like.
Like they don't care about
politics it's not like by the
way I don't need to vote they're
very engaged there engaged as a
Democrat as a partisan I am
confident in our ability to
persuade these independent
voters to come to our side I am
not remotely threatened by the
notion of more people voting in
our primaries twenty five
percent is pathetic right so
I just want you know I I I bring
this because I just want to know
please help me out I'm looking
for to really good discussion on
this tell me why.
The why Bob this bill is a
positive variations of this what
is it that scares people about
having more people vote in our
primaries I would really like to
know that and with that I said
to much will turn it over to us
society Senator.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I don't think I
could say anything more
passionate.
Then Senator o'neill has already
said yes I'll just add that this
is really important to me
because I was a Republican I was
registered back in nineteen
ninety fourth Republican was a
Republican for fifteen years and
before I change my party because
I had a son who was born with a
rare genetic syndrome had to
navigate a lot of specialists
and a lot of challenges came up
trying to access the medical
care that he needed and that's
when I really looked into the
political parties and what each
party stood for and I change I
ended up changing my party to a
Democrat but I really believe
that most people are not solely
Democrat or so leave Republican
on every issue their nuances and
one of the concerns that I've
seen over the last several years
is there is becoming more and
more of a polarization and I
really feel like this bill
addresses that issue and would
go a long way in reducing that
polarization that is really
dividing us as a country and a
society and this is a way that
everyone can participate in and
Alexion and not see it or not
every election primary elections
and not feel like they're having
to choose one of these polarized
parties so madam with that madam
chair we stand for questions.
Senators and I believe that we
do have folks who have signed up
to give public comment
And.
R. Representative Fajardo your
first unless.
are.
Yes for New Mexico accent and
we're one of only nine states
that don't have sometime over
the primary system it is at that
have a trend across the country
and start you are you having
that we need access to the full
we do more and more people to be
able to the I have had the
fastest growing both owner
registration have the in house
financing and New Mexico.
We want people to vote and we
encourage us about but then we
also wanted to try and help not
to participate in a primary
system and we need to change
that chair I was for this bill.
Thank you
seated please forgive me if a
sealer silent film so are you
and and I'm sorry mission of
with the first letter yes please
come up to the if you use the
money for the folks on the
webcasting fear is so large this
so.
So Joel thank you so much madam
chair I just wanted to point out
that current law New Mexico
prohibits those who have changed
their voter registration in the
past two years to participate in
the electoral process so I
forcing New Mexicans to choose a
party prior to voting in a
primary we are forcing them to
decide whether they want to
participate in the electoral
process or to serve their
community two quick examples are
participating as appointments
such as citizen redistricting
committee and to participate as
poll workers or election judges
many would races in New Mexico
are decided in the primary
election and this effect
effectively disenfranchises one
fourth of our voting bloc of
unaffiliated voters were
stripped of the ability to
participate in the electoral
process which their taxpayer
dollars fund thank you so much
thank the Mandy Vigil the this
election director.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
the office would like to share
with this group that we support
this legislation I wanted to
highlight just a couple of
administrative items for you
awareness there are just a
couple of items that we would
have to.
We stress based on the need to
send another notice out to
voters and also some additional
ballot support so some of the
systematic items however we do
recognize that the current
process for STR's complex and it
does require some some
additional steps for voters and
so we recognize that this would
streamline that process and we
do think that there would be
some reduction to the
administrative.
Requirements that the counties
now have.
Thank you thank you how does
he will soon.
manager there if the you all.
At least.
Remains.
Yes.
Of the Susan Calicut go ahead
and you yourself and.
Proceeds.
The responding at the moment.
There are a few other people
signed up on the to see if we
could go through them from that.
sure our yes this is this a I
think rock total transaction.
The staff and I need.
Mr tell please please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair a good
morning hi supports removing yes
the seventy three four.
I understand the objections to
the bill none of them are more
important than making voting
easier and for our.
The our democracy is long but it
bends toward more voters please.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman Jeremy
Gruber.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr Gruber please.
Thank you can you hear me we can
yes right thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee my name's Jeremy
Gruber on the SVP of open
primaries and nonpartisan
organization dedicated to more
open and inclusive elections I
want to thank you for the
opportunity to submit testimony
in favor of SB seventy three.
There are three hundred twenty
five thousand registered
independent voters in the state
of New Mexico that are currently
disenfranchised by the state's
closed primaries that's twenty
five percent of all voters to
put that in context New Mexico
bars more voters from
participating in its primary
elections by virtue of being
independent things of all
political persuasions in the
entire state of Wyoming.
New Mexico has independent
voters aren't going away they're
the fastest growing group of
voters in the state by far and
denying them the franchise is
not sustainable.
Who are independence well the
cross section of all new
Mexicans but some groups stand
out that starts with young
people over fifty percent of
millennial and Gen Z. voters are
independent Montoya thank you Mr
correct.
Thank you more on.
Is please please go ahead.
Yes hi good morning my name is
very talented and I was raised
to overseas so
thank you senator rand have
built for sponsoring this I grew
up in your district
And I'm a registered Republican.
That and I just.
Explains that this is an
enticing many members of the
militant.
We are trained to be nonpartisan
and our service we tend to
remain although I remain a
registered Republican please
support our veterans.
I'll allow
any primaries I thank you you
madam chair for I am hearing
this bill and I ask committee
members to support this bill
here working thank you.
As always please not yes we have
another name all right
do we have an innocent up in
opposition.
I don't believe so hi is there
anyone in the audience who did
not sign up I would like to hear
support by raising your hand
please do so.
You want to indicate opposition
by raising your hand please do
so.
All right.
Okay questions from the
committee first on the list is a
hundred mourners.
Thank you senator Senator sure
thank you I think it's going to
allow us to conversation we
signed today is here as a for a
lot of people that.
Image to hear at all three at
once of the biggest.
Forty go to decide.
meal once was a primary thing
was first elected in and my
decision reminder change my
opinion radicals were I've
sponsored Roadrunner legislation
passed and the messages are
macro recorder to version that
would change my mind was two
things one was that.
It is always a this is our party
campaign our our game
but actors paid for partners and
their their selection process an
active instructors on fair to
all the other taxpayers will be
excluded from the political
process ages two orders for New
Mexico or a lot of participate
that was sent use the biggest
struggle.
Are requires a young the young
voters just don't want for our
regular games anymore they don't
want to participate all members
Democrat fighting all the time
the one persistent long.
they they hello there are
reasons that we all.
Hospital for houses and we're
gonna have to move forward them
to stating this report and our
Democratic Republic that we lose
our state system or the future
of public is.
So that's where those two issues
of why it changed but I missed
student all right hopefuls of of
how we do this and I it's kind
of the to your senators madam
chair
So just a couple questions so
yours would this particular pope
proposal versus the other three
if I'm an independent voter
I show up to the polls in the
primary I mean Madam grabbed a
Republican ballot for Democrat
about would there be an
independent or minority party
primary in that process.
For the they're still just the
our dollar primary Democrat
primary what about all the the
green the communists the all the
other minor parties are there Mr
madam chair and senator you know
with where we are right now
that's where we are we have
Republican primary democratic
primary I mean somewhere in time
members of the Green Party
primary whatever maybe at that
point we come back and deal with
that issue that you raise which
is quite valid but it's just
it's just a peripheral I I
believe I guess I agree.
The Terence older one and
thought I was gonna say we might
ask Miss Vigil to to kind of
explain how is someone gets
primary and what we have to
qualify to.
Party on the ballot.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee so there are
three major parties currently
qualified in New Mexico so
democratic Republican and
libertarian parties and as the
question is how do you become a
major party or how do you get a
candidate on the ballot hello
hello so what it is is that if
you're you have to be a major
party to be to have a five
participate in the primary
correct there is a a major party
nomination process currently
ahead of the general election in
which all of the major parties
would have to go through the
process to get their candidates
on that primary ballot and the
nominated to move forward.
And for folks like the like
smaller parties like maybe the
Green Party there were not
seeing them on our primary
ballots because they have met
that threshold for it to be a
major party writer Act if you're
not qualified as a major party
then you as a minor or
independent could then
participate on the general Alan.
Madam.
So right now the other
Republican Democrat the terms of
mothers still major part of the
New Mexico can also be.
We have to go through the
process to review but they are
currently qualified so that
occurs in March okay.
so Mister chair Senators I think
that's one thing that might want
to look at it with move forward
is that it's you have all these
minor parties so either just
what we're hearing is that if
you're libertarian you can right
now get a libertarian about
directly but they dropped a
minor parties in a couple of
players and Republican or
Democrat primary right now
original Medicare you have to
get a tarian primary doctor
madam chair and senator Morris
that is correct so if you are
affiliated with a major party
you would have to participate
with that ballot and participate
in that primary if you're Miner
or DTS currently in law you
could update your registration
to the STR process to one of
those major parties and then
participate in their primary.
STR is etcetera and I'm sorry
yes same day registration.
And just to note in my
introductory comments I didn't
really go into detail but part
of that complexity is that if I
was to update my registration as
a decline to state voter or a
minor party voter just to
participate in the primary there
is a requirement for them to
that if they want to go back to
what they originally work they
would have to then re register
again so there's that extra step
that I feel like in the current
law creates a lot of confusion
for voters and I think there's
an expectation for their spot to
be some systematic process for
that and that is not currently
in place so this would this
would benefit the motors and and
really improve the current
process.
Welcome.
More morning members with the
electric bills.
For primary.
Yeah that year so it we knew
that that when we do stated that
a number that really work
because of logistical hurdles so
I have some.
Register in in the register and
that process to get people to
update their driver's license.
Mexico the other to restrictions
so I appreciate that that that
is true okay I just think as we
move forward with the senators
we might want to consider how to
work with those minor and
independent voters in the middle
of I don't know I support a
third primary no one for us and
for them and then for the public
Democrat won medalist did not
related to a jumbled jumbo
primary which I think we'll hear
that proposal here next but
anyways are applied you guys for
this on difference portable
primaries no legislation point
is which happened will come to a
fork in the road yes
Representative so thank you.
Thank you senator Senator says
if you know.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you senators for the third.
Right because I I can't of that
is the data you have
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Of madam chairman and and
sectors
finally had funded.
Thank
you Mr madam chair because we
wanted to use the because when
you declare your candidacy the
way it is now you're the
Republican or Democrat or maybe
an independent but you want to
you want to you know attain
public office and that's why we
have the primary Senate
certainly right now primaries
are even more important because
of the you know the lack of
competitive districts honestly
in our state this is the real
reason.
Primaries to love each party to
select their candidates.
For the election the just the re
election is in November the
primary on June and we have and
then so the the Republicans can
pick there's and the Democrats
can pick there's and somebody
doesn't want to pay for the
democratic candidate they
register as a dependent if they
don't want to take the
Republican candidate they
register as an independent and
if they want to vote in November
for somebody who's not those
they cast their vote.
They want all this does is a lot
of people who are really
Democrats who are really
Republican to tell the Democrats
were to have a say in who the
Democrats should have the second
with the Republican should have
as their candidate they don't
want to vote.
For the.
They want to vote for the hello
the Democrats have all have to
do is say to change the
registration can be done online
and then they both and I'm not
sure the problem we're solving
fear is because of the low
turnout in primaries is the
problem.
It's not because the
independence are floating is
because the Democrats are voting
in the Republicans of.
I mean to me that's the big
issue of.
You know a so I'm not sure what
was what the problem is that
we're solving here.
Madam chair center as always I
respect your opinion I just
disagree with you.
Thoroughly look the landscape
has changed it's no longer you
know when you're of voter you're
not like I'm a Republican I'm a
Democrat no it's different this
is what we're saying and in the
whole point of this is to have
people that are that are
currently shut out of these very
important elections in you know
in the notion that that is like
the demo like we're clubs you
know like like I'm a Democrat
and you're a Republican is just
the the world is to into a
lecture room
atmosphere is changed and this
is this is to me the point of
this the problem of this is that
people are being shut out of
participating in our democracy
and that's to me very
disconcerting but I respect what
you're saying of course but I
don't agree.
Madam chairman people are
eligible to vote only have to do
is register when we shut you out
of the good doctor see that just
says for this date I will
register as a Democrat so I can
help the Democrats pick their
candidate for the Republican and
if I don't want to stay in
Democrat I just change my vote
registration back afterwards if
what you say is absolutely right
the parties of lost pretty much
any to identification except for
this one purpose and if this
goes through their logistics
celery the process and actually
increase the polarization I
because the parties will be
trying to hang on to some kind
of ideological Care.
That right now the big tent that
the that that each party used to
have is getting smaller and
smaller and it's getting smaller
and smaller because they're
trying to make sure that people
know we're different from the
other ones and if we if we throw
to vote later suggesting party
identification loses all
character and then what we have
we have no no real way of
deciding.
The you know you you belong to
or which which position you the
waterfall.
Madam chair center I'd look.
People have different views I
mean there's partisan Democrats
there's like moderate Democrats
you know it's not as if there's
a big spectrum of voter you know
sense of sensibility and so
forth it's just it's it's to me
it's a question of I I don't I
don't feel like the world I
don't think it's going to have
that this is important but it's
not going to turn the the world
upside down it's just allowing
you know they just just a rural
very good direction and I don't
think that it's so easy the way
it is now are used I mean
seriously like all are you going
to do is is like register and
that then you got to go back and
re register like who does that I
don't know anybody who does that
I mean I know that was a an
amendment you know our they're
calling Senator Paypen I mean of
the state can keep came up with
that it's like what you know
this is really workable no
anyway thank you but I I of
course I respect my guy
tremendously so we just disagree
thank you Mr.
Thank you senator next up is
Center mechanical by Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senators career home Phil
and o'neill I enthusiastically
support this bill and for the
following reason I like the two
of you I really value
participation in this democratic
Republic and it pains me when
I've been on the phone or
canvassing and I talked to.
Independence for those who we
just declined to state what
party they are
and we talk about the primaries
and they share with me how
frustrated they are because
they're not invited to
participate in that party in
that exercise and I completely
agree with them and so I've
been.
frustrated as a citizen as a
legislator now that they are
close to them for primaries
So I I enthusiastically support
this and
I to chairman and and senders
I've been paying to see our our
participer dissipation rate so
low in this in the state in the
country as a whole and so I
think this legislation will help
increase our participation and
will solve the the problem of
folks having to to re register
after primary
I agree there are many voters
who simply don't want to do it
and and so consequently they
won't participate at all and we
need them to participate so
thank you madam chair thank you
senators thank you Senator
Pirtle.
Madam chair thank you senators
for bringing this
I've changed my opinion quite a
bit on open primaries throughout
the years I think as we've seen
the shift go from affiliation
with the party to not wanting to
leave the party
you know I think there's a a
large portion of people who.
Don't have their voice heard
but I really wish this even went
even further
I'm a big fan madam chair and
and senators of jungle primaries
I don't really like to turn but
I think that's the most fair for
for the public I mean it would
result in some of your have your
Democrat areas to have two
Democrats in the General or two
Republican sheriffs running
Representative two republics
running for sheriff in Travis
county and you know I think
that's what's best for the
voters because essentially what
happens is you will know
the sheriff in Travis county
selected by three thousand
people in a primary primary
election.
and the majority of people don't
have a state because they're not
allowed to participate so I'm
gonna support all the open
primary bills just for that
point because I I think that's
where we need to get to
I do see a little issue where
you have to pick a party.
because most of our Senate
districts going to multiple
counties in the rural parts of
the state so it could be a a
possibility where you wanted to
participate in the Republican
primary for state senator race.
But you want to participate in
the democratic primary for your
state your county offices that
are also up at the same time but
I this is one step closer and I
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
And I I plan to support thank
you.
Senator Pirtle several I think
you're gonna really like some of
our opponents are
just chairs
Additional discussion from the
committee if I may just to
follow up of the three bills and
and I just like this direction
honestly I feel like ours is the
most moderate it's the most
gradual and it respects you my
colleagues you know the folks
that have a real hard time with
the notion I mean even I I have
a hard time with the notion of a
jungle primary you know but it's
but it's like I applaud the
direction and so I just would
say on the three being presented
to you today that feel that
Senate bill seventy three is the
right way to go.
And Senator
so so because I mean other
comments are also I I I I I I
really like that I think Senate
bill seventy three takes a very.
A very common sense and
reasonable approach to this
issue
Funding has struck me when
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino was
speaking and and all all respect
to Senator to the Pino I tend to
disagree with him on this topic
as as you do
but he said he said the real
election is in November and we
all know that it and Center
privileges state and that's that
here in New Mexico often times
the reelection is the primary
and the fact that you know a
good quarter of our voters New
Mexico and and my understand
Miss Vigil correct me if I'm
wrong that I understand is that
the numbers of DTS registrations
are perfect are exhilarating
more than more folks are signing
up as DTS that's the fastest
growing on party I think in New
Mexico This act accurate thing
to say.
Madam chair members of the
committee currently we're
sitting at about twenty three
percent of our registered voters
being decline to state are not
affiliated with the majority
party and we do continue to see
that increasing.
So to to exclude go almost a
quarter of our motors
from participating and hacked
essentially half of our
democracy in the state I I think
is is unconscionable and I'm
also looking forward to seeing
kind of the different approaches
in the different bills but but I
really like that I I think that
seventy three.
Gets us to open primaries while
still acknowledging a lot of the
of the points that the senator
Ortiz Pino was making I think I
think it is a good fit for New
Mexico and where we are now
But I also.
And and this might.
Some folks who are DTS might
might not like what I'm gonna
say next.
As I was having and I was also
having a conversation with
someone who's DTS recently and
he said I I hate that you're
saying that GTS I'm not details
of independent.
And and the the the debate we're
having is that the truth is I
think a lot of us notice when
we're doing our campaigning most
folks who are far DTS were
declined to decline to pick
party still most of the time
vote reliably one where the
their voting behavior looks a
lot like they were problem they
were maybe I registered with
with one of the major parties
but for one reason or another
they don't want to be affiliated
with that party and and I don't
blame the
I'm proud to be a Democrat but
we all see I mean if you if all
you if you're reading the news
and and same.
Get.
I'm flattered but.
I understand why people don't
want to be affiliated with with
part of the space there's a lot
to turn folks off in politics in
general these days hi and we
have to if we want those people
to continue to be involved in
our democratic process we have
to acknowledge and respect their
feelings around that and not put
up any barriers to their
participation south thank you
for for bringing this bill I
look forward to and and senator
if you had said that if when we
got Center she committee Beloff
he wasn't here that you would
not mind put it on for him
however Madam if I may he says
he can be here just walking that
thirty is yes okay that actually
is excellent funding.
Okay we will and and and I I
don't know if you all heard of
beginning what we're gonna do is
we're gonna hear all of these
have a discussion and the vote
on the.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members.
Just.
There are provided they all have
their own bills drafted
everything the pretty cool.
So thank you for that.
Could you bring us up okay well
they gave me something there I
don't know what you are looking
there.
thank you I I really want to be
here for senator bill but we
just didn't work out the child.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you senator o'neill for look at
this issue we've had good
discussions I'll be very brief
my my bill very similar my my
bill is
If I may madam chair
it is it is a a fully open
primary so what I mean by that
is you show up to the primary.
And they say.
Senator Morris we're not gonna
ask you what party registered do
you want to vote in the
democratic primary on a voting
Republican primary absentee
ballot people
they requests for absentee and
they say I'd like to vote in the
democratic primary
that they're not just what the
registration is that's it.
so that's that's what the bill
does
the reason the last thing I'll
say on this is the reason that I
chose to do it this way I'm not
saying it's it's better or worse
than the other proposed ideas
but I think if we're gonna have
open primaries they should just
be fully open
there's pros and cons that I'm
sure have already been discussed
when I was out dropping off kids
and I'm sure we'll have more
time discussed now
you know for example I've had
discussions with the Green Party
and other minority parties and
that's my concern with looking
at the DTS issue
Is we we would still have have
some issues with the minor
parties and my and my interest
in this issue really is the fact
that a lot of people feel boxed
out of the political process
they feel like we have a
Republican Democrat dual
monopoly of course and this is
my attempts to throw some chips
on the table and say let's let's
bring some more.
People into the game.
and the and that that's it I
like I said I'll just keep it
brief I just I'm just thinking
let's to fully open primaries
and by the way of course the the
center and you may mention this
already but we're we're very
supportive of the process more
than I think our own bills
and so that that's my priority
my priority is not this is not a
no SB one seventy five it's it's
let's let's have a a good
thorough discussion let's let's
bring in the minor parties let's
bring in folks independence and
have a good discussion try to
craft legislation carefully
hopefully as things move forward
so the manager of the committee.
Thank you senator we do have
some folks signed up to speak in
support of the.
The.
Okay we're wearing them I'm not
the best options here to have
not.
The the okay yeah I'll note that
she signed up to speak in
opposition we don't have anyone
else signed up on this bill is
there anyone in the.
The audience who would like to
raise our hands indicate
support.
Anyone who'd like there is a has
indicate opposition.
All right questions from the
committee Senator Moores.
We do have a letter from.
Jones so.
For the record
I.
Transition
and madam chair your talk about
struggling earlier when you were
talking over there on the road
to get on.
There were a lot of Senator.
J..
And just five percent will
report our service our chamber I
was looking around the two
possibly three of them at that
time or in districts that will
competitive come November.
The rest of us that eight
wrestlers.
planners.
There were so many so.
So.
so madam chair of senators so
you just you saw ceremonial
postal
so basically I think reporter
for wrong this is more like I
think New Hampshire or some
other states do this is a New
Hampshire that's most prominent
that does this but but I've
heard of this before does work
very well in those other states
and I think it's either north
New Mexico one of the early
primary states for the
presidential actually do not
have to assault Carolina that
does this and I know works well
could you walk me through how
that's different uses of running
states in and I.
Should have a comprehensive list
there are some states that have
my the majority of states have
at least a partially open
primary Arizona's partially open
Texas is fully open so Texas
doesn't even have party
registration at all we have New
Hampshire I think
I think Maryland has re open
primaries as well there there's
a little bit about you know
we're looking we want to be data
driven right and so there's an
argument out there that I'd I
don't buy I guess there was some
sort of opioid and opening
process of primaries in Hawaii
in the maze of seeing this and
and right afterward there was
decreased voter turnout for some
reason but I'll tell you this in
the political world we we we
can't do controlled experiments
right I mean what all the other
things that happened I think in
the for I think was in the early
eighties madam chair and and
senator Morris that that
happened so some of the day we
have we have to also look what
was happening politically were
voters really excited how are
the candidates were there back
in the order your there's a lot
of moving parts the to try to
answer question differently then
there there's been no I think
the definitive evidence that
primaries have have harmed any
sort of what I call democratic
turn out for voter participation
or voter integrity or anything
like that it is going very well
in the majority of US states
right now.
After Santo road appreciate that
wasn't even for center of the
rules
it's a market points I both for
both you answer or you know
madam chair and cried Sierra
also take her to me as we're
going through the math of one
everyone files for their
elections will probably at the
fix then the the when
independents and minor parties
file because right now under
current law they could wait till
after that these open primaries
that files C. will who wins the
primaries and the miners parties
and everything else in file so I
think with a everyone I would
have to follow the same time to
to make that fair but so that's
a different bill that would have
to amend in the future sure so
thank you I think that's a
realistic perspective on what
we're trying to get thank you Mr
chair Senator.
Thank you senator Senator
phonics.
Thank you madam chair it's just
a comment on the F. I. R..
Senate bill one seventy five.
Has they were done by different
analysts first of all but Senate
bill one seventy five has less
of a fiscal impact and seventy
three.
So I just thought that maybe the
analysts at the LFC might want
to get together on that that's
all thank you.
Imagers center I I would say
again I I'm not competing with
Center Neal's bill just be very
clear I'm very supportive of his
bill I I'm I'm kind of hoping I
don't know what the committee is
going to do it's interesting
hoping a lot of things go
through but if this one doesn't
go through his goes through I'm
gonna I'm gonna support him and
work with them if he wants me to
sign off on whatever it is so
there's no competition here
really and I think I don't want
to put words in centennial math
and I once again apologize for
being late but I'm we are very
supportive of each other's
efforts and I and I think it's
more of the the efforts then the
individual bills at this point.
Thank you and have some chair
for a second time he said his
bill was better.
But seriously wanted to give his
life.
Why is your bill in your
approach better than centered in
he's he said it half heartedly
some but I think it behooves you
to statewide shares the best of
the three options once again
madam chair and senator I I
think there are there are pros
and cons to both I I just.
For for me at this point in less
there is changes and once again
I think Senator is very open to
changes
the the the my only heartburn
with the DTS is I feel like you
kind of get a little special
privilege for being a T. T. S.
and and then the other minor
parties are still kind of box
down and and I don't like that
we have people that are you know
libertarians are Green Party
constitution party that still
feel can out of the process I
think there's there's really
good arguments you know for for
the the DTS only you know and
that's Hey your independent
you're independent and you can
kind of have some choice but if
you've gone if you feel so
strongly they're gonna registers
Green Party will only that's
that's your choice and and you
get to you know you're you're
you're not going to vote in a
Republican or Democrat primary
but I am once again it's just
the the the the the culture of
being fully open and I think
what people are tired of and I
think what people why the DTS is
the fastest growing per
liturgical persuasion in New
Mexico is people are tired of
the endless Republican versus
Democrat that's why don't look
at fox news anymore CNN because
the headline you know the
headline of CNN is is all this
is a a bad thing about a
Republican the headline of the
fox news is all this is a bad
thing about a democratic people
just don't like that is not real
news and so I think the fully
open is I think a little bit of
kind of a peacemaking approach
for me to say look we're we're
we're not going to just put your
identity and location where
Democrat party Republican chart
just show up and just about.
Chair Senators project as a so I
understand the two proposals
that would relate to the minor
parties my understanding was
Center o'neill's built was that
the minor party if you show up
for constitutional or
conservative or green or
Communist Party enables minor
parties you could get a
Republican or Democrat about it
wasn't just limited to DTS is
that correct center in New York
with not.
Brandy.
I'm asking is it do they treat
that minor parties the same the
two proposals that if you're a
communist to conservative.
But Terry I guess right green
you still get a Republican
Democrat or is it just limited
to TSS.
This is a different story and
madam chair and members of the
committee my understanding is
that both bills would provide an
opportunity for anyone who is
not affiliated with the majority
party so inclusive of minor
party voters to participate so
those folks managers amended act
actually do registered
independent independent party
they could still vote in this
process okay and both proposals.
That.
Thank you.
Senator have to apologize
because you're on the left side
left center for stuff on
Representative I thought it was
it's okay madam chair this is
for state so.
Of the way I read it madam chair
and just the the clarification
did the secretary of state's
office would like to help me
clarify here the way I real I
Senator kneels it does allow if
you're part of a minor party
but if you were state of
registry libertarian you can
only vote libertarian primary.
so I think that's an important
distinction that that the the
committee needs to be aware of
whereas with Senator Schmedes
bill you could be a registered
Republican in Santa Fe County
and still have a voice and not
have to save both register as a
Democrat just to have a voice in
into your elected people are so
that's that's the distinction in
the way that I read it which is
like I said I just I'm
supportive of any step forward
but I just wanted to clarify
that quickly it it I understand
a lot of the issues with open
primaries I'm not
In.
All right campaigns it's easy to
do when it's Republican primary
only Republicans can run it
because more than likely seventy
five eighty percent of the
people that voted in the last
two were gonna vote again so it
makes it easy Hey I only have to
go hit the stores only have to
send mailers to the small group
of people that's gonna make
that's that's makes a little
easier as a candidate but you
know I think one of the
positives with side of that if
it's an open primary now as a
candidate going out in a primary
I'm having to reach out to more
people I am knocking on more
doors I am exposing myself to my
constituency at a higher rate
and so it's going to bring a lot
of positives to it's going to
make more people I feel even
more include not just as voters
but as going door to door and
and interacting with voters in
in that way that now you
it's going to cost more money
but Hey that's just what it
takes to get elected so I think
that's a positive
part of it the other thing.
You know we look at Congress and
we see help polarized things are
and it's because so many of
these districts specially now in
New Mexico whenever the election
is in the primary you're going
to have one small group.
Of of of party affiliation
picking that candidate so what
happens is you end up with two
extremes here and we've lost.
The ability in the middle
to really work together and it's
it's unfortunate that we lost
that I think this will address
that hopefully
fix it and and the other note I
had written down clarified that
whenever I looked a little
closer is that we will be
allowing major parties like the
libertarian party to participate
in in any any.
Primary that that so I do
prefer.
Senator meetings but like I said
I I I I support eighty step
moving forward you know I still
think that if say there was a
primary for county clerk of
Bernalillo county and there were
two Republicans and two
Democrats should be able to pick
one in each office
but maybe we'll get there some
day the commission.
Thank you senator Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Schmedes is for
presenting this bill
hi so it.
I have to say
I like.
Both teams and this in this
legislation both yours and
Senator leos and so I have
Yeah I have built because if
anything I want more
participation in this democratic
Republic that we're all trying
to take care of so with that
madam chair and senator Schmedes
I have a question for Miss Vigil
hill I'm looking at the.
The rules committee analysis
on page one under constitutional
and legal issues it says there
are there are no apparent direct
constitutional or legal issues
however I turn the page to page
two.
Plan under significant issues
includes that office suggested
that this presents an additional
burden to voting which could be
challenged as a violation to the
New Mexico constitution so I'm
I'm wondering madam chair
Senators metes Miss Vigil.
If you could expand on that and
perhaps explain to us.
What could possibly be a
violation of the New Mexico
constitution.
Was he deals okay not Senator
off of that I think would be the
analysts the same here with the
any time so this would require
the
Presented a a postcard
indicating which which primary
ballot you want I think the
analyst was thinking that
anytime we're putting in any
extra stuff and basically
between the motor getting the
valid potentially be seen the
constitutional job I'm not sure
that it would be in.
And madam chair and and Senator
McKenna I believe that we were
highlighting a Supreme Court
case that has already come about
and in that case there was a
determination that up held the
closed primary system within the
state of New Mexico and so I
think just anytime there's
already some precedent there's
an opportunity for something to
be challenged and and that's
really the note that was
provided okay.
It in Senator madam chair and
senator I I have a I had an
interesting and I can surely
email Sevilla with a drafter
because I had a similar concern
with I think a prior version of
this bill there was a separate
thing for absentee ballots and I
and I said no no that is that's
I don't like doing paperwork
we're not going to create any
that so I said I needed in the
bill that it's just going to be
on your absentee request it's
just an extra check mark there's
no extra step at all I'm used to
still request your ballots and
so I purposefully with the
drafters said we cannot create
this is about making things
easier we're not going to create
any more bureaucracy or anything
so that we had a discussion in
the tractor said that's taken
care of.
Thank you miss.
Are at more discussion from the
committee on this bill.
Mr Helen I'm sorry keep we keep
making you get up and down
but I I have a question for you
about.
All and then we have
clerk Lopez us here earlier but
I think she stepped out
how.
As far as our State election
administration the differences
between the administering
seventy three where.
DTS and minor party convo in in
the the major party primary of
their choice verses one seventy
five where anyone can go in and
any private of their choice what
what is the difference
administratively for election
administrative errors in the
tail.
Matt madam chair so just I think
Senator Pirtle did a great job
of highlighting kind of the
specific differences in each of
these bills so as as he
mentioned in the current bill
that Senators committee has a
has brought forth is that it
provides for major party voters
to choose the ballot that they'd
like for that election and so
that is probably the key
difference in the administration
so being able to kind of
align our ballot on demand
systems so when you go into vote
it can kind of just find for
that opportunity and that option
providing training obviously to
pull officials to understand how
that process is different but
other than that they are
similarly situated and that we
would have to send out
additional notifications to
voters receive a response back
where we have owners
participating in all male
precincts so where we just
automatically mail a ballot we
need to first get their
selection before we could we
could send out that ballot and
that applies I think in both
bills so there is an additional
cost there's as I mentioned some
additional administrative
updates to the system to handle
either process but generally
that and that is the key
difference and and so it would
just be that additional
opportunity to just say it it
doesn't necessarily matter if
you're a major party voter we
would have to adjust the system
to just find for for any ballot
at that point in time.
Thank you and.
Say that that overall there's
there would be a significant
decrease thank increases Mr
Burke with one person the
increase of Mr person that
I think that's fair.
What part of
move on to that thank you Mr.
So and I got is that I I really
really enjoyed the bipartisan us
love over at.
This year and and it seems like
a very appropriate issue for
there to be a lot of I I
partisan level on
You know and for me personally I
I tend to to prefer the approach
taken and Senator o'neill's Bill
really for for the reason the
that you identified Senator
media's which is that to me it
will one of the main purposes of
having of a primaries is to make
sure that folks who don't want
to affiliate with a major party
are not locked out of the
process I do think it's
reasonable if you want to if if
you've chosen to affiliate with
a major party that you be the
venue that's that's the primary
yes stick with
But but I I really like the the
coverage and and and and I I
don't think that your approach
is is no reason reasonable part
I think that very reasonable
minds can can differ on on the
the way that we approach to this
issue but I really appreciate
your
Passion on this issue and here
willingness to work with with
everyone regardless of what side
of the aisle there on and double
we're hearing how all three and
we're gonna vote at the end so
if you're able to stick around
please do if not we'll let you
know I have on I'm good I've got
a chaperone right now.
Wonderful also US senator Tom
and we will move on to a Senate
joint resolution seven the
manager.
Senator.
In.
Three.
We have a
had more than ten.
Distributor.
At the top.
Is that.
We're
the committee
restrictions.
For more funding.
Sure.
I only say this because of the
judiciary the other night
has something pass out the.
Before we didn't really know
where it was from.
What was in it.
The waffle
that's what.
Thank you.
Senator Tom please us please
proceed good morning everyone.
Thank you for a.
Sketching this early on in the
session appreciate that.
And
I think that steam the.
Committee this is we got three
chairs we are the president pro
tem.
We have the minority floor
leader and we have a.
We have.
We have a big time rancher and
cattleman.
And we got more he's a legacy on
to self.
Thank you forget to.
Senator McKenna should both we
can have
thank you forgive her because
she and I both graduated from
Syracuse University which
incidently.
According to US news and report
has a number one graduate school
of public affairs Harvard
Kennedy School number two.
So.
I.
I think we we have Senator.
resolutions
Number seven.
Which will of.
Require a constitutional
amendment at those two things
one that would create a non
partisan primaries.
with the five candidates who
would proceed to the general
election and secondly
that would hold a run instant
run off of lotus.
Hi and this proposal
Madam chair.
All candidates for a given
office.
regardless of party affiliation
would appear on a single primary
ballot to top five candidates
would receive.
We see the most votes will
proceed to the general election
in the general election voters
would be able to rank each
candidate for a given an office
from first choice to less choice
based on the first choice votes
if one candidate obtains a
majority.
Then that candidate is declared
the winner however if no
candidate the tourism major the
candidate with the fewest first
choice votes is eliminated and
the next round proceeds in the
second round voters to rank the
eliminated candidate as their
first choice have their second
choice candidate treated as
their first choice.
This procedure commences until
one candidate receives a simple
majority.
And madam chair members the
committee there I like to
outline I benefits of the system
number one increases voter
participation.
When voters are able to fully
express their preferences.
Voter turnout also tends to
increase studies have shown that
turnout elections using this
system.
Increases by ten percent.
Even after accounting for other
factors number two saves time
and money as Delhi the system
with that increase costs.
It saves time and money.
By eliminating the need for
costly runoffs runoff elections
are not only extremely costly
but if we as we've seen in
recent elections they tend to
have low income families turned
out resulting in the selection
of candidates who may not
actually reflect voter
preferences has already been
point out number three avoid
spoiler effect.
With ranked choice voting voters
do not have to worry about to
teach if the voting for
candidates that they do not
like.
In order to avoid.
Throwing away their vote.
If candidate be is the voters
favored choice.
She can both be without fear
that her vote will be wasted
number four to reduces negative
campaign tactics.
Order choice building forces
candidates to abandon negative
tactics because candidates not
only need the first choice full
to.
Not on the the first choice
votes of their supporters but
also the second and third choice
voters voters who prefer other
candidates studies have shown.
That jurisdictions with.
Ranked choice voting have
experienced fewer friendlier
campaigns and major support.
And finally number five madam
chair.
Equitable replicas
representation ranchers voting
elections allowing larger
spectrum of voters to elect
their candidates of choice and
ranchers voting elections
minority candidates and major
then.
Excuse me let's start over
again.
So the illegal to set down Hey
began to equipment makers is a
former.
He's a former a TV reporter.
And he's very articulate.
It would never mess up a word.
So ranked choice voting
elections allow a larger
spectrum of voters to elect
their candidates of choice.
And ranchers for elections
minority we communities and.
with a diversity of backgrounds
can elect candidates of choice
this in turn can lead to a more
diverse array of candidates.
So if you if you maybe levering
wondering why we have I.
I just optimal number.
But can a so Vance to the
general.
This is because it allows for
healthy competition expense
reports representation and make
space for candidates to be on
the general ballot.
Voters want more choices and
this bill will enhance candidate
options as well as increased
voter participation.
And in New Mexico of madam chair
members of the committee at this
system has been adopted by the
city council Santa Fe and Las
crucis.
And is under consideration and
the City of Albuquerque.
As I said before this with
there's not a justice system
that.
Cost anything in there is there
a legal barriers to this system.
So.
The committee to
Senator Ortiz panel I.
I disagree with and and agree
with uh Senator.
Neil that this system with
increased polarization I would.
With that it would decrease
polarization that increased
polarization as stated by
Senator he's a player you may
remember the election.
Recent electrical effective to
state served up to this Alaska
and Maine Alaska you remember.
The very faint of the infamous
of Sarah Palin lost in this
system could you probably
would've won had we have the
regular.
System of voting.
There is out issue it could be
considered extreme candidate.
And the candidate the one under
ranked choice voting.
Was a moderate native American.
So I strongly agree with
senator.
the this this system with the.
Would not increased polarization
but to just the opposite.
And
You know I America we're trying
to jam everybody and those that
were a diverse country trying to
jam everybody into two parties
it's that working.
And I think it leads to
polarization a lot of other
adverse effects
So I think you I can be said for
the multi party system but we're
not talking about that today but
by what my proposal I think gets
to to the European system more
than the our existing system so
the recap.
In two sentences or less madam
chair the system proposing with
the.
This is a call for nonpartisan
primaries and also.
implement and instant runoff
voting system.
And
Also the I.
The five benefits real quick
with number one increase voter
participation number two saves
time and money number three it
avoids a spoiler effect number
four to reduces negative
campaign tactics the number I
would bring about that table
Representative station so with
that.
Concludes my remarks and I like
to introduce my experts.
Witness.
Madam chair.
Can this for our who is here to
of.
make some remarks and also
answer questions thank you madam
chair.
Thank you senator and Mr are a.
Take your comments within that
five for five minutes for five
minutes okay all right well I'd
like to start off by saying that
I emailed all of you late
yesterday and I realize you may
not have even seen my email I
apologize for that what I did
was I sent you a copy of this
which I had been told I would be
able to do a power point
presentation and then was told
that wasn't allowed so I wanted
you to have a copy of this and
actually the electronic versions
include some clickable links
that lead you to additional
information that I think would
actually be very helpful for you
to understand this bill it's a
lot it's a very new this idea
only what's up came about a
couple of years ago it's been
put in place in Alaska it was
shown to work in Alaska and so I
I am very happy to support that
my own perspective we're on
coming from is a little bit
different from where everyone
else is coming from and that if
you look at the front page of my
hand out you will see.
I am I was an academic for
fifteen years and I was invited
to give a paper at a conference
on world peace in nineteen
ninety seven and having given
that paper changed my life it
changed my thinking about the
world and it has influenced me
in a way that when I come to you
today to me this is the
culmination of everything I've
thought about try to do over the
last twenty five years I've been
here back in my home state of
New Mexico for seventeen years.
Trying to figure out how do we
deal with this problem it's
integral on select and that's
exactly what we're seeing in
this country right now between
Democrats and Republicans and
it's getting worse.
And that's the first thing I
wanted you to understand and
what the first ten slides or
about and I wanted you to see
this visually because I think
this is really important that
and I've been hearing a lot of
people talk about polarization
and how that has increased over
the past twenty years what you
see there in the third slide
actually underestimates that
that was almost ten years ago
and so what's happening is not
only do we have an increasing
polarization we have an increase
in political violence and we
have seen this here in this
state Senator Lopez her house
was attacked her her daughter
was there in bed and fortunately
the the gunmen did not take the
advice and she lower because who
knows her her daughter could
have been killed and I just want
to stress this this is a problem
and we need to confront it we
took problem to us as a country
but you have an opportunity by
here all I can do is bring the
ideas to you and share them with
you but only you can act and I
am hoping that you will.
So do pass on this bill so that
it has more of an opportunity to
be heard to be evaluated I know
from here we go did you do Shiri
I know that I have you are on
that committee and would have
another opportunity to evaluate
this but what I'm asking you
please don't kill this B. Hall
let it go forward because I
think it's in my mind it's much
superior to the other two bills
and everything I wanted to say
to you is in this handout but I
realize you don't have time to
actually read it but it's all
there and if you and I'm what
what I would love this is what I
find to change minds it takes
time you have to think about
things and sleep on it and
that's what we can't do right
now because we don't have time
so I do want to say first of all
I want to appreciate Senator
Pirtle comments I really
appreciate senator Morris I know
that he's expressed support for
both parts of the the spill and
that's important to understand
there are these two pieces and
they fit together in a way that
that they need to be one piece
and that's kind of the
brainstorm of Katherine Gail
she's the one that came up with
this idea and it's worked really
well in Alaska and I think it
could work really well here and
I think it would put New Mexico
on the map as being in the
forefront of this kind of reform
that is needed to pull us back
from this threat of literally
civil civil war because we know
there are guns out there we know
there are a lot of guns and
we're starting to see this kind
of violence and our elected
officials are the ones that are
most at risk here and their
families and their children.
So we we all have a lot at stake
here and the problems that we're
having it's not the fault of
Republicans it's not the fault
of Democrats it's the fault of
the system and that's what needs
to be fixed and this is a way to
fix that and if I had more than
five minutes and I probably
already used up my time I would
explain that in detail I just in
at this point hoping to answer
your questions hoping to
persuade you to give this bill a
chance thank you for our.
and we we do have folks who are
signed up for public comment.
The some of the same folks so if
if you've gone or if you don't
have if you want to go again
you're welcome to if you just
gonna say what I said last time
feel free to to indicate that
but represents the heart of
Europe first.
Thank you and if you seven up to
the microphone we can get you on
on the webcast.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee Kelly
for heart a registered lobbyist
for New Mexico open elections
and somebody asked earlier why
we have primaries primaries
actually happened in the
nineteen twenties what happened
is the party late in the party
leaders decided who was going to
be elected and what happens the
people wanted their voice heard
they got tired of the system and
want to be part of the system
and so primaries reserves were
started it was decided by the
progressive movement and that's
or continuing to see today we're
continuing to see more and more
people want their voices heard
to the more time the more
opportunities we have for open
primaries the more opportunities
it gives for the people to have
their voices heard and so with
that madam chair members the
committee we support this bill.
Thank you.
Fila.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I just wanted
to echo the sentiments that have
already been said today we do
strongly believe that ring true
soda nonpartisan open primaries
will enhance collaboration and
decrease polarization and the
violence that we're seeing in
the station in the state thank
you so much both here
Susan how she owns in.
Madam uses.
Have the is this.
High school have turned.
Miss Vigil.
please go ahead to about one
minute.
Hi thank you for what we need to
participate madam chair I'm in
full support of this for thank
you Senator Tallman my main
concern is about young voters to
come into the process registry
to twenty state for a large part
and there the media the
disenfranchised from the system
I think this would
really
it gauge them and increase
participation it would reduce
polarization reduces the spoiler
effect
reviews negative campaigning
which is a huge turn off for
everyone
so thank you for considering
this and I sure hope it moves
forward thank you.
Thank you for mentality.
And.
added that.
Our Carol Miller.
To look.
miss Miller please go ahead and
and yourself and a person for
that one minute yes good morning
I want to correct a couple of
statements that were made of the
first is the ranked choice
voting was first implemented in
Cambridge Massachusetts in the
nineteen fifties it's still in
effect there and in many towns
and communities and also it's
how they choose the winners of
the officers it is a system that
works to make sure that nobody
wins surprised lectin office
without the support of a
majority fifty plus one of the
people who were doing the
selected the second thing about
the FIR which is stated it was
there was not correct and the
Attorney General in this case is
taking the same position and
Sarah Palin's challenge for RCV
Alaska
he is the chairman general FIR
talks about it would require re
writing the election code and I
will say as someone who is.
And small party started thank
you miss Miller.
and then we have one person
signed up in opposition to some
of those yes.
For.
Yes thank you please go ahead
for about one minute.
The madam chair members of the
committee my name is Janice
Arnold Jones on behalf of the
Republican Party of New Mexico
it's a privilege to join you
today and I see some very
familiar faces nice to see you
I'm here to make clear the
position of the Republican Party
of New Mexico regarding open
primaries the Republican Party
of New Mexico does not support
in primaries asked in bill
seventy three Senate bill one
seventy five S. J. R. seven HD
fifty four north doesn't support
the elimination of pre primary
convention the discussion of how
we select candidates to carry a
banner would be clearer if we
talked in terms of a nominating
election candidates from hearing
the Republican Democrat or
libertarian batter because they
support the majority of that
party's platform that makes it
easy for us to engage the to to
do so.
There are many other options
available to provide greater
access to decline to select
voters.
Some of the recall.
Thank you.
All right is there anyone in the
audience who did not sign up who
would like to raise our hands
indicate support.
Anyone in the audience who did
not sign up who would like to
raise our hands in the K.
opposition.
I and with that we'll go to
questions from the committee at
the center Moores was often
Senator Baca then Senator
Pirtle.
To get.
Yes.
Thank you
for being a manager Senator
Representative you for a lot of
agreement of all sizes that are
out here that the our system we
we're not really pleased with
that from police I can't say all
of us but many of us
yeah and I think a lot of that
you know you don't look across
the aisle for less what you're
Center Lopez and that really
proves what happened
watching a beautiful young girl
the race the last eleven years
as in this photo does it does
hit home so I think you see a
lot more collaboration at least
with the two forty two of us
here a lot of that is because we
can sit around and break bread
and have a beer sometimes during
the other and then be able to
collaborative get to know each
other a little bit better with
stress the country could have
that the bill the work so
disagree on big issues but.
Over each other in this.
Our professor so I appreciate it
so.
on the issue were trying to
tackle a partition you're going
to you're going to different
route see there the other two
proposal so I wanted to I.
why are you guys doing a
constitutional amendment versus
provided so what why why Senator
venture professor or you tried
to call I just in our
constitution.
Madam chair and members can
really on to.
Have a good chance to do it was
to.
The bill was.
Written that way.
Share some festive serves as a
former representative regarding
mentioned was that you approved
the primary system was a step
four hundred years ago stop the
back room smoke filled yield
that happening especially to
keep them along the same time
this operational while the other
announcements that we've had in
our participation is
codified we have some things in
our constitution that you're
you're well aware of that was
written over a hundred years ago
that we wish we did have now.
I think it's still in your
agents can own property this we
are thank you madam chair we
have women are allowed to vote
except for school board
elections.
And our prostitution the only
difference is that one of the
relatively recently patterns
here that they want the six
years ago that we yes right we
are debating Center rules with
German Lopez
About fixing that for the world
struggles on their that's one of
my concerns were codified this
election or constitution here so
we'll see this care.
Wonder why the hell we're doing
this right now madam chair
Senator those are.
My understanding is that it's
it's required that we can't
accomplish this any other way
than through a constitutional
amendment so that it would have
to go to the voters to approve
this
and by the way I just wanted to
mention that New Mexico is
different from Alaska Alaska was
the first state to adopt this
new system.
In New Mexico we can't go that
route they have citizen
initiated referendums there we
we rely on you as our
representatives to of come to
this and decide in your wisdom
that this is going to be best
for our state for our country
for yourselves and your families
and your children because I
really do worry about what's
going on in this country I've
been worried about it for the
last twenty years I've watched
it happen we've all watched it
happen how it's gotten worse and
worse.
Senator professor I think we're
all agree or maybe read what
you're saying of course for the
bureau election director cancer
but why why is this why would
this have been the constitution
versus unisex portal in which we
can then go back to an address
in the future and and senator so
that ranked choice voting part
would need we we have provisions
in our constitution that that
requires a top two runoff
essentially so we wouldn't we do
not need to do a constitutional
amendment for open primaries we
would need to do a
constitutional amendment for
statewide ranked choice voting
services.
Constitution.
Thank you madam chair we do get
a HSD bill analysis from the
Attorney General.
This is a look at this bill and
a.
So that we that we require then
that.
Thank you madam chair at the
Senator this year answer my
question.
Why you do the math Center you
said I was the magic number
Representative Grove schoolhouse
rock has always talked three was
the magic number.
Why I see to me it seems like to
March Madam chair Senator also
what what what's so magical
about the number five on the
wrong office.
According to my information is
because it allows for healthy
competition expands
representation and make space
for candidates.
Who traditionally would that
have made it.
Prentice's to be on the agenda
of the general ballot.
Voters want more choices and
this bill will enhance candidate
options as well as increase
voter participation I'm sure my
that witness can add to that I
thought I'd let me see if I can
address this to some extent this
differs from what they're doing
in Alaska they ended up with the
top four and so in this case it
would be tough I I think the
advantage of allowing it to be I
use that you insurers that there
within that pool of candidates
that are out of voted on in that
final RCV election that there is
representation of both parties
the both the major parties and
the minor parties and possibly
some independence so it gives
and and see that's the advantage
because it's being combined with
ranked choice voting so have
there's no disadvantage to
having I because you get to rank
your your choices so you you put
peel people off candidates off
one by one the one that gets the
lowest number there we moved and
their votes get transferred to
to another candidate so you get
to a major you're insured of
coming up with the candidate in
the end to it got at least fifty
percent that's so important
because there's a real problem
with our plurality system and
that was one of the flaws I talk
about in my hand of we need
that's that that because it's
too easy for someone to just say
okay I'm going to build my base
and then they pull pull voters
away from more moderate
candidates who might actually
help us pull us together and
that's what happened in Alaska
we ended up with two moderates
one Republican one Democrat and
they probably would not have
been elected without this new
system so with the new so.
In that allow this to happen one
of the cool things about what
happened in Alaska is as a
result of this in part they now
have a bipartisan coalition
seventeen of their Senators out
of twenty have formed a
coalition that's bipartisan they
can work together to solve
problems and that's what I'd
like to see happen here in the
state I'm happy to see how much
bipartisan agreement there is
here but it would be really
wonderful for for that to be
encouraged and I think this bill
would do that.
Receptacle with ground here but
a more bring that up.
you madam chair senator
so you still in vision drive
that this would still there
still be partisan labels just
did this yes ma'am you're
absolutely with the Republican a
Democrat to Democrats yes we an
independent and not only that
but each party will be able to
endorse one of their candidates
so that candidate would have a
special.
Dr how you would appear on the
ballot who gets to choose well
it would be the party it would
be the the Republican Party for
the Republican candidates that
say okay there's a lecture would
be a background smoke filled
room some belt.
Yeah you know you make you raise
a really good point there.
You raise a good point hi I
don't know how those details
have been worked out and maybe
this would be a question for the
next committee if it makes it to
Judiciary maybe this is
something they could talk about
and and work out whether we
would make sense to actually
have the party endorsed as
opposed to just having them
listed the will be listed I'm
they can choose I want to be
shown as a Republican and then
it does show on the candidates
on the ballot for Democrat or
an independent or a libertarian
so when you go in there and you
vote you'll know which party
you're voting for so if you
really want to vent Republicans
or Democrats you can choose the
number that part venture Senator
of doctor so what your proposal
and say you get multiple parties
in response so you could be the
constitutional party the
Libertarian Party the Republican
party the Communist Party you
have all these different to
endorse will you be some really
interesting questions and I
don't.
I don't know the answer to that
the endorsement part of it I
think could easily be eliminated
and it would not weaken the bill
at all I I don't see any reason
I think it was put in there to
appease people that thought well
wait a minute we're party we
want to have our endorsement so
even you know sort of satisfy
that urge to be in control for
the party to control this and
that's what I'm hearing a lot of
is we want to control the
primaries they are our primaries
can you this would turn it over
more to of the the the builders.
I'm sure Senator of Dr I I
really preacher Senate's this
model is a tree and I I guess
but it's doesn't really sink
team that tends to fit more into
a nonpartisan municipal election
that we have here in New Mexico
or parliamentary system like the
in Europe around the country
with more of a
That kind of tradition specially
since point forward to
Especially in western Europe and
not necessarily our Republican
system and Republican up party
Republican the former government
that we have here in our
tradition and New North America
and the evolution of that system
the last two hundred fifty odd
years
so if you could address that
does this system does seem to
fit to what our system of
governance is verses more
western European system of
government or a nonpartisan
so I think if you look at a
nonpartisan elections just make
sense armigerous system this
makes sense but not in our
current traditional north
American oil and and there's
some confusion about that we're
non partisan because they were
nonpartisan of primaries
partisan versus non partisan
primaries is also partisan
versus non partisan offices and
that is some of the language
that was corrected in the most
updated version of the bill and
so that's going to be some
confusion especially for some
people because in the case of
city council for instance these
are a nonpartisan offices right
so in this case it would still
Harbison office so that's the
difference you would still be
you would be in Congress or in
the legislature as a Democrat as
a Republican and it probably we
do make very little change to
the actual make up it's I mean
independent are still going to
be tremendously it disadvantage
in terms of getting on the
ballot getting the support we
know where the money goes it
goes to the parties and so it's
very hard I mean and if you look
at my hand that you will see
that of we have up it's actually
down to twenty eight and twenty
nine percent respectively of our
twenty seven twenty eight of
Republicans and Democrats in
this country forty two percent
nationwide forty two percent our
independence that's a huge
change.
Change that is dramatic and
you'll see how that happened but
if you look at Congress it's
right now it's fifty one percent
Republican forty nine percent
Democrat zero independence it's
very hard very hard as an
independent to get into Congress
or to get here there are no
independent someone you so
that's going to change much the
parties are still going to have
a lot of state it's still going
to be a partisan office so that
you see these you know I we
we're not trying to undermine
the parties here not at all that
is not the goal of this it's
really about reducing what's
happening here in terms of the
polarization we need the parties
to come back together to where
it was twenty years ago I think
that would be ideal two thousand
four and it's the independence
who have a voice we'll do that
because they're weird that's for
the moderates are maybe they
lean left or to the right but
the fact is they're going to
help you with candidate to come
together and to say okay I don't
have to rely on these extreme
members of my own party because
there is this pool very large
pool of kids of voters in the
middle who are moderate and so
this is what happened in the
school okay Madam chair Senator
a doctor I think there was three
or four independents in Congress
and the Senate so there's three
of them one of them only became
an independent to being elected
is very are to be elected as an
independent and there's a zero
in the house so you.
yeah I are you know just
continue our work to do I think
we're all trying to fix the same
problem with this one might be a
little bit of a bridge too far
for me at this point so I really
do appreciate the conversation
So that if the commissioners
been actually very I really like
the way this has gone thank you.
Thank you senator next I have
senator Bob.
And and all just so because we
have about twenty minutes so we
need to be on the floor
if we could keep things kind of
streamlined and keep that
responses at.
This is Senator my first to
speak.
And and and and I'm sorry that
that was not to use of this.
anyway thank you madam chair
appreciate that and I I will be
brief
just a you know for some of the
COVID the comment on some of the
comments earlier I should of on
opening a the vote we condemn
those actions in Albuquerque and
I think everybody in this body
did and I think that I I really
don't provide a listening or
congruency between those actions
in open primaries I just would
like to comment I think that
dragging that into this actually
decrease the argument to some
extent we've had a really good
conversation so far and so but
with that I'll move on I I tend
to agree with the chair about a
she was smoking use spoke on the
constitutionality earlier of of
what we have to do with ranked
choice voting I do agree and it
will require a constitutional
amendment and home as we know
and as was stated here madam
chair we really don't know all
the details with that and so
with that it creates a bit of a
walking into a pitch black room
of what it's done sort of
situation I think going over the
case cited in FY are from the
Duran it sets out a pretty clear
framework in there of what could
work in it talks about purity
and efficiency of the fit of
elections and essentially what
what they mentioned there was
that is a process overly
burdensome in that it violates
the constitution and there they
found that the two party system
was not you know so I hate to
rain on everybody's parade with
the bipartisanship in here they
found that that
constitutionally the the system
we have in effect right now it
does work and and is in line
with our constitution however
the left the door open in the.
Inclusion to state that under
open primary system of some sort
would could in fact of fall into
that framework and allow for
open primaries of some type I do
however think that this type of
framework that's been introduced
in this particular resolution
does overstep that and has a lot
of question marks behind it I am
convinced too much further
degree this year that open
primaries is something that that
is desired and wanted and we're
moving towards I I couldn't
however vote for your bill in
particular will be able to
support this resolution and I'm
still on the fence about the
other two but I just wanted to
point out on those couple of
items and I appreciate your time
thank you Mr.
Senator just on the portal.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator this is a lot closer to
what I would like to see
that the big issue though is
you're putting translation into
the constitution.
and and I think that's something
I've had a problem with very
early on following the lead of
of the chair Lopez many times
why do we have fifteen
paragraphs we could see as
provided by law
that way we can make adjustments
when needed make minor tweaks
and I have to go back to the
constitution every time that we
need to fix the things that we
didn't anticipate
so for that reason I will not be
supporting it in this manner but
if you were to bring back this
bill for cleanup this
constitutional amendment to stay
there shall be elections as
provided by law
that something that you can make
changes and do some of the
the wanted to legislation and
that process
but I will say having spent some
time in Australia during one of
their elections
they they did not necessarily
right choice Williams it was
quite interesting what they did
they had minor parties one of
them was the hunters and fishers
party.
Which I thought was pretty
collective sticker that I picked
up from there I thought it was
really neat and and speaking to
some of these these
the the voters who were part of
that party was really is it was
Hey I get to go vote for for my
guy we're live person lying to
everyone and then knowing that.
That individuals going to then
pass those votes to one of the
major party so then they were
participating excited being able
to vote for their real candidate
that they were really behind but
then knowing that
that person wasn't going to be
able to pass their votes if they
were the lowest to some other
candidates all the way up the
ladder and it was quite
interesting and that's where my
my mind started to really get
behind this this idea and and
thought so I I support the
concept I just don't support
putting it in the constitution
and and you know I started out
as a maybe there's some of the
testimony in the presentation I
went to a no and then through
some of the one of the
commenters off on the phones
maybe a standing yes.
but you know it reality I'm I'm
gonna have to be a no on this
one thank you madam chair.
He Senator US army and thank you
madam.
Just looking at that so possible
legal issues the adoption of
this amendment to the New Mexico
constitution could result in
challenges under the US
constitution or perhaps federal
statutes more particularly the
voting rights act you want to
trust that briefly.
In June.
Oil and gas I I I I'm not sure
if I can but I I will say this
that there was a challenge to
the Alaska system I mean this we
don't have much to go on really
just what's gone on in Alaska
and you did was question on
constitutional grounds in their
Supreme Court said no it is
constitutional I don't know how
that would apply here in New
Mexico because I don't know
enough about the differences in
the constitution their
constitutions to be able to
address that any further than
that thank you for your comments
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much is there
further discussion Senator
Stewart.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm kind of like Senator Pirtle
I like this idea of the form is
a little bit troubling let me
tell you a story though my
sister brother in law lived in
Australia for eight years in
Australia they have multiple
political parties and they are
all to ranked choice voting yeah
although the one day and by ten
o'clock that night they know the
results in every single election
and if you don't vote you're
fine.
They set out the fund is a
hundred dollars about sixteen
years ago I'm sure it's fine now
so this system does work.
I don't think we're ready for it
yet I think we should continue
to look at it
but it's it's pretty amazing.
They do in Australia I could
tell more stories but I'll stop
thank you madam chair because
the roads.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and on
that note yes Senator Brandt and
I were kind of on the same
wavelength.
Act like you know.
That the madam chair you know
we've had this discussion the
rules committee over the years
and I appreciate the continued I
think being it takes a while for
it's not just us here by thing
society and in general to me
with the you know moving forward
we change the system to allow
same day voter registration.
and I think that's part of the
increments to move I know we had
increased participations so I
think that's part of the intense
of what we'll get there
I and I agree thank you to my
colleagues remember having this
discussion and I appreciate your
reiteration that we don't want
to put statute in the
constitution.
we we never that there was
something that we have not just
with this legislation that
others because you want to you
know it can be done by statute
later so I think that that's
something with this particular
measure ranked choice voting I
think has potential it did help
to actually have a indigenous
woman elected in Alaska which
was totally wonderful
but not every state wants to
saying that every state has that
same propensity for change I
think we'll get there
but I do believe that open
primaries is another step for us
to move towards it's it's it's
incremental and part of us even
those of us who are elected it's
it's kind of for us to adjust to
it
I do believe that maybe the next
step for us to take so Sierra I
want to say thank you but.
For me we're not there yet just
from from my perspective thank
you madam chair.
Thank you anymore.
House committee.
I'll tell you US senator
Clemente.
I really like you but I don't
like your bills.
and and and it's not because I
disagree with anything that
you're saying doctor brown right
I I think you're you're spot on
a lot of that
I have.
Because this really is doing two
things so it's it's the kind of
an open non partisan jungle
primary and then rang twice
about.
I.
Looking just at that the how old
were for that that kind that
nonpartisan general primary
approach I'm I think those are
going to be very confusing
ballots for voters
and I was talking about this
approach with on election
administrator yesterday who is
saying it's time to think of
like what the voter education
that would go into some people
have their party designated but
some people don't and we don't
really know what that is the
nation means
I I see a lot of potential for
voter confusion here that I
think is my concern
but I.
So I this will probably make me
unpopular with with a whole lot
of progressive folks I do not
like ranked choice voting
Not be again not because.
I think that a lot of the
benefits that people talk about
with it I think maybe more may
not be true I think we we
probably don't have enough data
to really no other way the
reason I don't like it is
because of the way that those
results not the method of voting
I don't like is how the that
tally the results
the way the tally method that is
used and and and that we have
any fund testing or data for is
one that.
Let me back up.
There's a core principle when
you're thinking about election
policy there's no court order
percent principles and one of
those is to respect the will of
the majority.
there is something called the
the conversation that
which is that is complicated
mathematical theory but what it
make sure of is if you doctor
Halloween right choice results
using the Hanisee method you
make sure that the ultimate
winner would also win in a head
to head race against every other
person who is running and in
that way you make sure that the
will of the majority that the
ultimate winner truly reflects
the will of the majority that is
not how we tally ring for
sporting in this country or or
really anywhere that I'm not
aware of anyone actually
successfully implementing
conversely method and rigorous
vetting as a result we don't
have that on it we don't know if
it actually works it's it's it's
complicated but instead the
result that we take is one or
the the person we take is one
that does definitely often get
us to a more consensus
candidate.
And and and that.
You that's a that's not saying
that's a bad thing but if that
consensus candidate still does
not respect the will of the
majority then we're violating
one of those percent principles
that we should always be at the
forefront of our minds and and
and this competing interests
issue I have this conversation
Kelly who gave get comment
earlier I had this conversation
with her a couple weeks ago she
too was talking about the the
the more more extreme
polarization in our society
and she was saying you know.
Might we might want to consider
the fact that maybe that's just
as important consideration as as
the secretary thanks principal
respect in the world major and
and and I don't think she's
wrong about that I I haven't
figured out for myself.
Which one of those competing
interests is more important that
I think I have that well but for
now I'm leaning leaning in favor
of of of a person always
respects the will of the
majority and how I see ranked
choice voting working presently.
It doesn't have that's not to
say it's a bad idea overall some
say it's not something we should
continue to to to work on and
pursue but it makes me it gives
me great pause about making
changes constitution that would
allow them statewide levels
so I can't I can't support it
because of that but I really
want to thank all all of the
sponsors of all these bills and
all the members of the committee
I I know I've really enjoyed
this discussion today
I don't know if necessarily
where we're gonna be going with
right with open primaries in the
future but I'm really glad that
we got to have this this
discussion and and extra and
hear all these various
approaches and size really
appreciate you all are making
the time to do that with us
morning and Senator Stewart so
madam chair I would like to make
a motion know if it's in order
it is so the way that we did
this we heard all three we did
not take any motions on them so
I think that we've heard them
let's go ahead and start taking
motions as a specific offer them
I would like to move the do pass
on Senate bill seventy three
that all right have a motion for
that was our center neon
trend hotels bill Senator so
much FOR D. pass on Senate bill
seventy three let's do a roll
call.
Senator Baca no Senator Inc
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Stefanics yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator had
a meal yes.
Senator Pirtle the path of how
does this work with Rachel is.
Yes.
Senator Duhigg yes so you have a
a deep pass Senator o'neil with
a vote of eight to one.
Your
available on senator.
All right we have a motion to
table saved centric resolution
to us sometimes at once.
One also.
Is that let me ask Miss on on
this motion state was there any
objection to the motion to take
up more money.
I do not.
Is that correct I think we
should be able
to table.
Yeah
I know hello again and so we'll
go ahead for to the public can
clearly sees do above all called
up on on that.
From a table in motion so both
of yes to table motive now is is
not stable Senator Paypen yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator device nope.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator have you know.
Senator Duhigg yes so that
motion passes on a vote of five
to four I'm sorry Senator your
staff that is able
and then does anyone wish to
make.
The further motions the person.
It
still.
any motions on Senate bill one
seventy five.
The the
you have said the location I.
Right we'll do a roll call vote
on the do passed for one seventy
five Senator Baca yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Nope.
Senator Moores.
Senator Pirtle yes.
On a.
Senator Stewart now.
Senator had any of those.
