Senator Hamblen here Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator my Estes your Senator
McKenna.
Senator Morris.
Etcetera then yes.
Center yes
Center Pentel.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pulp.
Center share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator so.
Etcetera Stepanek's.
We do have a quorum madam
president.
Vincent hospital and remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be led today by
Senator Burt.
The pledge in Spanish to be led
Let us pray.
Remind us today dear god why we
are here.
I generally believe that
of all that we serve.
The family is attempting to make
ends meet week to week.
The poor and needy very basics
of food and clothing.
years of alcohol and drug abuse.
The people attending just to
keep it together somehow.
Jeez you tell us that those who
Let us be your brother and
sister's keepers.
We're here today to ask you to
send your spirit upon us and I
ask that now.
What is recharger harsh let us
ignite just in a deeper desire
to do what is right and just
enliven are tired spirits with
your love and generosity
we do that to so that your
presence and love is felt in the
state of ours and we we
accomplish all of this together.
flag on the diocesan join me in
the pledge of allegiance to the
flag of the United States of
America.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
Tremendo the F. Todd and.
Good morning madam president
good morning members unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection or on
announcements and miscellaneous
you put it the extraordinary
reach that we have each day in
this building as we work on all
these different bills it is very
much for being here and for
doing that today is leadership
Santa Fe government day at the
legislature I went and spoke to
them here today we have a joint
session honoring African
American day and I'm sure we'll
talk about the process for that
in a little bit
Representative Stansbury and
Vasquez so be prepared for that
on Monday madam president's
unanimous consent to remove
Senate memorial thirty three
three from the president's table
and place it on today's calendar
and madam president that will be
Senators to fan X. it yourself
for requesting bills to be
drafted is on Monday February
thirteenth and then Thursday is
the final day for introduction
madam president on a do pass
answer consent to excuse centers
of the U. and Lopez I'm sorry
Sedillo Lopez and Pinto until
they return to the chamber
except for the purposes of a
call and I do have a
Thank you very much of Madam
president I think everyone of
the building those who one of
the kindest people that ever
walked through the halls here in
and I was
loves New Mexico like all of the
people in this room and I just
want to recognize her for her
birthday when you have time go
by the office and we get is as
Dorothy teamer to stand and just
be recognized for a moment.
Other announcements Senator Bach
thank you madam president a
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Brandt Senator Moores
our own Vince torrez from
leadership office on the
minority side of a very Happy
Birthday so if you'll give him a
round of applause.
I first came into the round
house today hearing the music
that was in the rotunda I
thought was like the best start
to my day today as we celebrate
standing up Maryland she
currently serves as the price of
the vice president of the to ski
airman incorporated general
Lloyd W. Newton chapter she
served twenty years in the U. S.
where they were supposed to be
knew what they needed to know
and made them look good because
she knew everything that was
going on in the office she
served twenty years in the US
navy and is on the board of the
And then also with me I have
Mister Tony Johnson who is a
board member at large for the
City of Albuquerque serving in
the department of senior affairs
retired senior volunteer program
like no no no we're on the right
page run the same page and so he
is a Vietnam era veteran who
served in Europe is also
represented New Mexico and I
Veterans Olympics he also
Thank you madam president.
Thank you the Senator to hit.
is seventeen years old the
senior and high school at Los
crucis height and she's
passionate about theater and is
planning to go to the NMAA you
Thank you senator Senator pope.
just want to recognize them I
have a few guess behind me first
off I have Dr Nancy Lopez from
the university of New Mexico and
she's the director of the
institute of study and
it to tenure the college of arts
and sciences at the university
of New Mexico so we can give her
a round of applause.
treasurer of the UNM black
student union and African
American student services
student success leader if we
could give her a round of
applause as well.
representative and the African
American student services
student success leader as well
if we can give a round of
applause as well thank.
I have to in Los A. shadows with
me first cement the gun that is
Samantha is a senior against in
high school and our plans are to
future also I have Jordan Torrez
who is with the loss a program
at centennial high school and
her plans are to go to chemist
or go to high school to study
today.
Senator creeks.
Thank you madam president
earlier and on Sunday at three
o'clock at the Scottish rites
temple the Santa Fe community
orchestra will hold their first
shows thank you madam president.
Thank you senator for them
formation Senator Shendo thank
you madam president.
you have the honor of having to
She is a seventeen year old
student she goes to guest in
high school she's been in a lot
of state for the last three
years now she's currently the
president of the issues and loss
journalism as well as minor
environmental science.
All right.
Thank you your hand.
oil oil business growing up she
settle in Texas for a little bit
and then the until last year's
to move the family back to
Farmington to be closer to a
books begin an early age
doctors's Dr Seuss of the books
were and continue to be her
favorite books Spanish was our
first language and by reading
Okay of a does she as yet to
clear major she's considering
lower business interesting law
began in two thousand twenty
when she was involve invited to
Representative to representative
two in the shadows of we're
going to applause.
of other a business with the
state and I got to learn a
different subject areas
throughout the morning so thank
you again thank you I need to go
to Senator Padilla just for a
chamber I'm going to take the
profit of the chair for a moment
we have visitors from Emerson
elementary the while friends up
in the gallery and the head of
Other announcements
miscellaneous.
waiting so what we're gonna do
is just read in the committee
reports for the confirmations
from rules just those at this
point so unanimous consent we go
out of business committee
message number one dated January
twentieth twenty twenty three
and what's the governor makes
the following appointment
Patrick M. Allen as secretary of
the department of health for a
appointment respectfully
submitted that senator Katy M.
Duhigg chairwoman.
Senator Duhigg madam president
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
Senate executive letter number
fifteen dated may twelfth twenty
twenty two in which the governor
makes the following appointment
Christine on Harvey as a member
of the border Authority for a
Committee recommends that the
send confirm this appointment
Senator executive letter number
sixteen dated July twenty eighth
twenty twenty two and what's the
governor makes the following
at the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment respectfully
submitted Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman.
Senator.
Those opposed may the committee
report is adopted and the
journal will reflect they were
acted upon individually.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
a meal madam president I hear by
the bit the credentials of
Christy a Harvey who has been
appointed to the.
You can walk you through this
time madam president tester to
sprint.
Madam president.
Senator Diamond to discuss the
conferee.
Thank you madam president it is
my pleasure to introduce the
rules we appreciate the the
conversation Christie and I will
briefly go over this very long
resume of Hershey was executive
director of the Luna County main
the economic development
director for the county of Luna
much of her time there was
emphasized on border in border
infrastructure there Luna County
spearheaded a a big state
project that was there over
twenty million dollars was
allocated in total and state
funds for a Burma project so
border borderlands community.
Today she works as the director
executive director of the
greater Luna County economic
opportunity council there she
unique challenges but they also
have very unique opportunities
and Christy and you have done a
phenomenal job of celebrating
the customs in the cultures
some really good stuff going on
there and Luna County with the
Columbus entry thank you for
what you've done you are
phenomenal nominee for this
appointment and we look forward
to working with you thank you
Seeing none Senator Diamond to
close.
Thank you madam president I
asked at the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Christy and Harvey to the New
Mexico border Authority and I
US senators we are voting on the
confirmation of Christy and
Harvey.
These to your seats if you wish
the appointment of Christy and
Harvey to the border Authority
for term commencing on February
seventh twenty twenty two and
expiring July fifteen twenty
Christie and if you would please
stand up and be recognized.
the secretary of the department
of workforce solutions I know
you'll to Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen madam
president's pursuant to Senate
secretary of department of
workforce solutions I ask that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of serrated Neier.
Thank you senator Senator
Hamblen to discuss the conferee.
who is honored to serve on the
board as a Senator but also in
my day job as the EC the CEO and
president of the Las Cruces
green chamber of commerce
understanding the importance
have to say that when I heard
that it's that's Rita and just
full transparency of notes read
for many years when I heard that
have to tell you that I had a
sigh of relief because I knew
that in Surrey the that we would
have a ship that would be steady
in its course and continue to
of Pittsburgh got a degree in
African American studies at
Wesleyan University and worked
in the field of international
development New York City but it
was a road trip that would this
obtained a masters an inmate
community and regional planning
at the university of New Mexico
and if that wasn't enough she
earned a JD from the UNM School
appointment as well as you spoke
in committee this morning so
madam president I asked that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Sir right at
night here Nyerere Nyerere
rhymes with fire.
wanted to say about this nominee
and Senator Hamblen did a
phenomenal job as she always
does and I have to say that you
know you've heard the term madam
president everything that person
touches turns to gold I think
factual has gotten the work done
and every other thing that she's
been part of that I haven't had
not to talk to doctor has done
very very well so we're gonna be
in very good hands here I feel
very good that this massive
president I to stand in strong
support of this conferee as most
of you know we're all of you
know there's several tribal
nations and pueblos that lie
within my Senate district and in
powerful on three more eight
main points that she'll be
addressing to ensure that our
native brothers and sisters have
a seat at the table with
workforce solutions thank you
madam president.
we need leadership in this
position and I know that she has
that you know down in
Albuquerque I know she's been
tested and she just stepped up
madam president thank you any
other debate.
Seeing none Senator Hamblen to
close debate.
Madam president I think we have
a fantastic candidates to
record show that the roll call
the roll has been called in all
those present voted in the
affirmative except for those
voting in the negative by show
of hands.
Senator is we are voting on the
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative zero in the
negative.
twenty two and to be served at
the pleasure of the governor has
duly passed the Senate.
Senator Hamblen.
really excited I'm so happy I'd
like to announce it and my best
wrestling voice madam president
and body of the Senate will come
I didn't realize we had another
Madam president I hereby submit
the credentials of Patrick Adam
Allen who is under consideration
as the secretary for the
department of health I now yield
confirm the appointment of
Patrick M. Alan to the secretary
of department of health.
Senator Stefanics to discuss the
brown for five years as the
director of the Oregon health
care of Oregon health authority
that states umbrella health
agency he was responsible for
for state employees and
education employees he was also
responsible for the statewide
behavioral health system
including the Oregon state
hospital he also oversaw the
business services as Oregon's
lead insurance regulator he
played a key role in stabilizing
the individual health insurance
market through the
debate on the conferees Senator
Ortiz the panel.
Thank you madam president and
and the thank you Senator
Stefanics.
Facility administration as well
as all the rest of the of the
activities that the health
department is responsible for
this is going to be a great
department of health and any
other of the department in the
state it's a huge responsibility
I was particularly impressed
with his willingness to take a
of of of I think one of the best
the nominations that the
governor is sent to us for
confirmation just in light of
the fact that the need in that
department is so great.
senator other debate.
Senator Pirtle to debate.
wanted to just briefly state why
might my area
during the pandemic and the
overreaching shut downs that
that we saw here in New Mexico
so for that reason and for my
district I will be voting no
thank you.
Thank you senator other debate.
The Senators we're voting on the
confirmation of Patrick M. Allen
tier seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
voting no Senator Baca voting no
Senator Griggs voting no.
In the affirmative I am the
at the pleasure of the governor
has duly been confirmed by the
Senate.
Senator CENIC's thank you madam
president I was asked that
Patrick M. Allen please stand
Sir Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent that we go to
that our business third reading
We are on the without objection
we're on that order of business
third reading of legislation
Senator Stefanics madam
Thank you Senator Stefanics the
reader to read.
Senate memorial thirty three a
memorial commemorating the
thirtieth anniversary of the
founding of the quality New
ninety three a group of New
Mexicans transition from the
coalition for human rights to
create a statewide organization
with the goal of equality for
legislators educators government
department staff and residents
across the state about the lives
of lesbian gay bisexual and
Rights Act do offer protections
for lesbian gay bisexual and
transgender individuals in New
Mexico and whereas the actions
of the quality New Mexico insure
transgender seniors and elders
in New Mexico their safety as
they age and their unique health
care needs and the whereas three
decades of continued advocacy
in passing the safe schools act
for all for all students act.
And whereas the work of a
quality Mexico was also
instrumental in passing the
trans gender legislation and
we're as lesbian gay bisexual
and transgender New Mexicans and
their families have benefited
from the on going efforts of the
this memorial be transmitted to
a quality New Mexico signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics Senator
Shannon D. Pinto Senator Michael
by the US senator Linda M. Lopez
how we see Morales president
sherry due to Lujan chief clerk
and the Senate have advance the
causes and the rights of the
LGBTQ ally of community and I'd
like to thank everyone who has
community but not as organized
and I know we have a few people
in the audience watching today
but I would stand for debate or
questions or we could just move
you centers to fan X. and I am
beyond honored to be a co
sponsor of this memorial and
really to have been part of the
morning it took me back to
twenty ten in my second year in
the state Senate's governor
Richards and asked me to carry a
bill to establish domestic
partnerships in the state of New
Senate finance committee and
then was not heard in the Senate
Judiciary Committee or was
tabled I can't remember exactly
which but it just made me
realize how far we've come and
being top of the list and I am
particularly honored this year
to be a sponsor with senator
Hamlin and working on the Human
Rights Act an additional changes
and updates and that you know
that are front center and to
celebrate thirty years
incredible work that's been done
thank you madam president thank
you Senator Hamblen.
community in southern New Mexico
and have appreciated the
leadership in EQ and Ms they've
traveled around the state
meeting with L. G. B. T. Q. plus
people in their communities hear
live in Albuquerque and Santa Fe
know that there are other places
in the state that exists to my
right from my LGBTQ family up
there please stand and shake
your hands and like that that's
of working with many of those
folks as we continue to move
forward in our state in terms of
equality and acceptance and
who I think is just the bee's
knees and so I'm very grateful
madam president thank you very
much.
Thank you senator next we'll
have Senator how to meal.
Mexico is rebuilding a movie
right here in the land of
enchantment and not just within
our state but throughout this
country they were tyrants
made madam president to have two
quick stories to tell you what
and Senator Hamblen and I were
in the same sweet we had a
staffer who had to take
something up Senator Hamblen she
in that sweet that staffer did
say he cried in knowing that
representation matters and two
of us were there voicing not
only for New Mexicans but for L.
for leading the way but publicly
madam president I would like to
thank Senator Stefanics for the
work she did and for
trailblazing the way for
president thank you Senator
Padilla.
Thank you madam president I also
rise and support I have to say
getting a lot done for all of
our brothers and sisters and
what I would say is that you
know when I interact with Mr
Martinez I receive emails from
him and and from the quality
quality New Mexico works on and
the other thing I want to
mention is I think a lot of the
work done here in New Mexico
madam president makes his way to
the national level and makes its
way to other states because I
do look to us because of the
quality New Mexico it's such a
well run
you know organization and and
find so much information to all
of us in a way that's in a
Thank you madam president
it gives me great pleasure to
stand in support of this
memorial and to honor quality
New Mexico on its thirtieth
on their birth certificates and
I'm very proud to say that I
know that many individuals have
been able to use that that law
and I have family members that
have been able to use that law
the the future leadership of
senator how to be Center Hamlin
and but the quality New Mexico
is always there researching
identifying problems and
Thank you madam president I also
stand in support of this
memorial not just because he Q.
NM throws great events and most
They're saving lives you know I
haven't mentioned this before
but I actually had a family
member that.
I was struggling with who she
it's really does save lives so
support what they do but on top
of that educating us who are not
part of the community.
And for today being African
American day and and you know
And a lot of ways because of who
he was he was essentially erased
from history and a lot of ways
when he was the one that did a
sixty and I'll be around for
that maybe not here in the
chamber but I want to be there
for that celebration and thank
you for the sponsors for
bringing this.
Thank you madam president.
quality New Mexico on its
thirtieth anniversary and I just
want to take us back to maybe
thirty years or more ago we to
we spoke about about a president
coalitions in board rooms and
meetings with members what was
then called the gay community in
Seattle and and despite them
giving me a very hard time on an
up close the things I learned a
of of of of a cohesive plan to
do to alleviate our country of
HIV and aids that the the movie
had to go through a lot and to
change social behaviors to
educate the rest of us on HIV
the LGBTQ plus movie and and
back in two thousand seven
domestic partnership was a
struggle in it was a struggle it
was a no brainer to some of us
it's a no brainer to all of us
now
and tweeting and texting but
being in the building building
relationships and moving us all
toward a more equal New Mexico
for all of us thank you madam
president.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Stewart thank you for bringing
this memorial forward you know
we celebrate thirty years in
this anniversary today and we
to respect each other and Human
Rights in general and so I am
I'm happy to see that we're
doing this at least today I do
feel compelled to think
Yet at the who is now disease
these individuals among others
were steadfastly to say the
least in incessantly working for
and so a lot has been done to
get us to where we are today and
I just want to stand in strong
support of all of this thank you
Mr madam president thank you
Share my appreciation to center
just a phonics and you madam
chair for bringing us and thirty
three before this body today.
Some have passed some are still
alive.
And they should have never gone
through what they went through
treated mainly by them they
always for gave them.
And so if if.
Thank you senator.
That next we'll hear from Santo
souls.
Thank you madam president.
More than twenty five years ago
who died of aids his parents
help start that and today we get
to celebrate thirty years of a
quality New Mexico and they're
attacked and their families who
often have a difficult time
understanding of how they have
to change things and people used
to be in the closet as a high
school teacher I always had a
important that we have now moved
well beyond that in society
where we recognize that gender
identity is not black and white
forward thank you all for what
you do every day and just
supporting people in all shapes
forms sizes colors genders it's
memorial and I I also want to
acknowledge that even after
quality New Mexico's thirty
years of work here in New Mexico
LBG LGBTQ youth still experience
organizations that are here
today is so critical to our
state thank you for bringing
this memorial thank you senator
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much madam
It's a matter of education it's
a matter of outreach.
It's a matter of acceptance that
is sometimes hard for some
What acceptance is
Rick regardless of watching was
on the to fund as we scroll on
our the on these devices and
such.
thank you madam president I
would like to think the sponsors
of the memorial yourself and
senators to phonics for bringing
this forward and the good work
came out as bisexual and I'm so
incredible incredibly grateful
for the leadership of senators
to phonics Senator Hamblen
providing the guidance in the
leadership for our use and it is
it.
The more diverse our legislature
their work in the legislature
and for your leadership and the
leadership of Senator Stefanics
thank you madam president.
Thank you.
I just have a rise of.
And presents a porous of
senators to drugs to.
Not only one of the hardest
Thank you senator Senator said
about this.
Thank you madam president you
But I have one very deep regret
that I can't cure and it's
important to recognize I think
what we celebrate these efforts.
My best friend through high
And I didn't find out until he
called to tell me the was dying
of aids Kevin was a doctor and
any I think you felt so.
his roommate and his friends as
he could to live really and in
come out ever.
In his lifetime.
relationship understanding who
he was and what he meant and and
realize we lived together for
two years.
was in my wedding and even
though we consider ourselves
that close you could never come
out to me.
And that was my fault and I
regret.
today so thank you for that
thank you madam president.
Thank you senator any other a
debate.
Seeing none Senator Stefanics to
instrumental in working with us
on our legislation as well as
Representative Cisco McSorley on
this but in nineteen ninety
three when I was first in the
Senate chambers.
But
The L. G. B. T. Q. I. community
we're referred to we just very
And if you look around a from of
one of our governorship said
well my hairdresser's gate two
of.
It's not a special group it's
not a special class we are part
of society.
And that is why we want to
that the record show that the
rules been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
on Senate memorial thirty three
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands.
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senate memorial thirty three has
duly passed the Senate.
Senator comic thank you Mr
president madam president and
thank you to the quality if they
would stand up.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go that our visit mountain some
miscellaneous seeing no
us over the joint session so
what we will do is go into a
committee of the whole to go
over for the joint session and
we're going to do that right now
and then we will come back so
sergeant arms.
Sergeant of arms madam president
I have guests here from the New
Mexico house of representatives
well come house representatives
Welcome.
Thank you Mr Mrs Mrs madam
president president.
session to join the house to
celebrate African American date.
Thank you so much we will be
over there shortly.
Thank you.
consent of the Senate that we
resolve ourselves the Senate
resolve itself into a committee
of the whole Senate for the
purposes of attending the joint
session honoring African
and we will be going over to the
house.
