Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. There is an amendment
for this bill. Do you want to
start with that, Madam Chair, or
discuss the bill first.
Uh, some, I'd say go ahead and
discuss the bill first just so
folks can then put the amendment
in context. Sure.
Um, committee this bill
addresses transparency in our
lobbyist reporting act.
Transparency is the foundation
of public trust and right now we
have some loopholes in our
lobbyist reporting Act that we
could clarify we're a little out
of sync with our neighboring
states, um, Arizona, Texas,
Colorado, Utah, the states
around us and several states
around the country, ask a little
bit more, and that's essentially
what this bill is asking, um, a
little bit more clarity in who
is paying and.
For what exactly?
Um, it's, it's a fairly modest
bill in terms of comparisons to
other states, this would put us
middle of the pack in terms of
lobbyist transparency, but this
is a step we can take and put in
place an ad for the people of
New Mexico that extra
transparency in our lobbying
efforts. Lobbyists are critical
to our legislative process, they
are.
Experts in subject matter, and
they share that expertise with
us and it contributes to
informed policy.
But the public needs to see how
it works.
So if you look at page one.
Line 20 to 22, there, there are
several new definitions in there
to clarify.
Who is paying, who is
benefiting, follow the money
sorts of questions, and with
that, Madam Chair, I think we'll
just get into questions, I will
introduce my expert witness,
deputy director Amanda Berly
from the state ethics
commission, in case we get into
technical questions.
Great, we do have, um, 3 people
signed up and and support, don't
have anyone signed up in
opposition, uh, Mason Graham
from Common Cause, Judy
Williams, uh, and then we have
one person online, Trish Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Mason Graham
from Common Cause New Mexico and
strong support of SB 248.
This common sense measure would
give the public greater insight
into the activities and
influence of lobbyists in New
Mexico politics. We've long
advocated for increased
transparency in political
spending. Uh, this legislation
supports our mission by shedding
light on the role of lobbyists
and their employers. So we
support its requirements for uh
reporting activities related to
specific legislation and the
positions taken when money is
involved, lowering the reporting
threshold from $100 to $50 would
capture more instances.
of lobbyists expenditures
combined with new requirements
to disclose the purpose of these
expenditures. This bill would
provide a clear picture of how
money may influence legislators.
Thank you.
Thank you, as Judy Williams here
or online? All right. Uh, Ms.
Williams, go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Judy Williams. I'm
representing the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico. We're
supporting SB 248 or some of the
reasons Mason stated the
believes that methods of
financing political campaigns
and public offices should ensure
the public's right to know,
combat corruption and into undue
influence and maximize fiscal
accountability and transparency.
We'd like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
Trish Williams.
Trish Lopez, I'm sorry.
Trish, if you're on, go ahead.
Oh, all right. All right, then,
uh, we don't have anyone signed
up in opposition, uh, members of
the committee.
Uh, of the amendment for
purposes of discussion. Thank
you, Senator Stewart, and, and
Senator, do you want to explain
the, the amendment?
Sure, madam chair, it um where
the original bill has individual
and organization, it changes it
to the word person, which in
legalese actually does mean
individual and organization.
Um
And that is the vast majority
the significant one is page 2,
17.
Um, that definition is, is
really broad. The or maybe
Um, kind of opens it up to
absolutely anything, so we
narrowed it just a little bit.
Um, so that it's any matter
taken out or maybe.
Then it's a matter pending in
either house of the legislature
any matter that is.
The subject of action.
etc. etc. So strike the or
maybe.
And make it more real, more
focused, and less hypothetical.
Um, page 7, there is one other.
Page 7, 25, if you want to go
there and or is changed to an
end.
Other than that, we are changing
individual to person.
Great, thanks. I'll just note
for the members, uh, when you
have and.
Sometimes that can, it can
include or but or never includes
and, so you have more, more
flexibility, uh, with that yeah.
All right. Uh, is there any, any
debate on the amendment?
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
See none, that amendment is
adopted. We're on the bill as
amended the Townsend, did you
want to, I think I had you first
on the list. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair.
I just want to touch on um
Probably should have done that
during the.
amendment, but the question is
really changing that person and
I would ask.
Are we comfortable that
What we're doing is not clouding
the issue of
I look to the lawyer to my left
to tell me whether that's right
or wrong.
So Senator, the lawyer to your
left is who suggested changing
it.
Because person is a defined term
in the lobbyist regulation Act,
and individual and organization
were not. And so that's, that's
why those changes were made.
Somehow I suspected that, so I.
I think that's fine.
The
My only concern is, you know,
Fabulous
without regard to political
affiliations and a lot of time,
effort, and dollars on both
political parties at different
times on different bills.
And, and their time is as
important as ours is during the
session when
Filter up.
timing for recording purposes um
we'll go over that with me. What
is there?
required reporting time.
Madam Chair, the reporting times
are not changed by this bill,
but I can tell you when they
are, if the chair would is
interested.
In hearing that,
OK.
Current time frames are
reporting, they have a mid-year
report due in May, and that
covers from January 15th up till
May 1st, they have a fall report
due in October. That's from the
May date to October 1st, and
then they have an annual report,
which is due January 15th, and
it covers that spending time
from October through the end of
the year, and anything else that
wasn't included.
So 3 reporting times will remain
with the passage of this bill,
madam.
There,
there, that's my point. We're
not.
Laboring the claim of reporting
on them with this bill, correct?
If you go to, um, page.
6
7
Well, it started though.
Bottom of page.
going to the top of page 7.
Down through line 13, there are
some strikes in the existing.
Uh language.
And you expound on the purpose
of those changes.
Yes.
Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend, so we're changing the
$100 amount to 50, that's part
of the change, and then if you
look on page 7, the language
that's inserted.
We're asking for a little more
detail. The date of the
expenditure, the payee, so who
actually received the
expenditure, it might be a
restaurant.
Um, the beneficiary of the
expenditure.
Um, and the contractual client
and beneficial client, and to
understand the importance of
that, you have to look back at
the definitions.
If a lobbyist works for a
lobbyist firm, for example.
Right now, they lobbyist firm is
the employer of the lobbyist,
and that's what gets reported,
but beneficial client backs it
up one more step.
So if Acme Company hires a
lobbyist firm to lobby on their
behalf. The lobbyist firm hires
the lobbyist.
Now we get the report for all
three steps, not just the
lobbyist who's working for this
firm.
We get the beneficiary
beneficial client that Acme
Company up the chain who hired
the firm. So Madam Chair and
Senator
I don't, I don't have a problem.
what you're trying to do. I
I think
There's some catches in it, uh,
for example,
Um
If I hired you as a lobbyist for
a particular bill.
That would be my contractual
obligation with you to to lobby
on that one bill.
But if in your efforts, you were
lobbying for
Senator Brantley, on another
bill.
That also benefited.
My company or my efforts.
With their reporting
requirements be
Combined, would they have to
determine
That what I did was not only
benefit.
To Crystal Brantley's company
had also benefited mine and
would they have to report that?
In the oil and gas business,
that's gonna be an issue.
And Madam Chair and senator,
what they have to report under
this.
is for that specific bill, the
stances they were lobbying for
against pending um the who hired
them to lobby on that behalf, so
it is a contractual basis who
hired them if it happens to
benefit other people, it happens
to benefit other folks, but we
are tracking the expenditure of
funds and trying to make that
piece transparent.
Um, madam
Senator, where is this still go
next.
It goes, Madam Chair, to
judiciary next.
OK.
Madam Chair, I'm sure it'll be
addressed. Thank you very much.
Other members of the committee.
block. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, if
What's the reporting, uh,
processes, those are based on
Um, what policy again?
The lobbyists reporting.
Madam Chair, the lobbyist
reporting Act.
And
I read that in here, can, can,
Madam Chair and senator, can you
tell me, uh, when those reports
are due.
And Mr. Chair, I can.
Do that? Are you, thank you, Mr.
Chair. um, I can repeat that
information. There's a report in
May, a report in October and
then a report January 15th. OK,
I got it here on page 9, I lost
my spot. Thank you for that.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, if
If the report is
Late
Um
What's the process?
Mr. Chair, our Secretary of
State works for compliance, so
there'd be um a 10 day period in
which they'll reach out and try
and get the lobbyists in
compliance and get the report
filed.
Thank you Mr. Chair and Senator,
um,
I
is there, is there a couple of m
Mulligans on there, or is there
after a while the Secretary of
State is like, hey.
I, I got a hammer you now. Uh,
Mr. Chair, the Secretary of
State's.
Office is here, but they will,
they can eventually impose
fines.
If it's a habitual offender or
an intentional violation.
Thank you for that. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator.
What, what, what are those, what
are those fines, out of
curiosity. Madam Chair, those
fines are not affected by this
bill. This bill doesn't address
them.
I believe it's $1000 and you can
not, you can be banned from
lobbying for 3 years. Is that's
up to 5000. Up to 5000, OK.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. That, that's not,
that's not fun, so.
Um, OK, I just wanted to know,
make sure, uh, the lobbyists in
the electors understood that
because um I understand things
happen with lobbyists after the
session during the year, they
might not comply or forget or
whatever and.
Um, sounds like the Secretary of
State would give them a
A little poke, a little reminder
here and there and get them back
into compliance so they can go
do great things. Is that that a
fair assumption?
That, that's fairly accurate.
OK. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Other members
Yeah, was that no I was just
gonna make a motion. Uh, OK. Uh,
we'll, we'll come back to you in
just a moment. Um, Senator,
thank you for bringing this.
Uh
Yeah, I think all this does is
let us give us
clear information about who is
lobbying for what, um, and how,
how money is being spent, uh, in
a way that could present a an
appearance of, of influence, um.
This
I am
It's surprising that it has
taken until now.
Uh,
to, to, to do this. Um, although
I think there's definitely been
been attempts in the past to do
so.
Um
I do wanna address Senator
Townsend's questions, uh, about
if uh if there are people who,
who benefit incidentally. Um,
and I think the, the definition
of beneficial client there.
Makes it clear that it has, it's
just who whoever's request,
they're doing the lobbying.
There
That's on page one.
At Line 20.
So if I have requested.
Senator Figueroa to to lobby on
something, but it also happens
to benefit you. You don't get
reported. I do because, because
I am the person at whose request
she is doing it.
But um
You know, I think oftentimes
when we talk about lobbyists.
Some people will just say, oh, a
lobbyists are just evil.
Oh, they're just terrible, and,
and they're not lobbyists play
an important role, uh, in the
legislative process, um,
especially with a volunteer
legislature where uh we don't
have the expertise in a lot of
areas that they are, they
educate us on a lot of things,
but they educate us with, with a
purpose. They, they are
educating us to, to get a
desired outcome. So I think it
is, it is good for us to have as
much information as possible,
um, but as Senator Townsend
said, not
overly onerous, uh, and I think
that this bill strikes, strikes
that. So, Senator, uh, and
Senator guy goes, you just came
in, if you want to speak on this
bill, I want to give you that
opportunity before we go to
motion.
Oh
OK.
Senator Bergmans, but I'm sure I
would do pass as amended.
All right, um, let's go ahead
and do a roll calls.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
Yes, I guess we didn't need a
roll call on that one after all,
uh, with 8 in favor to excuse.
Do you have a do pass. Thank
you, Senator.
Not
And um, could someone grab some
of the Chevacas.
While we're waiting, I wanted to
introduce my, uh, my shadow for
the week with uh a me Amelia
Baggio, uh, who is finishing up,
uh, political science degree at
UNM.
So thanks for joining us.
I'll know she is my second
shadow that I've had who has
said, man, I don't want to be a
lawyer.
Go ahead,
Senator.
Yeah.
After, after some opposition, we
adopted the law regarding body
cameras. I think it ultimately
it's been a very constructive
thing. Uh, I formerly prosecuted
DWI offenses, and I've got to
tell you when there's video,
oftentimes it's pretty much the
end of the ballgame for a
defendant once they watch their
video with their attorney. So
it's, it's a positive thing,
the, the difficulty is that when
we adopted the law originally,
we did not evidently define law
enforcement or the agencies
required to comply with this
adequately enough for you and
them. So UNM
Police Department on campus took
the position that they were not
captured by this law, despite
the fact that state police,
counties, cities, all were
captured. UNM incredulously took
the position that they were not
within that definition of law
enforcement and so did not
comply with the law. So one of
the principal things this law
does is to assure that all
postsecondary institutions, law
enforcement have body cameras,
um, NMSU and I believe most
other universities in the state
uh complied, but UNM refused to
do so.
And so this is designed to
attack that issue. The other
issue that we've come up with is
that
We originally had a pretty
strict consequence. You all are
probably familiar with my
position that if we don't adopt
a law that has a consequence,
it's clear, it's a memorial, you
call it, it's probably an
overstatement, but it's, it's
generally my attitude. So we had
a consequence for law
enforcement who didn't do this
in the original bill. It was a
pretty strict consequence, then,
uh, after a period of a year, I
think law enforcement came back
and said the consequence was too
harsh, so we lessened the
consequence, and what happened
is, I think that law enforcement
has become somewhat lax in that
at least some um have.
And we have the noteworthy
example in Albuquerque, where
the chief of police did not
activate his body camera in
compliance with the law. So
we're trying to put back in a
little bit stricter um
consequence for law enforcement
doing that, and when you have
the chief of police for APD not
feeling there's a consequence to
him turning on his body camera,
then uh I think we're sending a
message to to the lower ranking
officers about the attitude
we're complying with our laws
here and um I, I know almost
every other law enforcement
officer complies, and I think
it's a good thing.
Um, and I think it, it actually,
because we have so many good law
enforcement officers doing their
job well. When I've watched body
camera, um, I'm always amazed by
how professional.
respectful law enforcement
remain under tough circumstances
and tempers flaring and so
forth, so, uh, just about
everybody out there, I think
body cameras a really good thing
for for the law enforcement
officers to have going and so
man, I'm sure that's what this
first bill does.
Thank you, Senator, and I don't
have anyone signed up in
support. Um, I have 6 people
signed up in opposition.
And then one.
This says neither speaking on
language, so
Mr. Bundy, why don't you?
Do that first and then we'll
have the the folks in opposition
go.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me, um, we want to
acknowledge uh the sponsor is
absolutely right, body cameras
are a good thing. We represent
police officers and sheriffs and
in Espanola, Berlin, Grant
County, uh, tell some other
places, um, Luna County as well.
Uh, our concern here, and we
haven't taken a formal position
yet, but our concern here is
that they're really 4 things
that can happen, um, that might
cause somebody to not have uh
the video camera on technology
can malfunction.
And certainly the battery life
of all these things isn't
getting checked necessarily
every single day, um, things
happen when you have thousands
of cameras, uh, also sometimes
in the heat of battle, you can
be ambushed, you can be
assaulted. And when that
happens, the police officer has
to take care of it of the
citizens and himself or herself
first, um, and can't be
necessarily thinking to do this
or have the ability to do it.
Um, a third option is that they
might not know it's a law
enforcement encounter. It could
be a discussion, it could
suddenly go sideways and they
might not.
Have the ability to turn it on
before it becomes a law
enforcement encounter. The final
is bad behavior, and we think
that the sponsor has brought up
some good examples of bad
behavior. We do want to capture
that, but we think making it
shall be liable instead of maybe
liable, um, really eliminates,
uh, pursuing those 1st 3
options,
why Cameron might not have been
turned on. So we think that for
this part, May should be
sufficient. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, so we
have.
We have 6 people signed up in
opposition. Uh, I will give the
same uh little speech that
Senator Cervantes gives in.
And judiciary, uh, we encourage
organized opposition.
Uh, so that we can really hear,
uh, in depth.
The, what, what the points are
for opposition on any any given
bill. Um, I don't see that this
is, this is necessarily
organized opposition, so we'll
go ahead and give about uh
About 2 minutes to to each
person, um, starting with the
folks that I have here in the
noted in the room is a Stephen
Hebby.
Troy, uh
Chief, uh, Troy West Wessler.
Victor Rodriguez.
Paul Joy and Clay Grett. If
you're here, go ahead, line up.
And we have 2 people on
Oh no, one person on Zoom.
Chief story.
And it looks like we do not have
nearly as many people as as
signed up actually here. So go
ahead and take a
More than a little more than 2
minutes take take up to 4
minutes each.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I mean,
first off, I do want to say that
we very are very supportive of
uh body cameras we had body worn
cameras, the state police before
that was even a statute
mandating it, uh, we
specifically are opposed uh to
the wording of the shells to the
mate, uh, Troy Easter chief New
Mexico State Police, my, my
apologies for not doing that
first. Uh, state police opposes
the proposed change in SB 505
that shifts the tort language
for negligent spoliation of
evidence.
For maybe presumed, you shall be
presumed.
Um, it is somewhat disheartening
to see a proposed change that
implies officers are acting in
bad faith. The current system
already holds individuals
accountable for negligence. We
believe this change is
unnecessary.
This body adjusted the wording
from shell to may just two years
ago and I know we heard a
reason, but I'm somewhat unclear
why we would reverse that now.
Technology isn't perfect and law
enforcement works in dynamic
conditions. This change ignores
context to one unfairly presume
bad faith.
I'll give an example. I know of
a critical incident where
several issues, none of which
were negligent.
Delayed one officer's body
camera by moments, though
multiple other cameras captured
the event in its entirety.
This law would wrongly presume
misconduct over something that
was beyond this officer's
control.
I can't think of another area
where we find people negligent
even when the facts would say
that they are not.
For these reasons, we urge you
to remove this section from the
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
I'm sure I know the order of
things. Uh, Paul Joy, Chief of
Police and Police Department.
I'm also voicing my opposition
to the language change. I am an
advocate of body cameras, uh,
when I started in law
enforcement, I, I paid out of
pocket that I had.
Uh, technology to record to make
sure that uh I doing everything
I needed to do and then I had
accountability and, and, and uh
tracking events happening
beneficial.
Uh
This is and should be the
responsibility of the courts.
To make the assessment, whether
or not an officer had.
I don't want to rehash what's
already been said, I agree with
everything that.
For me
Um, but, uh, I get asked often
in the public about.
Why
Sometimes we have difficulty
recruiting.
Wise
Folks interested in law
enforcement.
And it's things like this, where
there's a presumption of bad
faith acting.
Oh, a number of other things.
Responsible for
The malfunction of the issue of
the body cam.
Um, what it does is it gives a
perception that
These officers are being seen as
dollar signs use of a litigator.
Uh, and they're gonna
position.
to defend themselves and pay out
of pocket for that was.
ness an accident or outright.
issue with technology.
Thank you. Uh, do we have a
chief story on Zoom?
Chief, go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Jeremy
Story, police chief for the Las
Cruces Police Department. Uh,
you know, I, I support the
change to add university police
departments or uh police
departments for higher
education. That makes sense. I
do strongly oppose the language
change back to Xiao, have acted
in bad faith, and there's
several reasons why.
Our agency uses Axon body
cameras, which I think are
probably the most common body
camera used by agencies
throughout New Mexico.
One of the things, there's
limitations to all this
technology. One of the things
that we have to contend with is
that officers go home and their
marching and they come back to
work on the way to briefing
without a body camera, because
they have to dock that camera
before, at the end of shift, it
takes about 8 to 10 hours to
download all the videos from
their ship.
And then they come back and have
to pick that up before they go
back on, on the streets. If
something happens on their way
to work,
They're essentially presumed to
have acted in bad faith
regardless of the circumstances.
And I'll give an example that
actually happened to me. I, I
don't have a marked you. I have
an unmarked pickup truck.
Unfortunately, I had my body
camera with me.
Um, because I didn't have any
videos the day before to do
because I spend most of my time
in meetings and things like
this.
I look, I was driving to work. I
look over at a traffic stop with
the sheriff's department and
there was a female deputy that
was in an active fight.
On the side of the road as I'm
going to work.
And fortunately, I was able to
Get my body camera on at some
point during that struggle, but
I wasn't going to stop and delay
my action, or in this case,
officers essentially would have
to make the decision. Do I
intervene and help this officer
or the citizen, or do I not?
Because if I do, I will be
presumed to have acted in bad
faith.
This technology malfunctions, it
happens. Um, our officers work
10-hour shifts frequently
because of staffing and
recruiting challenges. They work
14 to 16 hour shifts. They stay
over for the next shift and
sometimes the cameras run out of
battery. And if it runs out of
battery, while they're at a
call, what do they do? They walk
away and leave or if they
continue that call and try to
help that citizen, they're
presumed to have acted in bad
faith.
It just doesn't make sense. You
know, there's not another area
of law that I'm aware of where
we don't weigh out the evidence
and make a decision based on how
the evidence is presented. Right
now, my officers are already
held accountable when they do
not use their body cameras in
accordance with policy and
therefore the law. I can't, I
discipline people all the time.
Up to including termination
depending on the circumstances,
progressive discipline and the
severity.
That's already happened.
Overall, we, we very much
support body cameras. They have
helped us far more than they
have hurt us, and officers are
doing the right thing. 99% of
the time, and even when they're
not, it's almost always caught
on body camera. And it allows us
to take the appropriate measure,
uh, to make sure there's
consequences and accountability.
And the last thing I'll just
say, Madam Chair, is that, you
know,
Making sweeping policy changes
for the mistakes of one person
is not good policy and I think
there's already mechanisms in
place to hold officers
accountable both internally
through the administrative
process and through the courts
when they do not act in good
faith, and the evidence shows
up.
Thank you for the time to, to
comment, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Yeah.
Thank you. And the other folks
who had signed up, I, I don't
see anyone here or are any of
them online, there's.
Couple of minutes left.
All right, Chief Rodriguez, go
ahead, there's about 3.5 minutes
left on time for opposition.
Can you hear me, madam chair? We
can hear you.
Good, good morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning, members of the
committee. Um, I'm not gonna
repeat a lot of what's been
said, but uh I don't think
there's any argument and
bodywork cameras um are a good
practice and continue to be a
good, a good practice as a
tribal law enforcement
organization were not held under
this bill, but I wanted to
comment to tell you that we use
body cameras as well, and we do
so because we believe in them. I
believe that the uh I I'm, I'm
opposed to the show for me.
Um, I believe that once again
this is a knee jerk reaction to
a singular incident that's
further labeling law enforcement
as professionals who
intentionally and purposely act
in bad faith. Um, these, we, we
currently have policies and
procedures as Chief Story
mentioned that allow us as
department heads to determine
the circumstances before we
issue uh and determine if an
individual deserves discipline,
and it's a shame that such a
bill.
would go back to from what the
legislative body believed was
made where it leaves it up to
the determination of a, uh, you
know, whoever is reviewing the
incident, uh, to see if what had
occurred was intentional or the
individual acted in bad faith,
and I think in these times where
we're struggling um to.
Um, recruit law enforcement,
retain law enforcement, um, I, I
don't think you're gonna have an
argument that the university
police needs to be on there. Uh,
that makes perfect sense, but,
uh, this, uh, continuous
labeling that law enforcement
act in bad face is not good for
the profession. It's not good
for public safety, and I would
urge that the sponsor, uh,
consider that, uh, uh, in his
proposal to this change. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. All right, we'll go
to members of the committee. I
have Senator Stefaniks, then
Senator Brantley, then Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this.
Um, I missed the beginning of
the conversation, but I want, I,
I believe this is.
Uh, good policy. I have no
problem with it. I think that
the people who are on the
university campuses, expect
safety and uh transparency and I
believe that um there is an
opportunity for individuals to
defend themselves if there's um
A problem. My question and uh
you might not be able to answer
it, but really, when the battery
is low, can an officer not
exchange it or check out a
second one,
could we provide 2 cameras for
officers so that they have an
immediate backup, but um I see
this as a safety measure and
it's a message to the public,
students, faculty, staff, that
they're gonna be protected.
So I don't know if you know the
answers to the questions about
exchanging or checking out
another one.
me following up on your
question, Senator. So number
one, I didn't hear any
opposition at all to the UNM
example where UNM refused to do
this. So I don't hear law
enforcement or anybody
disagreeing. Our colleges should
be held to the same standard our
campus police should be held to
the same standard. And I hear
all the law enforcement
uniformly saying they support
body cameras. I think it's a
good thing.
That was the original sponsor.
I'll just tell you, it was
difficult. It was a it was a
tough fight in law enforcement,
Senator Stewart remembering the
fight, we had very strong
opposition from the sheriff um
Gonzalez in in Albuquerque, and
he gave us all the same
arguments that we, the
technology didn't exist, uh,
didn't work, wasn't reliable, he
was gonna use iPhones, I think,
strapped with duct tape to the
officer's chest. You remember
the whole thing, it was, it was
all pretty absurd, but we, we,
you're right, we sent, we passed
a law and it's worked. Um, I
haven't heard anybody now saying
they can't afford it. I haven't
heard.
say now the technology doesn't
exist, you can't do it. I think
the important point to all the
concerns that are raised with
regard to batteries or on an
emergency call or whatever it
may be, the none of those things
will trigger this result. Uh,
the, the result is triggered
when there is noncompliance with
with the law enforcement
policies and procedures they
adopt themselves. So the the
existing law says they adopt
their policies and procedures
when you don't comply, then
there's a presumption of some
bad faith or a consequence. And
so, uh, the examples that we're
Given wouldn't presumably be
contrary to their policies and
procedures, um, and so I, I
think there's probably a lot
more concern about this than
than the law enforcement has, to
answer your question, but I
don't know about the issue of
having multiple cameras or
batteries, maybe um if the chair
um.
Chair now is willing to go back
to somebody who wants to answer
that question. I, there may be
somebody who has that that
answer.
And so, uh, Mr. Chair, I
understand that some of the
heartburn is around uh the word
shell, but again, they have the
opportunity to defend
themselves. So, um, I think it's
a good film. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to
see you, um.
Senator Cervantes.
This is a, this is an ongoing
conversation, and I want to go
back to some statements you made
um regarding SB 368 in 2023.
You're quoted saying the
language initially was pretty
harsh, you know, shall be
presumed in bad faith is pretty
heavy sanction.
My sense right now is that law
enforcement is very supportive
and cooperative and uniform in
adopting this technology, and
that's helpful from my
perspective.
I would support changing the
language to me, as an amendment,
but allows for some discretion
on the part of the court and I'm
all about giving discretion to
judges when they're exercising
it, and when we see them
consistently exercising it.
Senator Cervantes, why do you
want to change that now when at
the time you were so supportive
of of changing the child to me.
It's a very good question, and
the reason is because when we
originally adopted this, it was
shall. You know, we had, we had
a very clear consequence, and I
say shall, it's a presumption,
right? And so as lawyers, a
court can always exercise their
discretion and always overcome
that presumption and the point
was made by an officer can
always go in or and their
administrators and go in and say
we had a um equipment
malfunction. We had a battery
malfunction.
had a circumstance that
justified not having the
equipment on, but when a law
enforcement officer,
particularly the people at the
top of the department,
electively do not engage their
equipment and against clearly
what their own policies and
procedures are, and then there's
no consequence that that merits
what we're talking about here
today. So we originally had hoo.
And then uh law enforcement came
back and I, you're right, I had
the original sponsorship and
then uh I try and and be the
sort of legislator says, hey,
sometimes we get it wrong.
Um, and so a couple of years
ago, I said, yeah, we need to
maybe lessen the burden a little
bit on lower, so we changed it
to May. Well, that we see
sometimes with the consequence
happens here when you lower the
standard, uh, some people take
that as a message to say, well,
maybe we don't really mean it
after all, and so going from
shall to May seemed to make
sense to me, I supported it at
the time. We've now seen a
consequence to that which is
say, well, maybe we're not gonna
really mean what we say, and
maybe we're going to give a lot
more latitude to doing so, but I
think
it's worth really uh and I
appreciate the fact that you got
my words, that's pretty good. I,
I appreciate your research and,
and at least I think I'm being
consistent with you all today
that, that we lessened it and
there was a predictable result
in a very small one isolated
instances, but an important one.
And, um, and again, I want to
reemphasize the point that was
made, 99% of the law enforcement
engagements imply 99% of the
time we have nothing but pride
in our law enforcement officers,
the the concern about
recruitment, retention or
sending a message to law
enforcement. Let me just
disabuse that notion.
You, I, I said this in my
original presentation when you
watch these videotapes, we
should be really proud, I always
am, of the law enforcement
officers on those videotapes.
They're their professionalism,
their response is exemplary in
99% of the time.
Uh, Madam Chairman and, and
chairman.
We're, we're up here focused
with the number one priority
really is to just public safety
and arguably you're at the tip
of the spear and have done a
good job, and we just pressed a
number of uh crime bills and
we're committed to doing some
more.
as we pass those, I think it's a
good start, right? We to to
respond to the call of New
Mexicans to make New Mexico
safer, but the enforcement arm
of that regardless of whatever
we pass is gonna fall on our law
enforcement officers. If, if
we're up here in good faith
trying to adopt policies. Should
we not assume that our
enforcement branches that are
acting in good faith when
they're trying to adopt when
they're trying to to enforce
those policies, and I say that
because
The presumption that those
officers are automatically
acting in bad faith.
seems
Demoralizing to those who we are
entrusting to go out there.
And employ these policies that
we've adopted and and do what we
would assume is is is good work.
How do you address the
demoralizing aspect of saying
we're acting in good faith by
passing these laws, but we're
going to assume that you're
acting in bad faith when you're
enforcing the laws we pass.
So, madam chair and, there's a
flaw in your logic in your
question, which is if again, if
you look at the language that is
of concern to law enforcement
here today. You got to look at
the language in the bill, which
says that police peace officers
who failed to comply with the
policies and procedures required
to be adopted pursuant to
Section A, are the ones to
presumed in bad faith. In other
words, the only presumption
that's ever going to apply is
when they don't follow their own
policies and procedures. So
there should be no uh
demoralized response to this.
This is not a message from us
that law enforcement are not,
uh, again,
As I said, exemplary and
something we can be very proud
of. This is, this, there's only
a consequence when they don't
follow their own policies and
procedures, and they set their
own policies and procedures so
they can address the need for
cameras or batteries or
malfunctions or responding to an
exigent circumstance, some, some
kind of emergency situation.
They set all their policies and
procedures. The only consequence
is when they don't follow their
own policies and procedures.
There's no message from us here
that should be taken as, as
anything, uh, but, but.
pride and support for law
enforcement.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairman, speaking of following
their own policies, how can we
address some of the statements
that were mentioned in public
comment. One, the officer story
about how he was responding to
he was traveling to and from
work, saw a life or death
situation that would technically
go against policy, and yet we
want to encourage our officers
to go out there and provide
public safety and respond to
those in need.
Would we assume that that was in
bad faith because it wasn't
caught on camera.
Uh, so, Senator, first of all,
um, I want to appreciate the
chief story and if you I'll,
I'll get you all this, uh, some
press clippings, the city of Las
Cruces today is exemplary for
law enforcement agency. They,
they just adopted a new
community engagement program I
was reading about over the
weekend, uh, chief stories did
an exceptional job, and and it's
really turning, turning around
that department. Um, his
example, I couldn't begin to
address without knowing all the
details and specifics. I think
it's probably beyond us to maybe
dig into that one example. But
again, if he did not have time
to activate a camera, I would.
I would have to know what it
takes to engage in activate a
camera, and maybe somebody makes
a mistake. We all make mistakes.
Somebody forgot. But, um, again,
the, the example here would only
be the presumption that if
there's a, a problem with that
engagement on his part, that the
absence of the videotape is
presumed to be a spoliation.
That's really the critical part
of this bill, and we have that
throughout the law. In other
words, if you and I uh have a a
dispute between the two of us
and there are key emails that
you destroy.
You don't keep or documents, you
don't keep, there's a
presumption that those documents
would be adverse to your
interests, and we, we use that
throughout the law, so you'll
see in that paragraph on page 3,
we refer to spoliation. The
presumption here is, I know
there's a lot of concern about
the bad faith, uh, the bad faith
is not um new, that's existing
law. So, you know, for all the
people here who were upset about
bad faith, that's already in our
existing statute.
Um, and so I'm not changing
that.
But, uh, the, the spoliation
consequence is something that we
have throughout the law, which
is, and we would expect that if,
if there's a if there's a
dispute between law enforcement
officer and a member of the
public and there was videotape
and it was not kept or
destroyed, courts are entitled
to presume that videotape would
have been favorable to the
defendant, that's just really
kind of fundamental to all of
our practice of law. If
something's destroyed or not
kept, it's presumed that the
person who didn't keep it and
destroyed it.
Uh, didn't like what was in it.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Chairman.
I think that there's a lot of
examples that we can use without
knowing the details that if an
officers are working 14 to 16
hour shifts, we know that they
charge their cameras in between.
Something's happening in between
a call we can't presume that it
was in bad faith or that they
were trying to hide something if
they had to immediately respond
to something while their battery
were charging or we could go in
on and on and on with the what
ifs. I think that what
What I'd ask for is some sort of
reasonableness to, instead of
assuming that they are guilty
and having to plead their
innocence every time their
camera doesn't catch everything
is to assume that they're acting
in good faith and I, and I
appreciate the lesson here on
how there's this bad faith
history here, but, but you know,
well, you're, you're a lawyer,
Senator Cervantes, and there's a
lot of, you know, negative
public stigmas about lawyers
being sharks and self-serving
and their.
Self-interest. That's not, and,
and while that may be the case
on, on a few.
That's certainly not fair to say
of, of everyone, right? I think
that you could even apply the
same kind of thought to, uh,
being politicians, you know,
there's a lot of people that
will say there's many cases of
of harassment.
That that happened, it should,
should all politicians be
walking around with live cameras
because there's a history,
there's been a history of, of
harassment cases and if they
don't have it on in that
instance, we, we assume that
they acted inappropriate and
have to defend themselves. I, I
would just ask that when we're
adopting the same with law
enforcement, especially because
we put so much on them in New
Mexico, really our lot is how.
How we work with them.
And, and not against him, and
there's no one better to go
through this.
Then you and see how we make
sure that that perhaps in in
incidents when there was clearly
some some bad actions that
needed to be caught.
Are caught without penalizing
those who are who are.
The good guys, acting in good
faith and and didn't charge the
camera for for good reasons or
whatnot, and how we change this.
To just make exceptions for them
to add reasonableness to that.
So with that, I, I will yield my
time out chair. Thank you,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Um
The other day when we were
debating the crime package on
the floor, I made the comment
and I saw you concur with my
statement that
What we had done in New Mexico
on a number of occasions had
Because our police officers to
be demoralized. They, we were
talking about.
The rest being down and why they
were down in that.
And here today, Madam Chair, um,
We have had
You know, our biggest, uh, some
of our biggest cities, um, and
most prestigious officers come
forward and said, hey, this is a
problem.
I, I think, um, that you would
have overwhelming.
Um, support for this piece of
legislation that we made that
one amendment from
Um
child may.
Is that, is that something after
hearing the testimony that you
would be interested in.
And if not why.
The reason is because.
So
you look at the existing
language, it says that the me
taking apart the may shell for a
moment. It says that when they
fail to follow their own
policies and procedures. I can't
stress that enough, like, again,
I hear law enforcement here,
they're concerned. I appreciate
the fact that you think that
that's demoralizing to them. I
really don't think they're
reading the bill as precisely as
they should, which is again, the
only consequences when they
don't follow their own policies
and procedures.
Um, and, and so this is really
in some respects, I would think
the chiefs, here the leaders of
their agencies would see this as
a strengthening.
Of their authority, and, and
those policies and procedures,
but, but the existing language
says that um it's the bad faith
is existing law, number one, and
number 2, talks about an
independent tort of negligence
spoliation. I think that the
tort Claims Act would probably
preclude an independent cause of
action for spoliation. Again,
this is all existing laws, so we
should probably take that out, I
would think. We're not, we're
not, I don't imagine we're ever
gonna bring a tort claim against
the law enforcement officer for,
for damages because it's not,
uh,
addressed in the Tort Claims
Act.
Way beyond the scope of this
discussion, the Tort Claims Act
says you can only sue law
enforcement under certain
circumstances that are that are
so forth, you should probably
take all of that out. Um, but
the, but the uh concern that I
think you expressed there's an
important one, and I, I did
emphasize that on the, on the
floor. I think that we have
demoralized law enforcement. I
don't think that's really by
what we've done up here. I
think, uh, but maybe our failure
to act, and I think we took care
of a lot of that on Friday. I
tried to um address the fact
that they're demoralized, I
think in part by the fact that
you just see the same people
time and time again, released
and and uh and out.
Um, so I, I hope that addresses
your question, but I again, I, I
don't want to send a message at
all here today and certainly
have no intention, and I don't
think this does, it's a negative
to law enforcement. Um, I
understand they're opposed to
it, but I think it's, it's
simply they're, they're really
overreacting to what is the
existing policies and procedures
they have. And if they, if they
want to strengthen their
policies and procedures, they
should.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, I
appreciate that. I, I, um,
I don't, I don't believe they
still will, but, uh, uh,
Good luck in, in changing that.
There's no appropriation for the
colleges in this bill to to
address their
Lack of body cameras
when we, when I first passed
this and sponsored it, I'll just
say I had the same opponents
that I have here today, uh, law
enforcement were concerned,
opposed, but again, just as
today, they said they support
the idea, they support the
technology, they support this
tool, and, um, as I said
earlier, from as from a former
prosecution's standpoint, um,
the videos is makes the job of
law enforcement and lawyers very
easy. You play a videotape.
for a defendant who's charged
with a DWI or even a, a, a
police successive use of force
case, whatever it may be, and
almost in every case, those
videotapes exonerate the the
conduct, the law enforcement
officers and the arrests they
made. So, uh, but I, but I had
the same opposition back then
the world was gonna end and and
it didn't, I think we've had
actually a good result as a as a
consequence of that.
Senator.
Who is benefited by changing it
from May to shall, and who is, I
mean, that.
That's in your wheelhouse. I
mean, the, the what benefit is
that?
Is that, uh, change in language
cops are the beneficiaries, uh,
which are the ones who uh want
to uphold the badge.
And the esteem that they deserve
in our community. And so when we
say you adopt your policies and
procedures, and we expect you to
police yourselves and follow
them, but when you have, um, and
again, it may be a negligible
small fraction of 1% who says
we're not gonna, we're not gonna
follow our own policies and
procedures, and there's no
consequence to us.
That that sends a message, and
the goal here should be to say
we, we want the people that
lead, probably the largest law
enforcement agency of any
municipality to say, um, yeah,
my policies and procedures as
the chief matter.
Um, and if I want to ignore them
at my will, there should be a
consequence. And right now, as
best I can tell, there is no
consequence.
Madam Chair and Senator.
your testimony by others in the
room today, 99%, I think was the
term used that
Lobsters are good officers
complying with the rules and
regulations, doing what's right.
standing up for law and order,
doing all those things.
And we have a small fraction.
Yeah.
may not be doing it right.
So
I have to listen to those.
Officers that have come forward
with the presentations that
they've presented to the
committee.
Nobody wants a bad officer.
But our job isn't to make
Criminals defend themselves, not
make officers defend themselves.
And I think that's the problem
with this piece of legislation.
It's perceived in that manner.
Be another lawyer fight, I'm
sure it is who's right, but
I think we need to make sure
that we
support our officers, and when I
see state police.
Las Cruces.
Many others come forward and say
this is a problem.
I think the committee has to
realize that it's a problem.
And I think we have every
Obligation
To address those people that try
to skirt the law, and we ought
to, we ought to hammer them for,
for not doing it, not doing it
right.
But I sure have a problem with
attacking the whole because we
have a little bitty.
small percentage of those people
that are not.
Do we try and
So Madam.
Saar block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um,
I like the transparency piece of
UNM. I agree with you 100%. I
think they should have body
cameras. We, we need that on
college campuses.
Um
I don't, I don't really know you
that well. Um, are you, you're
an attorney, I, from what I
gather, were you a police
officer ever?
Thank you.
Um, but no, I'm not.
I'm sorry, sir. Your father was.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Were, were you a veteran
by chance? No? OK.
So
I, I look at this, and I
understand where you're coming
from, and I, I've heard all the
members here in the in the
police officers.
I look at this a little bit
different, um,
Because these men in uniform.
My opinion
Where I'm coming from.
Uh, every day they put that
uniform on, they're going into a
combat environment.
I think that's a fair
assessment, you're shaking your
head, yes, you would agree with
that.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
I served in combat.
I was in Afghanistan for
Several months
Doing some interesting things.
Where some things happened where
You don't have time to think.
Um, I'll ask you this, Senator,
um, Madam Chair, Senator, you
ever been shot at? You ever been
bombed?
You ever been rocketed? You ever
been caught in a riot?
They're trying to kill you? No.
Well, I'll tell you, these
police officers have been shot
at.
They've been ambushed.
They've been
Task saturated and certain.
Instances where they've been
Providing first aid.
And then getting shot at.
I have a hard time thinking.
Based on my experience,
Based on what I'm hearing from
the law enforcement today, Madam
Chair and Senator.
That they gotta be thinking when
they're getting shot at or
ambushed or bought someone's
fighting with them. Hey, time
out.
Put the gun away for a minute. I
gotta click on my body cam.
You're not thinking like that in
those situations.
I've been there more than
anybody on this committee. I've
been there more than you. I
probably haven't been there more
than some of these officers in
those situations.
Thank God.
I would also argue.
Madam Chair and senator.
But these men right here.
who have served for years and
years and years.
Probably have
Some mental health issues where
they get counseling.
Because of the things that they
have seen and things they've had
to do, unfortunately, for our
public safety to protect us.
Senator Townsend talked about
the
you know, the little bit of 1%
of these officers who are
probably bad apples. I don't
know if it's 1%, I don't know if
it's 20%. I have no idea what it
is, but what I do know.
If you're getting shot at in
Kabul, Afghanistan or
Albuquerque, New Mexico. It's
the same damn thing.
You're not thinking about body
cams, you're thinking about your
life or you're thinking about
the other person's life that you
are ready to sacrifice your life
for.
And then when we say shall be
presumed to have acted in bad
faith, Madam Chair and Senator.
When these men and women are
getting shot at, they're getting
assaulted, they're getting
ambushed.
It opens it up. You're a lawyer,
I'm not. We can have a
disagreement here, but there are
gonna be, as Senator Brantley
talked about,
They're gonna be those slimy
lawyers out there, very few of
them, I would hope, that are
going to exploit.
Of men and women in blue.
It's going to happen.
You know that. It's just gonna
happen.
You know, we had rules of
engagement over there.
And I know that they have rules
of engagement as well as police
officers.
And
Madam Chair and Senator, if you
haven't been in that position,
As many times as they have.
Or a few times as I have.
I guarantee you, Senator, you're
not thinking.
Turn a damn camera on, you're
thinking about your life.
In the lives of your, the life
of your partner, the lives of
the people around you.
And now we're gonna say you
shall be presumed to have acted
in bad faith.
I don't think I acted in bad
faith.
What we, some of us had to do.
Over there, I don't think some
of these officers have acted in
bad faith when they get a return
fire and forget to turn a body
camera on.
We hold police officers, in my
opinion, Madam Chair and
senator.
Probably one of the most highest
standards of profession.
That we have in the United
States.
We hold the police officers to
higher standards, I would argue,
Madam Chair and Senator, than we
do politicians.
And we do lawyers.
Maybe doctors.
And I would also argue that this
is another hit on our law
enforcement professionals, Madam
Chair and Senator. I think like
Senator Townsend talked about.
Because we've already extended
the retirement to 25 years.
Which was dumb
We've already got rid of
qualified immunity on them.
And now we're going to open them
up to this as well.
I, I gotta tell you, Senator.
This, this is very upsetting to
me because I've lived this.
No one on this committee as you
have, but I've lived it.
And they lived with it, and they
have to live with it every day
to the last.
breath that they have.
You're not thinking
straight
Madam Chair, Senator, when
you're in a combat environment.
You're not thinking about
Oh crap.
I turn on my camera.
So, I would hope that you would
maybe take that into
consideration, and I guess under
what I would ask you is the
amendment that you, you said, or
I'm sorry, you didn't say
amendment. You said that you got
a couple of things wrong in here
and you'd like to change it.
Uh, can I ask you what, what you
would like to change in this
bill before it goes to your
committee and judiciary.
Uh, yes, but I'd like to first
of all address many of your
comments. First of all, I want
to honor your service and
respect it a great deal.
Uh, you asked me if I was a vet,
I'm not. My dad was a vet of
Korea and and did see combat.
Um
I have practiced law for 35
years. Your question was whether
I'm a lawyer. I am a lawyer. I
practiced law for 35 years. I
have done nothing but defend law
enforcement in those 35 years.
I've never brought a lawsuit
against law enforcement. I have
defended law enforcement
officers in uh in the, the line
of service and including in in
fire, um, I've also represented
law enforcement in uh labor
negotiations and contract
negotiations. I, I want to
strongly reject the notion that,
that you're taking this to turn
it into a um
veteran.
versus non-veteran, good cop,
bad cop, uh, line of fire,
again, this is not, and, and
this is, this is our problem.
For the sake of maybe scoring
political point, we turn this
into an anti-law enforcement
argument. That's not what this
is. There there's really nothing
in this bill that's anti-law
enforcement. We, when we adopted
this bill originally, and again,
I was the sponsor, I said, they
adopt their policies and
procedures. I didn't say we're
going to adopt them. I didn't
try and put into this law what
policies and procedures they
needed to follow.
I wouldn't be so presumptuous.
Um, I did want to honor their
service and their expertise and
their professionalism, by
saying, you all adopt the
policies and procedures, and
it's only when you don't follow
your own policies and
procedures, there has to be a
consequence, or else the law is
meaningless, becomes a memorial.
So, I really do think that when
I adopted this and sponsored
originally, I gave great
respect.
To their ability to adopt their
own policies and procedures. The
problem is when they at the
time.
Uh, really, the, the reason this
law became uh important in the
first place which you had the
sheriff Gonzalez of Burnleyo
County at the time, saying he
wasn't going to do it.
It's under no circumstances was
he gonna do it.
And he gave any number of
reasons why he wasn't gonna do
it. We can't afford it, the
technology doesn't exist, all of
the, we can't do this in the
line of fire, we can't expect
you to do these things. It's too
much for us to do. That was the
sheriff's pushback at the time,
and he was adamant about it.
And so we had to come in here
and pass a law that says you
will do this, um, but we will
respect your ability to tell us
how to do it. And even then it
took
Quite a bit of time to get that
enacted, even after we passed
this law.
The, the, the period of time the
sheriff after that said, um,
even after he passed the law, I
can't, I can't comply. Um, but I
believe the sheriff there now,
Sheriff Allen, I think it's a
very different individual and it
and it's very uh very much
embracing of this kind of
technology, I think it's
probably meeting all of the, all
of our expectations, and those
of his own agency. You your
question was very specific,
which which language um I would
change, looking back on this, I
would probably um.
On, on page 3, I would probably
strike all of the existing
language on on um.
Lines
Probably 10, and all of 11, and
all the way of 12 all the way
through the word intentional.
So the bill would simply read
peace officers failure to comply
with the policies and procedures
required to be adopted.
Um, shell, and then I would, I'm
sorry, I would add some
additional language. I would, I
would read it this way, she
shall be presumed to have
engaged in intentional
spoliation of evidence. I would
add the words engaged in
intentional at the end of line
9.
And I would strike all of lines
1011, and 12 through
intentional, so it would read
that what essentially were law
enforcement failed to follow
their own policies and
procedures that that they shall
be presumed to engage in
intentional spoliation and just
leave it at that. That, that
should make law enforcement very
happy because we're taking out
all the references to bad faith,
um, which really has no meaning.
Uh, I understand all the concern
here. Well, you're, you're
looking at me quizzically,
Senator Brantly, but, but as a
practical matter, as a legal
matter, having the word bad
faith and there really has no
meaning.
Uh, as a matter of law, and, and
neither does the language that
that that's existing language,
we reemphasize that law
enforcement here today are very
concerned, everyone's concerned
about bad faith. That's the
existing language that we
adopted already. I would take
all that out. Uh, it doesn't
really mean anything as a
lawyer, I'll tell you, and, and
likewise, the language that says
they're liable for an
independent tort of negligence
oration. That's probably
meaningless also, because there
is no tort of spoliation of
evidence that could be
enforceable under the Tort
Claims Act. So we should take
that out too.
And frankly, law enforcement
should walk out of here with
high fives because we're taking
out all the language on bad
faith. It really has no
application. As, as a legal
matter, what should happen is
that when they fail to follow
their own policies and
procedures, they shall be
presumed to have done a
spoliation of evidence. And
again, it's a rebuttable
presumption that would be the, I
think, the best result of where
we're at here today.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. um, and, and I'm
Not every lawyer is you. Many
lawyers out there have gone
after law enforcement, and I
appreciate what you said, not
going after law enforcement.
And I'm not trying to make this
about, you know, um, I'm telling
you from my personal experience,
we all have different stories.
I'm coming from my personal
experience where I think I can
relate to.
Police officers and you would
even agree.
They have no idea what they're
going to face every day. And,
and that has stuck with me.
From my experience, so don't,
please don't take it the way,
the way you did.
Um
I, I don't know if someone else
wants to, uh,
Do that amendment
I would prefer
we use
yeah, I, I do, I do too.
Um, you know what? I'll, I'll
pause for a bit till the chair's
ready,
yeah, well, others working in
the center, I'll just tell you
that um um.
Contrary to what the you heard
this on the floor, and I don't
mean to put salt back in the
wound, but you're new, and, and
many of you all are new here, so
contrary to what the Republican
uh uh posted a party posted in
the Senate the other day. I, I'm
not about banning guns. I've
owned guns since I.
Can remember, uh, as a child, I
owned several guns. I'm a
concealed carry permit holder.
So the, the notion that I'm uh
about banning guns is just false
narrative. It's an easy way to
raise money and and get some
political points. But it's
bullshit. Uh,
very sorry about the death
threats. I, I had that too from
the Sierra Club right here in
New Mexico as a county
commissioner doing oil and gas
stuff.
So, uh, I, I feel.
I feel your pain, and um
It, it sucks when you're, um,
Public addresses out there and
they know where you live, so,
but you can understand I'm
married, I have children.
Uh, my wife has to worry whether
she has to draw the blinds and
keep the lights off and crawl
around on the floor, uh, I, I,
I'm prepared to take care of
myself, but it's not fair to our
families.
Thank you, and I have Senator
Gallegos on the list, but if
you'll, you'll allow me real
quickly, center guy goes,
Senator, what I hear from you is
that
You, there, there is an
amendment that you think is, is
appropriate that I think will
likely resolve a lot of the the
concerns of the committee. So
can I suggest and tell me if
this
Does what what you are intending
on page 3.
Striking all of line 10.
All of line 11.
In line 12 through the word of.
And inserting instead engaged
in.
That's great.
All right, so it would read
peace officers who failed to
comply with the policies and
procedures required to be
adopted pursuant to subsection A
of this section shall be
presumed to have engaged in
intentional spoliation of
evidence.
You're the way you read, you're
gonna insert the word of, I
think after intentional online
online 12, right? The way you,
you read the word of and so I
think you gotta answer that
there too, right? I, I see the
word before evidence.
another of?
intentional.
Well, you're right,
intentionally. You're rights to
have engaged in intentional
spoilation of evidence.
All right.
Um, and this would be a
rebuttable perception, correct?
we didn't mean it to be
rebuttable, we wouldn't use the
word presumption. Right, just
say it shall be spoliation of
evidence, right? If we just
said, if we said violation will
be spoliation of evidence that
would be um no rebuttable
opportunity, but, but in the
word rebuttable there is
essentially an invitation to say
judge.
listen to the circumstances.
Right, so for the nonlawyers on
the committee, rebuttable means
if you show evidence, so if it
just didn't work, that your unit
just didn't work, and you
provide that evidence, you can
defeat the presumption. So, uh,
Senator Townsend.
an old gas guy starts being a
lawyer, you got problems. So I
say that with the
But if you included in that
amendment.
That is, that the officer shall
be presumed.
With credible evidence.
So that the officer was
protected from having to defend
themselves. I know it's, it's a
rebuttable presumption. I
understand that.
But the, the first process would
be for the officer to have to
defend himself.
And what I'm trying to do is
give some credibility to 99% of
the officers that they're doing
it right.
But if there's evidence out
there that they absolutely went
out and, and, and with
forethought.
tried to circumvent the rules,
then we ought to go after them.
But if they're not, we should
have, have some presumption of
innocence.
And, and Senator, I hear what
you're saying. I think that in
this context, that, that kind of
undoes the point of a
presumption.
Um, or undermines the, the point
of a presumption here.
So I'll go ahead, is there, is
there other debate on on that
amendment. I'm hearing, I think
from the sponsor that that is a
would be a friendly amendment,
Senator B block. Thank you,
Chair. Senator, so I, so the one
thing I'm still stuck on is if
the officer
During the very, very stressful
crisis situation.
Gets to turn on his body cam
because the word spoilization
means destroying, correct?
Uh, destruction of evidence
could be spoliation could be
doesn't necessarily mean that.
OK.
So, Madam Chair, Senator, if the
officer, if he or she does not
turn on the body camera.
Is that considered?
foliation of evidence.
Under this definition, it would
be senator. Let me give you, let
me give you one of the things
that you'll be the beneficiary
of.
And I encourage you to do the
legislative council did a
terrific report this last year
on crime.
With an emphasis on crime in
Berlio County, but crime really
around the state. And the answer
for all of our efforts on crime
is in the data.
Most we we we see more and more
cases being dismissed all the
time. The dismissal rate of
cases is very high. The
principal reason for dismissal
of cases is uh law enforcement
failure to gather evidence. Uh,
that's the, that's the number
one reason cases are dismissed.
It's not because of any of the
other explanations were given
law enforcement has to step up
the game when it comes to
gathering evidence. And so to
answer your question is, yeah,
the failure to gather evidence
and be essentially a spoliation.
Are you asked, uh, the way you
asked your question destruction,
destruction implies.
an intent, right, you destroy
something presumably with the
intent to do so, but the failure
to gather evidence that's in
front of you wouldn't
necessarily be destruction. OK.
Thank you for that. I agree with
that.
Definition, Madam chair and
Senator, cause it says here, um.
Spoliation is the act of
destroying or altering evidence
that is relevant to a legal
case, I think you would probably
agree with that.
Um
So again,
The rub for me is.
We, we get it, we get an officer
in that situation, he or she
gets shot, Madam Chair and
senator.
And they, they, I mean, you, we
could end up.
There could be some serious
legal liability for that officer
who ends up getting shot, who
didn't even turn his body camera
on.
Because
That
Um, if I heard you correctly,
could still be considered.
Um
poliation of evidence.
That's the problem why I can't
support this because things
happen.
And then you're not one of those
lawyers that you admitted, Madam
chair and senator to go after
cops.
But there's plenty of lawyers
right out there that are more
than willing to go after cops.
And when an officer makes a, a
mistake.
In the heat of battle.
I don't think he or she should
be.
Hammered for it.
By any means, let, let, let the
department take care of it
internally, like you said, where
they have to follow their own
procedures and processes, so I
really appreciate you doing a
couple of things, Senator, uh,
Madam Chair and Senator. Number
one is including you and Edmon
here, and I agree with you, body
cameras are Senator, you got to
stay on the, OK, we're on the
amendment right now.
But it's not answering.
You're still putting the officer
in a very bad position.
Based on some, on a split, split
second decision.
But I appreciate you.
Working with it
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Is there additional debate on
the amendment.
See,
let's go ahead and do a roll
call on that amendment and then
just to, just so everyone's
clear, I'll just restate the
amendment again, page 3.
Striking all of line 10, all of
line 11, and on line 12,
striking through the first of.
And starting in lie thereof
engaged in. Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Gallegos.
Sorry, Senator Brantley.
Yes.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Yes on the amendment.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doha.
Yes, and with 8 in favor, when
excused when in opposition, that
amendment is adopted. We're back
on the bill as amended. Senator
Gallego, and I appreciate you
letting me jump in there.
Thank you, madam chair, having a
Another lawyer in the room
helps. I, I just wanna
Then turned center, go back up.
If I understood in your
testimony, you talked about a, a
chief of police in Albuquerque
and I'm gonna apologize in
Eunice where I live, we actually
get Texas news. I don't know if
that's how you are down in Las
Cruces area. Uh, can you
clarify, I don't even know who
the chief of police is in
Albuquerque, but was this one
instance or has he been um
multiple times. I, I don't know
the story. I read the the bill
last night and, and I did have
concerns, but, and I appreciate
you taking the amendment, but
I'm just still trying to find
out some of the facts because
I'm, I'm afraid and turned
senator, that we're doing
something uh for one instance.
In the state
Which will obviously cause
heartburn to let, uh, to
officers throughout the state
and I just wanted to understand
if it was just one time this
gentleman made a mistake or if
it was intentional, anything you
can give me to try to understand
that.
Uh, but I'm sure you raise an
interesting question, uh,
Senator, because I live in a
community borders uh Texas as
well too, so I know we have some
cross agency, the bill does not
address your first question, I
think, which is when you said
you have Texas, maybe law
enforcement, uh, is your
question, maybe I misunderstood
your question. Madam Chair and
Senator, I was just trying to
give you some example. I don't
get the Mexico news.
So I don't know what happens in
Albuquerque unless I read in the
newspaper or on the radio, so
our television uh footprint is
actually from Lubbock and
Midland Odessa, so I do not
remember hearing of this issue
with the chief of police. I just
want some clarification on that.
Right.
chair and, uh, senator, I'm only
aware of the one circumstance,
but yeah, it's pretty profile, a
pretty high profile, it was in
the news quite a bit, um, but.
Senator, um, I run a number of
businesses. I know a number of
us do too. The the the person at
the top uh sets the example, um,
and sets the tone and, um, so.
The the one instance where you
have the person who's in charge
of the agency is not complying
with the legal requirement and
evidently not held to account
for that or to explain it. There
may have been a good explanation
for it, uh, but, um, at least
relying on the press alone, and
I realize that's probably
inadequate information, and uh
and sometimes unreliable, but on
that information alone, the, the
body camera was purposefully or,
or at least negligently not
operating.
And Senator, I think Senator
Stewart can weigh in on that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
it was the previous sheriff.
That refused to use body
cameras, refuse to buy them and
then came up with some strange
just tape your cell phone on
your
On your uniform. Um, it was
pretty bizarre. That's done and
gone. We have a new sheriff.
They're all using it, and by the
way, in August of last year, UNM
also started using body cameras.
I still see the necessity for
the bill, but they at least have
stepped up. Thank you, madam
chair. And
yeah and and to be uh thorough,
um, at the time that this hit
the press, it was you and him
and one other, one of the
universities in the state, I
don't want to speculate which
one it was, but I do remember
there was one other than you and
them, so there were at least a
couple of them that were saying
we're, we didn't, we didn't say
university law enforcement. We
said state police, local
municipality county. We, we left
out the universities and a
couple of them were UNM and one
other one were.
Essentially capitalizing on that
ambiguity in the law and say we
don't have to do this.
Thank you, madam chair and
Senator, and I guess I got
confused. I was using chief of
police in Albuquerque, now
Sheriff, uh, in that, uh, gives
me a little bit angst. We have
the mayor of Las Cruces here, I
would have thought that the
Oversight would have been able
to explain to the sheriff that
uh
I guess county commission that
that even though he may not have
wanted this, it's gonna be.
reality in his life, but uh I
just wanted clarity chair
Senator, thank you and I Protem,
I appreciate that because I, I
view, I view this as one bad
actor.
Causing an issue for 5000 plus
officers in the state, and I
think that we ought to be able
to deal with that one
individual.
Instead of putting, even though
you've taken a great step
towards clearing the bill, but
you still have one shell in
there and I, I still have fear
that uh like my colleague to to
the right me says if it's a
mistake that happens in battle,
which did not happen with this
one. It's an intentional. I will
not use such a refusal.
But I have a fear that in a
point in time that someone has
to react.
In an emergency situation, I
would hate that we would
penalize them in a situation
they don't have control over, so
with that I yield. I thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. Appreciate the title.
Right. Thank you. Um, and just
real quickly before we go to
send her Harmio, who's next on
the list. I think what you're
also what you're really asking
about was a situation involving
Chief Medina.
Um, of APD that happened, uh,
pose it.
Earlier this year, or?
In August, um, when he, uh,
He was engaged in.
In a car accident and then
apparently said that he
purposely or intentionally did
not turn his camera on.
Uh, after that.
And so I think that
Senator Stewart was talking
about the very real issue that
was happening with the Berley,
former Burnley Berlio County
Sheriff, but I just
I wanted to make sure that your
your answer that question or
your question got answered.
Thank you, ma'am chair. I
appreciate it, but that was the
testimony I'd heard as a police
chief and, and, and I appreciate
now I understand there's two
issues, uh, a chief and a
sheriff. So it clarifies for me
cause I'd heard him testimony as
police chief, so thank you for
that. Thank you.
that harm you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, Senator. So
the city of Espanilla had some
concerns with the bill that it
would, it would hurt them with
retention of officers, but in
working with the amendment, I'm
assuming that they might take a
different approach on that. But
I just wanted to comment that
when you think about the digital
age on how quick people are to
go live on Facebook, or start
recording with their iPhone, we
could just assume that we could
move as quick with a police
officer activating a camera. And
so because of that, I, I see
this as a win for
officers throughout the state of
New Mexico who are recording
just as quickly as those on the
other side of the badge who are
recording with their phone. So
I'm seeing this also as a safety
measure for police officers for
recording versus it just being
one-sided when we see somebody
hit the record on their iPhone
and going live that this also
covers them when they're
recording incidents that are
happening. I just wanted to make
that comment, Madam Chair
I'm sure there's not a question,
but again, any of you all who
have the time, watch some of
these videotape.
types of law enforcement
engagement. They're incredibly
well trained, very professional
and something I think that we
should really respect a great
deal. I'm I'm, I've watched a
few that I've seen in, in every
case that I've seen, we could be
really proud of those.
Right, what is the will of the
committee, Senator Stewart. I'm
trying to move a do pass as
amended on the Senate Bill 505.
All right, let's go ahead and do
a roll call.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly, no.
Senator Gallegos.
No, ma'am, I'd like to explain.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator
Townsend.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Doha.
Yes, with 5 in favor, 4 oppose
1, excused, you have a due pass
and, uh, Senator Gallegos to
explain his vote. Thank you,
ma'am. Chair and Senator, I hope
that uh as you go forward you
still consider it's sort of like
center 10 meals talked about how
fast it is on your phone to do
something in the heat of the
battle.
It goes into a moment's notice.
And you're not gonna have the
time to make that, uh, can you
pause, can I start this? Uh, we
don't live that life.
But I feel for them because uh
they're gonna be put in a
situation they have to be
thinking, do I protect myself?
Do I turn my camera on, so, uh,
that is the reason I voted no. I
hope there's some changes
between here and the floor. I
thank you for the changes you've
accepted now. I appreciate that.
I'm guessing that law
enforcement sleep on this and
think about it a little bit, um,
we've eliminated this amendment
eliminates all the bad faith
language entirely. My guess is
that when they get to judiciary,
they after sleeping thinking
about it, all of that opposition
would probably fade away. I, I
certainly would expect it to.
All right, so here, let's move
on to Senate Bill 507.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair.
We've, we've been talking a lot
about crime. We've been trying
to address it, we've also tried
at times to address it by uh
looking at guns.
Um, I think we should be, we
need to be realistic about when
it when it comes down to trying
to address crime by guns.
Um
We're not gonna do it by, we,
we, on, on Friday, we looked at
blocks which is eliminating
block switches and making that a
crime. Um.
One of my one of my staff people
in in judiciary could probably
make a box which, uh, in 10
minutes with a 3D printer.
Um, with, with this bill intends
to do is revisit the issue of
concealed carry, which uh I was
one of the original sponsors of
to to authorize concealed carry
in the state of New Mexico. Most
of our gun crimes from my
observation, and again, I don't
have the data and I'd like to
get it.
Most of my observation of gun
crimes are typically more often
than not, the result of, uh,
some late night party where some
teenagers are at and they didn't
get in or somebody got in a
fight or somebody's playing
around with a gun, or some
family members get uh
intoxicated or get upset, a
family dispute, those seem to be
the vast majority of of gun
crimes, from my observation.
The goal here is to try and make
sure that responsible gun owners
are respected by really reducing
some of the requirements for a
concealed carry.
Um, and as, as I mentioned, I'm
a, I have been a concealed carry
permit holder. The, the
qualification requirements, the
courses and all that are really
too strict, and they're too
demanding. Uh, when I took the
course, it was a full weekend,
all day Saturday, all day
Sunday, the people that are
teaching the course were trying
so hard to come up with content
to fill 2 days, that the
operation of a gun, the
mechanisms if you're just a gun
owner, and don't really require
2 days. It's pretty hard to fill
those days, and they were
stretching every way they could.
They had hours of presentation
on what kind of purses women
could.
Carry and what kind of harnesses
so uh you could wear on your
body. It was really an effort to
try and, and fill that
requirement. So this is to
reduce the requirements for
concealed carry, because I think
we want more responsible gun
ownership. Um, the one, the one
thing that this does in addition
to that, is it takes the failure
to get a concealed carry to be
concealed carrying from a petty
misdemeanor to a full
misdemeanor. The goal here is
to, again, increase the
penalties on people casually
carrying guns who shouldn't be,
and who are responsible about
that. And I, I, I hope that
Ultimately, this is a bipartisan
effort because I, I'm in
agreement with people on both
sides of the aisle and are
oftentimes on the Republican
side to say the issue is not
guns. Uh, the issue is bad
people uh using guns
irresponsibly, and I agree with
that. Um and again, I'm not
gonna repeat the comments I made
in the last presentation, but
I'm, I'm a gun owner. I always
think I've been a responsible
gun owner. We're not the
problem.
Um, and so, Madam Chair, this is
to encourage more people to meet
the minimum, uh, requirements
and to lower those requirements
for responsible gun ownership.
I'll stand for questions.
All right. Uh, we did not have
anyone sign up and support or
opposition on this bill, so we
will go to members of the
committee. I see Senator
Thornton here.
Uh, unless we start moving a lot
faster, I suspect we might not
get to your bill today. I just
want to give you a heads up, but
we will roll over.
Go ahead and go back to
education. We'll call you in if
if you need to, to,
to come with a note here real
quick to
to also acknowledge the bill,
right, right now a concealed
carry permit, you have to be 21
years old, but you can own a gun
at 19. So once again, consistent
with this objective of making
people be responsible. If you
can own a handgun, you should be
able to get a concealed carry
permit at the same age. Um, and
that's the idea behind that,
that age change. I neglected to
mention that.
Members of the committee,
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
I think that for too long.
The responsible gun owners have
not taken a seat at the table.
And we have a responsibility to
engage in the conversation.
If we're gonna say don't take
our guns, don't take a gun.
Well, well, how do we prevent
them from getting in the hands
of irresponsible gun owners or,
or
Or the bad guys.
And these are one of those bills
where, where we need to sit
down, have a.
seat at the table because there
are, there's a lot of good in
this. I wanna, I wanna address
from the beginning one, I
appreciate the work you've gone
in, uh, here to address
concealed carry.
You're right. If a 19 year old
can buy the gun, why can they
not conceal the gun if they go
through the proper training
benefit for this. Um,
I, I want you to answer a couple
questions where there's some
concerns about expanding the
number of prohibited locations.
And when I saw in the bill,
All I saw was that those
locations would include
And let's be very clear, may not
carry a loaded concealed handgun
at a preschool or on the premise
of any school, post-secondary
institution or an established
license that is dispensing
alcohol, I think also in the
bill included or posted public
property locations.
Where, what is the expansion
include of those locations that
that's not already in current
law.
Um, so, Madam Chair, uh,
The goal here is to continue to
try and track where the Supreme
Court is going with these
things, and I mean, first of
all, um.
Reemphasize your point. I, I
couldn't agree with you more
strongly, and that's the point
I've been taking for years. I've
been, uh, maybe this is why that
there's some um misconception
that I'm about banning guns.
I've tried to be the leader on
any of our gun laws, whether
it's red flag, which I sponsored
a background checks, which I
sponsored on the last session I
sponsored and passed the 7 day
waiting period. Um, we were told
it would be challenged,
constitutionally, it was, it was
unsuccessfully challenging the
courts affirmed what we did
here. So I agree with you 100%
that as a responsible gun owner,
I want to be not just.
The table, use your words with
the seat table. I want to be the
lead. I, I think that gun owners
should be the leaders of any
efforts to try and reduce gun
violence, and I, and I really
believe that uh the gun owners
that I know that are responsible
are all about reducing gun
violence and and and put and
having guns in the hands of
people who shouldn't have them,
including this example, young
people, right? Um, and so I, I
wanted to re-emphasize your
point there too. In in terms of
locations, uh, the goal here is
not to expand where um.
Uh, guns are disallowed other
than again where we in the
Supreme Court have recognized
there's certain places where
guns are are shouldn't be. The
capital, here's one example of
that, and let's be honest about
it, we, we, we even that was
debated and discussed and and
there was disagreement about
whether we should have people
going through.
Uh, security and, and metal
detectors which we now do here.
The, the point that I'd like to
make is that, that you have the
absolutists when it comes to the
2nd Amendment who say the the
the the right to bear arms shall
not be infringed, and they focus
on that language, but we do
infringe it. You, you can't take
a gun into a courtroom.
Um, that's, that's inconsistent
with the strict language of the
Constitution, says the right to
bear arms should not be
infringed. Well, we don't let
people go in the courtroom with
a gun.
Uh, we don't let people go see
the president of the United
States with a gun.
We don't let people, uh, uh,
come into the Capitol with a
gun.
In in schools is another example
of a place where we've said as a
society, we're not going to have
guns. We have to recognize the
fact that the Constitution is
inconsistent with that, right?
If you're an absolutist and you
want to strictly hammer away at
the Second Amendment, we
shouldn't be able to prohibit
guns from this building, and you
shouldn't be able to prohibit
them from the courtroom, and,
and you shouldn't be able to
prohibit him from school, but I,
I, I think that we all apply
some common sense to the second
and one of those examples where
I think we should do we should
do so.
Thank you. So, madam, uh,
Chairman and and senator, it's
my understanding that it's
already illegal to carry a
loaded concealed handgun on
school premises, so on this list
that it includes preschools, any
post-secondary institution
established a licensed uh.
Dispensing area of alcoholic
beverages.
Well, where's the expansion is
my question. What, what is, what
locations are being expanded
that aren't.
Already prohibited.
In law today.
Um, yes, and Madam Chair, again,
let me, I hope you don't mind me
conferring a little bit. I don't
mean to call my staffer an
expert, but he is, um, the, uh,
the existing uh
Locations that you're referring
to, to my understanding from me
are all in the existing
regulations. So we're, so we're
not, uh, we're not doing
anything in consistent with
regulation. Thank you. I
appreciate
that. It was my I'm sorry I'm
not a big fan of
of legislating to regulations,
you all probably know that about
me too. We ought to, we have to
do this ourselves and then let
the regulations follow our
policy making rather the other
way around. OK, thank you. So to
clarify, this is not an
expansion of locations. Um.
I, I also want to address the
concern that's been uh vocalized
is the enhanced penalty because
this bill enhances the penalty
or here's the word, for unlawful
carrying of a deadly weapon,
taking it from a petty
misdemeanor to a misdemeanor.
Here we are trying to be tough
on crime and for anyone who
would oppose stricter penalties
on someone who is illegally
carrying is absurd to me. And
so, uh, I, I have no problems
with that either. We are
increasing penalties for the
unlawful.
Carrying of a deadly weapon, as
I agree and I think we should.
What one concern I do, I also
like the in this Bell how you uh
reduce the number of hours
because as you and I know,
taking that class, it's a lot
like Hunter's safety. You spend
about 567 hours maybe doing some
meaningful work and the rest is,
you, you know.
Probably not as important or
taking it seriously, you can
certainly and I like the
extension of uh the renewals.
There's one area in here I'd
like you to address, and that is
the reciprocity.
We are ending a provision that
would allow state to state
reciprocity. What, what is your
intent in doing that? What is
your thought on that?
New Mexico should be the master
of its own domain. Uh, we, we
shouldn't uh take what other
states think is an appropriate
level of safety or training and
say whatever qualifies in other
states, it works here. In fact,
I think some states allow
concealed carry without any uh
training at all.
Um, and, and we should, we
should have some minimal
standards, Senator, but I agree
you've taken the course and so
have I. It's an absurd course,
right? And, and the people that
teach it know it's absurd, they
really desperately try to fill
the hour requirement with
content and there's just there
isn't any, um,
say basic operation of a gun is,
is really doesn't require two
days of education. Um.
I, I, I appreciate your earlier
comment too. I want to
reemphasize it.
Our efforts to deal with gun
violence in New Mexico are not
going to be, in my opinion,
controlled by trying to restrict
or limit the number of guns on
the streets, there are just far
too many. We can get excited
about buyback programs and so
forth, but there are, they're a
tiny drop in the bucket, right,
to the number of guns out there.
What we need to do is we need,
we, we should attack the
cavalier attitude by which some
people take guns to a Friday
night party, uh, or, or
teenagers playing with guns and
showing them off at school.
And, and right now you're right,
uh, the, the consequence for
that is a petty misdemeanor. Um,
we should take it to a
misdemeanor and we may even want
at some point in time, take that
up to a level, uh, even higher
than that. But right now, I
don't know what is.
Yeah, so, um, I, I don't know,
I'm not sure and I can't recall
whether anybody's ever been
charged with the petty
misdemeanor, but, oh, Senator,
some folks, when I, when I was
going to take a concealed carry
course, uh, some, some folks
respond and say, why bother to
take the time, why make the
effort, just just carry anyway
without the permit, and if you
get caught, there's not gonna be
a consequence, right? Uh, it's
petty misdemeanor, and I've I've
had more than a few people tell
me.
Why, why bother?
Madam Chairman, Senator, in my
short time as a legislator, I've
seen a lot of gun bills.
Very few of them though, are.
Reasonable
And um
And and beneficial, helpful.
And, and I would say this is, I
mean, we saw an insane executive
order issued in Bernnao County
and immediately the court struck
that down. We've seen um some
really overreaching bills that
will continue to hear that the
gas operated semi-automatic one.
These are absurd because they
are so wide-reaching that they
influence a lot of law-abiding
citizens. This is common sense
gun legislation that will make a
difference and um I'm gonna
support the bill, and I
appreciate you bringing
something that actually uh.
That that actually everyone
should and could get get behind,
um, these are the kind of bills
that we need to push back on
what we need to do when we're
addressing gun policy. this is
it. So thank you for bringing it
forward.
Thank you. Of Senators, followed
by Senator Townsend. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Uh, this section about
not having to refresh your
license it's gonna make a lot of
people happy.
Thank you very much.
Townsend. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um
What's the difference in the
penalties between the petty
misdemeanor and the misdemeanor.
Uh, may I ask Mr. Cummins.
Thank you. I, I don't practice
criminal law, Senator, so I
appreciate you letting me check.
So petty misdemeanors maximum
penalty is 90 days. Uh, a full
misdemeanor as a penalties
maximum up to one year.
Uh, also on, um,
Page page 2, line 21. There's
new language about a lawful
permanent resident.
Uh, and a citizen. Can you
expound on that, please, sir?
What's the difference and who
are you trying to capture.
Senator I'm not trying to
capture what I, what I'm trying
to do is get people to be
responsible in their gun
ownership. And so if you're
lawfully in this country, I
believe you should be able to
get a concealed carry permit and
take the course. I, I really
believe that anybody um who
wants to carry a gun should have
the training, should know the
law. Uh, the one thing that was
beneficial in the weekend course
was to have the instructors tell
us what these penalties and
consequences are. Um, and I want
19 year olds and I want young
people to know there's a
consequence, the, the issue that
I see with gun violence,
particularly in youth is the
fact the Cavalier attitude by
which they carry and and
exchange and play with guns, uh,
in, in my day growing up, again,
I've owned guns as long as I
can, um, being irresponsible
with a gun, playing with a gun,
taking a gun out on a Friday
night, inconceivable to me, uh,
as, as a young person, it's just
not what we would do. Now it
seems to be a matter of course,
so by trying to get the message
out there to young people that
there's a consequence, potential
consequence to taking the gun to
a Friday night dance.
uh, or out to the movies or
playing with your friends and
having a few beers out by the
river, what we used to do, but
we didn't take guns. Uh, the
messages out there that that
that uh we should try and get
ourselves back to the fact that
you don't take guns to every
opportunity, and it, it has
become a status symbol, which I
think probably with you I had
from constituent was in the case
of a
Um
An immigrant had come into the
US even illegally, that was.
Apprehended and was under
Um, an immigration court
proceeding Act.
They are, are they under this
determination? Are they here
legally and would they be able
to apply for a concealed carry
permit.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, one
of the important things about
that language that you're
focused on is the fact that
lawful permanent residents can
currently are permitted
permitted to buy and own guns.
Um, and so if they're allowed to
buy an own guns by our country
lawfully, we should again
encourage them to be concealed
carry permit if they're gonna do
so.
So there's been a lot of,
there's been a lot of
News and
And political hay made over.
The immigration issues of, of
recently and so the question
The question is,
Even though
Well, under current law.
Today.
If that person as I described.
Are you saying they could, they
could come in and legally
purchase a weapon.
If they are a lawful permanent
resident. My understanding is
yes.
So, what is the difference on
permanent resident, how, how do
you determine permanent
residence?
Uh, Senator, you're going beyond
the scope of of my understanding
of this bill or the law, uh, all
I can tell you is that right now
are you lawful permanent
resident can buy a gun and own a
gun. And so consistent with my
objective here, if they can buy
and own a gun's the same issue
with the 1921 year old. If you
can buy and own a gun lawfully.
We want to encourage you to to
go through the training and
demonstrate proficiency and know
the law.
I'm, I don't think I'm beyond
the
Preview of this bill, but
because the new language is a
lawful permanent resident.
And, and I didn't mean any
disrespect to you, um, I don't
know the answer to what it takes
to get lawful permanent
residency. I'm not an
immigration lawyer, and I, I,
what I'm trying to say is that's
beyond the scope of what I know,
what I, what I can tell you is a
lawful permanent resident can
buy a gun, a lawful permanent
resident can own a gun. And so
from the goal of this bill,
anybody who can lawfully buy a
gun and own a gun, I would like
for them to get the training and
demonstrate the proficiency and
know the law. I get it. And um
Madam Chair and Senator.
Y19, I mean, you can be inducted
into the law, into the armed
forces today at 18.
We're gonna, we're gonna.
Requiring him to go in the
service, but we're not gonna let
them be armed. That seems great.
But
not
Yes, sir, we've we've wrestled
with this a little bit because
we we had inconsistent ages
requirements for handguns versus
a long rifle or something, but
my understanding is that at 19
you can purchase and own a
handgun. And so again, the goal
here is if you can own a
handgun, you can buy a handgun.
You ought to be able to get a
concealed carry. Once again, the
goal here is to try and have
responsible gun owners, uh,
distinct and treated differently
than than.
Knuckleheads who were 19 years
old and can buy and own a gun,
and don't understand the
consequence of doing so.
I, I agree. um, Senator, I'm
sure, um.
The point of Senator Brantly
made about being at the table. I
I agree wholeheartedly.
I think we got to just
understand what we're doing and
why we're doing it, so I, uh, I
appreciate it, ma'am too.
Feel that
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, madam chair.
I think this spill has a lot of
good changes. I like what you
did with the training.
Um, I like numerous parts.
But I don't like the 19 years of
age.
I personally do not think just
because you can buy a gun.
At 19.
Should also mean you can conceal
carry it.
I don't, I don't believe the
ability to own a gun should
automatically mean that you can
do a concealed carrot.
19 years is the age of numerous
of these school shooters.
Where they've indiscriminately
killed students and teachers.
I mean, we're seeing huge mass
destruction.
Every year in our schools, um,
they're starting to not put them
in the paper very much because
they're so frequent.
So, um, I just, I can't support
that part of the pill.
Thank you I read recently that a
student that was found at school
with a gun, um, and as best I
could tell, the only consequence
was they sent him home. Uh, they
called the parents told them to
come home and take the gun and
child home. That's, that's not
getting the message out there.
Um, and, and you're right, um,
The 19 year old can buy and own
a gun, and and I understand
your, your point, but I, I
really do believe that that that
we benefit from that 19 year old
they're carrying the gun anyway,
right? They're bringing them to
school. Uh, they're just doing
it undercover. They're putting
it in their backpack or whatever
else and and and these shootings
are those individuals. They're,
they're doing it anyway, um, and
they're concealing the weapons.
I think that if they can get a
permit and they go to the
training and somebody impresses
on them, this is what the
consequences are. This is the
limits. This is the uh this is
what's gonna happen to you if
you.
Do this unlawfully or in
prohibited places. I think
that's gonna be a good thing
with those, those 19 year olds.
I think they're gonna start
realizing the seriousness of of
playing with guns, and they do.
They're, they're taking them out
to the Friday night parties.
And man, I just think we're
gonna have to disagree on this.
Um, I don't think that the logic
of well they're doing it anyway,
is the reason to make it lawful.
So, uh,
Means so a 19 year old can buy a
gun.
No training, nothing.
Right?
Uh, so I don't, I don't think
allowing them to conceal carry
with, you know, training, etc.
uh, will necessarily make them a
better gun owner.
I, I think this.
These young people doing the
shoot em ups are really
I've needed behavioral health
treatment for many years.
And I, I, I just don't believe
that allowing concealed carry
will help that, but.
You know, we can disagree on
that and, and I see your point
of view and.
And there may be some
credibility to it, but um.
I would like us to be uh uh
beyond the.
You know, serve with caution
about this. Consider this with
caution, and to me this just,
there's a reason we put 21 in
there to begin with.
So, I just, I just can't support
it with that.
Lagos.
And I'm sure, thank you, and
Senator, I want to go back to a
discussion you had with Senator
Brandtley and talking about the
reciprocity.
Uh, currently I travel into
Texas and into Colorado often.
And if we take away our part of
the reso, but I still be
eligible to go into these other
states or do they eliminate us
once we stop participating.
Madam Chaser, I don't know the
answer to that. I don't, I think
you would probably have to do a
survey of every state you're
gonna go to, so my, my suspicion
is every one of those states has
their own laws, where you bring
in a gun into that state and
Uh, if you're going into another
state with gun laws, you're
subjecting yourself to that
jurisdiction, but I, I think
it'd probably be beyond me to
try and tell you what every one
of those different states law
would be, and I, I, I think this
is getting to an important part
because my understanding is that
the, the new administration and
some in Congress are suggesting
that they would pass some kind
of a national law that would
that it would apply for
reciprocity across the various
states, but that I, I couldn't
begin to tell you what, what you
would have to do when you're
going to some other state, and I
would guess that you're going to
New York or California.
Uh, the law's gonna be very
different than when you go to
Texas, like I, I go to Texas
routinely, um.
When I have a, a gun in my
vehicle, um, um, I don't.
Change my, uh, I don't take the
gun out of my vehicle when I'm
going over to El Paso. I, I
shouldn't say that. Um, so
encourage people to break into
my car, but, um, so Brantley,
you know, had hers taken from
her vehicle too. The the
distinctions pretty clearly when
I go into Juarez, it's a whole
different thing I very careful
about going into.
Thank you for that chair and
Senator, uh, what I understand
is that we have joint
Thank you for that chair and
Senator, uh, what I understand
is that we have jointposity.
Sorry about that.
Uh, and, and I think that if we
remove ours, that's gonna give
them a rationale, why not.
Participate with us and there's
some really good stuff in this
bill, uh, that I appreciate you
looking at.
But uh I'm just a little bit
concerned on that because I,
there again, I don't know what
it would do.
As I crossed a line for any
reason, but uh I just want to
clarify that I was hoping you
had a better answer, but still
have freedom's crossed when I
needed to and.
Um, but then on you. Thank you,
madam chair.
Thank you.
And Senor Stephonics for a
And Senor Stephonics 1st 2nd
night we was I just going to you
for emotion?
Oh, OK, so our sponsors, thank
you,
Senator did, Madam Chair, thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator, did I
hear you say that it was in
rules that identified this, the
Places that are concealed
wrapping could not go.
Madam Chair, that's my
understanding from my experts.
Of course, you had to step out,
but that's my understanding is
that those those uh locations
are in regulations. So, Madam
Chair, senator, I wanted to
confirm that schools or school
grounds was part of that.
That's correct.
OK, so, Madam Senator, if this
does get to the um floor. I hope
one of our analyses does include
the places where concealed
weapons cannot go. Thank you
very much.
Thank you.
I don't have anyone else on the
list, um, oh, Senator Burtons.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
trying to formulate it as I'm
thinking, um, I was just looking
up when anything was changed in
The statute for the applications
previously.
And in section 2, where we're
lowering the age in this bill.
That was also lowered in 2005
from 25 to 21, and I'm, I don't
think you have the data, but I'm
curious what that time frame
look like? Like what happened
with the concealed carry permit
holders when we lowered the age
to 21.
people
who were between the ages of 25
and 21, commit more crimes with
their concealed carry permit or?
I don't know if that's data that
you have or could answer right
now, but that might be
interesting for a floor debate.
It is a very interesting
question, and again, I've I've
said this earlier and I'll say
it repeatedly, those of us that
are on, on the committee in the
interim and elsewhere, the
solution to our crime problems
in the data. It really is. And
it's right there in front of us.
So your point's a good one. What
was the consequence when we
lowered the age, uh, did we see
uh how many uh 21 year olds that
hadn't buy, uh, and we're
waiting 25 apply. It's a good
question. And did we see any
corresponding change. I, I'm not
aware of circumstance, but
again, I'm relying mostly.
on the press or the data we do
have, I don't know that we've
ever done an analysis of gun
crimes that are committed by
somebody where they concealed
carry permit.
Uh, my, my anecdotal belief is
that the people who are
concealed carry permit holders
are probably responsible for
very few, if any, gun crimes,
because again, they're
responsible gun owners, and I
appreciate Senator Gallego's
comment. He says there's things
in here that he likes, and, and
maybe there's some things here
we don't like. I think that's
where we're always going to be
when it comes to gun laws is so,
and that's that's what I'm
trying to do. I'm I'm, I'm, I'm
a gun owner. I want to lead. I
want to just be at the table. I
want to lead the effort, and
there's going to be some things
in here that gun owners are
gonna like.
Some gun owners are not gonna
like gun some some gun owners
are gonna think that whenever
you increase the penalty, and
any penalty associated with guns
from even a petty misdemeanor to
a misdemeanor, I think that's,
you're gonna come out against
it, but interestingly, they're
not here today, um, and, and
that's a first for me. I carried
a lot of gun laws, and I almost
always have all the gun people
here and screaming at me and
threatening me and those kind of
things too. They're, they're not
here today because I think they
see that we're striking a nice
balance.
Thank you for that. And I also
tend to agree that I would
assume people who are trained on
how to use firearms are less
likely to commit crimes with
them. And so I understand what
you're getting at, but it would
be really interesting if we
could find that data.
Thank you
earlier too, which is, I, I
don't know the answer, but I,
I'd like to believe that, yeah,
if you're taking the courses and
you're trained, you're gonna
commit fewer crimes.
Thank you.
So, uh.
Senator, I, I initially had
Senator Stewart's.
same heartburn about changing it
to 19. Um, but I, I hear what
you're saying. Uh,
I'm also told that
Uh, if
A 19 year old has, uh, their
concealed carry permit, that
means that their driver's
license and car registration
will identify them as having
that concealed carry. Is that
correct?
Um
I was contacted by
I was, I was contacted by a
concealed carry instructor.
Who was very concerned about the
changes to the hours of
training. I hear what you're
saying that they're struggling
to fill those hours. This person
is telling me.
They're struggling to get
everything in in 15 hours, um,
especially because it includes
range time.
Um, so it's not just
Just, uh, a class that's being
taught, but it's time at the
range. Uh, but, um,
I'm struggling to to know.
Oh, what information is is
accurate?
with all respect, I don't know
who the person is, and I
wouldn't want to be accusatory,
but I, I saw Senator Brantley
smiling. She's had the course,
I've had the course. I don't
know who else I'm looking at
Senator Townsend and Senator
Gallegos and I've seen others
who don't mind. I don't know
whether anybody who's nodding
their head I don't know we've
had the course, it's a total
stretch, uh, and, and they
charged for the course, right?
So I can understand why some who
are putting on the program might
want an expanded number of
hours, uh, because they can
probably justify.
a higher fee for keeping us
there for two days than they can
otherwise, but in my case, we
had a full Saturday of of
coursework and then part of a
Sunday and the the the work on
the range to the show
proficiency is 15 minutes. I
mean, you know, exchange a
couple of magazines and hit a
target at a very close range,
it's not pretty tough on the
proficiency, but the proficiency
part shouldn't take more than an
hour, and the rest of it was a
lot of fluff.
And, and standing around and
having a lot of debate and
discussion about whether guns
are bad or what the source of
crime was, and I, and of course,
I'm, I'm in the course as a
legislator, so you can imagine a
lot of the subject matter in
conversation was addressed to
me, uh, and, and with people
that generally were pretty
probably pretty antagonistic to
any gun control or or
legislation at all.
So in looking at other states
with their concealed carry
training.
Where does this 6 hours fall in
that spectrum.
I'm sorry. And looking at other
states and and the the amount of
training that they require,
where do 6 hours fall on that
spectrum? Is it high, is it low,
is it in the middle? I'm afraid
I don't know the answer to that.
OK, and, and again, I, I think
that the I didn't understand
your question, but I, I don't
think that it should matter to
us, uh, what other states do,
um, of others, I think what,
what is the reasonable amount of
time that it takes to train
somebody and know the law.
So again, some states are going
to have minimal, some may have
over, um, I don't think people
are gonna go from New Mexico to
some other state and move there
or go get permitted there, just
because they have a lesser.
One of the most important things
that was useful for me in the
course was a discussion of what,
uh, what is the law in New
Mexico? What are the
consequences? What is the castle
doctrine? We all hear about the
castle doctrine. When can you
use a gun in your home? When can
you carry right now realize you
can carry a concealed carry in
your vehicle without having a
concealed carry permit. And and
a 19 year old can do that,
right? Um, and so, um, an
understanding of the laws and
the consequences of
irresponsible gun ownership was
the most useful part of.
So send on page 9, I think your
drafter missed a strike and a
title. The title of section 5
page 9.
And I'm looking at lines 12 and
13. It still refers to
reciprocal agreements with other
states, but you have taken all
the reciprocity stuff out of
that section.
So
Is that just an oversight or is
that in there for a reason?
Oh my insurance, that's good
catch, that's existing language,
right? But, but if we're taking
that out of the.
Right, then I will propose an
amendment, page 9.
Line 12.
A striking reciprocal.
Through line 13, striking
through states.
Probably leave some dashes in
that I'm sure, uh.
Elsie Aswell
have concerns with
They could probably sort that
out.
Is there any debate on that
amendment?
Could you repeat that? I, I was
thinking it might need more
language structure, would you
repeat that? Sure. Those page 9,
in fact, we'll do through.
Threw the 2nd set of death from
the 2nd set of dashes line 12.
Through the word states on line
13.
Any debate on that amendment.
Is that a friendly amount? OK.
All right, is there any
objection to adopting that
amendment?
See none, that amendment is
adopted.
Um
Senator, explain to me, so, so
I'm looking on page 13, and this
is about the renewal stuff.
And, and I hear loud and clear.
People really want to make these
renewals less onerous. Um, I get
that.
So I'm looking at the started
online 15. If license has
expired, a licensee shall not
carry a concealed handgun until
the licensee receives a renewed
license. So even if you haven't
expired license, if you get a
new one, it's a renewal.
And so then I'm looking at the
next language on 18 to 20.
Shall not be required to
complete a refresher firearms
training training course to
renew the application.
So let's say I have let my
license lapse for 30 years.
Uh, and I have not had any
training in over 30 years. And
but now it's renewal.
And I still don't need any
refresher training.
After all that time.
Ma, I'm sure I think the answer
to your question, but I
understand it is on page 13 line
13 through 15, which is the the
provisions for renewal are
limited. In other words, you can
submit for a renewal under
limited circumstances, but once
you've once you've exceeded the
renewal period of time, then
you'd have to requalify for an
entirely new permit.
On senator, that's initially
what I thought, but that line
that starts on 15, that sentence
makes it sound like, even if
it's expired.
You could still get a renewed
license, so I think maybe taking
out the word renewed.
On 17 and making clear that that
would have to be a new license,
not a renewal, would, would
address my concern.
If you're getting a new license,
then you, you would do the 6
hours of training.
Um
So I would, I would propose on
page 13, line 17, striking the
word renewed and adding and
replacing it with the word new.
I have only
senators.
We've had a circumstance in the
past where the department is the
cause of the delay. So for an
individual who submits for a
renewal application, if the
agency does not act timely and
expeditiously on the response
within the time limitation,
you're gonna have an expired
license, and, and we shouldn't
fault individuals where the
agency is not staying up with
the, with the applications. I
don't know where they're at
these days on that, but I know
that it's been a problem in the
past was keeping up on their
end. So we have to be careful. I
understand you're concerned very
much, but I, I, the goal here is
to have people lawfully taking
the time and making the effort.
For us to know who the, who the
good owners are. And I certainly
wouldn't want to make someone go
through getting a whole new
license just because of
Something that that's going on
with the agency. Uh, what I'll
ask of you, Senator, since this
is going to judiciary next and.
We're both in there, uh, is that
between now and then.
We can, can come up with some
sort of solution to to that
concern.
The goal here is if you, if you,
we want people to renew their
license, um, and if they do
that, we want them to be able to
keep it, but you're absolutely
right too, if you, if your
license expired for years, you
should have to go back to the
full course and and show. Great,
what is the will of the
committee.
And I'm sorry, center short, did
you want to say something when
we're talking about that
amendment, I say yeah,
uh, man, I, I don't think your
men works because 2 and 3 are
really after that since our that
renewals. So this, this would
have to be rewritten, which is
basically what you just said.
Thank you.
All right, members of the
committee, what's the will of
the committee?
There's Phonics, Madam, I'll
move uh do pass as amended on
Senate Bill 507.
Is there any objection to that
motion?
Show, uh, some, uh, Stewart
voting no and all other members
voting in the affirmative.
Oh, said her block, voting no as
well.
Right.
And such,
you have a do passes
right?
Totally different reasons.
I just like the bipartisanship
even when it's opposed to.
Thank you. Thank you.
Senator Tobiasson.
Come on up.
Yeah, she was looking for a
voice.
I said no.
So.
is
Now, and Senator, we're on the
floor at 11, so if.
If there's, there's debate on
your bill and we're not able to
get through it, we will, we'll
roll it over and continue it on
Wednesday.
Lovely Madam Chair, let's just
not debate and pass it very
quickly then. I'll get to the
point. Um, Senate Bill 496 is a
bold step forward towards
government accountability
requiring the legislative
Finance Committee committee to
identify underperforming state
agencies and ensure taxpayer
dollars are used efficiently by
mandating performance
evaluations, this bill aims to
improve public services,
eliminate waste, and restore
trust in New Mexico's
government.
All right, and we don't have
anyone signed up in support or
opposition members of the
committee.
Senator Brantley. Can you
quickly explain what this would
do that LFC doesn't already
report.
It, it gives a little bit more
teeth and requiring, um.
That if uh if the metrics is not
met, if that agency is deemed,
let's say, to have failed to
meet those performance standards
that then, um, the committee
itself looks and LFC looks at a
budget reduction.
out of here. I don't wanna go
too hard, but isn't that what we
already do with red, yellow,
green, and then the committee
votes on what they're going to
put in the budget. I have an
expert helping me cause I knew
some people were going to get
tough on this one. Madam Chair,
Adrian Avila, chief of cybers of
finance, I'm neither in support
or opposition of this, I'm just
here as a for technical
purposes. So LFC does do
performance-based legislating
and they do rank every agency
green.
Um, yellow or red for each
performance measure. Uh,
however, as of right now, that,
that's the extent of it, that
there's no further steps that
are taken. So the language
that's in here is meant to, uh,
kind of instruct LFC to if the
performance isn't meeting the
standard.
Look at potential cuts instead
of just continuing with leaving
it as is. At the end of the day,
the legislative uh members of
the committee will either accept
that recommendation from staff,
or say, no, continue, please.
Um.
Don't look at it that way. They
need more money, or let's tweak
it in some other way, so there's
flexibility around it. OK, Madam
Chair, Senator, and, and
specifically Adrian, but what,
what is LFC doing that they
don't already do, they go red,
yellow, green, then they offer
LFC recommendations, we
certainly don't want them to
have the, the appropriating
power.
They, they make recommendations
and then the committee decides
how we're going to act.
How is that any different than
what this bill is proposing.
Um, Madam Chair, um, Senator
Brantley, so what this is
proposing is basically with the
that specific measure, that
specific part of the agency.
Proposing a reduction in
funding, um, that's the
difference instead of it just
being status quo.
Thank you, ma'am.
The phonics followed by southern
town.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. The
reason I cannot support this
bill, Senator, respectfully.
Is that um oftentimes a
department will come in.
With identified performance
measures that are not accepted
by the LFC.
And the LFC or the DFA rewrites
them.
And it's uh not necessarily
meaningful to the work of the
department.
So for that purpose, I think
there's um agency meddling by
LFC and DFA with uh the agencies
that are providing services in
the state. So I, I'm sorry that
I can't support it, but thank
you, man.
understand Senator Townsend.
Yes, thanks. um.
Madam Chair, as I read this, I
And having set on LFC, I think
it adds a dynamic that we're
missing now.
The dynamic is
That it would instill the
authority.
to make the change.
And
Today what happens, or maybe I
shouldn't say today I haven't
been on LFC in a few years, but
At one point in time, the
decision came down to pick on an
executive or an LFC budget.
And the option of really going
in a budget and making
Um
Demonstrative changes was
limited, isn't that still true,
Adrian?
Uh, Madam Chair sent her to buy,
uh, Townsend, um.
Yes, so house appropriations
does still look at the executive
rec and the LFC wreck. And then
during the interim process, the
members of the LFC, uh, working
with their staff, the staff
bring recommendations to them
and they consider that specific
recommendation.
Uh, so yes, you are correct in
your recollection of that
process and,
Madam Chair, and uh
and I, I think this is a good
measure. I think it, it
strengthens the ability of
The committee to enforce or to
Suggest changes, doesn't require
that it's done, but it, it
allows the opportunity. So I,
uh,
I don't remember who said it
early on, um,
Maybe it was Senator.
Want this in another committee
about we weakening, uh, a weak
legislature and why I suppose we
delegate it to other people. I
don't think this really
delegated other people. I think
it keeps it within the
legislative body and strengthens
the ability to make needed
adjustments because in my years
in the leg in the LSC.
House appropriations.
With the exception of 15 when we
slept.
You know, every school fund we
could get our hands on.
I haven't seen really great.
Um
Manageial
Experience displayed in
budgeting. It's
They look at income, they say,
OK, we can get 3%, let's get 3%
and say, well, why are you
getting 3% because you reverted
money last year.
But we still got money, we can,
we'll we'll balance the budget
by getting 3 percenters. It just
doesn't make any sense. So I, I
think bringing managerial
expertise and and ability to the
process would
would help all of us. So I'm
happy to support because of it.
Is it perfect? No. Is it better?
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, so.
Sir Tobiasson, do you know how
the performance standards are
created.
Madam Chair, um, Senator
Stewart, I have an idea, but no,
I, I am not an expert in that
category, no.
So Madam Chair, I, I would like
to have an agency that would
look at the performance
standards that LFC has put
together.
No, we have two interim
committees that basically are in
charge of the entire budget,
LESC and LFC.
LFC has different performance
standards for education than
LESC does.
Performance standards in general
are guidelines, and frankly,
what you're proposing is exactly
what LFC and the finance
committee's inappropriation does
right now.
When they don't like what a
department is doing when they
don't think they've met the
performance standards, yeah,
yellow, green, red, but they
have the ability to adjust those
budgets, and they do it on a
daily basis during the sessions,
so.
I understand.
Why you want to do this, but I,
I just can't support something
that elevates those performance
standards over everything else.
There's a lot of issues that
come forward with every agency
and, and we all fight about it.
We fight about it all session
and all interim.
Um, so, uh, I, I, I cannot, uh,
vote for something that lets
performance standards trump
everything else, especially
knowing how they're created and
who created them, whose ox got
gourd and whose ox didn't get
gored, so, uh, they're not,
they're not really scientific.
So, uh,
But thank you for the bill.
Thank you, my chair,
Senator Bergmans. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Senator. Just a quick question,
which either one of you could
answer maybe.
Uh, when
identifying the failed
performance standards, does it
really make overall sense that a
reduction in a budget would
solve that?
What if we're in the situation
where they failed the
performance standards because
their budget was reduced too
much.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, very
good question. Um, I think the
spirit of this is that it gives
more teeth, right, more
accountability and taking action
with, with, uh, Senate Finance,
so that if the, the lack of
performance is based on true
just lack of performance. I
mean, we see every single day in
this committee, agencies that
are coming forward that have all
these exceptions, they're
bringing forward bars, they,
they have vacancies and they're
asking.
For more and more money, but
they've had so much money to
play with that they haven't even
utilized maybe effectively or at
all. So it's to look at that and
say, in those cases, should we
be um better stewards of the
taxpayer dollar and say that,
hey, in some of these cases, we
need to be held accountable to
take appropriate action to make
sure that we're not just
wantonly increasing budgets. Of
course, if there's an agency
that has an unforeseen.
seen challenge, and that's why
they didn't meet those
standards, then I think we take
those on a case by case basis,
but there's really as Adri
Adrian pointed out, there's no
next step. I mean, the colors
are great on the chart, great
green, yellow, red, but then
what? And I think that we should
be held as a body to a higher
standard for, you know, being
the best stewards of the
people's dollar.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and just
to follow up on what I think
I've also heard the committee
say
I don't understand why
legislators could not already
make that decision, but
I think you've already answered
that also, so thank you I think
they can make that decision,
but, but do we are we held in
the best interest of the dollar.
I had Senator Stewart for a 2nd
time on my list, but Senator
Gallegos, were you?
Was that a hand I saw or no?
OK.
Uh,
let's see if we can get, get
this bill done in the next 5
minutes.
And tobias and I've gotten
question for Adrian. So this
year I was put on the LFC and,
and it, uh,
It was quite enlightening. I'm
just trying to understand and
and I did go through the color
spectrum, trying to figure out
what the budget was doing, uh,
and I was gonna ask Adrian on
this.
This bill here, uh, as far as
the budget development and the
um uh outcome monitoring.
Would this give you a better
indicator of, of the departments
just going backwards, ma'am turn
senator and Adrian, uh, when the
departments would come forward
with their requests.
There's always dialogue on what
they've done with the money and
where they were currently.
Uh, many not spending the money
we'd give them the last cycle,
but they're asking for more
money now. But this bill help in
that chair and senator and
Adrian.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gallego, so.
If I'm understanding your, your
question correctly, right, uh,
volume one is produced and it
basically presents.
How everyone scored.
Um, what this bill would do is
basically if.
Those categories are
specifically in red, which part
of the department?
is accountable for that piece.
And then it basically says that
there would be a recommendation
for reduction in that department
if there's persistent failure.
Uh, I'm using the word
persistent, it's not written in
here, but that that's the idea
at the end of the day, the
legislative body is the
appropriating body and the
legislators on LFC would make
the ultimate decision.
Madam Chair and Senator and
agent then it's an
accountability piece like you
would take a deeper dive into
the red to find out where the
issues are.
And then possibly correct him
and or adjust that department,
is that what I understand?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Gallego
said that's one way to thank you
Madam Chair and senator because
of time, but I just wanted to
make sure that um we're using
this as a tool.
be able to see where our money
is going and what they're doing,
so that all you.
So there's phonics. Um, Madam
Chair, I moved to table this
bill.
That's a non-debatable motion.
Let's do a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend, Senator Rail.
Senator, Senator Brantly.
Senator Doig
Yes, with a 5 in favor, your
bills table. Thank you.
All right, uh, that's it for
