Yes.
Okay and.
Not to New Mexico yes Senator
fear.
Senator said.
Senator Shendo funds will.
Senator here Senator here.
Okay
yes Representative.
Thank you very much of Madam
terrible members this is a house
bill one hundred thirty four
that deals with Division within
the up tourism department that
has not been funded for over a
decade.
It's still good law there's
there's money and helpful to to
fund this division back to life.
Thank you all and reinvigorating
sports sports events sports
tourism for the bill does is
Early there's a five member our
advisory committee with you know
numerous cabinet secretaries and
things of that nature we of the
we want to make a consistent
with other similar committees
under the Tories Department we
have a seven public members
with that I'll turn over my toes
Sanchez resembling thank you
madam chair thank gentleman west
of some of those one point.
The anybody they will.
Sort of.
This is on line.
Thank you I don't know not that
I'm aware of okay you will move
to yeah this is there anybody in
four of the bill.
Anybody and opposition.
I
think that the.
They had added to individuals at
Jabal in San.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which strongly supports
house bill one thirty four the
chamber supports the
establishment of a new sports
authority one that's going to be
more active one that has a
broader mission and one that's
going to work to attract all
kinds of new athletic teams
leagues and events to our state
this effort will not only create
meaningful jobs it will provide
additional recreational and
leisure opportunities to our
residents and can attract
visitors from elsewhere as a
chamber of commerce we talk all
the time about competing
economically with other states
for jobs and new opportunities
in our sports astronomy is one
potentially huge piece of that
house bill one thirty four is a
sound concept it's a good idea
and it's a meaningful effort
that the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce supports and
we applaud Representative
Maestas for bringing it thank
you.
And.
I know.
And I and the secretary of the
New Mexico games we are the
largest amateur sports
competition in the state we have
Sports every we can may through
November with the largest
basketball turned in the state
in
okay and we support this bill we
think this will help increase
sports tourism and help I just
as an organization and we urge
you guys to support this bill.
And I'm sorry yes.
Hello everybody my name's on the
rostrum he I am a local sports
entrepreneur I am also the co
founder of the Dixie eight
professional football team I'm
also the owner and operator of
the New Mexico runners
professional arena soccer team
and I am the executive director
of the New Mexico games as well
and we would like to urge you to
support this as Megan had
mentioned you know we find so
many different sports events up
to twenty sporting events
throughout the entire year you
know we've been around since
nineteen eighty nine and and
this this would help you know
folks like us that knows could
promote what we do here in New
Mexico improve and promote the
sports in New Mexico and grow
what we have here and so I again
I urge you guys to definitely
move forward with this and this
will this will help New Mexico
groping in the sports industry
thank you.
That's what on the here and now.
Would you like to including.
Because of the thank you madam
chair just the sports authority
up with a tremendous role up.
You know prior to the banking
crisis in organizing various
events just associate
relationships and public private
partnerships Mexico has a
comparative advantage in a lot
of.
Let us sports arenas horse
racing you know golf tennis the
weather
it's a big state you know sports
took a big hit the last couple
years because of the pandemic
but I think with with the
leadership of place amongst
coaches athletic directors
entrepreneurs and and the and
actually it's we're gonna bring
it back in and bring back sports
in the strong strong way.
I think this will play a key
role thank you madam chair.
In a sense of committee on new
thank you madam chair I'm just
case of back in the day what
kind of events that the sports
authority facilitate in New
Mexico there was a viable thank
you madam chair said o'neill I
think
I think I was specific
professional tennis tournaments
professional golf tournaments I
think the big.
Thing was organized the first
ever New Mexico bowl which is
now owned by ESPN it's it's
state Saturday afternoon before
Christmas one of the prominent
non new year's day of college
football bowl games it is the
largest single.
Single day event in terms of G.
R. T. in the state of Mexico
that's prime premiere but the
things I recall from.
For over ten years of and then
madam chair why did it fizzle
out.
Thank you madam chair center
Neil well about back in two
thousand nineties recall we
discussed budgets we you know
and we just kind of strong
government to its constitutional
charge I just never brought it
back and is this still in
statute we finally we have
following the law the past two
years because it's still the law
but
it was just off the radar screen
and so it didn't make it wasn't
in the recommended budget in the
executive or the list LFC but we
we we worked hard we got some
money and not the junior budget
as well as house bill two the
secretary is excited about
reinvigorating the board and
making it really.
I thank you madam chair of
Representative what why did you
not.
Current it's not recurring what.
What it did not ask for the well
thank you madam chair the in the
bill as the bill is drafted
That language was.
The language was ambiguous with
the rest recurring a reoccurring
but but it's now up in house
bill two.
And so with a little bit of
effort I think it'll become we
become reoccurring as of next
year.
Okay thank you thank you for any
other questions from committee
Senator no thank you madam chair
just just real quick there's
nothing in there is other than
the fact that it talks about the
the representation to resemble
demographics in conjunction with
the congressional district map
I'm honestly not sure what that
really means but I just I just
madam chair and.
Representative just want to
share it with the kids with the
boards cost.
That is representation is
inclusive of all areas of the
state.
Of the fares you can readily
become in Albuquerque for and I
just wanna be sure that as we as
we move forward especially
question specially should free
redistricting every district
touches Albuquerque.
It would be it would be
relatively simple to do that so
I would just.
Additional like you all for sure
that you will work to be sure
that the board.
Representative all of New Mexico
thank you madam chair Senators
you certainly have my commitment
on that that that sentence no
longer really applies as a
result of the new maps you know
before was north Albuquerque's
south now it's like a pin wheel
so
yeah would that they need to
make sure that rural voices are
heard all work with the
secretary this dynamic
recommendations of.
Folks who've been hitting me up
to be on the board but the
appointment goes from the
governor to the secretary but
all but I'm sure the secretary
because of me statewide and
folks that are on the board can
still can still time and
participate in a.
And build the sports
infrastructure in New Mexico.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative that I
mean change redistricting
happened you know Albuquerque
every all three districts such
as for.
And so.
Membership could just be
comprised of of individual from
Albuquerque and that would not
you probably would be the best
interests of New Mexico show I
appreciate it if you guys work
hard to make sure that that
didn't happen so thank you madam
chair.
Session thank you madam chair
the Representative ring fills
and.
Reinstituting the the authority
in the fifties you for.
All three of.
Whether.
Of I have a question of the the
numbers of going down to seven
members the.
Your the other thing you know.
For this.
No representation of committees
resemble demographics of New
Mexico secretary and I I just I
don't know if you if any of the
tribe or anybody representation.
What.
The interest well the seven
members it's not a whole lot.
you know I'm just thinking about
you know the Santa Ana soccer
complex that brings in a lot.
You know all of back to the days
will Santa Ana slowly Stefanski
of competitions
noted brought is of surely
grandslam from New York to New
Mexico to fund raiser of you
know I took to New Mexico to
north American indigenous games
of two thousand to two Winnipeg
Canada one point I thought we
could posted here but our venues
are you know big enough it was
so so I'm just thinking you know
that.
As people are thought of who
should be on there the maybe
somebody and I'm not sure of the
tribes or aware of it or want to
but I think you know with the
demographics and the values that
some of this I have to go around
call.
Because the Santa Ana for the
worked at the office most of the
PGA golf tournament several
times in New Mexico so those
things are important and I I
think you know with the
infrastructure and some of the
tribal facilities.
You know that others don't have
you has the potential to a to a
trackside miss madam chair is
one point that out so as the
members are constituted
provides.
Somebody from one of those
tried to rely on Santana comes
to mind because at the center
complex it also host noticing
a golf fundraiser.
So so one point I think that the
thank you Mr Santana starts with
the case anymore so if anybody
the person from Santa Ana might
be the ideal person because of
the number of professional and
amateur this madam chair held
over the years individuals.
Understood thank you madam chair
thank you senator Senator.
That.
Quested from committee.
The the the.
Senator Diamond has a memorial
that is asking for money the
next time our.
Madam chair served until I'm not
aware of the memorial and spoken
to her regarding that yeah so
it's for local entities to
John the budget I think it's
really gonna make develop all to
have certain events in local
areas thank you madam thank you
madam chair center yes I'm aware
of the of the of the budget item
essentially it's it's a fund
within state government so that
folks can.
Applaud bid on
No funding I think it's for
facilities yeah that's that's
not part of this bill but it's
still part of the.
Of our lowest board and and the
the and the need to upgrade a
lot of facilities what one of
the things I'm gonna ask the
director this four story do is
inventory all the sports
facilities.
Gymnasium high school football
soccer really like how much and
then compared to other cities
and and and states and see where
the gaps are so that so that
every child in our community
except to to participate.
I think this can really compare
New Mexico to other states so
you can stop session one talk
about water and grass and now
Dora that's right the supposedly
moving towards actual terror
the environment but the one of
the negative aspects of it was
the with the voters voted
against the stadium for the
United.
The HSD to.
I guess just making sure that
voice of the locals it is not
over at by this particular
entity.
In that sense.
The.
Thank you for your.
One quick sync Senator Shendo
product product all from there's
there's things that New Mexico
open that you know which held
annually across different golf
courses
The promotion of that is the
issue really very little.
the you know you could make more
out of the Connie Mack World
Series up in Farmington little
league place of ships the ocean
big tournaments in Gallup
with the the.
The facilities that they have
there in Gallup
thank those are those are things
that the the authority could you
know could look at information
and help help market in some
ways for more participation you
know statewide and.
Your Senator Shendo with his
relationships with with noted
Begay and and that sort of stuff
can help help certainly grow.
Certain things and be exciting
to see that and you know I don't
know and Senator brought up the
the seven member board
You've got it down
substantially.
Is there another number share.
That we still do here you know
for the bigger encompass a
little more but still accomplish
the goal.
And I the only reason I I guess
I'm bringing that back up you
should be cares I hadn't thought
so much about the the situation
of redistricting which could put
away the way too much ball.
Right inspect at Albuquerque.
So what what do you think
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you Center grace.
My original bill actually had
membership.
From various entities various
high school.
Use the sports college boards
the secretary of I'm excited
about sectors interest in this
provision so the secretary's
recommendation was to send it
down to seven but.
But I think and so in my view
it's not going from twenty five
to seven it's going from zero to
seven.
But but I think nine or eleven.
Certainly works for me we would
consider any.
Amendment friendly if we were to
do an amendment this at this
time I would actually on page
four lines eleven twelve.
Right resemble the demographics
and geography of New Mexico here
it.
And strike in conjunction with
the three congressional
districts.
Yeah I think that nine or eleven
would be great I I agreed
A compromise with the secretary
was seven.
but.
But the will legislature on.
Would be great.
Yes thank you madam chair or is
this something that could be
altered once it's ready in
reading this she added I mean
you know for us to stay Maez
Thursday you really want to
amend this bill.
Chairman chair Senators alive
every amendment offered by a
Senate committee in the last
forty eight hours is wonderfully
friendly to me
At this juncture but if in fact
you were to amend the bill I
would I would clean up that
language in regards to questions
but but in my mind madam chair
center group center nearly goes
from zero to seven we're not
shrinking anything it it's
nonexistent right now so they
have seven this summer would be
great and then maybe next year
we can.
Our next session we can talk
about nine.
Maybe we could do is think about
you can get it in place.
Correct and we can think about
it duration is next year to
where the membership can expand
if you believe when she died
that that would be beneficial.
Plus madam chair we can see what
the secretary comes up with with
the composition of.
Action is now that we're looking
at very closely.
When the questions are not.
Chair I know we do thank you
madam
I'm happy with it but I think
also having conversation with
some of the tribes of hosting
large events will be good to
kind of get their fault it
whether they want to be part of
this order different capacity
however and in the the visit
this next year enough all COVID
doing that Senator.
So is gathering of nations of
sporting events the.
Is this.
I
think this not but my neighbors
actually organize it.
Looking for to make it bigger
and better next year but it's
but it's similar in content in
terms of the tourism we can
capture with with the optional
ship and the and events that we
do.
The anymore questions but
Canadian.
