Senator Baca your.
Senator Brandt.
Senator do head.
Center guy echoes.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey here center Ingle
Senator Ivey Soto.
Center our meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Etcetera now.
Etcetera but do are to the Pino.
Senator Sanchez there Senators
CD's.
Center city a Lopez now with
center share.
Senator Stewart.
Center Thomas.
Your Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You now have a quorum Mister
president we do have a quorum
senators we ask that you please
rise those in the gallery to
join us for the invocation to be
pledge of allegiance to be led
today by senator Linda Lopez.
The salute excuse me the pledge
allegiance in Spanish for that
today by Senator Baca and the
As we gather together today to
accomplish the work of the
people of New Mexico.
We pray for the godly wisdom.
him ask god that giveth to all
men liberally and operate it's
not.
Further we know that you hear
our every thought and our every
word.
those who sin against your laws.
And have no forgiveness for
those who will not forgive.
We pray lord that he will remove
to the principals who have
taught us.
Make us mindful of the on the
alienable rights that you
provided by your divine hand an
We look to you lord as we
endeavor to accomplish the work
of our fellow New Mexicans.
May peace and harmony prevail in
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
Once again would like to welcome
everyone to today's meeting now
Senator Lopez back today just
before in Ms that we go about
our business announcements
miscellaneous around that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Peter
Wirth thank you Mr president
just before I give a road map
the members you consent to
excuse Senators when jass
for the is Campos Gonzalez Karia
gallery.
Hearing objections cameras are
allowed both in the gallery and
in the Senate chamber today
senator Michael Padilla thank
you very much Mr president
For for Gastonia requesting
Jackson be removed or
disincentive Mr president the
fighting eagles of oil and high
school I want to make sure
they're nice and comfortable Mr
president thank thank you so
appreciate your words appreciate
your service to our country and
I just I I I pause and hearing
sharing your invocation with us
leasing gentleman the Senate
today is Los Alamos County day
at the legislature and center
meals gonna have eight guest
Mexico school for the arts choir
performing Mr president
unanimous consent that we remove
Senate memorial sixty one St
Patrick's and Good Friday
agreement day from the
Senator Peter Wirth I thank you
Mr president that will be read
in that Senator McKenna Senator
o'neill and Senator share when
we get to that point and after
we're done with the memorial
committee reports to come down
once they come down we'll get
them read in and then we'll do
the four con confirmations
doctor news though is in the
But I've certainly had his
treatments before I certainly
encourage any members to go in
and and take advantage of him
being here
Mr president center Sanchez has
twenty two members and coaches
twelfth grade students here from
Waldorf school yeah once you
guys all stand up that come to
visit and they're in their
second day of kind of
governments class and are
And with that Mr present I think
ideal first two US senator
Sanchez to introduce his his
guests where that order business
announcements miscellaneous.
have with me some gas I have the
New Mexico state champs the for
a bowl and high school wrestling
team with us here today
starting first we have a Josh
how to meal Emmanuel Valdez
Damien Rodriguez Lazarus lay in.
Go ahead and stand.
Augustine Lopes's Daniel tell me
does.
Kelly Morgan and the size.
What they ask for the Edward
Freeman.
Henderson crisp area and Chris
Robinson.
And.
This I was a blend junior I was
president and the Senate members
here today this is probably one
of the toughest sports it
teaches you discipline respect
dedication determination.
that mat you can't lie to nobody
you don't have no teammates it's
you and that other person you
don't do your pushups you run.
Well the whole schools going to
see you get mopped across the
you lose you use wrestling and
everything is just it sticks
with you so with that Mr
president I would ask the Senate
to help me well I guess Senator
before we do that I know we have
other members who would like to
want to welcome the blend
wrestling team state champions
that's something that is
fantastic this is a moment that
you'll be proud of for the rest
of your lives and we will
go myself slightly older than uh
Senator Sanchez but I have
strong ties to that community
I'm proud to be the
recognize the coaching staff and
there are their dedication and
the time and the effort that
they put forward in supporting
a lot of what they do is after
hours long road trips taking
care of these young men and
women teaching them the values
and discipline that will benefit
you Mr president thank you
senator Baca we do have other
senators who wish to speak to
the graduations of the land high
school wrestling team Senator
to congrats to congratulate the
coaching team and each and
everyone of the successful
wrestlers I hope that you will
take this success and learn from
what you did to achieve it and
apply those principles to
achieve even more in your lives
and and I know you can because
if you were able to do this you
male who served on different the
different teams over the years
so it's really nice that you
achieve this this pinnacle thank
you Mr president thank you
cheer on the land any time I can
as long as they're not playing
Los Alamos or Espanola valley
high school and so I want to
congratulate you I myself am a
state champion and twenty five
lives thank you Mr president
thank you center had a meal.
Senator Sanchez to close out.
Thank you Mr president I have a
few more guest with me today my
introduce.
announcements we have senator
again Kernan.
Followed by Senator Brandt
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president and I know what
senator Wirth is already
mentioned that today is
is our expert candy maker and
she is a member of that
wonderful organization and so I
hope you take time to look
through the magazine because we
we're looking forward to
participating upstairs and
recognizing what women need to
the state of New Mexico but
enjoy your candy thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Diamond Senator committee.
Senator Woods center share
Senator Gallegos and river
Senator Moores except for the
purpose of the call also would
Brandt Sierra X. all of my
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator Kernan and senator
Wirth for mentioning
international women's day I
looked through my jewelry box
this morning and I actually
the world don't have.
The rights and privileges that
we do.
We have women who are mired with
war.
We have women who are not
protecting our trafficking
victims and try to provide
services for them so for
everyone who has a woman in
members of the.
Legislature.
Back in nineteen thirty seven
there was a gentleman boring to
Henry and mais um.
his wife Rosalynn Begay Zana and
his two children still reside in
New when drunk.
Arizona.
He was a very influential man.
He was born in low mountain
there's no.
And he attended the Phoenix
Indian school.
And later the Arizona State
all the Navajo school board in
nineteen seventy two.
In nineteen eighty three and
nineteen eighty seven he was
elected to the chairman of the
And at that time I was fairly
young person and it was a moment
when politics in our nation was
very
Very difficult.
Thank you there was a ride on
the Navajo Nation during that
time.
but nineteen one ninety one to
ninety five he became the first
And when he became president has
vice president was Marshall
Plummer which was my grandfather
John Pinto his wife Joanne
Dennison Pinto.
internalize as young child.
When I say president.
That is where we established and
and gas leases that were barely.
Putting a quarter like a quarter
four ton the cold that was going
to the Navajo Nation.
of the Courts cases he took went
to the Supreme Court and it was
really about the sovereignty of
the nation and highlighting it.
With that really he emphasized
was for the future of the nation
for the children and always
advocated with any of the new
or kind of in that sense to
jeopardize our climate.
Because those cases he took to
court we're about clean water
Nation.
But it was a very typical tech.
Because after that he went to
Arizona State University he
doubled the enrollment of native
So it was very certain that our
people.
Heard him about education being
a priority.
And as we move forward thank you
Mr president.
Those in the chamber in the
gallery please rise for a
moment's silence.
See that.
We're still in that order
Thank you Mr president I just
want to.
See my remarks also the passing
of a Peterson's all president he
was a good personal friend of
mine.
during his presidency.
And I was at the university some
of New Mexico at that time
working in the college of
engineering so we often spoke we
so forth.
And I have a a funny story he
would call me up because after
he stepped down as being
president he would still be
working with families that are
flight out of Phoenix who called
me he always says Benny my
friend.
And asked me if he could borrow
my truck so I would he would fly
four thirty five o'clock you
show up in he'll pick me up at
the airport I'll drop them off
and those kind of our state just
quietly helping him with the
issues that he was dealing with
as a Senator Pinto mention he
did a lot in the short term that
he was there because it was a
tumultuous time for Navajo
Nation and what happened in in
and just want to say that
because it was a personal friend
of mine and
Who prefers family and and to
do it like the the Santo Hotmail
who's got some gas for Los
Alamos county day than we do
have the committee report down
for the rules confirmations so
we'll go to committee reports
one that's a bill I have Senate
bill one I just want to hand out
out so everyone has plenty of
time to look at the three
changes made in the house and
we'll do that after we get done
with the currents and we got the
day right here in the capital
and if memory serves as well
this is the first time the Los
Alamos County is having their
official date right here in the
Public brothers and sisters for
approximately four hundred years
a lot of their traditional
places are still in the space
where they come and do
ceremonies and continue to
grant holders homesteaders
merchants farmers and ranchers
before being acquired by the US
federal government in nineteen
forty two for the Manhattan
Project and eventually
department of energy national
laboratories creating world
changing science and
technologies for more than
seventy years a place that I'm
pride.
Los Alamos is also the gateway
to three national parks the
Manhattan Project national
historic park the Bandelier
national monument and the virus
because that I national preserve
December twenty twenty two an
American World War two heritage
city and will join seventeen
other community this honored for
the contributions to support
America's war effort during
two senators who represents them
right now Mr president like to
introduce my guests who are here
today starting on the rostrum Mr
day the three women who are
joining us are part of our
county council and I'd like to
introduce you to trace the call
our county vice chair Tony stark
our local pride in Los Alamos
either captain van lemur Los
Alamos fire department while
land operations lead Kodi you'll
wretch the emergency manager
Alamos see on a fast learner
Donald of the L. A. CDC who's
our executive director
Jacqueline calmly of the main
street who is our main street
me with them when we do not
tractor on the field as their
mother ginger and so we also
have our dancers from the youth
America Grand Pete pre assembly
has men and my good friend Amy
story is also up there who's
part of the Los Alamos
Democratic Party and behind me
is more Neil of the Los Alamos
reporter a woman who doesn't
N. Espanola believe that we are
this you know it's helping the
scene was neighbors helping
neighbors more I has volunteered
her time to work at our only and
first homeless shelter taking
that we help each other out
ladies and gentlemen I am so
proud to represent Los Alamos
please help me and welcoming
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Hemphill Senator Peter
Wirth thank you Mr president and
thank you center how to meal
unanimous consent we go to that
order of business committee
message number I dated March
second twenty twenty three and
what's the governor makes the
following appointment Garrett
Daniel mostly as student member
of the New Mexico State
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman
Senator.
Mr present ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
second twenty twenty three and
what's the governor makes the
following appointment I'm mood
of a stali Ph.D as a member of
the New Mexico State University
board of regents for term
commencing on January first
Senate executive message number
six dated March third twenty
twenty three and what's the
governor makes the following
appointment Deborah Kim Romero
as a member of the New Mexico
Senate executive executive
message number I dated March
second twenty twenty three in
which the governments the
following appointment Paul
Blanchard as a member of the
confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman.
Senator Mr president and with
the committee reports Senator is
we have a motion to adopt
Centipede or take us to the next
order of business I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
presented to the full Senate for
consideration as board of regent
to the university of New Mexico
I now yield to Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart.
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment Paul in more
Blanchard to the board of
regents for the university of
New Mexico.
Mexico it was nineteen seventy
he got a football scholarship to
UNM he arrived with forty
cattle ranches he has developed
residential buildings all over
Albuquerque in particular he has
made the racetrack and casino at
he's just got the kind of skills
that you want on a regent he had
he is employed over eight
hundred and fifty people in his
genius he's just able to bring
people together come to
consensus and do right by his
businesses so we really enjoyed
Centers we're debating the
appointment of Pueblo answered
as a regent for the university
of New Mexico anyone wishing to
make.
he's not on the day is today but
two years ago he put together an
incredible Christmas party for
five schools that surround the
downs there in my district there
or period shoes their families
got to be fed it was after COVID
it was just one of the most
important things that we had in
the neighborhood so he's a true
the university of New Mexico and
asked for voice roll call.
Show of hands thank you sister
senators were voting tier seats.
By a vote of twenty seven the
Fuhrman is in the negative the
appointment to Pueblo answered
as a member of the university of
New Mexico border regions for
term commencing upon
Thanks Senator Stewart will
yield now to Senator how to
meal.
Mr president I just the the
credentials of Dr I move
residents present Senator
Senator of pursuant to a ex
Senate executive message I dated
March second of twenty twenty
three I move that the Senate do
Hearing no objection Senator
Hernandez explained thank you Mr
chairman president do you have
to your right adoption of us
always who's presently the
president of the board of
regents and has served admirably
with the arts and was very
pleased to see the governor put
it to work on the border regions
for years back and I'll just
tell you that who treats this
today background education in
Russian of languages number
grant to the United States with
Vance degrees both her and her
issue I think it's so also
fortress noted that we've been
through some challenges of late
at and much to everyone's aware
of that we've talked about them
here in the Senate chamber quite
a bit and she has stepped up
and we'll look back with a great
deal of accomplishment after
some of those some of those more
challenging days that we've had
of late but also it's important
recognize all the many
look favorably on this
reconfirmation.
Thank you senator John to Santo
is very debating the
confirmation.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator serve on tests for
sponsoring a native of a stali
and you know I first knew of a
mu and Rama when I worked for
twenty years at the public radio
station as the morning news
anchor I always used to say
support for morning edition is
know them until I got to see
them out in the community and
especially supporting events for
the public radio station and and
you know it was lovely to be
it was intended to where it was
needed because they truly knew
that and now as a region I get
to see her twice a year when I
say.
Many challenging names from our
lovely international student
population at New Mexico State
University and it's always just
a wonderful day to be able to
celebrate them and I'm honored
voice on the MSU board of
regents and so I'm very honored
and proud to see you there up on
the stage on the rostrum and to
be able to continue to support
confirmation the doctor and I
were able to talk early on in
the session about the issues of
climate change in the sectors of
northern New Mexico and how The
New Mexico State University
Mexico and this morning she's
trying to encourage me to get a
second degree and earned the
online from New Mexico State
University and I just might
accept that challenge and be a a
you Mr president thank you
center how to mail any further
debate centers.
Si no further debate Senator
she gets like a lot of us you
know you she gets roped into
just about everything because
she's in town and she's so she's
that one region who's actually
from Los crucis a New Mexico
neighborhood for many years
which they donated recently to
the community foundation of
Southern New Mexico which is
then taken that asset and use
corner of University Avenue in
el Paseo you'll see a beautiful
old home that we preserve and
it's really just a great tribute
to who they are two of the
Jennifer was to direct director
for many years and the issue
serve with on many boards and
commissions and city right
behind her as my sister in law
Leslie who oftentimes gets
so Mister president I ask I move
that the Senate now confirm the
appointment of who are
devastated Ph.D and unanimous
Senator want to Senators tier
seats please we're voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative zoom the negative
the reappointment of a mood of
us only Ph.D is a member of the
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate Senator want this thank
you president Senate colleagues
would you rise please and how me
really join our new regents
Thanks Senator want this so
you'll have to Senator Hermio Mr
president I just of the
senator souls Senator souls
thank you Mr president pursuant
to Senate executive message
number I dated March second
twenty twenty three I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
also explained thank you Mr
president I'm honored to be the
the Senate
So what are we the the Senate
sponsor for Garrett Moseley I've
able to Representative students
he functions well working with
faculty and with the
administration he is an
ambassador for the university
the president of a as an agency
to the student government
organization in order to take
this appointment as the student
regent it this morning in rules
people he'll be a wonderful
member of the student of the
board of regents as the student
member and will represent all of
the students in the state of New
any questions or comments thanks
Center souls we are debating the
appointment of Garrett Moseley
as a member.
City member of the board of
regents in New Mexico State
University and we L. to Senator
Hamblen.
commencement and but I really
got to know Garrett a lot the
session when he along with his
fellow students were here
talking with legislators and
and to share your concerns and
your needs and I think you and
your your fellow student
colleagues did an incredible job
of representing New Mexico state
will be happy to set up on that
stage with you and commencement
and I'm so proud of you so thank
you Mr president thank you Sir
Senator souls and
he has currently held students
who are first generation college
students no I shared my
experience of being a first
generation college student
myself Mr president I had to
work full time while going
be the voice of students who are
just like myself means a lot and
he also shared his stories on
what he plans to do and as a
champion of the opportunity
scholarship all of us know that
president Senator how do we have
any further debate senators.
Saying no further debate Senate
Bill sos to close thank you Mr
president.
and political science he is
planning on then attending a
masters in business
administration program at New
Mexico state he will be around
for a while and again a similar
I'm very proud to to be the
sponsor with that Mr president
pursuant to the Senate exec
message number I dated March
second twenty twenty two I move
record show that the role is
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
Senators we're voting tier
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty four has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate Senators souls thank you
Mr president please help me in
Senator Lisa how do you Mr
president I just of the
credentials of Deborah Romero
the presented to the full Senate
as consideration as board of
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator how to meal
Mr president members pursuant to
Senate executive message number
six dated March third twenty
twenty three I move the Senate
do hereby confirm the
we are extraordinarily lucky to
have our secretary who recently
yet again to serve as a regent
for New Mexico state
she described herself and she
said these words once a public
president you've got a terrific
new member of your regents who
has a background this
extraordinary just some things
that were said during her
of absolute integrity and then
Senator Padilla is quote from
the other day she's going to
have to pay and so you know this
is just again for someone like
to put the time in to really do
the job and I just think given
given where New Mexico state is
this is a terrific appointment
by our governor and I'm super
Wirth centers we're debating the
appointment of Deborah K.
Romero.
See no debate Senator Wirth to
close thank you Mr president
negative by show of hands
centers where voting to your
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
cameraman was a member of the
New Mexico State University
border regions for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty six has been duly
husband is here to thank her for
stepping up yet again.
this is an ounce Mentzer
miscellaneous we're in that
order business scene and houses
miscellaneous center Peter Wirth
thank you Mr president Senator
o'neill we do have a memorial
yield to Senator McKenna first
percent of a moral sixty one St
Patrick's and Good Friday
agreement day where that order
business third reading
B. not printed not refer to
committee and that it be read
for the third time in full.
Opportunity to its final
passage.
Thank you senator can other
reader to read.
agreement they in the Senate
whereas the twenty fifth
anniversary of the Good Friday
agreement has been reached and
while there are still some
Friday agreement over the last
twenty five years of state
legislators successive United
States presidents the United
States Senate the United States
agreement is honored on this
year of the twenty fifth
anniversary of its ratification
as the framework for lasting
peace in Northern Ireland and
whereas the Good Friday
acknowledge the right of
different political traditions
to pursue their goals of
remaining part of the United
Kingdom or of Irish unity and
whereas the Good Friday
implementation of the Good
Friday agreement and whereas the
Good Friday agreement is the
error vocables foundation of the
peace process regardless of
agreements important issues
remain unresolved the Northern
Ireland including securing
justice for victims of state
sponsored violence and other
States came together to support
the Good Friday agreement and
whereas on the seventeenth of
March during the annual
celebration of the feast of
Saint Patrick the patron Saint
celebrate Saint Patrick and
whereas this year there is also
celebration and thanks for the
twenty fifth anniversary of the
Good Friday agreement now
therefore be it resolved by the
Friday agreement day in the
Senate and be be recognized as a
symbol of the link between the
United States and Ireland and be
caucus signed and sealed that
the city at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator Brandt
Brenda G. McKenna senator bill
Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr president and I
would like to share with you and
the body
go ahead and move them the
subject to debate amendment for
substitution see no objections
center McKenna to explain.
Yes thank you Mr president and I
want to share with you in the
Was the following so Northern
Ireland was created in nineteen
twenty one and remain part of
the United Kingdom when the rest
stay within the United Kingdom
and the nationalists who want to
be called to be part.
Part of the Republic of Ireland
and so there in Sioux the
the Irish Republican Army and
the Ulster volunteer force
carried out bombings and
shootings and British troops
were sent to Northern Ireland
Friday agreement Mr president.
Thank you Senator McKenna.
mark McKenna for sponsoring this
and also for the history lesson
because you know it's something
that as sort of vaguely remember
but certainly the violence was
real and it's been the subject
it's a very positive thing that
that that folks have come
together at center center but
it's still not perfect there's
still a lot to be worked out and
special kind of technology then
kind of tied into Saint
Patrick's day but Friday Saint
Patrick's day or you get to see
Senator share and killed ten
we're gonna have the dance of
that have a the tended NCSL
you'll you'll laugh you might
have noticed this mark daily guy
who's really a charismatic
fellow that is a Senator over
Irish caucus movement here with
Senator McKenna being our
leader.
And so having said all that it's
just really important to
acknowledge
so so having said all that thank
you very much Mr speaker
president and there for allowing
us to to note this important
occasion and thanks again to
agreement was we're people were
really that many was ugly not
quite as ugly as we've been in
here but it's pretty ugly and
we're just all peaceful and
happy and we love each other in
and so I'm really looking
forward to that but I would like
to point out Mr president that
And and I think that we should
be proud of that you know it
it's it's all odd when you look
at these obviously my family of
grand mother born in Scotland
but her parents were from
Then take many steps for me to
become Irish.
But the today I'm certainly
proud to be Irish and I even
found a green shirt even though
of peace
that that I think that we ought
to be
thrilled about in the whole
world should take an example of
chance last summer to travel
with NCSL on a leadership trip
to Dublin and Belfast the leader
of our group was senator mark
Bertie Ahern who negotiated the
Good Friday agreement with Tony
Blair and then traveled north to
Belfast and and it is an
feel that tension as we met with
the various leaders in Northern
Ireland but the result of the
Good Friday agreement is just
extraordinary what's happened in
Ireland and open the whole
bravery to negotiate and risk
because as senator o'neill said
and Senator McKenna said I mean
the the violence that was there
in Northern Ireland and in
to recognize this and so I'm
happy stand support.
Thank you senator Wirth we do
have further debate on the
memorial we have Senator Sedillo
bay area and we took a cultural
tour of the area and we saw a
lot of the evidence of the
conflicts between the Irish and
the English and I remember
speaking to the to the leader of
I'll never forget this he said
madam.
It isn't it is the policies not
the people that one must resist.
And I think that's exactly right
And to find common ground and
like I said I'll never forget
that and I can understand that
with people like the tour guide
are Irish and all of the many
people in the United States and
in New Mexico of Irish heritage
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Any further debate Senators
I did I also visited the of
Northern Ireland.
About twenty five years ago our
daughter was working at a place
kids Protestant and Catholic
kids would go together and have
week long retreats and get to
know each other get to interact
get to try to build
Madam I also learned that I will
never drive in Ireland I didn't
get out of the parking lot at
the airport before I.
Crashed into the curb of into
emergency brake by mistake is is
on the wrong side so I I don't
think I'll ever drive in Ireland
again but it was a great visit
thank you Mr president thank you
center participate in a.
that Senate memorial sixty one.
do now pass.
Senate that the record show that
the roll then called for all
those present voting in the
Fuhrman of on Senate memorial
sixty one except for those
pass the record reflect that all
forty two senators and the
lieutenant governor voted in the
affirmative.
Seeing no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
Senator Peter Wirth today is the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
for members of what we're gonna
do on the floor today the plan
is to do items one through six
on the Senate calendar then we
And we'll do them in that order.
So Mister president
Unanimous consent we go to that
order business concurrence.
members I move that the members
concur with the house changes to
Senate bill one.
Senator Peter Wirth of you
please explain I thank you Mr
technical changes there's three
there were two that were made in
the house ag and water committee
the first was at the request of
an election issue and it
provides that and authorities
initial board have
representation from the founding
and joining entities and then
then finally on the house floor
they change the the word shall
to may for the list of different
powers and duties of the
authority originally as was
if needed so the the amendment
was made to change shall to may
so that's the changes to the
bill.
Herrera with that Mr president I
move I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that all those present voted to
unanimous consent that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one as twice
amended that the house concur
with the change that the Senate
concur with the changes made in
centers there's a motion to
concur with Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one is twice amended.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of twenty in the
affirmative on the negative the
Senate has concurred with house
amendment to Senate Judiciary
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from the
house we're in that order
business message from the house
the reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to ninety seven
as amended by the house House
Bill three seventy six House
Bill three oh nine House
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa am Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk journal so the message
from the house has been
received.
business committee reports the
reader to read.
Mr president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificates of
appreciation certificate number
Senate respectfully submitted
set Senator Katie Katie M.
Duhigg chair Senator.
Mr present ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
Certificates of recognition
number twenty five twenty six.
Twenty seven.
bill three seventy seven as
amended has had it under
consideration reports same with
the recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Katy M. Duhigg
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee port has been
adopted in the journal show that
they're acted upon individually
the reader to read Mr president
Senator William P. souls
chairman Senator also Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate did agree
to be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
public affairs committee.
House bill one ninety eight do
pass.
House Bill to sixteen as amended
Bill five thirty three do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator William P.
it the committee port has been
adopted in the journal show they
were acted upon individually the
reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
bill eight do pass respectfully
submitted senator George when US
chairman.
Senator Michael by the.
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually see no
objection the reader to read.
Senate bill sixty six as amended
to pass.
bill three sixteen do pass.
Senate bill three eighty to do
pass as amended.
House bill seventy six as
amended to do pass.
House bill one seventy five as
amended to pass.
Senator yes thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
thank you Senator there's a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee part has been adopted
in the journal show they're
consideration and report same of
the recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
chairman.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all of the
committee reports in that we
not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill one fifty I do pass Senate
bill one sixty four as amended
amended do pass.
Senate bill three forty five do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
House Judiciary Committee
House bill ninety do pass and
then just referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House floor substitute for house
bill one sixty do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
adopted and the General
reflected their acted upon
individually.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take is the next
order of business thank you Mr
third reading do items number
one through six and then we will
jump over item number thirty
four which is house bill four
and then jump back into item six
bill two sixty is amended.
Senator is aware of that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous for those that are
watching the webcast that's
going to be Senate bill two six
Thank you very much Mr
president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill two six zero on final
was Senate bill two six zero is
essentially updating statutes
with more modern and what I
would call less offensive terms
the terminology that is
currently in our statute Mr
chairman that is referred to as
mentally retarded Mr president
as many of you can look in your
Senator thank you Mr president
so.
When language like this was put
in our Los long time ago it
actually had some kind of
medical meaning.
offensive in that are no longer
appropriate especially when
you're dealing with Special
Olympics or you're dealing with
any of the DD waivers or low
Merion things that are out there
Lopez thank you co sponsor
senator Sharon Mr president will
stand for questions Senators
remaining Senate bill two sixty
as amended.
and more friendly society of.
This was requested specifically
by some members of the Supreme
people to certain programs or
whatever and so this really does
help members of the supreme
court and the judiciary
generally thank you Mr president
Senator participate or any
president I now move that Senate
bill two six zero as amended do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate Senator
share Mr president I just want
to note wanted body to know that
this is the best co sponsor team
ever.
Soto thank you Mr president so
disoriented after that last
bill.
This president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all actions for
I see no objection Senator Ivey
Soto to explain thank you very
much was present was president
there's a project that Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino and I've been
working on the last two and a
covenants on property.
The unfortunately.
Mexico.
With with the building boom that
throughout the entire state
have confidence in them.
That are racial in nature
religious in nature doctor who
And so we finally working with
the land title association came
up with a way to be able to.
remove these restrictive race a
restrictive covenants when the
able to
To be able to.
Go ahead and re record their
own.
Do that without these racially
restrictive covenants.
home those kinds of things would
not be impacted by this
we also get rid of gender
specific language
Yes Mr president just to say
that Senator Ivey Soto is
captured it very nicely and that
in fact this may be an even
better.
Thank you Mr president for
questions senators we're
debating Senate bill two eighty
six million to senator Greg Baca
thank you Mr president with the
ours will kind of see see ours
are they are they like old in
nature these targeting like
outdated restrictive covenants
some of them introduced I don't
know early nineteen hundreds is
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president Mr president
we still have.
Official describes as a property
that's a.
We still have properties a state
no person of the Jewish faith.
May may live in that property.
We still have a legal
And this simply allows us to
drop those from the official
description for that rate.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
is correct okay that that
answers my question though Mr
present those documents can
originate from decades hundreds
of years ago so I completely
Thank you Mr president I a straw
I rise in strong support of this
of this bill my neighborhood in
the southeast tights.
Was identified has the great
said no negroes which was the
word use their and no Mexicans
and I know some people who I
know you all know to grew up
there and they were Hispanic and
he said we weren't Mexican we
were Spanish.
And I think that that's part of
the explanation when you see in
wanted to share that little bit
of history that little footnote
because this is a very important
thing that we are that we not
carry on these vestiges of of
Seen we do have for the debate
we're Senators committee.
Thing is present with the bill
sponsor you four hundred seventy
the clerk recording restrictive
covenant.
to restrict ownership because of
and let's just let's just say
religion
the state I'm doing this money
and I donate these investments
from donate this land but I'm
gonna put a restriction on it
it's only for you know the the
Catholic Church that my family's
Church for that one religion not
further religions
I've heard these kind of sort of
you know conversations come up
so agency presence enter we is
president it would not
restricted bility of somebody to
to do the land to a church.
So Mister president center on on
page six and maybe I just want
to walk through with you and I'm
covenant covenant based on and
I'm just picking religion as one
example we cannot attach a
restrictive covenant based on
religion it.
live here that would be dropped
from the from the description of
the deed.
We
Chicago right off Daley plaza is
the one historic Protestant
church that is still downtown
first Methodist church of
Deeded it to the Adventist
church and if you and other
resources to use that land it
returns back to the owners.
That's not restrictive covenant
that's a condition of the deed.
Thank you Mr president center
and I I wanna be brief here I
know you're here voice
I I I hear that so it sounds
do to something only for a
religion.
But with our and it is some some
additional restrictive covenant
ancestry or this specific and it
seems exclusionary but I think
it you know we have museums are
like that we have we have
churches and and historic things
unintended consequence so thank
you for answering my questions
appreciated thank you Mr.
Thanks committee any further
debate senators.
eighty six do now pass us Ms
because that incident the record
show that the rules but called
that all those present or the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative slide show fans
By a vote of thirty nine
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill two eighty six has
passed the Senate Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much Mr
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate Bill I
mean Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for three sixty eight
on final passage and final
Thank you Mr president we are
going in this legislation we're
going to add some body cam
exemptions from the great work
that was done in this letter
doing any type of explosive
recovery those would be the two
exemptions we also
of this section we remove shell
and put may be presumed to have
acted in bad faith and we remove
shell again may and and and
evidence.
With that Mr president I am
ready for any questions or
debate.
Centers we're debating Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
want to rise and support to at
least acknowledge why we're
changing some things from the
bill that I sponsored passed
back in twenty twenty I think
it's important to recognize
pass this legislation part was
because of what we're seeing at
the national level.
In the case of of.
George Floyd and others who
be gained by learning from the
knowledge of having body cameras
the other chamber with may
remember the.
Sheriff at the time Bernalillo
county sheriff Mandy Gonzalez
and and at the time the chair
from Bernalillo county of told
me he would never do this so
this legislature came together.
Unfortunately on largely
partisan vote at the time to
is that we have come to accept
body cameras as an expectation
of law enforcement.
Want to rise because at the time
And they would protest and
demonstrate and denounce me and
and others in this chamber for
doing this and.
I think it's important for us to
recognize that sometimes the
they operate and how they do
their job and.
I want to do acknowledge what
I've done with our pope we don't
get it exactly right.
And I wanted to know the one
important change that he that he
enforcement mechanism on law
enforcement the law that we
passed said that if the police
officer fail to comply.
In the stress of from of they
were telling us they were going
consequence we said if you do
not.
Keep and produce video of these
of of arrests and certain
And that was in and that was the
word that was in the original
bill you should the court shall
interpret that as a deliberate
willful act to avoid scrutiny.
for one is he's pulling back
from that.
From that shall to a may we're
putting the responsibility back
where it belongs with the courts
for the courts to use their
was acting deliberately and
willfully to avoid that scrutiny
and we'll leave that for a judge
to decide on a case by case
basis and that's the way it
should be and that's the way it
handful of those law enforcement
said they would not honor the
wishes of this legislature and
sometimes this legislature has
to force change even among those
originally and and I believe the
resistance is now.
Evaporated entirely and so I
said I rise to support and to
remind this chamber a little bit
that we now want to recognize
our partnership with those in
law enforcement and show the
more support thank you Mr
president thank you center PO
and instead of the last speaker
talking about
The fact that we had a lot of
us called out the fact that you
were requiring.
a officer to where the camera we
need to death notifications and
That would protect those
situations.
And so you know let's let's try
not to revise history too much
let's try to actually you know.
But I don't know.
And for what I just heard maybe
it wasn't.
But those are things that need
to be fixed and so I really
for law enforcement to do their
job.
And make it harder for the
public to trust them when it
comes to things like death
notifications though should
never had been recorded.
overdue but these things could
have been fixed in twenty
twenty.
But we were ignored and that's
leave history where it belongs.
and and learn from it and be
careful as we do future bills
that we don't put in a lot of
Si no further debate center pope
to close on the bill.
Mr president I moved that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
those voting in the native by
show of hands.
Senator is rare voting all
senators tier seats.
By a vote of forty one of the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill three
bill four sixty eight as amended
and I yield to senator Linda
Lopez.
I thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate.
for Senate bill I'm sorry.
I'm on the wrong bill Mr
president.
Start over I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
to explain the bill I thank you
very much Mr president what
Senate bill four six eight is
proposing for New Mexico to have
about a person who has been
instrumental in the labor
movement especially in the farm
workers you in California and
lotus where the day not a state
holiday it's just declaring on
April tenth which is her
birthday and with that Mr
president I'd like to hand this
bill with senator Linda Lopez
she has been a role model and
somebody of for people to look
look up to for a long time.
And the lotus where the is also
the idea of being a role model
and.
Coming to the Senate and being
in this position I've really
seen it up and how impactful it
grateful and I just was so moved
and so it's very very important
that we honor
long so I again I think I think
with the senator Linda Lopez for
her leadership and I believe
we're ready to stand for
questions or.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator Lopez and studio
Lopez yeah I I met Delores some
fellow workers and I learned so
much from her so I'm really
proud to stand with my
colleagues for this for this
bill Mr president thank you.
thank you Mr president and.
Hey be Rick remiss upon me and
have and I don't want you to
worry I'm going to support the
bill this for the bill but a
He said that in Tucson Arizona.
And the I'm just going to say
that we're that.
I don't hate Latinos on Latino.
kept my mouth shut that day Mr
president but
for Hispanic cultural there
there was a whole slew of people
that were recognized or Hispanic
it's democratic Hispanic
cultural day or.
Referred to suspend a culturally
because the culture I come from
is one of the most inviting
cultures there is welcoming
but I will support the bill
because I believe in elevating.
Hispanics even when you don't
agree with what they say.
as amended.
Any further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
Lopez to close on the bill.
Thank you very much Mr president
and on all those present voted
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands Senator seats where
voting.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative for the negative
Senate bill four sixty eight as
amended has passed Senate
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
that order business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president we had a
couple of guests that didn't get
introduce we want to do that now
Center McCann ideal to Senate
Thank you Mr president earlier
we discussed in past Center
moral sixty one and I want to
share with you and the body we
Introduce you to miss Kathy
Wimmer she is the vice president
and treasurer she's right here
it's a nonprofit nonpolitical
nonsectarian organization whose
purpose is to further Irish
American relations through
Thank you Senator McKenna.
Senator Peter Wirth I thank you
legislation and you'll to
cinnamon else that Senate bill
one forty three Semenya's thank
you Mr president I ask Miss
consenus Senate the record show
Mr president this bill right
here because of the non profits
in the situation with technology
and what's happened with non
profits they are no longer
about fifteen years and so we're
bringing that up to a ten
thousand dollar payout for these
are only for non profits this is
questions.
Senator many of us.
We do have debate Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
senator would you would you tell
you I don't really go user
gaming systems when you go in
there they say we can get
machines replaced we can get
machine's fixed and and so then
you figure out who is who is in
where they said they're having
problems with.
Senator Steinborn Mr president
did anyone ask you to carry the
bill or your you just figured
figured it out.
longer available on the market
with the pay out there all ten
thousand dollars and so that
this is a problem to fix that
Senator Steinborn okay well miss
forgive agency presents and I
still don't still understand but
up I'll I'll keep reading in the
Senate debate thanks.
shield Senator steel miss
present yes I do.
Senator when we first begin to
do these machines back on
Senator Fadell was the.
Senator from that area one of
them.
Senator then yes Mr presence in
I am not on that one dollar bill
of five dollar bill a twenty
dollar bill a hundred dollar
bill those are all presidential
machines and I know one time
Senator for those pictures were
on the five dollar ones but I
was just curious you know which
amount had your picture on.
they had covered wagons and and
road horses to the bar and and
tied him up out front I mean
those are there in the olden
days when when the government
didn't have coins and they had
Well back in the eighties Mr
president and but the since then
when you came along all a all
over comes out as a piece of
tokens in the US and so on the
Navajo reservation when they
were trading in and there wasn't
currency available donor built
or change or anything they had
Saturday I believe they would
gather at Cameron Arizona and
trade all the tokens for dollars
resigned the tokens out to the
to the trading posts but the
federal come government came in
slot machine tokens present I
never did have minor Senator
Campos you showed me his and
it's really a really finally
done.
record show the rules being
called and all those that voted
in the affirmative except for
those voting negative by show of
hands.
Senator seats where voting.
All those present voting the
Fuhrman except for those voting
by show of hands in the negative
Senator Wirth voting no Senator
Lopez voting no.
Senator committee voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
on to item number six that
Senate bill two forty and I
yield to senator bill o'neill.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that all action
center New Mexico in the bill
thank you Mr president Senate
bill two forty raises the
threshold from five hundred
thousand dollars to seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for requiring small charities to
Mr president since hi help run a
nonprofit tax and organization I
will recuse myself from this
vote not that I'm anywhere
approaching this limit but our
kids myself nonetheless
thank you Mr president I move
that Senate bill two forty do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
If you wish to vote.
No please raise your hand.
Five thirty five the Fuhrman is
here in the name is Senate bill
two forty has passed the Senate
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
objections Senator haven
explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president.
So Mister president.
This bill has widespread support
drawing support from forty nine
of the nonprofit community and
other labor unions it also has
the support Mr president of
seventy faith leaders and
religious organizations across
the state.
reality for every qualified
voter in New Mexico.
Mr president I'm going to kind
of walk through the
The different sections of what
know native Americans have only
have the right to vote New
Mexico for seventy four years
and while we recognize the
courage and perseverance of his
letter Pablo's Miguel Trujillo
double standards for our state's
regional happens.
Tribal communities still face
structural barriers and
exercising the right to vote
with poor rural address the long
travel times inconsistent
that they honor the existing
political boundaries of tribes
and pueblos by requiring
translation services at the
polls allowing voters living on
tribal lands to designate tribal
communities honoring local
expertise and tribal
sovereignty.
Another thing this bill does
Mister president is to adopt
This is a policy that has grown
more more popular across the
country including and democratic
states like Colorado and
Republican states like Alaska
showing us that this is not a
forty second in the country.
So what this would do it would
be to automatically register
eligible citizens in the state
of New Mexico when they complete
rolls are maintained and up to
date and it streamlines our
registration practices to make
it easier for potential voters
and election administrators
alike.
This also ensures that rural
registration experience so they
can access the ballot and have a
say in their government.
Another part of this bill Mr
president is the part of
voluntary permanent absentee
that's particularly important
for our our older voters members
of our disability community and
folks who had just have
inflexible work schedules so
this bill would streamline that
election unless they move move
and don't update their address
or the opt out.
And voting by mail makes our
elections both more accessible
HB four will restore the voting
rights of formerly incarcerated
folks are streamlining the
process for those individuals so
that they can enter re integrate
Mexico due to our existing laws
about Rian for incising
returning citizens.
And and Mr.
there's also a policy reason for
doing this.
Folks who are are leaving
incarceration and who engage
with our communities and
in a way that works that that is
functional for New Mexico and so
far what we've been trying
hasn't been working.
So Mister president regardless
secure and inclusive process.
The voting rights act H. before
that's before you reflects the
will and desire of New Mexicans
have a secure fair and equitable
eligible New Mexicans have the
caught their constitutional
right to vote and Mr president I
want to just acknowledge my my
Senate co sponsor on this bill
Thank you Mr president Mary
Miller make a requesting them as
request to remove our jackets.
Seeing no objection so order
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill four as
amended amendment sponsored by
senator Munoz share.
Senator moving explained the
elected chairman does so Mister
president this is actually a
very very very important
amendment in San Juan County
today San Juan county is being
precinct boundaries aligning
with with Navajo precinct by
entries in the county prison by
getting all that together.
But.
So.
It just moves it from twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
five to allow the litigation
play out and and make things
Is not really doable in reality
on the ground.
With San Juan County and Navajo
Nation today.
Thank.
voting rights act until after
our next general election so no
this is unfriendly.
Senator debating on the
amendment.
that Senator Here raises I'll
just simply point out that
article four section thirty
four.
Of the state constitution says
no act of the legislature shall
affect the right or remedy of
that our adopting this act at
this time of including the
native American voting rights
act.
will have an impact upon the
in effect at the time that the
redistricting was to.
and and release pursuant to our
constitution it should not
impact of the rights remedies of
either party.
legislature in the and the
executive have had run ins with
each other over time and we show
up in court.
The problem is once that
The same precincts that they are
now which are not in
coordination with the Navajo
precincts.
delay this on the on that point
okay the this is just something
that is one way or the other.
We're not going to do it right
Martinez Yazzie suits now for a
suit for what fifteen years
at least ten years and so we try
to fix things we try to make
The Navajo Nation gets their
precincts lined up with someone
counties precincts and and then
everything votes right.
The judge can undo it.
So.
There's no point in saying that
we're going to force this
through when clearly there some
This is about making it work on
the ground with real people.
Really happening.
may have spurred some of this
but the suits there now.
It exists now.
And I just I'm concerned Mr
president that if we don't allow
Senator I'm so Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you Mr president this
president.
It starts off with when
adjusting precinct boundaries
for a group of census blocks
that are on in the nation tribe
or pueblo less.
So that.
In other words this doesn't this
doesn't say.
This is not a mandate that it be
done yesterday.
This is a mandate that when you
would just pressing boundaries.
comes along.
And you've had twenty five
hundred dollars of twenty five
other people were more living in
a precinct or.
We have more than seven hundred
you're not required to adjust
precinct boundaries on to the
next decennial census.
So that.
The language.
should that be an issue in this
litigation right now thank you.
Centers we're debating House
Bill endorsed by amended.
senators position here but he
went through a litany of things
if this happens if this happens
if this happens the one thing
settled on what those should be.
That's that's a huge thing that
was just left out here.
It's not population it's not
And that's still a big deal.
This is this is this is about
doing it right.
About doing it right and if
we're not gonna do it right
amendment.
Do it right the judges in the
middle of it.
And it doesn't matter what this
thing says the judges still
going to be in the middle of it.
number one with all sincerity.
The house bill force already
twice amend.
And I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that the rules been called and
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator month is voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator or DC Pino voting no.
Senator my S. voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator McKenna voting no
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator common voting now.
Senator Shendo voting no.
Senator Lopez Moquino.
Senator souls voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
one has failed to pass the
Senate senator Munoz to explain
his motive Center share
certainly does thank you Mr
president you know in McKinley
county we are lined our chapter
Juan they may not be so thank
you Mr president Senator Stewart
back on the bill we do have
debate on the bill we have
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president and
As a woman and also native
American not having that right
to vote.
And even thinking at this moment
Of not having the progress on
the voting rights for women and
native Americans so I think it's
very important that we still
continue to make progress to
Into's to exercise the voting
rights thank you.
Senator Pinto we do have further
debate will have Senator
Gallegos followed by Senator
Hamblen Senator Gallegos.
couple questions I was in Senate
judiciary the other night
waiting on appeal in heard of
part of the testimony on this
but it it concerns me and I'm
your bill and
in the discussion she had made a
statement that she had enough
presents centers chance you
could tell me if she was able to
get more of that money Senator.
Mr president Senator so my
underfunded by this body and
they had just gotten the funds
that they needed to do those
reimbursements for the counties
Senator presence Center I I
appreciate that because that's
what I'd heard but I was told
that the reality of that payment
that came to her as one point
disclose the amount.
This presents center do do we
know why the.
A number change and or if of the
for unanimous consent to have my
expert witnesses join us which
is secretary of state Maggie
Toulouse Oliver and director
Lindsay Bachman from secretary
of state's office I see no
Senator goes to restate the
question.
Counties back
and and it sounded like you
would have enough matter of fact
I think our floor leader on this
side yes if you thought your
That we have two point three
million dollars outstanding not
counting Santa Fe County which
the clerk did not want to
disclose that amount and I
this presents center.
Senator and Mister president
senator so the secretary of
state has been use in place with
this with the cat with the
county clerk's and they have
beyond the MO you that is in
place between the clerks and
secretary of state Senator goes
Mr presence enter then I would
and my County clerks were
reimbursed.
Mister president senator I the
secretary of state doesn't Emily
with every county and every
county is being fully reimbursed
under the terms of those Emma
six million received in the two
point three obligating is that I
understand that this present
Senator Mr presents under now
that amount is not contracted
it's not just the obligation of
the counties not secretary of
state.
Senator so Mister president
center so the amounts that I
have here they're called money
owed to the counties for the
Senator Mr president center yes
your cracks not all of that is
that that is the responsibility
secretary of state's office one
point six million of it is the
and I appreciate your time and I
yield.
We do have further debate we're
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president I don't
need the sponsor to you'll just
crucis it one of the things that
I think is very unique and I
think it's unique about the
state all of our communities is
that folks folks feel that they
can approach their put their a a
served their time.
Our out giving back to their
community but our that are
challenged by getting their
voting their voice heard and I
Debbie.
She is the person who makes this
amazing burger at a local burger
place that has been in existence
since the nineteen thirties in
catch up on catch up on what's
going on with them and when I
was running for office she had
expressed how she would love to
be able to vote.
But she can't because she just
she was so discouraged by the
current process to restore
voting rights that she is still
her voice is still not heard.
And then I think about Joe I
recently met him over the last
country that is impacting his
ability to live authentically.
And is terrified because he
doesn't have a voice in that as
well.
heard so I'm grateful to the
sponsor for the element of this
for many things about this bill
but also just particularly the
restore a restoration of voting
rights on behalf of Debbie and
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill four as
hasn't been passed out I don't
have a caution so the the
amendment is being passed out
with the minutes be passed out
last Senator Diamond.
Move the amendment.
Don't have explaining Senator
we've heard about the importance
of creating this permanent
absentee voter list and so this
ammendment just insurers that
are true election experts are
secretary of state and our
third party's partisan third
parties and their involvement in
it and all this all this
amendment does is amend on page
five one eleven after that
period we're gonna insert the
words the voluntary permanent
ensure that we're taking steps
to ensure that those elections
your security can be so that it
doesn't discourage people from
voting.
this is a slightly different
version of it but this is come
up each time this bill was heard
this is unconstitutional this
when a similar amendment was was
moved.
In the twenty twenty election Mr
president there were some third
party groups that sent out
applications for absentee
was frustrating for the clerk's.
But the truth is those third
party groups have a hot have a
first amendment right to be
number one we do have debate
with Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president I just have to say the
the thought or the statement
that somehow someone has a
constitutional right to send you
on the windshield of my car
because of the first amendment
as my private vehicle you can't
do that just because you have
the right to free speech and the
an idea that I think is well
thought out and would make this
bill this horrible bill at least
a little better thank you Mr
president.
Diamond detailed thank you Mr
president.
So Mister president senator.
The constitutional argument
here.
Yes I mean it's it's it's our
right as Americans to vote we're
trying to expand and open this
process to include as many
voters as possible there's fears
ballots what we're trying to do
is is to dispel that idea and
and and open this up so that all
those know that we are going to
be managing those ballots as
Sometimes like in the last
twenty four hours of.
We had a a bill before us where
we were told that it had to be
this way.
you rolled your eyes when
somebody said something that
could possibly be aggrieved.
There had to be a private right
of action.
And so maybe what we should have
done is we should have put in
here that there's a private
right of action.
that like in the last twenty
four hours.
The same argument applies here
if we're going to interfere with
somebody's rights.
Potentially causing fraud in the
voters may potentially.
That is interfering with a very
clear.
right to vote that we really
are.
Making sure that every.
qualified.
nobody just making the money
muddying the waters around them.
It should be clear and easy to
vote.
When you get all this other
garbage at you.
ability to go on on the.
The internet or you know
whatever and and tell you how to
vote.
This isn't doing that.
That's all.
Take the money out of the water
make it clear.
So if it's coming from an
official source.
And we do that'll time we don't
allow people to register their
car.
Or get married or do other
things without the official
we don't have to have a a
license.
The comes from the state we can
have a license to comes from
anywhere we could have the bill
driver's license here you know
people that I can give my
driver's license but it's not
really true.
You know on this side we believe
Just make it clear make it
simple.
An official document is clear
thank document muddies the
water.
Unless we're going to put in an
amendment that says we have a
private right action for anybody
that send the stuff in grieves
us because the offended us by
stuff because while I was ugly
member yesterday just makes a
lot of sense to me today Mister
president thank you.
We do have for the debate to we
are on the amendment with center
Brandt followed by Senator Ivy
Senator Hey Dale yes Mr
president Senator Brandt thank
you Mr president thank you
senator for yielding
So with this amendment it would
it would only allow the county
I'm trying to understand so you
your response was that that
would be unconstitutional
because all these other groups
wouldn't be able to send out
application just to be on the
permanent absentee list shall
only be distributed by the
county clerk or through the
secretary of state's online
this isn't ballots this is just
an application to be on the
permanent absentee list anyone
else and no one else is allowed
to share that information other
than the county clerk or the
share this information only we
are that is a free speech first
amendment issue it is here it
also wasn't SB one eighty when
all together I could start doing
that to you too if you'd like or
we can be respectful.
Thank you
but so my my question.
not.
Senator.
Mr president senators so when we
talk about this issue on SB one
promulgate for an application to
be on the voluntary permanent
absentee list is the only thing
that that that can be used to
apply to be on that list so if
accepted at to get on to the
voluntary permanent absentee
list Senator Brandt so Mister
president senator.
Who does the official form.
Thomas present Senator
So you're saying that that.
Mr presents under no they would
not be allowed to put their own
information on the form itself
now.
But they could using their first
So can that be done with any
other forms of the government.
Senator.
Mr president Senator yes.
What happens if a person gets
you know ten or fifteen of these
from different groups and fills
them all out and since then.
Senator.
Separate.
Information so they would check
what the list to make sure
everything was the same how
would that work and why do we
want to confuse our voters that
way.
that then that updated
application would be entered and
and there.
More information for that list
would would reflect that update.
on the fiscal government form I
can't use someone else's
important and no one sends L.
since me that form it has to be
used on the ones with the the VA
and making sure that our voters
are not confused to the point of
the year thanking that the rules
are being messed around with
I think that's a weak argument
thank you Mr president we do
have further debate we're still
on the amendment Senator Ivey
Soto.
On the amendment.
This is what out first of all
that while I understand the
constitutionality argument.
On the regular form.
I just talk about where you get
a from.
In addition there is a federal
case out of Tennessee.
We're restricting where you get
And and then there's a big
difference does not the regular
has to form does the one to be
put on the voluntary provident
list which is a different
situational together thank you.
Mr president center of misprint
with the Senator yield so is
at the center of the amendment
to the bill centered on the on
the amendment Senator Diamond do
of your amendment is Senator
Diamond Mr president Senator guy
a ghosts this requires that only
the county clerk or the
secretary of state be allowed to
taking applications and
distributing them.
Senator Gallegos immersion Mr
president center that that
brought me to my thought on this
last election cycle
it could have been the one
introduce the we trust here our
state on our voter integrity
that would have the
Options and I like that you have
Senator Gallegos it is your your
concerns and fears surrounding
absentee ballot lists are
widespread what we're trying to
do is to ensure you Mexico
county clerk's elected and that
those are are chosen experts in
the field those on only those
entities should be handling such
a delicate information.
pressures that would change that
some of the opportunities to our
state so I'll yield but I thank
you for your time.
Thank you thank you senator
amendment center diamond to
close thank you Mr president I
think the most important part of
this amendment is that was
brought forward by our local
county clerk's people that are
our constituents of also elected
is the voice of our local county
clerks have been completely
ignored and left out of the
selection bell people who know
our know and understand our
local elections better than
of what we need to our local
actions and so with that I move
that
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill four as twice
centers we're voting on the
amendment Senator seats.
If you wish to vote no on the
amendment please raise your
hand.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
Senator Hemphill voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Senator Pinto voting no.
Senator poll voting no.
Senator McKenna voting no.
Senator Lopez Sedillo Lopez
voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
By a vote of sixteen the
affirmative twenty five in the
negative senator member number
one has failed to pass the
Senate Senator Diamond thank you
Mr president we do have we're
Thank you Mr president I have
a common question Mr president
will be sponsor yield Senator
obviously not only in my Irish
from what we talked about
earlier today but I'm also
Hispanic and I'm in it I'm a
If anything I take the cue from.
Mr Miguel Trujillo who in
nineteen forty eight.
the from the war and try to vote
he was denied so in nineteen
forty eight that's when the
Supreme Court agreed with his
claim that we need have to have
Mr president and senator.
I attended a county commission
meeting sometime ago.
posed to the contracted
consultant.
Was pretty alarming.
Was heightened when he was
speaking to a Navajo Nation
tribal member.
And said quote no one is going
to out Indian me.
because it came from a non
indigenous person.
So with that president and
senator I offer this one
question.
I'm.
Senator.
Mr president Senator yes it was.
And I'm offering it because it
ties into my next question so in
twenty nineteen ahead of the
twenty twenty census I visited.
Now why we're revisiting to
Hodges the on that day we wanted
to show him.
In person on this field trip.
they have nontraditional
addresses.
For instance Mr president and
senator.
One of the families we visited
And the gentleman said we drive
to the going to pueblo.
That's a sixty mile round trip
senator I share that example.
That experience for my second
question.
Mr president Senator can you
Mister president senator my
understanding is that there are
there's about fifty thousand
individuals on the Navajo Nation
who live at nontraditional
Mr president and senator I am
really glad that the sponsors
are able to answer that
question.
because.
means for their mail.
And that's why to I'm such a
strong supporter of the secured.
Ballot boxes.
reassures me Mr president and
Senator that we are.
Abiding by what
Miguel Trujillo did in the early
Thank you Mr president like
Senator McKenna I also have an
inspirational role model in this
and that is Nino terror Warren
were successful.
And this bill is the same kind
of progression and that is
opening up to the franchise two
people who should be allowed the
franchise.
about specifically and that is
when the when the restoration of
voting rights to former felons
part of the bill was passed to
professor Tim Canova and
follow it and they ended up
serving has experts on the bill
because they did so much
research on it it was definitely
a trend throughout the the
country.
And we all know that would
happen after the civil war there
were several attempts to deprive
the vote from from African
Americans from from black people
an important reversal what
happened however is there were
so many requirements and it was
such a difficult thing to do to
do that we actually try to help
hard so hard together and no
matter how hard the secretary of
state and the clerks tried to
make it smoother it's still is
felons and I said well you can
get the vote back and they
didn't even know.
They had no idea and so I really
think that the provisions
they become more engaged.
In that specifically there is
that it actually lowers
recidivism so I'm very proud to
stand in support of this entire
For a second time.
It is I listen to this debate
here.
There's a lot of interesting
things to come up and so if the
Mister president you mentioned I
believe the number was seventeen
thousand people were denied the
right to vote the last election.
Is that correct.
Senator.
last election or if that how
many have been denied the right
to vote since we've been taking
the the current the approach
that we took currently tech.
thousand over a hundred years
will.
That's not not a lot of people
but if it's seventeen thousand
of people over the last election
let is a lot of people but but
right now is a system that
fundamentally does not work
where folks have to go get all
of this paperwork to the these
dysfunctional so you have to
have this paper to be allowed to
re register to vote but you
can't get the paper there's
there's a fundamental problem in
Senator Mr president I'm.
I'm confused by that because we
said there were seventeen
thousand and we talk about our a
As a real ID driver's license
you certainly have to produce
paper you have to produce a
birth certificate marriage
certificate and divorce decree
seventeen thousand people who
probably have a driver's license
can't figure out how to come up
with the documents to register
to vote.
Did I understand that correctly
providing for yourself to the
NMED to get that license where's
Mr president in this case this
is a document that that are
returning citizens they do not
Senator.
Mr president why why can't they
get it.
Senator.
been trying for years and it is
not working so that is why we
took the simplified approach to
enfranchise in our returning
citizens of if you're in you
I still don't understand how how
how that works
But I do know that in all the
time we we talk about numbers
like that and you know we have
don't qualify and she couldn't
name though not you the person I
was asking
In I was only half facetious
rest of us probably fall in that
category we don't know it.
Before one percent part is
pretty high.
And so we thought these weird
numbers like that I'm just
In yet I don't have a clear
answer of how long ago that was
when that was where that was
just they can get a piece of
paper because of bureaucracy
So.
That's just my just my concern
there Mr president I do believe
But also thanks Senator we do
have a floor amendment.
The reader to read.
The Senate floor amendment
Have their member delivered to
them Senator some of the
amendment Mr president I move
Senate floor amendment one to
house bill four twice then.
Senator goes to explain the
amendment.
At the wrong.
person shall be offered the
opportunity to decline to be
registered and may decline to be
registered during the in person
Senator debate and senator
member number one.
Senator had.
Mr president this is an
unfriendly amendment what this
in the country for voter
registration and doing at doing
this this often approach that
this amendment would would turn
amendment would basically keep
the status quo and undo the
change we are making in this
bill so it is on friendly.
Senator we're debating senator
of ideal.
Senator Brandt Mr president
senator why is this important
amendment that it be put in
Senator Gallegos misprision body
of the Jehovah's witnesses group
discussing this bill in its
entirety Mr president center and
and it even goes further than
that they have to take a stand
and actually Mr.
Senator I looked into our
constitution for the January
twenty twenty three version and
what this bill is doing term in
this amendment would give them
the.
The protections that they feel
that they're obligated to at
through the of.
The constitution because of
violates people's rights.
To not be registered to vote
because that is their religious
be neutral and this makes them
part of the process and I just
want to be able to protect their
work their rights.
Senator ready so that's for
thank you Mr president thank you
senator I I think you're
involved in politics or I
wouldn't be here today I believe
we should vote I believe we
should register to vote however
there are others who do not
there are others who their
piece of paper to remove
themselves but it's already
violated their constitutional
right to set up to be separate.
sued and when they sue with
other so it'll just be thrown
out because it's
unconstitutional in its current
form.
Because it gives no one the
maybe they don't want to be part
of the process maybe it's not
just a religious beliefs they
just don't want to be part of it
they never have then they don't
want to be and we're forcing
have to have our free will.
The building in the greatest
nation in the world that we get
to actually have these guys some
discussions to be able to show
that you know there are people
here and so I think this gives
me the only opportunity I have
to give them their their freedom
this presents etcetera thank you
Mr president answer I thank you
for bringing up the on the
registered voter you are forcing
them to associate.
So those that make this bill
violates constitution to
different places Senator.
won't think through we we are a
delivered a body in the state to
be able to write law and we
don't look at what it will do to
our constituents and or even
the legal aspect and I know
currently they're tearing this
bill part at the corporate
office of the Jove witness Luke
will fight back thanks for the
question was pressed Center read
most present Senator I thank you
for standing up for your oath of
office to actually support our
freedom not to associate so I
appreciate that I support this
amendment I think it's an
amendment needs to be on here
but if it's not it's a poison
pill for the bill so I guess it
can just stay off and we can
We're Senators meetings on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor of the bill please yield
Senator Duhigg detailed yes Mr
president.
Thank you Mr presence
hoping I apologize for that but
I was hoping
that I could hear your your
response to.
A person that has a religious
objection.
Senator.
Mister president senator my
understanding and the example
was used of Jehovah's witnesses
and enrollment I will yield to
center create Hemphill but my
organizations across New Mexico
who have signed on supporting
this bill but this would not
yield to senator Crapo.
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president St thank you to the
bill sponsor for yielding up
having grown up as a Jehovah's
actual participation in the
voting process that we weren't
supposed to do and certainly if
there's an opt out method that
does not violate any of the
because I was raised to have his
witness I didn't know anything
about voter registration or what
the party stood for and so I
really would have appreciated
running for state Senate I can't
think of his name right now but
I think it was a lieutenant
governor.
knowing how to participate it
would have been really.
Appreciated thing in my life and
not have the ability to be able
to go and register somewhere and
wouldn't know how to do that
either and I want to make sure
that people like Nicholas and
know for for us in New Mexico we
should be encouraging voter
participation two and and want
to make sure that more people
thank you Mr president and all
all all go ahead and while we're
at it address the constitutional
arguments so again because.
This is just a registration not
look at the bill on page sixteen
line twelve if someone declines
registration it shall be deemed
they shall be deemed to have not
registered to vote so it is
you as a Republican are
automatically registered to you
as a Democrat and you had no say
in that that would be
unconstitutional simply being
any religious rights Senator
manages to have the floor thank
you Mr president it is really
interesting answer I appreciate
give me the the page in line I'm
I'm still I'm still trying to
decide how many vote on this
amendment if it's you know if
it's necessary unnecessary and
I'm I'm hearing kind of a couple
of things are little conflicting
were I'm kind of hearing a
center.
Senator Mr president center yes
look at page sixteen so what
happens in this process is you
go to the MVD.
transaction you will then be
automatically register to vote
if you're not already you'll be
informed of that at the time and
given an opportunity to pick a
party at that time if you want
postcard send it back in and it
you shall be deemed as said have
never been registered to vote so
I'm looking at and so on page
sixteen that subsection II
Can we go before that real quick
I I I I understand there's going
to be a chart so it says.
step back haven't seen this bill
on in committee
What what happens before that so
I I'm I'm trying to turn our our
would assume is a is that
correct.
Senator Mr president Center CSO
so that person will be
registered if they return the
card saying I don't want to be
issue here and please please
correct me if I'm
misinterpreting what you're
telling me is I'm kind of
reading the bill.
They they are in fact registered
with that.
there are
Multiple groups and this is
their belief okay a lot of there
are kind of works based
denomination cult followers of
the way.
follows the way believe that
they they don't yes they they
they deny they don't want to
participate in any way in what
what they refer to as earthly
politics.
and so certainly being
registered to vote is
very it's very very clear maybe
will disagree but it's very very
clear to me with my knowledge of
different denominations
I think we don't need to go down
you know we're we're not gonna
have the constitution we're
going to resolve this and debate
yes it is constitutional is not
that's the judiciary's job right
I I will have the my my concerns
alleviated but so far I I I
guess let me ask a different way
Mr present center it is there a
way for a person that has a
registered at all in your bill
as is right now.
Senator.
So Mister president Senator
duty this but so if they so yes
the answer to your question is
yes they will mark no on the
postcard and send it back in and
it will be at shut that will be
I would as a yes the same folks
not wanting to be involved in
any kind of earthly politics
when they get called up for jury
duty they probably go in there
of telling someone that so yes
if you get called up for jury
jury duty in a conflict with
your beliefs can go there and
say that if you're securely
Senator is yes and then Mr
president center I I.
I'm hearing what you're saying
but I'm still asking because I
this is a big bill it's it's a
lengthy bill I'm I'm still
Registered or not under the
bill.
Senator Mr president they can
return that postcard and they
there is a post card that can be
placed and they can revoke their
name but is there a way for them
to have to not need the postcard
in the first place is there a
That would be the system that
that we have now which is an opt
in system rather than opt out
system which is what this
amendment seeks to accomplish
and that is the system that has
is another red herring logical
fallacy I'm I'm not asking about
of voter registration on asking
about the intent of the bill I
am asking.
for them to never be included on
the voter rolls.
Or not.
Senator Mr president I can keep
giving the same answers if he
wants to keep asking the same
return the card and it shall be
deemed not to have registered to
vote
And under the.
Under with the what you're
Senate committee Mr president
center in I I've I've had
debates in committee debates on
the floor.
Answers so the members can
understand how the bills work.
I think this is the core issue
it keeps it keeps coming up I
I'm still not getting in so I
still have because it's such a
lengthy bill it's still hard for
me to to know exactly what's
going on because the sponsors
not providing a direct answer.
on but this is delaying the
debate and if the answer was
provided in a clear way during
my first attempt to answer the
question to ask the question we
we kind of moved on and and
going to I'm not going to prompt
someone I'm not going to ask a
question and say tell me yes or
no I find that to be rude and
disrespectful but once again Mr
president I Mr special not to
that answer that we are going to
protect someone's.
Ability to not associate with
earthly politics I think it's a
legitimate concern I really do.
And I think our religious
believes our religious freedoms
in this country are very very
very foundational.
objector to say you know I I
don't want to be associated with
it the other problems we can see
in in that's going to happen is
we just heard from another
member about how people house
for a neighbor in the mail.
Whatever it may be or the card
gets lost and then what happens
that person that religiously
objects if they don't receive
the card.
religious objector what I mean
that's not gonna happen that's
not realistic.
So let's say they don't get
taken off and then they start
getting political mail it's such
a it's such for other get
present so I I don't see a
problem with with simply
allowing someone to religiously
object how it just doesn't seem
to go against the spirit of the
bill Mr president.
because we have a federal US
constitutional argument over
this.
but anyway the to see we would
seem to really be simple to just
amendment Senator goes to close
on the amendment.
Is present I just do want to
clarify to the body that my
discussion with general counsel
Joe hold awareness organization
would be forcing them into
anything and so I'm just saying
and wanting state that they
their main objective is for them
president I asked so we moved
that Senate floor amendment
number one to house bill four
twice amended in ask unanimous
consent Senate that the record
endorsed by amended.
I'll Senators tier seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator Gonzales voting no.
Senator my S. voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Center how to meal voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
Senator when US voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
By a vote of sixteen affirmative
twenty two in the negative
have another floor amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Mr president I move Senate floor
amendment number one again to
House Bill endorsed already
twice amended.
See no objection.
from county clerks all over of
place and
Some of the things that they
right here just kind of some
check the drop boxes this is
McKinley County.
And the it was a wasted trip.
And it was a wasted trip because
it was nothing in the drop box.
The box at the admin building.
Of was used on election day.
boxes a they're not used often
apparently and be.
It costs time and money and and
wear and tear on county vehicles
Say they weren't used at all in
those that were used for used
minimally.
And it took a long time for.
good Senator tell me why I'm
wrong.
Senator is we're debating Senate
floor member number one and I
yield to the Senate Sanchez
Senator thank you Mr president
so Mister Mister president all
know first that there are
there's a variety of opinions
about monitor secure containers
amongst the clerks hi there some
what this language does is all
this does is it codifies an
existing rule that the secretary
of state has on that says.
that doesn't work for you you
can request a waiver of this
requirement so in counties where
having to monitor secure
containers does not work they
monarch monarch secure
containers and there will now be
a notice that is sent out to all
voters telling them about this
and telling them where those
monarch secure containers matter
is because as noted earlier more
more New Mexicans are choosing
the convenience of voting by
their ballots to these
containers I want to say and
Colorado it's about about half
of voters return them using
these more secure containers
because Mr present their heck of
that they're going to be secure
that's going to be monitor the
entire time and that they're
going to get to the clerk and
the count.
and I don't need the sponsor of
the amendment or the the sponsor
of the bill to yield I just want
to share my experience in doing
in a county with Dropbox is in
my community and especially in
health situations and during the
pandemic the drop boxes proved
to be very effective for those
folks who did not want to go
into and closed buildings they
primary with the drop box and
was greeted by two friendly
folks who are happy to be there
monitoring those boxes to make
sure that nothing nefarious
happened with the ballots and I
That when they are living so far
out often it is challenging for
them enough to vote as it is and
by not having these
opportunities for drop box is
available to them we are
effective way of doing that with
security from each of the the
clerks and to make sure that our
residents are able to have their
Thank you Mr president
with the sponsor of the bill
yield Senator yield yes Mr
president Senator Brandt thank
with video surveillance twenty
four hours a day.
Senator Brandt
and Mister president senator so
company as I'm told by the
secretary of state also there's
are also sensors on these
monitors secure containers
that's another way that the
monitor so that like so it
for being stolen or they being
monitored for.
Senator.
Mr president all of the above
although they are permanent they
are installed in the ground it
They were doing testing these
more boxes are so secure they
were doing testing on them
trying to set them on fire it
took it took it it took the
Orange County fire department an
any in there Senator Brandt
this presents Sir thank you for
mentioning one of the few
Republican counties in
California.
for sheet that but
else in one of those boxes
senator Dick.
Mr president and senator I think
that with the so in SB one
where you have to yes sign and
say who you are and and and your
how your associate with that
person
and in that I'm trying to
about for someone else that
that's in current law and we.
Your take.
Mediate family caretaker
domestic partner that's in
current law.
So is that to the is that built
in on the governor's desk we're.
I'm used keep referring to that
bill and I'm trying to find
what's in this bill so is is
said to you about who can return
that's in current law
I was thinking of estimate there
they're all starting to melt in
my mind Mr president so I
apologize of that is confusing
Mr president no Senator so if I
wanted my wife to return my
ballot to one of these drop
boxes I would have to sign the
outer envelope saying that I
Mr president so if you're the
voter you're gonna sign where
the voter signs but there's a
part of the on the top of the
envelope that whoever's
returning it your wife which she
making sure that's actually
happening.
Senator.
Mr president when those
envelopes that get to the county
clerk's office they are doing
They have surveillance cameras
surveillance.
How do they know whether or not
my wife is returning my ballot
her ballot.
they were if your wife was the
one million and your ballots
verses verses you.
Senator rand.
Mr president Senator you make a
have someone so the monitoring
system it's almost putting in
five six seven ten balance is
the monitoring system.
has ten wives in the state but
maybe who knows.
Senator.
Padilla looked at me really
strange on that one so.
The.
But if you know that no one's
watching and you know that no
one's going to catch you who
cares.
That they're committing a felony
we'll laws only as good as it's
being enforced.
track that there's no way to to
determine whether or not someone
actually committed that felony
who's investigating it.
Who's reporting it.
Senator Representative Mr
president center.
How many others did that that
didn't get caught.
How many others did it to the
camera didn't see how many
ballots they were putting in the
Senator.
Mr presence on our out all know
there's probably also people who
drive drunk in the state and
and do the wrong thing and there
won't they and not every single
person who who commits who does
that in the state will be caught
elections that help voters have
make sure that their voices are
heard.
Senator Representative this
presents senator I think it just
opens it up.
And not really being monitored.
just makes it more of that in
secure way of returning and it
all those tapes are to that will
happen in Espanola did they only
find it because someone else
lodged a complaint.
Senator Duhigg.
What is someone the at in this
situation and Espanola and I
appreciate that so much charged
county clerk discovered what was
going on in that instance but
but Mister presents under also
note that
can put ballots in the mail I
and there's no footage so this
is more security because.
If that situation comes up and
company but by this contractor.
Center right now thank you Mr
president thank you senator
procedure answers on that
but we're definitely not going
to get rid of mailing in ballots
because that would really hurt
those who can't actually go out
and mail like my father in law.
Senator is we're debating
senator member number one any
further debate on the amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator to close.
that all those present voted in
the affirmative.
Or I should do to the where all
floated in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senators tier seats phase we're
voting on the amendment.
Senator Wirth voting no Senator
Padilla voting no.
Senator souls voting no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator my SS voting no Senator
Pinto voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no center
how to meal voting no.
Senator Rodriguez Moquino.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Thank you Mr president that one
actually took a lot longer than.
I thought it would but I'm
grateful for.
Senator where Hemphill on the
bill.
Center K. Hempfield you're on
the list to speak on the bill.
Reiterate that I really
appreciate the secure automatic
voting registration just because
for.
Ability to go and register
this is going to help them
participate and
Having grown up Jehovah's
Thank you centers we are on the
bill.
Senator Senator Brandt.
Senator take the field yes Mr
president thank you Mr president
and after I get done I thought
of something else to ask but it
works on the bill as well as the
drop boxes is that a public
record and is if Roybal.
Senator Mr president senator yes
those to try to find the
multiple drops is that right.
Senator Mister president senator
yes.
I recommend.
going right now and in the the
when I went and got my secure
driver's license because I
thought I lost my driver's
license actually wasn't even
going to worry about secure
driver's license because I have
might as well get my secure
license and course I was just at
that time from registered to
vote and I certainly hope so but
yes I I am
and
re registered in our new
address.
And you know what I did to re
register.
Was really cool.
And I want to thank secretary
state for this because I think
I do have to ask for important
from anybody.
Then it was super easy I just
put my current information in.
other people register online
because right well I don't know
where to register and I'm like
you guys are.
I need to register right now.
Because it's probably a lot
easier for them to register
online at home.
Then it would be to go down to
the DMV and register.
So can you help me understand
We we made it as easy as it
could possibly.
Senator.
Mr president center I agree with
you the online registration is a
registration alone was.
Was a not for that we probably
wouldn't be forty second in the
country in voter registration so
for vote folks who have that
access that is a wonderful
option not everyone does and
simply having that great option
is has not gotten us above being
And that's a whole lot better we
are in a lot of other things.
But.
that's what it was where I grew
up the in the the was was very.
Do you need are you registered
to vote yes okay.
And yet we're gonna force people
who apparently don't want to be
part of our voting system.
To register to vote as this I I
don't get that I don't get the
things but on this one issue
we're gonna force everybody.
So anyway there's there's other
issues I have in the bill again
and that and this bill because
I'm a little bit confused
Senator it sure so Mister
president senator.
What wishes right now someone
that involves the courts
at the corrections department
where her probation and parole
and if where you're supposed to
it is incredibly hard for
returning citizens to get that
form that would then allow them
to re register to vote so what
we're changing here is we're we
are simplifying it we are saying
Debt to society.
Having a felony is not.
A light thing right it's not
like I do want to make a felony.
have paid their carceral debt to
society we are they can vote so
after when they are no longer
incarcerated they can vote.
they still haven't paid their
full debt to society some people
haven't paid restitution like
they're supposed to.
with that the the other issue is
and let me ask you this so if
someone has a felony and then
they get their voting rights
restored can they then run for
office.
President Senator then we have a
judge in the last election rule
differently than that.
So Mr presents under anyone can
if you qualify for the ballot
can run for office under our.
to restore the rights but not
fully.
Mr president Senator we are we
are allowing them to vote if
they are not incarcerated that
They now have a right to have a
firearm.
Because we think they should get
their rights back.
repeat laws those federally and
state
But I just think it's it's
interesting which ones we pick
and choose.
And I say to leave.
Actually completely served and
paid their debt to society they
should not have the right to
vote they should not be involved
in the system.
So we must present the.
I thank you.
Senator for yielding to my
questions I thank you for
yield Senator Hey Dale yes Mr
president thank you Mr president
thank you senator I do have a
question how many people were
not able to participate in the
with which law are you talking
that the whole bill.
Senator Pirtle Mr president
Senator we're here.
Basically claiming that without
without the passage of house
bill four is twice amended did
not participate in the last
election because this was not a
in a current law at the time.
otherwise be eligible to vote in
New Mexico who are returning
citizens who who'd have not had
the ability to vote.
And this presents the the.
that one small section we know
of a there could potentially be
seventeen thousand and we'll
probably just rolls at the forty
two percent or even less are
Mr president Senator we don't
have anybody I haven't received
an email from one person saying
I wasn't able to participate in
the election because House Bill
voting rights act twenty twenty
three but yet at I believe that
everybody that wanted to
participate put in the effort
necessary and participated just
here and we've argued many
aspects of this bill but the the
truth of the matter is is it
it's doesn't expand voting
rights everybody has the same
probably zero people were
prevented from participating
election that wanted to I I do
think that Mr president Senator
I find it ironic that we have
the right to vote in the
vote on election day.
But yet whenever it comes to the
second amendment and other
constitutional inalienable god
given right that we have.
it harder and harder to exercise
that right so I I think it's
quite interesting as a body that
we're gonna sit here kind of
pick and choose what
constitutional rights we believe
our constitutional inalienable
strange that that we don't
require some type of
responsibility on the electorate
to put in just some effort with
convenience centers and
other than restoring voting
rights to felons I wish that was
separate that might be something
I I could have supported I I
think it's important going door
to door when I was running for
office I met quite a few people
many issues we have the county
clerks
beating down our door say this
is bad and I I just hope that.
In two years whenever we see all
passed isn't working I wish
somebody would have said
something well there they did
there in the building today and
so I I think that's one of my
want that we want that front
page above the fold in the
Albuquerque journal on this bill
as opposed to let's let's be the
the body that that works
for the debate on the bill
Sentinelle.
Thank you Mr president and and
members I don't need to sponsor
yielded just because this is a
technically if you support this
you know successfully complete
your parole if you can track
down that many documents that
you need from just the
corrections department let alone
these folks have been released
from prison it's very simple
either in prison you can vote
when you get out you can vote
but in the larger picture is
present the possibility of a law
abiding life to folks said
they're truly want to change
their ways and and the message
that we can send is you can vote
if somebody can just add to have
having been sentenced and coming
out and trying to do the right
things in their life it's it's
assistant you know
superintendent of corrections or
something to get the proper
paperwork is that is has been
the reality so I just feel
strongly this is an important
Thank you senator nail centers
we are on the bill.
Could be.
Any further debate on the bill.
Senator.
Mr president
I move to table House Bill
Right right.
Senate floor substitute for
lands addressing precinct
boundaries expanding early
voting sites an alternate mobile
locations find the providing
native American language
Education Task Force addressing
compliance with the federal
voting rights act of nineteen
sixty five and state native
American election statutory laws
providing for compliance making
appropriation declaring an
emergency.
Senate floor substitute for
This was done once before twenty
years ago.
So this is a history lesson you
all pay attention.
Not true but this takes care of
that so it has some some simple
things in it let me just read a
couple of them no later than the
third Tuesday in February
preceding the primary level
block the county clerk shall
clerk consults with the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo.
Of for the election day voting
so that's one of the steps.
Of the run Indian nation tribal
or pueblo lands the board of
county commissioners and the
county clerk shall consult with
each Indian nation tribe or
pueblo in the county to find and
with consultation they will also
set up early voting sites so the
early voting sites will be
exactly where.
sites to be considered so again
if the nation tribe or pueblo
chooses to have this mobile
service in the county clerk will
make mobile service happens so
Provides for broadcasting.
In native language of all of the
things that have to happen or
Each county shall hire a native
American language interpreter
under contract who speaks the
language fluently.
The secretary of state shall
further enhance election
an announcement through those
same native languages.
The county clerk shall produce
printed materials.
That the consultation with the
nation tribes or pueblos to the
places they want those things
distributed.
The native American voting
Education Task Force.
Is created to address the voting
needs of native Americans of
nations tribes or pueblos.
So in short.
I believe that this this
addresses.
Most of the issues that were
brought up here.
So the the native American
voting rights act.
And so with that Mr.
Identifies stand for questions
thank you same as we're debating
in here that have I seen them at
any time before we're in the
middle and the floor debate on
the bill.
I probably would have been
interested in it integrating
them in into the bill and I'd be
deprive New Mexico voters of all
the other protections in the
bill.
Thank you senator Senator voting
we're debating Senator
substitute for House Bill for
anyone wishing to debate.
Senate senator substitute for
house bill four center Baca
thank you Mr president.
Can you tell me more I actually
with the sponsor of the
that this would do that this way
to to to sort an act some of the
positive aspects would enact in
your in your particular
location.
talk about how are we going to
outreach to our nations tribes
and pueblos how we can include
them make sure they're included
and so in this particular case
it sets up.
The nations tribes and pueblos
not only work with them but
where they're told to put the
voting the voting.
could to pick where that
happens.
So they get to choose you know
this this place is a voting
place for this place shouldn't
be a voting place whatever it
so you have to tell everybody
where to vote how to register
where to register when
registration ends with early
absolutely making sure that
everybody who has.
Of the right to vote.
Gets to vote and we're not
leaving them out of anything so
that's the that's the.
native American voting
educational task force and the
of who consisted is is really
interesting
and I think it would achieve
from northern Navajo each agency
member from Navajo election
administration of Navajo Nation
I'm one member from Mescalero
Apache one member from hickory
seems to be a really inclusive
and seems to to really capture
what we've what we're really
setting out to do in this bill
the other thing that I was going
pay the the Navajo speakers and
so that's what that would be for
is to make sure that there was
not a of the a financial burden
Woodley that's that's what I
lost I have trouble with those
multi slip backwards sometimes
Mister president.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president I want to thank you
for that answer it
pueblos in this state and I I
just look at this and this is a
fine example of of what we we
should be looking at and what we
should be trying to do in other
thing I like about it Mr
are controversial to say the
least but this I think we can
agree on is something that's
needed something that that is
substitute for house bill four.
Si no further debate center
shared clothes on the floor
substitute.
we should not be trying to log
roll a lot of other things in
here we call them voting but
there's so many other things in
there this addresses one of the
key components straight up no
for or against will be accused
of something else doesn't matter
I voted against it and I will be
accused of something I voted for
it I'll be accused of something
Does everything that I believe
we should have been doing for a
long time with the Indian voting
rights act it absolutely.
We're providing them lots of of
information we're providing them
information in in their own
language.
On the native American voting
rights act it's just that
simple.
It's not a lot of other things
it's not about drop boxes.
Hard for me to understand how
anybody could not vote for this.
Because I think it's clear.
One issue.
One thing.
there's all kinds of reasons to
vote against something.
That's where we get all to get
ourselves all twisted Mr
president.
Because I may vote against a
legacy fund to help take care of
New Mexico.
There was one little bit in
there.
That I didn't like.
I voted against it.
But it did have a poison pill
and it as far as I was concerned
it wasn't put there on purpose
which is there.
letters thanks.
Almost people love me that much
they certainly started to Love
Me more.
But it wasn't because the idea
was that it wasn't even because
the bill was bad it was because
Without even understanding what
all of the ramifications were.
This fixes that one issue let's
do it so with that Mr president
For House Bill endorsed twice
amended and ask unanimous
consent that the record show
that the role is being called.
And all those that really want
to enjoy it.
Senator share center Ingle for
the historical knowledge the
background institutional
information that was able to
share so as strips are develop
we always learn new things here
the Senate floor substitute
house bill four four house
before voted yes we'll table the
original bill that we are on and
then substitute it with the
floor.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator Ivey Soto loading now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting no.
Senator want this voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator Hickey voting now.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Center for the a voting no.
Senator fenics voting no.
Senator could Hemphill voting
no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no.
nation incentive for substitute
for house bill four has failed
to pass the Senate Senator.
Representative I want to thank
you in in that's a lesson so we
all need to pay attention
Mr president as the sponsor to
yield just a couple more
questions Mr Jake Dale yes Mr
president.
Mr president center earlier and
ammo you in place I'm just
wondering Mr present center of
appear expert witness can
explain to me why it's in
electric code hello election
code sorry
item to serve reimbursing the
county for the cost of
conducting and mistreating
the differences between.
The M. O. U. and stature.
This present Senator this
the use of based on anticipated
costs and then if they have
additional costs that are are
covered under the statute they
funding given to cover those
costs this year but my
understanding that so they went
to the board of finance to get
accordance with the statute now
if they were caught additional
costs that aren't covered by the
statute than those are costs
that the secretary of state is
I do I do appreciate that I can
read that and
section do I do have a question
because in judiciary of the
floor earlier on the side as
your expert witness if that is
still a true statement.
Senator Mister president senator
yes my understanding is the
budget her budget is going well
this year and she asked that
this body support her budget as
it was it in H. B. two as it
money to pay the outstanding
balance is currently owed now
not on the next budget this
presents center can you check
with that Senator okay Mister
president center yet that was
Senator.
This presents center than I will
refer back to my counties to
make sure that we are
receiving the entitlement is yes
discussion about our current opt
in measures we have Mr president
center do you understand that
over seventy percent of the
think what you're referring to
is how much are our current opt
in system is being used my
understanding is that it is it
is not being used all that much
out and that's about five
percent so about ninety five
percent who are securely
automatically registered I would
choose to remain registered.
because I think that shows the
value in the need of the opt out
and all yield with that thank
you Mr president center.
Just just quickly here.
It is time for another history
lesson.
Because things are set out there
that that.
Our.
When the of the Indians could
vote.
In the United States.
The United States was literally
at war.
The Navajo Nation was a separate
nation.
They weren't part of the United
States.
And so to say that they were
denied to be Americans well on
one hand absolutely because they
were foreign nations same with
the pueblos in the and the
So the United States in the
Navajo Nation clearly had
battles same with the Apaches
so that was the mindset that's
when we were.
We were to really change that.
outstanding soldiers sailors and
marines.
During World War two and that
really started to have a mindset
change wait a minute.
These are the enemies of the
was still written that way and
still a lot of things kind of
what we did this morning by
removing some some antiquated
language from our laws that all
had to go through a process.
But it was when.
changed.
And that was good that was
important.
But the mindset before that was
that we were enemies.
The United States and the Navajo
Nation.
So that was one thing the
women's right to vote this once
this one is really interesting.
So.
Women actually got the right to
vote from the nineteenth
amendment to the U. S.
passed Congress in nineteen
nineteen and then was sent to
the states for ratification.
In nineteen eighteen.
Republicans passed it out of
Congress and send it to the
states to ratify New Mexico
ratified it we're one of the.
legislature were Republican.
It was ratified very quickly.
Those are the things that are
I just want to be careful here
you know as we so we throw
things around about what's you
know who did what to whom.
But even though I'm going to
point out that Republicans did
that.
On this side we all believe that
the that people have a
constitutional right to vote
absolutely.
Never a question over here on
And we're not sure that that is
what's happening out there we
have doubts but Mr president I
would like to point out that in
twenty sixteen.
school way that both sides of
this chamber can say yes we know
that we've got honest elections
here and not doubt whether it
was or not and certainly there
We work together a little bit on
this.
Should not be one of those
things that's just jammed
through again because got twenty
six votes.
but we won't do that we won't do
that.
In the FIR here.
Mr president the the motor
vehicle department.
customer NVD would need to
determine appropriate access to
citizenship information that
would now be tied to driver
record and their database NVD
would also need secretary of
the more vehicle department.
Our motor vehicle department
state of New Mexico motor
vehicle department not a
Republican or Democrat motor
vehicle department says we're
not sure we can do this.
clerk's affiliates.
They took a vote on this do they
want to endorse this
legislation.
And they came back with a pretty
solid no.
The people running are counties
thank you this might not be the
right thing but you know the
most disheartening thing about
this debate today and the thing
that would have made this debate
To fix real life problems.
On the ground in San Juan
County.
We've had we've been able to
just take one simple amendment
But we can't even do that.
We can't even do that.
This is like the third or fourth
And because you got twenty six
votes doesn't matter which gonna
bash it through.
And that's because the debate
Done twenty six.
And so what can I do Mr
president.
Well I can do what I do I can
talk.
And we should work together.
We could have a wonderful.
Voting rights bill.
like it was fair and honest.
And we've seen several of these
and we're going to see another
one tomorrow.
everybody on the side of the
chamber would feel that was
fair.
And we did it poorly because we
didn't.
Except any.
Amendments that would have made
it better.
And we do that all the time half
Coordination a little bit better
effort.
I think we could avoid all of
that.
My point.
Thank you Mr president I'll be
brief
Your last year I believe it was
it was not to build that others
want to.
Representative couldn't stand up
at that point say that the
Senate voted by partition Lee to
ultimately which was passed and
signed thank I think Mr
president and and members of the
body that's that's what's
unfortunate.
Usually we had already done
that.
dishes workers has come to pass
is that we have we pretty much
got the one party approach to
other bills we take a.
The rest of this session so
Mister president with that thank
you very much members of the
body vote your conscience ideas.
Thank you Mr president and I
just want to correct one one
thing that we heard before I.
Before we close out on this bill
there is a comment that the
the clerks were on the call it
was not a quorum.
Thirteen of the clerks thirteen
Clark first voted against this
vote was taken without a quorum
The New Mexico New Mexico
counties to us it clarified and
the they were neutral on this
first vote where a minority of
clerks were on and did vote
against it but with that Mr
president.
Also this year seats we're
voting on house bill four is
twice amended has been requests
for roll call.
Senator Brandt votes no senator
Byrd.
Senator Burt both snow Senator
Campos Senator Campos both CS
interest of this Senator Vontaze
Center guy our no ma'am etcetera
guy because of us snow Center
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
both CS Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle about snow Center
Ivey Soto.
Senator meal center our meal
Center McKenna yes Senator
McKenna votes yes Senator
Moores.
Centerman yes.
Senator Ortiz Pino votes yes
interpret DS Center video votes
yes inner Pinto.
Senator Pinto votes yes center
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle votes no Center
Sanchez both snow Center
smitteez.
Senators maybe is votes no
centricity elephas yes center
city elephas both CS Center
share.
Senator Stefano votes yes
interest I'm bored center
Steinborn both CS Center Stewart
Senator Stewart both CS Center
Thoman.
Hickey at center Hickey both CS
Center Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto votes yes.
Mr president Santo Domingo spoke
Twenty seven affirmative
fourteen the negative house bill
for us twice amended has duly
going back on the calendar to
item number seven.
And you'll to Senators panics.
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
thirty seven of the put on final
passage and that it has been
this is a state agency bill the
offices this of state engineer
and the Interstate Stream
Commission spent the last year
bill would actually change some
of their statute to create new
regional water planning function
prioritize projects and
activities and to secure water
supplies and address
environmental issues Mr
cities counties towns small the
state kia's communities and
this.
A fifty year water task force
more and water planning and I
would stand for questions thank
you senators we're debating
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
thirty seven we did debate on
question or two Senator anexio
Mr president I yield.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president US senator you member
this summer in and we talked to
there was one chart in
particular that is loved and I
loved it so much a broader home
put it in my office in and had
of water that went to the
riparian area of the screen and
it is usually counted as
river flow itself
it and I'm sure that you
remember that in you may not
remember the exact percentage
and sad to say I don't remember
water was for municipal use and
seem like it was twenty eight
percent of the water was for.
and then at evaporation on top
of the stream of Mr president
and senator do you member that
some of the charts that present
the use of water and how it
evaporates and how it flows
where it's of no use and all
drought never come down into the
irrigation ditches we've been in
the areas of the state where the
essay kia's have gone dry the
moisture for the cattle to feed
on so Mr president and senator I
do know that it's a great
concern to the rest of the state
I was trying to make Mr
president and senator was this
but it's kind of a
misrepresentation when I talk
about seventy eighty percent of
And.
The problem being in Arizona we
the age Stewart Lara water
underground in New Mexico is the
volcanic action of our our lands
around here.
we don't know where they could
go.
And so we have a little problem
storing water above ground but
going to do this but we know one
thing for sure that water
storage in the future is going
to be critical and how we do
that we might have because we've
got challenges in front of us
thank you Mr president thank you
senator for yielding to thanks
Center was we do have further
debate.
support of this effort this
piece of legislation this is
exactly what we need to be doing
as a state which is being
proactive which is enabling our
those plans is such a critical
pieces we navigate through the
water challenges that we face as
a state and you know it's it's
we change their mission in two
thousand three to add things
just like this and so it's so
encouraging to see them coming
forward with a proposal like
drought with fires with climate
change we're going to be dealing
with a lot of crisis and I just
think the opportunity to
mitigate that is what this bill
will do just one final thing the
a really important step in just
appreciate.
Senator Vanik for bringing it
really appreciate the Interstate
Stream Commission the task force
that came up with this thank you
Mr president.
Si no further debate.
thirty seven do now pass and I
just unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show the
rules been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
I to thirty nine affirmative
zero the negative Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate tax business and
transportation committee
Senator Kernan to explain the
bill thank you Mr president.
This bill is basically the same
bill that we passed out of the
to address the destination based
sourcing issue that we have
experienced and so with that
I'll stand for questions.
the president Ms consent to skew
Senator Lopez and his return to
the chamber.
Seeing no objection si no
further debate Senator Kernan to
Ms consent of the Senate that
the record show that the rules
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senator seats if you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate tax business
transportation committee
calendar that's going to be
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy three and I yield to
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
debate amendment or substitution
see no objections centered I
want to explain the bill thank
you Mr president legislators on
both sides of the chamber and on
legislative session to send a
clear message joining within the
governor with her executive
orders to send a clear message
that no longer we tolerant of
this in New Mexico it was during
potentially incorrect
statistics.
Share during their presentation
lack of transparency that
involved injury or death for
bill does Senate bill three
seventy three creates the office
of the child advocates it works
to bring relief to our over
burdened child welfare system by
ensuring the transparency and
Attorney General in which they
will provide the oversight that
CYFD is much needed I'd like to
recognize the co sponsors on
this bill Senator guy a ghosts
three we do have debate with
senator Ortiz panel.
Thank you Mr president and
something about CYFD my mind
tells me this is not what we
have to do I'll tell you why.
name to run the department will
place that person in the
attorney general's office.
Because they've been.
Probably.
The issue is not.
A structural one it's not that
we don't have enough people over
the secretary with that we don't
restructuring things in this
way.
Is gonna leave the workers who
are the ones that actually.
Provide the services to the
so that they will have a clear
indication that no matter what
decision they make if they're
supervisor says go ahead remove
that child there will be
together there might be somebody
looking over their shoulder and
saying no you made a terrible
mistake by returning the child
has been poorly run for a long
time.
And if we have a poorly run
department we don't say well
let's put another department
over that department we say
Under the previous
administration the decision was
those local boards are not doing
a good enough job there the
quality of education is to pour
now revamping that because the
issue was never structural.
The issue was cultural what's
going on within the department
what's going on with the
and who can support the people
that are coming into the
department at the entry level
and give them the right training
and supervision I agree that
To avoid being held accountable.
But you don't have to create a
whole new structure over this
department outside of this
department to achieve that.
going to take a new look at
being transparent.
That's what's needed not a whole
new structure.
My impression is that the people
that are bringing this forward
confidentiality provisions and
that has I think some positive
Contributions to make to
improving that department.
But I just think that this
shoulder checking on everything
they do that's already an almost
intended bill job.
How do you decide to this child
is going to be abused.
a you're you're asking them to
make very very difficult
decisions if they're not well
trained if they don't have the
proper background.
really want which is kids to be
safe and families to be held
together so I I I certainly
appreciate the the the concern
Senator Pinto followed by
Senator Ivy Soto followed by
Senator the office thank you
thank you Mr president and thank
you senators were bringing this
children in the state of New
Mexico and the disparities and
issues all the problems
behavioral health everything
that's included in there that's
money into behavioral health.
All these other things we need
to get them a little more money
what we doing about snap
benefits to that have decreased.
it is their duty to tackle all
these other issues that actually
surround these issues with our
children.
and you still haven't acted on
them we're still sitting on them
waiting waiting for to blow up
socially waiting for the data to
increase waiting for the suicide
it even though we have all this
money that is there.
But have we really put that as a
priority to put our children as
But it is I don't think it's
adding to it is not something we
really need to do so thank you.
Although I come to a different
conclusion my conclusions to
support the bill.
but but we're agree with what
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino said in
Now I happen to have hope.
In terms of the current
leadership.
We're all frustrated.
We all want changes to happen
yesterday.
Especially one of the largest
departments in state government.
That's not turning on a dime.
For the turn.
Continues to move that
battleship.
Almost as if.
No nothing had been done.
Exceeds the force of the
inertia.
And so for me.
When I look at bills dealing
Ministration of this agency the
new leadership.
In terms of changing the
direction.
The organization.
for people deal with them and it
was somebody else.
For me that very well could be
the office of child advocate.
top of this administration of
the bureaucracy on top one
bureaucracy.
But we do need to do things.
That will allow people.
We do need to do certain things
to support them.
So the force a change in
president with the sponsor of
the bill yield Senator Diamond
do you thank you Mr president
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president could you explain the
consent of the Senate attorney
Matt back please Senator Diamond
attorney Matt Becht is
representing.
New Mexico child first thank you
Mr child first seeing no
objection.
unanimous consent it with the
attorney general's office.
Senator is can you give your and
your expert witnesses name
please any catch that.
chamber and find a seat at each
of the senators.
Yes please.
in this bill there on site on
page fifteen.
that would otherwise be kept
confidential disclosure would be
from CYFD to the attorney
general's office only in the in
the event of those records are
needed for the purpose of simply
It is it is going is it possible
for to to disclose the
information about a parent
guardian or custodian.
the child advocate act.
Mr president I believe that it
is if I if I read this correctly
the other thing that apparently
it does.
If I'm reading it correctly is
if the information is already
known to the public it allows
benefits the investigations to
initially have complete
confidentiality.
and and I don't think that this
general's office and the
attorney general's office I know
that this particular Trejo off
general's office said that
it is his intent to focus on
complaints and then try to
resolve them and remain neutral
if the office is right is is it
has another division that is
litigating.
yield again.
Yes Mr president I still yells
good I'm.
How does this bill interact with
direct me to the page on that I
want to clarify on the last page
there the this the AG does not
supervise the office of child
information is not allowed to be
made public what they had access
to this comp information sharing
from CYFD to the office at the
office is there is nothing in
the bill that is creating
screens and other kinds of
mechanisms that you would use to
ensure that that confidential
Confidentiality provisions I'm
also concerned about the about
housing in the attorney
general's office well the
Attorney General may not be
officially supervising the
position being house there is
extremely risky.
regulations as the act the our
federal Indian welfare Act is
referenced on page eleven lines
Senator Lopez Mr president that
doesn't answer my question about
the interaction with the acted
simply says that there shall be
training that office staff
should be trained with regard to
Mr president us Senator Sedillo
but they would act as necessary
but they're trying to just like
in any stature they're trying to
specifically the that the office
of advocate or of the office of
child advocate hello is required
to comply with those acts and to
ensure that the purposes of
Miss Mister president I think
going back to the issue of
confidentiality.
the problem is is has we
required to be kept confidential
I understand and I go through I
mean the the the now sis
different analysis of had
different different problems
of notice an opportunity to be
heard before their their conduct
is reviewed by this office
because it's not clear from the
bills.
I understand the concern.
Sanchez what what's best like we
all do you want what's best for
our children.
But I agree with senator Ortiz
needs a cultural change and I
believe I have really great
hopes for the current secretary
I've been impressed with the
problems for a long time but
another one of its problems is
the fact that they don't pay
very well and that the work is
very hard and they're subject to
intense criticism.
perfect protect confidentiality
and his house with the attorney
general's office is not a
structure that I think is going
to improve the situation there.
I think it's Senator Tolman who
opposition to this bill with all
due respect to the Sanchez I
know they're well intentioned I
just don't think this is the
best way to do it at this time
thank you Mr president thank you
Mr president yes Mr president
the senator
Is the current secretary gonna
be the secretary CYFD forever.
consistently to ship in CYFD so
it's hard to determine.
So Senator would it be fair to
say that when we write
legislation like this we have to
write it.
would agree with that the intent
of this office is also not to
create an external office that
is adversary to the secretary
it's supposed to work in
conjunction with the secretary
understanding is that this
office will will really advocate
on behalf of the child is that
is that correct that the
attention of this.
we've seen just by reading in
the newspaper that that's not
working and so what we're doing
was are having an outside
independent office we're if
there any grievances that can be
complaint against CYFD take it
to CYFD is there an apartment
within seo FD that takes the
complaints or is it just CYFD in
general.
eventually into the the office
of the inspector general which
leads directly back to the
secretary so if it's an internal
grievance the grievance remains
grievance is with the secretary
the secretary decides.
Senator.
Mr president center Brandt you
would be court correct most of
the grievances are often case
Center right.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator and and you know I I
rise a lot of concerns not with
the bill but hello concerns with
that were right but I like Ivey
Soto I've come to a different
conclusion I think we have to do
something I think this is a good
first step it may not.
It will be the final step
Provide oversight ourselves
though.
This is great.
Mr president Senator Brandt's
yes there are provisions in
there that allow regular updates
will be provided to the
What what interim committee are
those taken to.
Senator Mr president Senator
Brandt I'll I'll refer you to
legislators.
Email.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president I was actually trying
that and this is no knock on the
finance committee their job is
finances.
Right there there Raul is
finances is to watch the
This department.
The sewage Department
accountable for what's happening
within CYFD.
adults in the room are we gonna
educate the child we're gonna
worry about the adults in the
system it's time for our focus
to to to go back to our most
failed to do that I was really
helpful with the new secretaries
that would change but it just
hasn't.
There needs to be greater
accountability there needs to be
that we need to figure out what
is reasonable there's national
standards there's best practices
that those need to be looked at
importantly I hope it will save
the life of a child thank you.
Senator yes.
Mr president and body I just
give us a third party oversight
is present.
Thank you senator Angus we do
have further debate with senator
when you lost followed by
Senator Steinborn.
do you.
Senator I'm in this Senator yes.
Mr president let me ask the good
senator question I I know that
we dropped our for all the
child advocacy act act at risky
Act how many FTEs is going to be
how much time is going to spend
on it and how much investigation
is because he said he would
absorbed in his budget.
Senator Mr president he did and
that's why the appropriation
district for this first year I
will defer to Senator Gallegos
thousand doing your money is
going to be used towards us and
it's going to have to FTEs than
three hundred thousand becoming
out of the Attorney General
Senator because he has yielded
centers you have further
questions.
Thank you I'm here meal to me so
I apologize for that so center
if this is going to be a
attorneys at a hundred thousand
dollars apiece I mean an F. T.
cost is about average salary is
sixty thousand with budget
that's an additional thirty
investigators on this house
gonna handle the those large
sums of dollars it's going to
cost us
necessarily an attorney in that
they understand that the first
year will be of governed by them
as far as the finances and then
the look to us for act.
document what happened correctly
because if they have to go to
court over a portion of this in
the tourney General has to file
suit isn't there a requirement
with the.
Child in the report it and how
does how does that process fall
through on the advocate side.
Senator.
dialogue to the secretary so
they're not looking to go
outside with lawsuits.
Mr presence in but they're
and says we need to process this
claim who and then in turn gets
handed over the investigation to
prosecute.
In center so if there is actual
criminal complaint that is
service that would go over to
the attorney general's office to
be handled in the current
Child or something who handles
that claim currently and see
what I do.
Senator S. center CYFD has their
Attorney General is going to
make the claim again CYFD again
said apartment but if the claim
was within the department then
they would handle their own
claim so I I think there's a lot
kind of sit there till we get
this resolved if he has enough
capacity to move F. T. E. around
and get a three hundred
additional thousand in his
moving money around internally
in the agency and and really
doesn't need any extra money
because the FTEs are funded with
junior this is going to be a
recurring cost it sounds like
could lead to a cost attorney
fees investigators and I'm not a
criminal attorney but
investigators and everything
else could be as high as three
hundred thousand to two hundred
thousand per case and handles
created that issue on is owned
by taking on something that.
Sure they had FTEs are sure to
Senator Gallegos present centers
this is unique they don't
legislature for review for next
year to see what the costs are.
Semenya's Mr presents an army I
don't of the turning general
knows is I know he's new but we
bill the the budget during the
office which I don't think
you'll be able to do and we're
gonna look at and say well I
think you need more time in this
this agency but the point is I
have a bill up there that says
with this bill and so I don't
know if we really need that bill
I heard and Senate finance
because the tourney general
seems to have enough money to
move around at FTE ease with
need an advocate outside of of
CYFD but when you say there's no
cost in the comes back and there
will be a cost if the claim goes
cost to the to the turning
general's office and so I think
that becomes an issue here if
they wanted to set up a program
cost but I think that this
number could get.
Into the millions in in just a
couple claims with investigators
in New attorney's costs and
his claim and so that claim it
from CYFD is gonna require
attorneys and FTEs and
investigators adicional cost of
doing that and so these are the
this cost operationalize and
FTEs in junior money which
junior money is non reoccurring
in should have been place for
nonrecurring items if this is a
pilot program it should have
a reoccurring expenses to the
state.
And so when we look at the
junior money funding the junior
money funding could it could
lead to stay out of trouble Path
and junior.
And so but the cost to build
that I claims it at a million
Bucks in and plus attorney fees
plus investigators plus the
court costs on both sides
because this is something that
they wanted should have been
created with junior money and
now here we are with the a lot
more expensive than than we are
led to believe in in the cost of
don't need anybody yield I just
want to first of all thank the
sponsors for the bill I
congratulate you for kind of get
through to this point.
Children definitely need more
we do about it and I have
concerns.
All of which have been spoken.
It's yield under guy goes to
mass and again I guess because
he's got the chief of staff for
the two senators to yield we
yield I take it back and then
Senator them
independent office in CYFD
President Senator has that
happened or is there a bill to
do that kind of as an
alternative path.
looking now at the outside a use
of the Attorney General just
administrative so originally
this one was going to be housed
in DFA as far as the
attorney general's office thank
you.
Mr president centers well I
think this is something maybe
you all study that I'm sure you
of investigations given attorney
general's office a lot of other
responsibilities they're taking
the fund with only two hundred
thousand what is that really due
to their resources how does that
deal with the issue at hand
which is protecting kids and
helping you know pay their case
with their social workers a
decent wage.
So I worry about all these
potentially straining staff
resources draining resources a
little bit
but I do agree that we need more
resources kind of looking in and
So.
No for gonna go this route
couple things we're gonna need
to fund it.
that provide services to the
kids let's not have this be a
gotcha law enforcement things.
Where we take a tough on crime
approach but we actually neglect
the root of the issue.
before some really horrible
thing happens but these are just
different thoughts I have and I
know the bill moves forward
other people going to look at
these things and.
This bill doesn't get through.
in a more efficient way to go
but hopefully we're looking at
other states we're seeing now
what are some other effective
models out there but thank you
again senators for your work on
Thank you Mr president and
I I just want to respond to
something that was said there's
nobody looking at CYFD.
monitor this been appointed by
the courts to oversee that
settlement.
And now we want to say Willis
noted let's ignore what that
what that monitor in that court
And the settlement is been
negotiated.
That that should be allowed to
play out that was just signed
last fall I think last summer.
Joseph and Josephine a court
settlement the consent decree
for Joseph and Josephine A. was
filed.
And the department had to follow
all the restrictions that were
workers they had reduce
caseloads they had timelines
they were following all of those
a provided extensive training
all of that was done because
now we don't need the Attorney
General adding oversight to what
the courts are already doing my
suggestion is we we don't pass
paying we already you're paying
an oversight system for looking
at CYFD.
And to expected overnight that
settlement would have
you know it it's irrational to
think that it could happen that
fast things will get better if
the court monitor does its job
and if the system it's in place
for making sure that the
take the courts in their
responsibility into account by
adding the Attorney General of
all things to that thank you Mr
president we have further debate
number of us worked on a
committee that actually.
Tried to dig deep and figure out
what were the issues within CYFD
concerned about is the lack of
independence within the
department and even now the
opportunity to make that of
oversight that is currently in
particular cases that have gone
through the courts
right involving children and
report back to the Department on
whether they did the right thing
effort to try and separate that
from the administration we have
run into roadblocks and they
will not even accept that
opportunity to make that one
talking about that that's my
frustration is that we do need
independence this is one thing
that could have been done the
department could have shown some
secretary but I am not.
Confident that one person will
be there to see this whole thing
through and so we just a
legislature have a
not included you know that's
frustrating as well.
In light of the fact that there
is certainly revenue available
in my concern is we're gonna
work all through this session
know I think we have to at least
at this point send a message to
trying to something that is
going to separate and make some
respect for my other senators on
the floor but.
Through the interim just
listening to all the issues and
in my own community we have that
department had worked and done
the right thing for those Gaydos
so thank you Mr president
Senator Kernan we do have
further debate with senator
Clemente.
Thank you Mr president I'm going
understand their desire to do
something but this is not the
answer.
This office.
Is not going to fill vacancies.
do something but this is taken
decades to get ourselves in the
situation and it's going to take
years to change it I think that
the the current secretary is a
who are.
We can probably only attract
with them higher salaries so
thanks thanks again for bringing
this forward I I understand your
frustration but this is not the
in and I attended the the all of
the interim hearings that we had
in health and Human Services and
I never saw this bill so I ask
the sponsor to yield.
Senator Lopez Mister president.
Was was consultation with the
tribe's with the stakeholders
the attorneys who sue the
happens when we have these bills
presented in the interim is
everybody becomes aware of them
and they get together they talk
did any of that happen.
Senator.
that sued CYFD there the reasons
why we have the court monitors
that were just recently
reference the Kevin just
implementation team is actually
settlement so the stakeholders
have that the monitors are
expressing frustration because
their grievances cannot be taken
anywhere outside of CYFD.
Mr president are Senator I'm not
specific certain yes.
In the interim they were they
Senator Diamond.
Mr president to clarify they're
not official legislative interim
with only nine consenting votes
And they were actually the bill
was introduced during an interim
committee of courts and health.
I was told that there was not
tribal consultation on this bill
was there consultation with
advocacy groups such as Pegasus.
Senator.
referred to as the child on the
budget bill up until this point
and so if there's some
clarification there is to page
bill that they were attending
meetings for Senator Sedillo
know some differences in terms
of the power the arms as I
understood the bombs but which
is a whole different concept it
was to resolve to resolve
bill from I believe the bill
that I saw dealing with the arms
but the person Mister president
senator this is exact duplicate
so the powers of this child
advocate are no different than
administratively attached to the
AG's office but not part of the
AG's office so while they will
submit their budgetary requests
as the AG and the X. but the
lawsuits because they cannot
bring a case the arm not often
but it's meant or what we're now
referring to as a child advocate
cannot move forward the case the
of cases Senator Lopez Mr
president as I recall if it the
arms but
arms but person arms but person
to reform a CYFD that I may be
having the mixed up this
obviously isn't an exact
duplicate because even the title
is different it's a child
advocate and I do not recall it
being housed in the attorney
discussed in both the committees
that of that I serve on ledges
the interim committees
Legislative Health and Human
Services and courts and
corrections look quite different
and the discussions were quite
stakeholders including including
the.
The the various of people who
bill was really well vetted and
it certainly wasn't well vetted
and that I'm aware of in the
committees not during this
legislative session and not
during the interim thank you Mr
close.
Present thank you I just want to
do a little clarifying before we
call for the vote I'm currently
looking at twenty twenty three
regular session House Bill Levin
Restroom the system that will
actually get something that we
can get to the governor for
signature to provide some
assistance for our kids in the
avid could is only
lot of really deep dive into
this bill to give us some
clarity on issues we had in the
bill so I feel comfortable I
think the body for the day
Center how to mail.
Send me a detailed I feel sorry
Mr president thank you and so
side with concerns of children
and so with that.
Mr president I yield back to the
other Sanchez.
Senator Diamond to close.
reports to the AG they provide
their findings after their
investigations to CYFD to the
legislative finance council and
if there is a need for an
oversight of CYFD if that's
necessary for K. the Attorney
General would bring that case
forward just as what's happening
today it's designed to to reduce
the number of cases that are
expensive to create this office
right now we have a crisis going
on in New Mexico we are seeing
the most horrific cases of child
abuse in the nation.
here to save kids so for anyone
listening this is the only thing
the only idea the only
alternative that we're saying if
we need to find outside
is doing wrong because we're
doing a lot wrong I also want to
say that this isn't in response
to a dozen desk first of all
there's hundreds and it's not
just deaths we just learned it
This is in response to just few
recent child abuse cases this is
the best standard practice
that's happening all around the
nation forty three states have
I would like to say that this
legislators committed to doing
anything at least something that
the other forty three states are
doing that it seems success in
keeping our kids safe for.
Best practice models to give
them up what needs to be done
and how we start saving
children's lives and we need to
do it and I will tell you at
this point we're we're looking
the house has today come
together to stay with for the
time being we're willing to put
in outside ombudsman position
advocate position in place to
chambers for coming together
drafting this legislation that
we've seen several times but we
know now we need more than ever
and so with that Mr president I
move that Senate Judiciary
Actually Mr president I ask for
a show of hands please yes the
rules we called in all those
voting in the affirmative by
show of hands wrists are are
marked except those voting
The worst of all know please
raise your hand.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
the Senate Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president I want to
thank senator again this was
work on the Senator Hotmail I
also want to thank
Representative terra hunt terra
how to meals carry this to the
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
messages from the house floor in
that order business messages
from the house the reader to
read.
Mr president I am directed to
seven house bill two thirty
three as amended by the house
and request the concurrence of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
go about our business committee
reports.
When that order business
retreat.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
Senator towards moon Jooss
German.
Sentiment us.
Mr president I move that
vote on them with one motion and
the General flecked they're
acted upon independently.
I
see no objections the reader to
read.
Senate bill three forty six to
Senate bill three seventy four
do pass.
Senate bill four sixty seven do
pass.
Senate bill five twenty one.
Do not pass but that Senate
adopt the committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye those opposed may the eyes
have it the committee report is
been adopted in the journal show
that they were acted upon
consideration and reports that
the same has been duly enrolled
in a gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Senate respectfully submitted
senator Pete Campos senator
of the committee reports centers
we have a motion set up trade
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee part is been adopted
and the journal and I'd like to
order of business thank you Mr
president Mrs that we go that
our business announcements
miscellaneous.
When that order businesses
senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
judiciary head up right now so I
DO sense of this Senator want to
thank you Mr president president
I've had a chance to visit with
the leader and he's gonna excuse
members of the Judiciary
Committee so we get started
a number of bills that we've
identified can probably move
very quickly so please listen up
to slow and and check these
quickly so Senator pope Year two
ninety nine and we and I spoke
one too Center o'neill STR
thirteen.
And the Senate four eighty two
not sure who the sponsors of
that but we were you are come
up.
either Sanchez we want to see
upstairs and come see Peter or
I'm sorry senator Wirth or
Senator Stewart about getting
really step to Judiciary but
committee members Judiciary go
right away right now we'll get
president I will go back to
announcements after we get the
bills introduced so unanimous
consent we go about our business
introduction legislation on that
order business introduction
of child advocate act providing
for the state child advocate act
creating the office of child
advocate and establishing the
powers and duties of that office
appropriation house bill eleven
has brought eleven having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee that's house bill
for compliance inspectors for
the alcoholic beverage control
division and cannabis control
division including the boards
and commissions division and the
information technology division
rules committee that's house
bill two thirty three.
House Bill to sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Harper and Garcia and activated
a section of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight House Bill to
sixty seven House Bill to sixty
seven having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
tax business transportation
relating to gaming control
increasing the maximum award of
a gaming machine on the premises
of a nonprofit organization
gaming operator licensee House
House Bill three forty nine
introduced by Representative guy
goes and others and act relating
to licensure amending and
Committee that's house bill
three forty nine.
House Bill three seventy five
introduced by Representative
Garrett and act relating to
charter schools requiring the
House Bill three seventy five
House Bill three seventy five
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
Education Committee that's house
bill three seventy five.
board of directors of the New
Mexico medical insurance pool
revising the manner in which
rates are calculated House Bill
three seventy six House Bill
three seventy six having been
House Bill for fifty nine
introduced by Representative
Lundstrom sun discussed the I
know how to how to meal and
Spence Ezzell and act relating
to our racing revising the
tax business and transportation
committee that's house bill four
fifty nine.
House Judiciary Committee
proposed rule changes making an
appropriation house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety seven.
finance committee that's House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to ninety seven.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
the requirements generally
applet bolted license holders
prohibiting the acceptance of
advertising money to
preferentially list a product.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill three sixty four
having been read twice by title.
Is referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
bill four hundred and Act
related to health care requiring
a study on the feasibility of
creating and implementing a
state administered health
administered health coverage
plan requiring reporting
requiring collaboration between
the Human Services department
and the office of superintendent
committee substitute for house
bill four hundred.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth state is the next
order of business thank you Mr
president Ms because that we go
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous or in that
it's get the following referrals
it's currently in Senate health
and public affairs committee
it's Bill of Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino that he will remain as the
requiring a space on license
application in license renewal
forms for applicants to state a
desire to make an anatomical
gift requiring the motor vehicle
is two two five three five zero
point one so I ask unanimous
consent that that have two
referrals first to public
affairs and the tax business and
transportation.
at eleven o'clock so now's the
time for committee chairs to
make announcements and I do know
there's a couple of other
unanimous consent.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
it the bill is career technical
education program unit.
It's been requesting Aniston
sensing no objection.
So ordered.
affairs committee will be
meeting tomorrow at nine thirty
thank you thank you senator now
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Mr president members of the
A lot of house built in a few
Senate bills to to clean up we
won't be hearing any of the mid
mail bills that were originally
on the original agenda those of
president and I just wanted to
announces to the body because
today.
My number two granddaughter
nearly became a teenager.
Birthday to.
Thank you for sharing that with
us we do have further
announcements of center how to
mail Mr president unanimous
consent to move Senate bill
three five seven parents of
regarding this bill and I have
the approval to request the
committee assignment for Senate
bill three five seven be moved
out of the Senate Judiciary
Committee and moved into the
Senate Education Committee.
Oppenheimer bobble head and also
outdoor the Tamar who live who
works in center probably as
office her daughter Victoria
T. where worked for a the robber
Oppenheimer movie that was
for alumnus of Los Alamos I
thank you so much Mister
president thank you center how
to mail any further
announcements Senators centerman
us.
Thank you Mr president we
finance today we're going
tomorrow about nine thirty and
here few bills we don't have
very much left on our agenda to
hear it and so Senate finance
from Los crucis made a reference
to a
of film and television star
yesterday about that but you
know Senator llantas also has a
film and television bill in our
or some other the Brady bunch we
we could cast him in the bunch
whole bunch of characters but he
does have that film and
television bill in our committee
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president thank you
won't have a similar link
session I just wanna get center
share plenty of notice that I'm
gonna work hard on the
scheduling so that we don't
conflict with the basketball
