Senator Brandt.
Senator guy across Senator
Gonzales present Senator Griggs.
Senator happen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator meal.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Kernan.
Etcetera then yes.
Senator Neville here center to
the Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator oh now.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Center share.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You do have a quorum Mister
indication to me that today by
Dr Jennifer wreak chaplain
spiritual care department
Christus St Vincent hospital.
To please remain standing for
the pledge of allegiance to that
Hello thank you for inviting me
to add to the honor to be here
I'd like to say a few words
about St Francis where city is
And we remember how radical he
was.
He was he befriended other
species and cared for creation
poor the voiceless the abandoned
Francis is everywhere in the
city can we also bring him into
our hearts.
Let us pray.
injury pardon where there is
doubt faith where there is
despair hope where there is
darkness light where there is
understood as to understand to
be loved as to love for it is in
giving that we receive and it is
in pardoning that we are
the LA Repubblica Representative
the when I see one hundred the
oldest in the Siva go live with
us it was the ship out of those.
joining us here in the New
Mexico state Senate's and with
that I yield to our Senate
majority floor leader Peter
Wirth to take us to the next
order of business.
Good morning Mr president good
doctor reek for being here
certainly it's our honor to have
you here and it's very
appropriate to share.
Mr president couple of of.
Work here moving some things
first I want to remove sentiment
Morial fifty which is there a
Memorial Day off the president's
table to be placed in today's
calendar Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president and I will do that
along with senator rod Regus and
center guy a ghosts will do that
after the memorial
What we made juggle that around
if we got one other memorial a
Senate memorial forty a
conservation district day off
the president's table to be
placed on today's calendar
Senator Wirth Mr president
that'll be senator Neville and
that one will not be read so
just for the reader again will
tomorrow Saturday is indigenous
women's day at the legislature
and they'll be a program in the
capitol rotunda from ten AM to
two PM and Monday the department
introduced guests that are not
part of the memorials and first
I would you'll Senator Padilla.
I thank you Mr president I Mr
leader units consent to excuse
Senate chamber so there is a
request to allow cameras in the
Senate chamber only.
See no objection.
happened in our state in many
other states.
Where.
A lot of schools.
Santa Fe happened in my district
in Rio Rancho happen in Los
Lunas and happened in
Albuquerque.
And the reason I bring this up
is I think that we need to very
law but we put in as a
misdemeanor.
And it really just doesn't have
any teeth.
And so I was contacted by
several news outlets yesterday
In fact of the matter is there
some people in here that
obviously don't think it's
serious enough.
To make a felony even though a
bomb threat is a felony.
state but in several other
states.
And the repercussions of that
are that parents.
In grandparents and aunts and
schools in New Mexico.
Think about that for a minute
think about if your children.
Then at those schools.
school in my district.
We're young man that I actually
know was held at gunpoint at
Cleveland high school.
By making sure that when someone
does that it's considered a
felony.
y'all gonna have one more chance
to look at it.
We'll think about protecting our
children and quit just talking
about things and actually take
I don't know what else to say.
Except that I'm sorry that you
had to face that yesterday I'm
sorry that that happened to you
in the state.
Sir Stuart I ring a bill here on
the floor that will help address
some of the stuff and I think
Sir Stewart for her leadership
on that bill.
But we need to start taking the
My feelings about what happened
yesterday.
Where are order business
announcements miscellaneous we
have Senator Ingle followed by
Senator Campos then Senator
morning to have my for two
dollars here and one of their
husbands and I have my four
grand dollars here today.
And Mr president it's
It's such a thrill when you you
know get a in your years and you
have your wonderful children
granddaughters here they're the
best my granddaughters HEVC
Catherine.
Only in Katherine wave just a
teeny bit there we go.
Catherine lives in Dallas and
their mom is Laura she is an
investment officer for fidelity
investments and my other doctor
dollar here is a doctor her name
whole world and
They're just wonderful and I
look at them and see their
success in our life because of
hard work and thank you Mr
Thank you Senator Ingle Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
president and before I introduce
my guests I'd like to go ahead
Senator Ingle really appreciate
that Mr president members of the
Senate with me today is an
individual who and both of us
have quite a bit in common
you will the skills that we have
to work with young people with
me today of course is Bernadine
Martinez and if you all would
just please hold your applause
and it but if the guests
to you today is not only an
attorney in New Mexico is a
former MMA fighter but along
with that he always continues to
go ahead and advocate for people
gentlemen at this time I'd like
to introduce to you Mr.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate with me
today are my two shadows for the
Ingle does but but only to then
came here today with me so the
of first I'd like to introduce a
freshman at St Pius said being
she's she cares for a cat to
blundered into our family some
of and she also cares for the
two pit bull
dog that we adopted from the
making sure that those animals
are well cared for and then her
sister.
Collect Korea process is also
with me and Collett is a senior
in girl State and then she went
to girls nation she was so that
one of the two New Mexico
delegates to two girls nation
and of she also took part
Senator Padilla you'd be
interested in this in the
Washington DC with with our two
state senators as part of that
effort were to New Mexico
students spend a week in
Thank you senator the subpoena
Center were three is thank you
Mr president I a ask unanimous
consent to introduce we have two
very special gentleman here
us a lot so I'm very excited to
introduce them and their city
right close they are to you and
later Senator we are I'm sorry I
Partille and he is age eleven
he's in the sixth grade he
attends Pignon elementary in
Santa Fe and he loves playing
beginning and then Lucas Karia
was age eleven he is in the
sixth grade any attend Santa Fe
home school classroom he loves
of Ayrika Velarde and Michael
career recovery we come Spanish
as Stefan is a son of Estevan
Patillo and the grandson of
and more so I'm just thrilled to
have them both here and be able
to introduce them as honorary
lieutenant governor so please
help me welcome them and give
Thank you Mr president please of
the Senate thank you center the
area's Senator Pirtle thank you
Mr president and today I have
with me of my shadow tie can men
high to a grasshopper back then
so he's changed quite a bit
started in two thousand thirteen
as a page and now that he's in
the tenth grade I figured well
it's time to to step up his game
cooking music and riding horses
and you may also be a should in
no he is my second cousin and he
informed me earlier that he's
looking forward to following in
Thank you Senator Pirtle with
Senator Stewart Bolivar center
by the end and Senator Kernan
and Senator Lopez.
Senator Stewart thank you Mr
elementary school they have a
memorial this year about the
forests and the health of the
forest and how we all need to
Center for the.
I thank you very much Mr
president I do have some guests
of service in many different
areas we do have Catherine
Freeman here who is the
president CEO of growing up New
Mexico and a stalwart champion
of early education can ask the
good friend to all New Mexicans
we do have a lot of lieutenant
governor's as it turns out in
the room today in the chamber
today we have our former
lieutenant governor Dan Dan
just a a great friend to all of
us and I I just have to say that
I must be her favorite because
every time she comes to the
roundhouse I get some really
great baked goods today I do
education and care department we
called the war room Mr president
we all get together from that
two thousand nineteen experience
and so when we're in my office
we called the war room and I
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president I do have some other
guests that are in the gallery
and and one of them's a cousin
of mine and she you know she's
And Mr president along with her
today and I believe they're
doing some work for twenty first
century charter school twenty
first academy charter school in
Thank you very much Mr president
thank you Senator Padilla.
Senator Kernan.
today from Oxford Mississippi my
brother is currently the
executive director of the lot
leadership insists institute at
the university and helps trying
young people out who have an
time since I've come to visit so
please help me welcome my
brother bill and Donna cultural.
proceed Senator thank you very
much Mr president I have some
guests who were seated here in
the well of our chamber but
before I go to into their
established in nineteen sixty
nine by students and for
students annually the touch over
fourteen thousand students and
families across the state and
programs Representative are the
college assistance migrant
program it plans their research
fellowship transformative
mentorship program so much
can highlight Mister president
the students are also sure to
find success in their future
endeavors so with that Mr
president I'd like to introduce
Mari Bettis.
And I any Sanchez.
Jacob Griego.
Kori sob O. Smith.
I'm not has she also Mr
president that we have for staff
members are in the gallery this
morning Rossa the Senators
Thank you Senator Lopez Senator
where Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president I would
here today for teach New Mexico
teach we have Gabby Begay who is
a friend and colleague a teacher
and also at the school board
Thank you Senator Hemphill any
further announcements Senators.
We do have.
yesterday Senator Moores and his
wife Lisa welcomed into the
world their new baby boy so if
the body could please stand and
Any further announcements
Senators.
Si no further announcements
the certificates and then on
third reading today items one
two three and four so that
Senator manuals Stewart's Kernan
third reading and then we'll go
back to announcements and do the
certificate Senator guy a ghosts
Mr president Ms because that we
go about our business third
or fifty Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president I move that Senate
memorial fifty B. not printed
not refer to committee and the
red for the third time in full
declaring February seventeenth
twenty twenty three Sarah grace
do rendez in the Senate whereas
Sarah grace stood on was a
lifelong resident of Santa Fe
Margaret Maggie grace and was
the eldest sister to the Larus
Julian Peter Hermann gusts
Roddick and Patrick and whereas
Sarah and her beloved husband
Linda and husband Larry Jerry
the lotus more mark and his wife
Linda of LA and Patricia and
whereas they had seven grand
to Rome Joseph and his wife
Jacqueline Jared Ambrose and
another law and they had six
great grandchildren Jacob
six years as a public servant
beginning her career as a Santa
Fe county deputy county clerk
from nineteen fifty one to
nineteen fifty four and whereas
dedication the she was honored
in the congressional record when
she retired after thirty two
years of service and whereas
Serra then began another career
specialist where she quickly
became a cherished mainstay
interacting with governors
legislators maintenance staff
residents and tourists alike all
known to Serra as he thought or
legislative building services at
the spirited age of eighty nine
M. where as a plaque will be
placed in the capitol
public library board of trustees
and also serving on the first
board of the Santa Fe community
housing trust and contributing
to numerous charities throughout
six year career as a public
servant and as an exceptionally
loving and caring wife daughter
mother grandmother great
Sarah grace did on for sixty six
years of public service in Santa
Fe and be it further resolved
that February seventeenth twenty
Serra Graeser stood on and the
governor signed and sealed at
the capitol in the City of Santa
Fe Senator Peter Wirth Senator
think a reader for reading that
special memorial Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president I move
that set a memorial fifty be put
on its final passage of the
debate amendment or substitution
see no objections center more
couldn't help is hearing Senator
Ingle and his family and Senator
Ortiz Pino with with his
grandchildren and we've got a
new a new baby who's now welcome
sixty six years of public
service and working until you're
eighty nine years old wow what
an amazing amazing person and I
governor or on the maintenance
staff and that was something
that was who she was and how she
held herself out and was always
there with a smile on her face
all worked closely with her and
think of her in that way and so
I just think that it's so
appropriate to have the whole
being here and having the chance
to kind of share all those years
with her in this building is
something that that will I will
thank you Mr president it is
indeed a very special day but it
is very moving to because it's
understanding she was continuing
to live our life like she did
every day just with hope grace
literally and in just continuing
life losing loved ones for one
thing at least the she had pain
in her life she handled that
with extreme resilience and just
close there I would go to my
office she went to my office at
least twice in sat there just
she and I and one time mark
walked in I remember and we were
so we had a lot to share and and
then another time we visit it
she wanted to visit with me and
we visited in the bench on the
second floor of the road right
just share and that we had a
beautiful time just sitting
there for a few minutes what an
extraordinary time and what a
special time I will always
and her her way of expressing I
see myself moving my hands and
my eyes my face and I'm just
that way but Serra she would
just look at me and say a few
amazing you know I can't imagine
her working at social security
for thirty two years that's a
long time this over three
decades all my gosh and then on
goodness for commitment and
loyalty she was a mainstay in
friendly face you would see when
you walked into the capitol all
mentioned that sixty years while
that that's a long time she you
know she working for over sixty
years of our life goodness
and serving in other capacities
but faith that she is still not
only in her family but in us she
had hope and belief that she
then here comes another tragedy
and you know she lost her
husband and I can't imagine what
that must of felt being
through and here she was again
repeating that going through
that repetition of pain but
again nothing moved your out of
her more than anything I know
that we all face difficulties in
life nobody here today can tell
me that we have been through
through anything some harder
than others but the way we
literally she deserve that name
because that's who she is.
but I also knew and loved
he was just wonderful to a
delight to work with and you
know they were two pillars here
at the capitol and everywhere
else that that they stood and
one thing for anyone not only
Serra and Ambrose but for all of
us because it's not a matter of
of how we go or if we're gonna
think of of Serra you know when
I think of that that it's if
it's something that we have to
embrace and know that she did
in guiding us and teaching us
continuously how to live life
with hope Grace inspiration and
strength thank you Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
center there is we do have
Thank you Mr president president
it's
My years here fortune.
Been a little more than three
dozen.
so proud of those children.
And I'm proud to have known all
of them.
And there is a quality here.
And they will continue to do
that and it's just there's just
not a better family in New
Mexico in the directions.
Campos thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
and of course we see the the
family members there and it's a.
This is.
continue to show each and
everyone of us the proper
etiquette decorum in the way to
treat others.
the way that they took care of
themselves and their family.
I mention Ambrose because he
loved his family first and
foremost.
The work with each one of his
But it all started if you will
with the example that this
loving couple continue to share.
He was in the military.
As he wanted to ensure that
where he was raised where this
family lived there would always
be that legacy in the family's
taken very good care of that.
awhile to become one.
And this was that relationship
that we saw the developed.
And within that is both
individuals not only worked in
So again we go ahead and we talk
about one we talk about both
that we talk about both being
one and again this is a very
that's the example that we all
need in our lives in order for
us to love one another thank you
very much Mr president
Campos Senator L..
Senator Rodriguez pointed out
the middle name of course it was
grace I mean she was such a
consistent welcoming presence
here and there's certain
families that have embraced me
as as one who is not from here
and just I still can't believe
Thank you Mr president and to
the family of and to
person you know I I think she
does have that hard that was so
big that Arshi could accommodate
about Santa Fe and then the same
of in my part about the northern
part of the state and we just
had a very beautiful camaraderie
really got me and she really got
me good.
Is so when she told me that the
she was retiring.
But she said I wrote my own
contract.
news talk about someone that
really cared about New Mexico
you know anyone that has worked
that many years you know and in
her apartment with that
so with that are you know what a
beautiful day and one of the
very special day to the family
you know four percent in this
but also for all the members to
Thank you very much Mr president
and I rise in support of Senate
memorial fifty and I think
senator Wirth Senator Rodriguez
for bringing this forward I we
Ambrosus cancer here with his
audio Kerr I called to look at
it that he would always have
something in here as he was
delivering things he'd always
come through here in the
hallways and always had a
pleasant word for us no matter
Invitation to if I had anything
I wanted to learn learn how to
about this building about the
process because she was she knew
were pretty fun and interesting
but when you walk into the round
house who is there to greet you.
as we mentioned Mr president for
each of her children we've
interacted with you in so many
different ways over the years
and I first remember meeting
Linda I think I act Linda Linda
looks so familiar why it what is
this commonality that I sense
until your mom told me yes my
daughter and I was like oh my
parents are and what they have
instilled in us and knowing what
Serna Ambrose what they were
doing here at the roundhouse all
the work that they've done in
you're continuing the work of
what your parents brought
forward and your the your your
prodigy our children are going
to continue because it's just
she was a woman who knew exactly
what was happening she knew and
always had a suggestion and you
know what her vision was is
Senator Gallegos.
Mr president I stand in support
of Sen bill Senate memorial
fifty just wanted to thank the
Senator Lopez brought it up on
your heritage the legacy the you
have I was not able to meet your
father but to just see and
Marshall there's not as head
just to I've been here before
because the school board but
I've never been here as a
legislator in the greeting that
I got as I walked in in we have
tour of all the capital and all
the facilities always the annex
I did know as can be living in
the annex but she took the time
to make sure that I understood
the grounds and everything about
person that cared enough for you
the would take time out of their
day to be able to make sure you
had everything you needed have
the knowledge of where you're at
Very seldom only to find someone
that has that kind of passion
for themselves their family and
they're up there others around
them but I did want to just
there earlier that to see the.
The history goes forward and
what you do what you do for us
here in the capital god bless
you know that you're in my
and we thank you for all you do
published thank you senator
Morris Senator Padilla thank you
very much Mr president I I think
you know I think Senators worth
it or that he is for for this
Senator Lopez was also saying
this to it took me awhile to
figure out all of the
relationship here I didn't even
if I did it took me about six or
seven years to truly put it all
together and then I figured it
service but I will I I will tell
you just.
I would be coming down the
stairs and there wasn't a time
where if she was there.
It was really cute I have to say
and then after a while if I
everything and then what issue a
full upset me actually my gosh
what have I done it would I do
and she says she goes like that
since you really need to slow
down a little bit of you're
gonna following your bomb one
the years not to fall on their
**** and sure I've done that
several times metaphorically and
whatever in this building but
but I just want to thank her for
that but she was really really
about.
And if I can if I didn't see her
sometimes I'd run over there Hey
what's going we're we're just
you know and they would tell me
what was going on or whatever so
thank you so much for for
Thank you Mr president I also
rising supporting in them take
coming in as a freshman
legislator and building on the
fourth floor and I think you
you see more and then they found
out that Pignon one time well
then I was the first one on the
list right
and then he'd come in and say
were getting ice cream out of
the cooler in those you don't
know that ice cream in in my
Senate office and so it was very
interesting to watch that loving
passed in and getting the
attention that I got from them
really about maybe still special
in this place just having
someone around and and having
known for something and
Hey Linda has followed in his
footsteps.
missed them both I appreciate
you guys are loving family honor
your father mother and and walk
in their footsteps thank you
thank you seven yes.
It's an honor to be here with
the family today and with our
Senate chamber in paying tribute
in recognizing that beautiful
family that you are in that you
you walk in those doors was a
smiling face.
And to us we were just so
welcome and every time and I was
grateful because need alternate
just the impact what that means.
In our communities and in our
Hispanic culture and for all
cultures and all families when
we look and see what that heart
exactly what we pay tribute to
was what she was not only to the
did on family but too many of us
who are in here today and what a
gift when she is able to bring
gift as well as Ambrose and we
look and see where we're going
and what other things that we
can do in the state it's always
important to recognize the
legacy that was left.
And the remembrance of how we
one of you so thank you for this
opportunity for allowing me to
take part to pay tribute and
such a beautiful soul such a
beautiful rock and a beautiful
days are hard but it's really a
time to celebrate and an
extraordinary life and I just
think hearing hearing the
stories from colleagues and just
of us but I know special for you
so I I think one thing we didn't
talk much about there's going to
be a plaque that's going to go
inside the office and I
appreciate very much the
consenus and it's all forty
members and lieutenant governor
be shown as voting affirmative
seeing no objection by a vote
the forty three in the
affirmative zero the negative
introduce the family and lots of
friends that are here some gonna
go down the list as I call your
name please stand up and stay
standing
her children are here with us
course mark Duran is here
daughter Adela Taran.
Then son Brian kee ho and his
wife Joanna article up in the
gallery please stand her
Representative Terrel Han was
here earlier she may have run
run out to the back to the other
chamber I know up in the gallery
there's lots of close friends
stand and just honor this
amazing family an amazing
person.
put on Centers one that order
business third reading of
legislation Senator Neville
thank you Mr president Mr
president
Lost it here I move that.
Thank you Mr president
This is for water conservation
day I think I need to make the
next motion do not I move that
first career when I got out of
college was working for an
agency we all know is in our CS
natural resource conservation
service I did that for about ten
you wanted it during college did
got up there these are the guys
that are on the look on the
front row of conservation
efforts all around the state
they were farmers ranchers and
all landowners around the state
and without our defer to the
rest the body for any comments
thank you senator bill we are
debating Center moral forty soil
and water conservation day
anyone wishing to speak.
number forty do not pass and ask
for the forty two senators and
lieutenant governor be shown as
voting in favor thank you
senator bill seen objects and by
a vote of forty during the
conservation district around the
state we have with us Willard
hall of known Willard since
college days a long time ago and
dusty hunt Wheeler by the way is
president of the New Mexico
two gentleman.
Thank you Mr president.
objection Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president I yield to
senator guy a ghosts for a
certificate of recognition for
colonias day which is going to
be read.
direct the reader to read.
Mr president the certificate so
I think I apologize I apologize.
The reader to read.
New Mexico state Senate does
Senate or as residents of rural
New Mexico alone just
communities face harsh
challenges on a daily basis but
they are proud people who are
reluctant to ask for help and
whereas individual counties
opportunities for all residents
of New Mexico and whereas by
initiating a statewide
improvement program for rural
and Cologne yes communities the
while simultaneously creating
new intramurals owns that would
complement existing projects in
incorporated municipalities now
therefore be it resolved by the
be it further resolved that
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
and her cabinet be requested to
work with the board of directors
of the New Mexico association of
list of programs for legislative
funding signed and sealed at the
capitol in the City of Santa Fe
Senator David M. Gallegos
Senator.
Thank you body are I just want
to give you a little bit update
so when I was in the house we
only had one colonia Syria in
Lee County when I came over the
those things it's an honor to
represent them they are small
areas in the state to do not
have any kind of mechanism to
help them but Mr president I'd
knowledge of the acequia.
Organization and the folks to
support that throughout the
state of New Mexico when the
first things that happened when
mistake it was at that
particular time solutions
combined he he got in the car we
on the chart together we went
all around two rows looking at
the acequia he explained how
from there he shared additional
information and he I said as I
typically do well if there's
anything I can ever did help me
out please let me know so the
thousand dollars in for for the
acequia
I was just not even after co
chair and somehow we figured it
all out and I work with
leadership and we're actually
than happy to do that but just
to re emphasize the importance
of the SAT is within the state
of New Mexico I also want to
acknowledge you were can Dawn I
of that nature but he's also
been so involved in the Seiki
organizations and and support
for the sake is in southeast New
given our good buddy humor can
Donna around of applause for all
his work not only for us in the
southeast part of the state but
certainly for the safety
organizations in the state of
Senator about this followed by
Senator Steinborn we'll go to
Senators time one that will go
to Senator months after Senators
time morning thank you Mr
president thank you senator for
carrying this you know Dona Ana
County is home maybe two most of
challenges that we have there
that kind of necessitated really
the creation of the clone its
infrastructure fund which has
been a huge huge help and kind
every year we have a colonial
day I'm I was in the house we
created and Senator Vontaze
really champion and he'll speak
to it but
Ana north through Dona ana
county so thanks again for for
highlighting these issues that's
all I have is present.
Senate finance committee but I
think it's important to
recognize the you lieutenant
governor because you were one of
the leaders in the creation of
the colonias
together for the first time the
the the
data that I reviewed coming at
UNM shows there's a hundred
eighteen colonias in New Mexico.
there before but I some of the
larger communities are
representing the district
someone part and Anthony but in
our all colonias.
with any pride when we have so
much of our state population
that doesn't have water.
It has to get its water by
running garden hoses with the
electricity is known from coming
from extension cords but for one
property the other or where
sewer is not properly treated
properly manage.
kids to get to school when
there's flooding and realize
where the desert down there but
but we have floods when there's
a flood the that we will go out
there with rowboats to get kids
the bank in that New Mexico
could really we can only invest
with bands together and build
the least of of us really it is
what I think this recognition
appreciate the the statement
made in this memorial of the one
of the introductory statements
is the claim is that there the
the people who live in the fund
position that they should be
given more.
All they really want is a chance
only really one is an
opportunity only one is a chance
to have their kids have a better
life than that may have and
of us very proud as an example
and so I'm very proud to
represent those Cologne is and I
I appreciate the the chamber
here in the house recognize that
that the work you did with
clones along time ago so thank
you.
Thank you Senator about this any
further debate.
CNN Senator Gallegos to close.
and and and also support the
memorial
it you know when I first learned
about the colonias and when I
went down there.
our tribal communities those
aren't any different and I'm
many of you of some of you are
here back in two thousand and
colonias not just a tribal
infrastructure fund and and it's
amazing to known of most of the
tribes are up in the northern
part of New Mexico and the
colonias are all done the self
this body and and the house to
pass the colonias Act to include
them as part of the the the
severance tax bonding capacity
family had dinner with the
family at their trailer and
showing the whole area and it is
just wonderful I mean I think
you know as I want to say
Senator Cervantes you know
mentioned you know they're
know if this is what we're about
here in New Mexico sides want to
share those comments that thank
you a sponsor for bringing this
up thank you senator Shendo
Senator Gallegos provided
but thank you for that I I do
have a lot of respect for the
colonus and to see them to
advance themselves and work
investments thank you Mr
president I yield thank you
senator Angus.
Senator Majority Leader Peter
Wirth.
Tickets to the next order of
business Senator Wirth thank you
Seeing none we're gonna do items
one through four on the calendar
so with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
order business third reading of
pensions.
Senator yes.
Thank you Mr president us as
consenus and the record show
that all action for placing
bill ninety six actually in
doesn't increase the state
police and pensions it actually
act allows them to get a hundred
percent of the pension the
have to have served thirty
thirty years of service in
public safety and so with that
Mr president I'll stand for
questions thank you senator
we're debating Senate bill
Kleenex to my expert witness out
there crying because there's no
questions by the.
Improve that Senate bill nine
gonna you'll to Senator Brandt
before we take a vote center at
Mr president you do excuse
Senator Diamond search committee
Turner Moores and Senator Woods
except for the purpose of the
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
how we're going on to the next
item on the calendar that says
the number two Senate bill one
thirty one is twice amended
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
substitution see no objections
Senator Stewart explained the
bill.
Thank you Mr president this this
bill represents twenty years of
work on behalf of the
were equitable in our
Disbursement of funding for
public schools this bill
did not have available funding
so.
It does multiple things I'm
gonna very briefly tell you the
highlights.
oversight task force all worked
on this was endorsed unanimously
by LFC and postcode.
so one of the most significant
In other words it up it in
decreases the local match and
increases the state match by
the state match by pass all pre
kindergarten projects will be
reduced by one half.
three and it goes through fiscal
year twenty six that will give
us three years to look at and
determine whether or not the
current formula we have a should
It on does that passed current
and prospective Legislative
offsets these were put in for a
reason they no longer need to be
offsets that means they it's
very difficult for them to come
to public school capital outlay
council those offsets are
dismissed.
and next year of the those
impact aid districts would have
to account for what they spent
on capital outlay is part of
some technical amendments also.
What's also in this bill.
Is twenty five million that will
go through the state
He can to garden programs or for
maintenance and operations
through the SCG so that
PSSA operating budget we've
tried to do this year over year
and that bill just sort of gets
for gotten from a three year
So we put in an amendment in
Senate education which we then
removed and Senate finance
because our amendment the Senate
million through the SCG and
we're going to ensure through
those methodologies that charter
schools all charter schools will
twenty years to address the Zuni
lawsuit we should be proud of
ourselves for being at this
place where we can loosen up the
repair bad systems colluding
ventilation systems H. FAQ roofs
we're just rocking and rolling
in our construction of school
sponsors Senator Brandt I'm
happy to yield to him at this
point.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president and thank you to
Senator Stewart I think this is
gone in this interim time on
this bill is very important
things the some of us have given
money to our districts that
offset that was going to be
charged us is being taken out by
done this bill provides money
for security for districts it
provides money for districts for
CTE to actually you know.
and so I just urged the body to
support it
it has been looked at like
Senator Stewart said by you know
of the Scotus by legislative
finance committee and the LESC
and we all agree this is the
you have any questions I yield
answers to it I will yield for
questions.
Senate is very demanding that
I'll go back to center Stuart if
Mr president Madam macro
tailwinds Center.
Thank you for bringing this fall
registered one have one
clarification as you know on the
in the school board so
of high and low Senator Stewart
Hey honest person I do have that
chart in here it's about well
we have a districts like our our
Tisha that have huge offsets
amount.
So a smaller districts have been
I actually have an expert
witness waiting in the wings
Mister Tim but go from L. E. S.
C. could I ask him to come in
might be able to answer every
question if I did that seeing no
So Mister president senator were
pulling up that list the total
amount.
For all the districts is seventy
four million.
Zero.
Mr president Madam pro tempore
of I got a copy of the offsets
through all gas reserves are
coming back to the state so I
just want to get that
clarification I did find
Eunice's but I appreciate what
you has done and I stand support
had a little bit of a concern
about the offsets that at the
end of the day the good thing
about this bill is the increase
in match that's going to help
all the districts and we need to
kick start that program again
and get our school districts the
funds they need to make
improvements so thank you for
bringing in.
Thank you Senator Kernan any
further debate.
thanks to everyone for the
debate you're gonna be debating
this in your districts for for
years it really is I'm just
proud to have senator Brandis my
we all get this this will be
good for good for the state I'm
Mr president I move that Senate
bill one thirty one has twice
amended do now pass and I ask
thank you Mr president consent
to skew Senator how to mentally
returns the chambers of the
purpose of the call saying no
objection.
Senators tier seats if you wish
I have over thirty five in the
affirmative zero on the negative
Senate bill one thirty one has
twice amended has passed the
three in the calendar and we'll
to Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing a tax
amendment or substitution.
See no objections Senator Kernan
to explain.
Thank you Mr president many of
you are no have heard
bill six and twenty nineteen we
learned very quickly when that
went into effect on July first
of twenty twenty I actually
twenty twenty one that that
could collect and so Mr chair
this bill is simply an
appropriation bill that will
compensate Carlsbad for twenty
five million dollars for the
The G. R. T. that was paid to
the cities is now being paid to
the counties at a much lower
rate due to the mining services
bills have been dropped in the
house of that offer permanent
solutions to this issue and
hopefully those bills will reach
the Senate before the end of the
session for discussion purposes
Senator debating Senate tax
business transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill two ninety eight anyone
wishing to debate.
Say no debate center Kernan
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
rules been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative show of hands Senators
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative zoom the negative
Senate tax business
transportation committee so this
two percent of bill two ninety
two has passed the Senate
Senator Kernan thank you very
president us and send the Senate
the rules be spent in the record
show that all action for placing
Senate conservation committee
sub two percent of bill fifty
eight on final passage is been
taken and now subject to debate
a while at first pass the Senate
think back in twenty fifteen and
then actually passed both
chambers in twenty nineteen and
was pocket vetoed by the
governor it changes the
still all pointed by by the
governor there are nine members
on the Interstate Stream
Commission under the current
statute and that remains the
same the state engineer and then
representatives of major
irrigation districts or sections
and it says no to members of the
appointed from the same
irrigation district or section
and the governor shall appoint
at least one member of the New
three to add to the Interstate
Stream Commission the whole
string a water policy issues and
water planning issues and
because of that I think it's
this is a continuation I'm not
re doing this from prior years
we just worked on this bill as
it's gone through a for members
will continue to be appointed
New Mexico drinking water
utility that provides at least
five hundred acre feet of water
annually for domestic use one
member of the water resources
groundwater resources who is a
faculty member of the New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology or a professional
engineer with the New Mexico
consulting engineering practice
member so now there needs to be
one member from New Mexico
Indian nation or tribe and at
least one member shall be a
member of the New Mexico Indian
pueblo that was done at the
that we found the right mix here
and that we can get this up to
the governor and get her
signature that's what the the
build us and stand for
questions.
Thank you senator Wirth.
Thank you thank you Mr president
and thank you senator Wirth.
You mentioned one one tribal
members and one member of the
public could you clarify that
appointed from the New Mexico
Indian tribe or pueblo so
currently has one of the line
we're not gonna make it to
tribal members and what it says
And at least one of whom shall
be a member of the New Mexico
Indian pueblo.
Thank you Mr president and
senator thank god I didn't ask
Mr president and Senator Pinto I
don't know that I can answer
that question I do think that
the agency that works on our on
our water settlements and
because we've got settlements
that involve the pueblo
communities and others that
and Mister president senator
Wirth and I think you for
cooperating that into the bill
but two members of the body I
think that is something we need
Seeing no further debate.
Center were to close on the bill
thank you Mr president I move
that Senate conservation
Senator Sears seats please we're
voting.
If you wish to vote now.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
By a vote of thirty affirmative
six in the negative Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
eight has passed the Senate
president the unanimous consent
we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection or in that order
business announces miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so that's it for of
Monday so now is the time for
committee chairs to make their
announcements we'll start with
Senator Lopez followed by
Senator Stefanics then Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
I thank you very much Mr
Entitled we are the ceremony
there will be a prayer walk that
begins at ten AM where we
convene on the east side of the
roundhouse and then of course
tomorrow here at the roundhouse
from ten to two thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez we do
have centers to FedEx.
eight thirty AM not nine at
eight thirty AM because we have
had some of extra bills referred
to our committee and we don't
want them to be backlog also Mr
Esteban Lopez on the Colorado
River and its impact upon our
state he is the state does it
need for
negotiating all of our water
rights for the Colorado River
Thank you Mr president the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will meet to one half
savings time will be waged yet
one more time one more round in
the battle of conversion
therapy.
rights and child placement
Senator Pirtle has another bill
and cremation.
A law enforcement fund
distribution Senator how to me
we may have to rule that if he's
hour following the caucuses.
Thank you senator Ortiz panel
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president Senate
education will meet Monday
that it is not in the list here
so please do check your rostrum
as to whether your bills might
be on thank you thank you Center
souls we do have senator Munoz
followed by Senator Duhigg
yesterday on the capital in the
governor share an out and doing
that if you didn't get your
sheets let me know right now so
we can give them to you and get
an email they should be in your
timelines gonna run out as
capital needs to get done it's a
big process up stairs to do that
I just want to mention house
need our money I just met with
someone who was told that they
got cuts and there was no cuts
in any budget that was all adds.
three o'clock we will not going
to finance.
Thank you sermon yes Senator.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate rules committee will meet
those seeking to we would like
to give public comment to please
check the rules committee
procedures on the what's
happening page of the
Legislative website thank you
thank you senator.
Senator pope.
president Senator Senator sendo.
They give us president you're
you're Senate tax business
transportation committee will
Senate Republicans will be kaka
Singh in the lounge right after
the floor session.
Senator Brandt I'm gonna go back
president and if anybody does
not want their succulent my wife
love secular should really be
helping me out if you just come
set those on my desk thank you
uncertain because the caucuses
so we'll start thirty minutes
after the caucuses are concluded
in both
Democrat and Republican caucuses
also we had on the agenda you'll
will will postpone that CYFD
hearing today to make up for
some of the time lost a caucus
but please be listening up
thirty minutes after we're done
with the caucuses within the
Thank you Mr president I just as
we close out the week here I
just wanted to extend special
thanks to the staff Legislative
Council Service legislative
office rostrum the calendar the
copy room you any I. T. journal
maintenance payroll proofreaders
all the sergeant at arms
committees including the
communications legislative
assistance then of course
Lorraine Sanders and Vince I
wanted to thank you all of you
for your hard work as we get
busier here in the session Mr
that we do appreciate you have a
great weekend.
Thank you senator boxer.
reminder this Friday March the
third on behalf of
Representative metal
Representative Serrato and
myself will be hosting the
hundred bill party at the are of
at the Grammys that he's gonna
be driving up from Albuquerque
to spin some records thank you
Mr president Friday March third
six thirty to eleven thank you
Memorial thirteen was introduced
Center o'neill's Joint Memorial
and the slip was put in that it
was not printed it needs to be
printed because it's a Joint
objections Senate Joint Memorial
thirteen will be ordered as
printed.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thanks to the members
for a good week and the New
we got some of.
With a little work up on the
table we got ahead of ourselves
we we do Senator thank you so I
unanimous consent we go to that
has passed house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bills two and three
House Bill two oh five and
request the concurrence of the
Reiterated this president I am
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed Senate
bill three sixty four as amended
by the Senate with emergency
the house has been received.
The reader to read.
Mr president I am directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate finance
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal show the message from
the house has been received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been read
birds Senate bill seventy two
has had it under consideration
and report same of
recommendation that it do pass
Mr president members of the body
I ask unanimous consent the
Senate re re route to read all
the committee reports we voted
on the with one at one motion
that'd do pass respectfully
submitted.
Senator.
Okay got down one forty five to
pass one fifty three to pass.
a motion to death Committee part
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the Canadian
forces been adopted in the
journal reflect their acted upon
twelve has it under has had it
under consideration and report
same of recommendation that it
do pass as amended.
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman session I'll
update was presented as an
institution of the Senate agree
to be allowed to re all the
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill two sixty eight do
to adopt the committee report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the Canadian
borders been adopted in the
eight has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
motion and that the journal
reflect that their action plan
individually see no objections
to retreat Senate joint
resolution nine do pass and
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three fifty one do
by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part is been
adopted in the General reflector
Act upon individually.
duly rules and engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
There's been a motion by Senator
Pirtle to adopt the committee
report.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
And I'd like to announce.
I'd like to announce to the
members of the body that the
this is the Senate have signed
an open session center more
of fifteen and Center moral
memorial forty seven has had it
under consideration and reports
that same has been duly rules
and engrossed preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Move adoption the committee
report we have another motion to
adopt the committee part all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the committee
Senator Peter Wirth takes the
next order of business thank you
Mr president I miss that we with
our business introduction of
legislation we're in that order
memorial declaring February
twenty third twenty twenty three
New Mexico highlands they in the
Senate Senate memorial fifty
three Senator Mario fifty three
having been read twice by title
Chattfield how to meal Madrid
and Spence Ezzell and act
relating to food and acting the
meat inspection act authorizing
and poultry inspection director
providing for inspection stamps
and establishment numbers
providing penalties providing
exemptions for ritual slaughter
committee House Bill to I.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
state agencies required by law
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two and three having been
Present Senator many of us what
purpose is the rise related on
the present state will make that
the next order of business.
we got our business
announcements miscellaneous run
that order business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you so lashon if anyone is
announcements seeing none
