Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one fifty three.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
fifty three having been read
twice by title is ordered.
House bill one sixty one
introduced by Representative.
D. Wonda Johnson and act
relating to Indian Affairs
ceremony ceremonial Association
amending and recompiling
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight making an
one.
House bill one eighteen
introduced by representatives
lane Dixon Serrato and or non
this and act relating to
reports making an appropriation
house bill one eighteen house
bill one nineteen having been
read twice by title.
Is referred to the Senate tax
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
forty two an act related to the
environment and acting the San
Juan generating station facility
restoration options options for
the San Juan generating station
facility and money legislative
record required reporting
requirements authorizing the
restoration options for the San
Juan generating station
facility and money making
appropriations.
House Energy Environment and
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
forty to have entered read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate finance committee that's
seven and act relating to health
insurance coverage amending and
enacting sections of the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico insurance code the health
supplemental breast examinations
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
seven.
committee house bill twenty
seven excuse me that's House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill twenty seven.
Senator Peter Wirth today is the
just looking up at our clerk I
think we've got everything up on
the table so that's it for today
will be in at eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning so now's the
it said that we were the
sunglasses for the rest of the
day.
Seeing no objection is to the
critical with that thank you
senator Morris.
dark sunglasses then a pot
holder
and I tried to figure out what
the theme of the meeting might
be too mean to be behind these
we've been talking about mostly
here in Santa Fe but I I'm sure
we'll find some use for this
somehow somewhere the sun
judiciary committee will meet at
three thirty today will have a
hard stop time so please be on
time so we get a lot of business
and three thirty Senate
tomorrow that would be Tuesday
at nine thirty in room three oh
three thank you.
Thank you senator Ilyas Center
these amino Mr president the
Senate bill fifty one it's been
added to the agenda that you
have printed out here
but we also have built by
senators Diamond Lopez of fifty
And pope introduce you Pino and
will meet at three eleven at
three thirty of the senator
Hamlin's bill is been role till
all good and so everybody start
watching that make sure that
comes forward.
It's correct Senate finance ago
in it through the thirty we're
Stefanics I thank you Mr
president the Senate
conservation committee will meet
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
AM in room three eleven thank
you.
Thank you centers of annex.
president thank you members
unanimous consent that the
Senate Senate recess and eleven
