Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Brandt this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Senator my S..
Senator McKenna now in.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator smitteez.
Senator deal office here.
Senator share.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
please report to the chamber.
Also this is the chamber we're
still lacking a quorum.
All senators we're still lacking
a quorum I'll send it to the
chamber.
indication to be led today by
chaplain Rachel Donovan former
Albuquerque police and community
chaplain please remain standing
for the pledge of allegiance to
be led today by Senator Craig
Heavenly father thank you for
hearing our prayers and thank
you for each person here today
home you've given stewardship
over others father teaches
courageous generosity when we
speak father are right does not
have to make others wrong let us
speak with charity and humility
and seeking the good of humanity
and teachers courageous
three thirteen make allowance
for each other's faults and
forgive anyone who offends you
remember the lord for gave you
so you must forgive others and
I pledge allegiance.
The newest one that on the list
also needles there medico della
I salute the flag.
Welcome to all the members and
we reach you today on the last
Monday of this legislative
session I'd also like to just
services would be here ninety is
would be his ninety ninth
birthday today so thank you for
spending that special day with
us here in the Senate Senator
Peter Wirth thank you Mr
Wirth thank you Mr president
generally I like to quote
Senator Lopez on Mondays happy
Monday but I like yours better
it's the last Monday and that's
a good thing.
with each other instead of
against each other a good good
kind of mantras for all of us as
we navigate through the final
stretch so again really
appreciate you being here this
reports I think they're ready to
go so just for the confirmation
we've got to get the committee
reports read in first and then
we'll do the for confirmations I
then for the members lunch will
be provided for the senators and
Senate staff tomorrow so we'll
have lunch for all the senators
you very much Mr president just
consent to allow cameras in the
Senate chamber and in the Senate
gallery.
Hearing no objections cameras
are to be allowed today senator
Michaelia thank you very much Mr
president Eunice consent to
No objection so ordered etcetera
but the act thank you Mr
president.
Further announcements.
Senator.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
affairs representative for
chevron and he's here today to
support his Beverly Allen who's
gonna be confirm so we really
welcome Patrick help me welcome
pope.
Thank you Mr president today
we're joined in the gallery by
crossroads for women for twenty
five years women and staff
across roads have advocated for
their voices to address the
issues impacting their lives
today they're here to continue
that legacy in advocating on
criminal legal reform substance
Thank you senator pope.
Si no further announcement
Center Peter Wirth today because
the next order of business thank
you Mr president so we do have a
committee reports from rules
read this present your rules
committee has had under
consideration state of New
Mexico commissioner of public
lands letter dated February
sixteenth twenty twenty three
and which the governor the
commencing January first twenty
twenty three and ending December
thirty first twenty twenty eight
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
to read all the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion that the journal
reflect their act on
individually here no objection
the reader to read.
Mexico state land trust advisory
board representing the general
public for a term commencing
January first twenty twenty
three and ending December thirty
heather Miller as a member of
the New Mexico state lands trust
advisory board representing the
beneficiaries for a term
commencing on January first
twenty twenty three and ending
dated March third twenty twenty
three and what's the governor
makes the following appointment
Raymond Joseph Birmingham junior
as a member of the eastern New
Mexico university board of
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman
Senator.
that they're acted upon
individually.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth stages the next
order of business thank you Mr
president you meant unanimous
consent we go that our business
the full Senate for
consideration to the New Mexico
State Land trustee advisory
board I know you'll to Senator
Kernan Senator colonel thank you
Mr president I move that the
to explain thank you Mr
president it's my privilege and
pleasure to presented Beverly
Allen for confirmation she is
currently the community affairs
she is responsible for managing
community and stakeholder
relations social investment and
communication for chevron's
operations Permian assets across
covering southeast New Mexico
Chavis Eddy and Lea counties our
portfolio included mining energy
transportation education
behavioral health and
disparities across New Mexico.
In any County Beverly's on the
Carlsbad department of
development board in Carlsbad
chamber of commerce government
relations committee she also
serves on the Lee County
degree in social justice and
intercultural relations from the
school for international
training in Brattleboro Vermont
she's a proud New Mexican she's
comments thank you Senator
Kernan centers were debating the
appointment.
Everly Alan.
Senator Hemphill.
she is she worked in our
community and help to with the
health council and she got
funding for us and I know that.
so thank you for your service
and your willingness to serve in
this capacity thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator Akaka Hemphill
Allen.
Just one tell you it's really
unique that they look towards
our small communities not only
to help our students and in
school but she actually would
Udall's office she's always been
one to spare an acrid and
everything she says and does and
I really appreciate who she is
what she does for our state
confirm the appointment of
Beverly Allen and
Just the record show that the
rose then called in all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative on the negative the
first twenty twenty eight has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico Senate Senator Kernan
thank you very much Mr president
I would like to just Beverly
Senator had a meal Mr president
I ask that the credentials of
heather Miller the presented to
the full Senate for
appointment of heather Miller to
the New Mexico state land trust
advisory board.
Say no objection Center vertex
money thank you Mr president we
of this young lady who is going
to hopefully be confirmed by the
Senate she's the special
education director for the New
Mexico school for want of
visually impaired Alamogordo New
with autism the bachelor of
science in general special
education she does multiple jobs
at the school for visually and
the our hotel in Tularosa closer
to roses come in between two
rows in Alamogordo as we we talk
a little bit today and
I would open for discussion.
Thank you senator Byrd centers
we're debating the appointment
of heather Miller Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
about this advisory group in a
and I have to say.
Currently we we put some people
at last year but I I really
didn't remember the whole point
of the of this advisory group
beneficiaries of the of the law
of the land grant permanent fund
one of which is the school for
the blind and visually impaired
and and Alamogordo so it was a
great opportunity to to hear
represents the extractive
industries there are a couple
it did represent the
beneficiaries and and it was it
they meet three times a year and
they and and and they do it all
impressive in their credentials
and I you can see that they're
going to give great advice to
the land commissioner who
probably needs a lot of created
Thank you Mr president nice to
stand in support of this nominee
I think it's it's always a great
because the opportunity to give.
The state land commissioner good
solid advice that she'll listen
nominee shows thank you Mr
president.
Any further discussion centers.
Say no further discussions
etcetera but as thank you Mr
voted in the affirmative again
except those voting in the
native by a show of hands.
Senator is more voting all
senators to your seats.
I have a thirty one in the
affirmative zero the negative
the employment of heather Miller
is a member of the New Mexico
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate senator Byrd thank you Mr
president I'd like to have their
to please stand and members of
the Senate please welcome our
Senator Leo had a meal Mr
president before introducing the
next country I would like the
Senate to welcome my good friend
Center how to mail Mr president
I just that the credentials of
my in the bright and be
presented to the full Senate for
that the Senate do hereby
confirm of the appointment of my
any Barudin to the New Mexico
state land trusts advisory
board.
with all the tribes in the
Indian of problems governor's
council she also besides her
bachelor's degree she has a
master's from Oxford and she had
president thank you senator
panic senators are debating.
Employment the main route in.
As a member of the New Mexico
state land trust advisory board
stand in strong support of Mr
Rudin to the State Land Office
advisory board I have seen her
do her work for New Mexico
A very competent
environmentalist and look
forward to seeing her work with
the secretary thank you thank
and she is just an amazing
individual who's gonna bring a
strong perspective to the the
New Mexico state land trusts
advisory board and it's an
you thank you Senator Lopez
further debate we have Senator
pope thank you Mr president I
stand the support as well I want
border I know that that young
perspective that we need as well
so thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Paypen a
further debate.
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands thank
you so Mister fanning centers
the New Mexico state insurance
advisory board representing the
general public for tournaments
and a January first twenty
twenty three and ending December
thirty first twenty twenty eight
board of regents for eastern New
Mexico university I know yield
to Senator by the center for
them thank you very much Mr
president I move that the Senate
do hereby confirm the
very much Mr president I you
know every now and then we get
to do some really fun and great
things up here and actually do
some stuff that really ties all
of the work that we do together
three right before my first
birthday Mr president he's done
a phenomenal job of leading so
many young people in every
aspect of his life it is truly
professor he's been a coach and
a professor also at the New
Mexico junior college a
journalism degree which I
learned today I had no idea now
kind of all comes together and
and and every opportunity he's
had after a storied career he
volunteered to do this work as
well how remarkable is that the
tagline on his resume which I
think is says it all about coach
have to be here for about three
days it's really remarkable and
some of them are just I can tell
very heartfelt because of the
work that he did without being
asked and or paid a penny to do
eastern New Mexico university a
region like this is going to
bring so much experience to that
board of regents that were very
very lucky to have him so with
that Mr president stand for any
university board of regents are
you'll to Senator Kernan thank
you Mr president and I'm sorry I
wasn't able to stay in rules
this morning to stand in support
but I certainly am going to do
that right now right Birmingham
back in two thousand ninety to
two thousand seven and eight The
New Mexico junior college
Birmingham is how he
How he shares his heart and his
love for kids I'll tell you we
have a good conversation this
morning about two of his mentors
influenced by those gentleman
and it shows because he has
taken what he learned from his
roots and Hobbs and he is sure
that across the state of New
Mexico I'm not known for giving
going to be a great region and
I'm so proud to stand in support
of this nominee thank you.
Thank you senator we have
Senator Campos followed by
a presentation this morning to
talk about this distinguished
New Mexican if I may of course
talking a little bit about ray
is he's move forward throughout
his career.
school level the junior college
level at the university level
he's been there for these young
people day and night to ensure
that they not only have the
proper training and conditioning
the kind of things to expect as
they move along and because of
that these young people have
gone on with a great character
and that's one thing that that
group regardless of where it's
at and who it is he motivates
these young people they go up
not only for his autographs but
they want more of the the
attention that he can give them
that he is going to be the best
recruiting tool for the
greyhounds and I say that
because he has worked with so
many young people across New
very much for everything from
the heart that you give to New
Mexico you definitely are one of
our legacies and I really
appreciate you thank you Sir
working with the merit eastern
and
You know I just heard something
that on the floor the senator
really more million that was
Senator Campos wishing eastern
Mr Birmingham that you made him
say that but for your gifted I
can tell you that.
Because he is a.
look forward to working with you
and we have a new president
their nation and I think
everybody is really tickled with
and I know that you'll work well
Thank you Senator Ingle we do
have Senator pope followed by
Senator Gallegos David Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino and center
o'neill.
Thank you Mr president if it's
years now and I really like the
fact that in the players that
I've met that he's been there
coach he's really and still a
lot of character in those
players and really prove that
he's been a winner here in our
state and he's done it with New
Mexico kids as well I think
that's what's important just one
complaint you know I got to
throw the first pitch of the
happens again thank you Mr
president thank you senator pope
we have center gave us all of us
and Ortiz it's been a.
the product of his students of
he is the pride of Lee County
and Hobbs we go around anywhere
you go around in Lee County
there's people that have
but he must been in the smarter
group I don't remember him in
class so so I look forward try
to find out the years that he
was there but I I just want to
his legacy will continue on in
the economic thank you for what
you've done for New Mexico we
look forward to what you can do
it eastern bless you thank you
great region to and his
performances you best baseball
coach really emphasizes that but
when Senator Kernan mentioned
this morning that he had started
We all know happen that is we've
been losing regularly to the
house in the in the annual game
until he coached us and then we
turn things around the defense
installed which Senator o'neill
and and we look forward to many
more years of success the seeds
that you planted are bearing
fruit thank you very much Mr
president thank you senator
but we got that trophy board
belongs and if I remember right
I think our talented lieutenant
governor was of was on the team
and before you just send it to
your higher higher office there
support of this country you want
to know the most beautiful thing
about coach is he understands
the struggles of students who
come from humble beginnings and
because of that he's going to be
be the key to success for so
many New Mexicans like he and I
and I'm proud to stand here in
support of this country thank
you Mr president thank you sent
Of we've had eight two guys from
Alamogordo who I was able to
coach when they were younger
guys Kevin Smith and John Henry
more court and all of those
engaged in their family speak
president thank you coach thank
you Senator Griggs any further
discussion Senators.
Senator by the end of close.
Mr president he is literally
bill Lobo baseball on any number
of other programs from the
ground up and you we heard
earlier today about his arm
twisting and what legislators
over the years to get that thing
where we needed to be and I
that but he's also still
building level baseball in my
arms just recovering from all
the twisting that he does with
me at two in the morning two in
the afternoon and all that so he
will always contribute to New
as consent that we can excuse
senator serve on this and when
you just until they return to
the chamber.
Senator Munoz until they return
to the chamber that's this is
ask that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Raymond Joseph Birmingham junior
as a report of regents member of
the university of New Mexico.
Senate is more voting.
Joseph Birmingham phone of four
member as the eastern New Mexico
university board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight has been duly
university of New Mexico member
Raymond Joseph Birmingham junior
can the Senate please welcome
and conducting graduated.
Center for them should I bet
that could Birmingham should
grateful to put you in for forty
seven seconds when it comes to
Senate came.
Mr president I was just in our
and miscellaneous and that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so after
we get the few things up on the
table read in the plan today is
the list thinking one through
ten on the Senate bills and then
we'll see where we are we may
have a House consent calendar
depending on kind of where folks
message from the house the
reader to read.
This president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred in the Senate
amendments to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
from the house has been received
the reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill two eighty
eight House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill
amended by the house House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for House
Bill three forty five as amended
by the house House educate
Education Committee substitute
The gentle we'll show that the
master of the house has been
received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
Senate bill three ten as amended
by the Senate.
Senate bill sixty four as
amended by the Senate and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted the same
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
thirty as amended by the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
gentle show the message from the
house has been received.
committee reports where that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been re
fall referred to the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen.
it the committee part is been
adopted they like to announce to
the members of the body that the
option of the Senate have signed
an open session Center memorial
forty four Senator Peter Wirth
to third reading we do have a
member with a birthday today
Senator Lopez Happy Birthday and
centering over.
Birthday true you happy birthday
June and all high achievers very
Senator Lopez Mr president to Ms
consent to say just a few words
no objections proceed Senator
few words I thank you so very
much I appreciate you each one
Get a moment go in and get a
little bit of cake Mr president
with that unanimous consent we
go to third
reading of legislation we're
Twenty four Senate joint
resolution fourteen we're on
that order business announced
that thirty to eight station
ideal to sit upon the F. for
Senate joint resolution fourteen
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection etcetera
but it explains thank you very
much Mr president this is
in terms of their their size
however they were appraised at
within about two or three weeks
of each other and the value is
really just about a hair
coordination etcetera this will
put all five of those into this
one property right off of I.
forty nine twenty five which is
a very good freeway access back
and forth and I forty north
Senator as we're debating Senate
joint resolution fourteen anyone
wishing to debate.
See no debate center for the the
Pirtle answer Baca except the
personal call hearing no
objection.
Center politicos thank you Mr
in the affirmative this except
those voting the negative by
show of hands that is more
voting to your seats please.
I to thirty one the Fuhrman is
here on the negative Senate
joint resolution fourteen has
duly passed the Senate Senator
I thank you very much Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill three three
nine.
objects and Senator Lopez to
explain the bill I thank you
very much Mr president I'm what
Senate bill three sixteen
to receive services through the
juvenile community corrections
grant Fund so it was this will
be to include not just educated
use but those who have also been
Is changing educated
delinquencies to list them as
juveniles and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you senator debate in
Senate health and public affairs
I just think this is a great
bill you know whether at a U.
juvenile as an label an offender
or if they're high risk we're
whole funding mechanism so so I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward thank you
thank you senator nail any
further debate centers.
Senate bill three sixteen do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the role has been
called at all those present
voted in the affirmative except
Fuhrman is in the negative
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute.
For Senate bill three sixteen
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Lopez Mr president Mr
president thank you thank you
members of the Senate.
Mr president I think you're on
item number two I apologize
apologize there were an item
number two central for twenty
six as amended now you'll to
million final passage is been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Hearing no objection Senator
mantas explained the was present
so this would create staff and
emission and division within the
attorney general's office to
enforce intervene and try to
prosecute civil rights
violations in the state and also
Thank you Mr president I think I
got a couple of questions for
the sponsor feed you.
Senator what's the field is
present I cannot imagine
representing a bill without
so Mister president.
I I I we hear that the Attorney
General can't do this right now
does it can't
you're reading from but the
information from is incorrect
and untrue.
Okay so the so the Attorney
General can.
Of get involved in civil rights
general's office to try and and
put a specific emphasis and
focus on so rights claims I
guess I should probably have
answer your preceding question
more clearly as the insurance
rights cases and what we
describe as civil rights cases
is pretty broad that's a but
it's kind of a broad term you'll
see there's a definition in the
bill on page for what is a civil
definition and so I would want
to say that change okay and
become involved in also writes
of violations but my preceding
answered use probably pretty
hundred and twenty one years or
so and and we certainly had
civil rights issues since the
mid sixties.
and today we're looking at a
Thomas present center I think
the Attorney General probably
answer that by saying that we
addressed so rights violations
through his office and the state
of New Mexico but that he'd like
Should this really be a memorial
instead of a law just to say Hey
we want to do this we want to
put focus on it.
I'm just present center again
they may be looking additional
resources are grants or other
funding resources to try and
bolster that so I I think that
we're doing a little more than a
Senator all right thank you Mr
president I'm just I'm just
surprised that of the Attorney
General can't do that today
without a law from us saying to
do it I'm also surprised to
without a law saying that that
the Attorney General can do that
so.
I don't know Mister president
I'll probably vote for it but I
something in law that we're
already funding so what's the
point but.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator sure we do have for the
debate Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president center I
got to hear.
The quick version of this bill
of one night when I was in your
committee and
So I think I understand a little
basically saying as a
legislature we want this to be a
priority not just for now but
for future attorney general's.
division I may do so on a full
or to a part time basis so the
permissive language there would
suggest that the Attorney
General in incoming or future
attorney Joe could prioritizes
but I think that a future
Attorney General may decide that
this is not a priority I hope
that would be the case.
Mr president of the center I
would hope it wouldn't be as
well and and
that that gives them the leeway
to put in what resources they
need in their so we're not
prescribing that they have to
have you know the division chief
Senator that's correct.
Thank you Mr president and
senator and and I'm guessing
that it be any civil rights
violations you know we passed a
General would be able to help me
with that one when you know
someone violates my civil rights
just as well as anyone else is
correct that's correct senator
if you look at the subsection a
is a legal term that a lot would
allow the Attorney General to
step in or join a case that may
have been initiated by someone
else thank you Mr president and
in the state thank you thank you
Senator Brandt we do have
further debate with Senator
means followed by Senator Ingle.
The agency present with the bill
sponsor please feel Senator want
regarding the division's ability
to.
Requests evidence.
is that this is basically a like
a can we call this a subpoena
investigative demand which may
be made to a person or public
body for the production of
documents so if you're investing
in civil rights demand for
example let's say if the claim
was that a company was
company to evaluate salaries
being paid women as opposed to
men that would be an example of
potential civil rights violation
and the investigative demand
documentation that present we
difference of this investigative
demand and in a subpoena I'm I'm
specifically interested in if
we're are we are we creating a
to understand and so once again
is is this is this investigative
demand is it.
Is it currently different than
subpoena power.
question is yes the answer one
of your questions is yes we have
civil investigative demand
authority in various other parts
of our state statutes so for
example I passed the fraud
against taxpayers act bill years
component not on like this so so
that there there are other
examples in our statute where
we've done this.
How this differs from a subpoena
I guess the the principal
authority to issue a subpoena or
to grant an attorney the
authority issue a subpoena when
there's a pending case with the
parties have been brought to
court there's improper service
of process there's been
have been a case filed so this
allows for a civil investigation
to demand the production of
documents without having to have
a case pending or having a court
yet involved or and potentially
basically saying well it
whatever these requests are they
have to kind of be consistent
with a reasonable subpoena
issued by a court and so I I
do they have the ability to to
make some sort of investigative
the man outside of a subpoena
fraud against taxpayers act
which is again a bill that I
sponsored pass it gives the
Attorney General the authority
to do an investigation to keep
the investigation confidential
general's office without there
ever being a court proceeding
initiated and and and the other
good part of that center is that
in some cases presumably the
this is the Attorney General
would investigate provide no
court against just speculative
claims there presumably there'd
be an investigation of the
Attorney General for example was
a criminal case the Attorney
General would decide whether
they can meet their burden of
proving beyond reasonable doubt
equally important to eliminate
claim of unlawful conduct.
Thank you very much and Mr
president Senator.
this is exactly where we're I'm
with limited resources and
it's found that yeah there there
is no there was no wrong doing
doing so is there any recourse
when when the entity or the
person has to do a lot of work
is there any recourse for them
when when no wrongdoing was
done.
subsection may petition the
court for enforcement of a civil
investigative demand so for
example of a business received a
civil investigative demand it
felt that it was excessively
to petition a court to enforce
civil investigative demand then
this triggers a sequence of
events you'll see there the
court shall order the production
require in the demand it's as
would go to court and asked the
judge to modify the civil
investigative demand allow for
more time to do so or to limit
it to something that might be
more relevant a reasonable
investigative demand from the
AG's office is not
it's not legally binding it
doesn't actually legally require
the entity of the person to
can directly answer questions
like to answer it of the the
statue presumes that that a
civil investigative demand can
be mated authorizes that and it
authorizes the request include
that so for example to my
example earlier if there was a
civil rights claim made against
the business that it was not
paying women the way it pays men
want to have our salaries and
our payroll information out in
public and so if you look at
paragraph F. this provides for
the confidentiality of of some
the court that the demand should
either be quashed entirely those
prohibited or that it should be
limited or or the other but
boundaries or reasonable
but is there is there a place
that says the
the in the entity or the person
being investigated.
could you help me kind of figure
out where what we're we're we're
giving them the ability to ask
the court for help.
Representative Yuri the bill
explaining the bill would
require the Attorney General if
there is demand is ignore they
would have to go to court and
get a court order to enforce it
that would trigger the process
and that would give the
first up but they would be not
compelled to do anything until
they change I went to court for
so that that puts the burden on
the Attorney General to not just
misprision center so I think
that that really answer my
question and you you said and I
want to make sure I heard you
understate you correctly you
said the recipient.
that accurate restaurant yes yep
yes Mr president we look at
subsection C. page on page two
this is the provision that says
a so writes Division may issue a
description so for but you'll
not see anything in there that
has a consequence for failure to
comply with the civil
investigative demand the burden
would shift to the Attorney
investigative demand without
going to pursue a court.
Thank you very much and Mr
present the Center that that
exactly
gives me relief that was that
was it thanks for working
and you you know you for you
prior me speak about this I I
you know we had a bill earlier
session that was giving
executive my ping was giving
concern maybe just a comment
really is you know where where's
where's the recourse where is
the recourse if if the business
has to do tons of work to
someone else diver their work to
produce all this stuff in and
yet and yet and it doesn't go
anywhere
in here maybe it's not possible
but like I said maybe maybe just
a comment so thank you for
working through that with me I
I'm very relieved to hear this
civil escalated then is not
Thank you Mr president I don't
necessarily need to sponsor
yield but I read through this
and it really
Just really has some things here
that really do
As an Attorney General to
promote your
Name identity and your things
that you may want to do for
the time we finish these things
if you're the person that was
written about our company you've
been reading about it's too late
the damage is already been done
we have now is bad I don't think
that at all but I can see where
this could be misuse so easily
and so many ways and there's
really no no way to stop but we
things in life five years and
it's a.
It's it's tough sometimes to get
things done it really is because
for one thing you don't hire
lawyers for lawyers for nothing
it's in the tremendous expansion
people I remember when we first
creators the children youth and
family the governor in charge
said there would never be more
really responsible you don't
have that here but you do have
you do have things here that can
can be done by employed by
employees of the attorney
always are you can't ever keep
these things quiet there can be
some real damage is done to
business and people thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle.
Any further debate.
colleague who sit next me here
let's be Frank and any political
officer can capitalize on their
office to try and seek political
gains in advance themselves and
I and I I think it would be
so that that is not the goal
here we have a new Attorney
General he wants to make a
commitment to a certain area and
he was elected by the citizens
New Mexico should have that
opportunity to to set an agenda
been called and all those
present voting affirmative
except those voting in the
negative budget plans thank you
for we take the vote I yield to
Senator by the F..
If you wish to follow please
raise your hand Senator Ingle
voting no Senator Woods voting
no.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
senator Byrd voting no Senator
Gallegos voting no Senator
Pirtle voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
I have a lot of twenty three in
the affirmative fifteen negative
Senate bill for twenty six as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator mantas the agency
present members sent we're going
to the next item on the calendar
all action for placing Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three oh nine on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
projects in this bill re
authorizes three hundred and
nine I'm sorry two hundred
ninety nine capital projects the
bills numbers three three oh
nine and these projects have
as we know maybe re authorized
to expand the reversion date
expand or change the purpose of
the original appropriation or to
change the administrative agency
authorize now two thirds of the
projects that stand the the
reversion date because of what
we went through with the
pandemic when things were were
slow that's what it does Mr
to percent about three oh nine
with emergency clause.
Is there any debate senators.
Centerman yes.
that some have been completed so
as we move cautiously move
forward I voted against this
last year but I'm not gonna vote
against it today but we have to
dollars sitting there in the
closet.
That's not doing anything for
New Mexico not putting the
single person to work.
Thank you Mr president.
whole point of this isn't it to
of Senator Rodriguez would you
yields isn't the whole point of
this to make sure that we
actually get those projects done
that the delivery of material
support was very slow and people
just couldn't get to the
projects as they wanted to sell
it they tend to build up in
were sent a few weeks maybe a
couple weeks ago or so you
percent the the whole bill
individually to look at projects
and if you have any questions
comments whatever they may be to
important thing to do to make
sure we don't have four billion
dollars sitting there that we
actually start getting some of
those projects converted from
president would Senator manuals
yield for a quick question
Senator many US steel.
Presence and yes Mr president of
the four billion dollars you
almost four billion that's just
approved total.
Do we have any that idea Mr
president how many dollars are
actually encumbered or dollar
borrowed and sitting in the
treasurer's office setting us.
nineteen hundred did capital of
twenty nineteen that's all cash
that has been sitting there in
the closet.
And so that's cash that was
there the monitor mount I don't
answer to that the staff went
yesterday evening after we pass
this in the finance committee we
tried to get a balance of what
came up with was approximately
one hundred and sixty million
dollars and again this is
approximately a hundred sixty
million would be the balances on
thank you Senator of I've harped
on this LFC meetings all summer
that we are sitting on money
that is borrowed and the
projects are not moving so we
borrow the money even though the
for our design for state are you
ready to go so yeah yeah I'm
ready to go and he's not or
she's not who it of the cases
and we're paying interest on
those dollars we but whatever
the bonds you know that couple
presidents the Senator but it
seems like you know we just we
this year using capital or our
cash money that we're going to
have to fund our projects it
seems to me like if we got
think we ought to look at it I
think senator Munoz might have a
comment Mr president sentiment
yes.
I'm and it talks about who has
capital outlay in the mount sent
there and this is the balance of
the million more greater
excluding bond proceeds and
debtservice investment accounts
but the totals about
hi including all agencies about
million and more I scroll
through some of these and and
look at them the total.
Capacity thanks for the pages
quick enough.
billion in capital so now we're
actually over the billion dollar
mark four million dollar mark
we're about four point two
billion billion.
Is present that's the money in
the closet.
That's I guess that's my point
we're.
The not so much three else but
that are ready to go and not
borrow any more money I know
it's good to be back it would be
complicated because we have a
mix of capital money and we have
made of general fund money and
ready to do it but in the
meantime we've already got a bar
already be using those dollars
to actually pay for projects and
then of whether it's re
interest on dollars if we got
that figured out that's all I
have Mister president thank you
thank you senator Neville.
We have further debate on the
bill.
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the record show
that the role has been called
and all those present or the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator Tallman voting no.
Hello.
supercenter bill through aligned
with emergency clause has passed
the Senate stimulus to explain
his vote the Sierra which
explains vote senator Munoz
thank you Mr president I did the
didn't have those projects and
we would be wasting money and
painted to the bond companies
increasing our costs so thank
you Mr president thank you
senator Senator AUMENT.
passed my capital outlay reform
bill we wouldn't have this
problem number two most of the
this money that Sen reserve
would have been spent by now
under reform package number
being built thank you Mr
president thank you senator Tom
and we're going on to center the
biggest.
Yes thank you Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent Office of the
Senate that the record shows
that all action for placing
Senate.
or substitution hearing no
objection.
Senator Gonzales explained the
bill.
Thank you Mr president in the
Senate bill three ninety three
agricultural use now encompasses
a natural resource conservation
program in alignment with a
change in federal law and with
witness to be escorted and that
is so Leslie Allison and she is
with the western landowners
alliance.
Thank you Mr president for the
Senate bill three ninety three
does it provides clarification
that the agricultural producers
with state and federal agencies
to improve land health and
achieve natural resources
priorities including New Mexico
Research recommendations to
encourage landowners enrollment
in federal conservation
programs.
What Senate bill three ninety
three does not do it requires
any state or federal agency to
maintain or create any new
program.
require any state or federal
funding commitments with them is
present on stand for any
question thank you Sierra as
senators are debating Senate
bill three ninety three you know
Senator Gonzales president I
yield to senator.
Senator Mr president and senator
could you tell me what state
programs qualified for this what
Thank you Senator Woods Senator
Gonzales thank you Mr president
and senator of the underground
water conservation pilot program
sponsored by the New Mexico
inner Stream Commission.
groundwater the purpose of the
program is to begin conservation
measures so that the New Mexico.
New Mexico has sustainable
groundwater supply.
way that enables farmers to
bring land back into production
when adequate water supplies
returns.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
purpose I didn't receive money
for it but I.
Solicited money from the state
for a program just like that.
But what I'm concerned about is
that.
That lay in.
And cattle are grazed on the
grass for goats or sheep.
amount of the evaluation because
the the irrigated land you were
talking about a minute ago
where they quit a year gaining
when we say this which value
would it be would it be under
the air gated value that the
land would be of value that or
exactly what you mentioned but
if it's not permitting you know
to have a livestock then though
this gives that opportunity to
So so with that what I'm getting
at Mister president and senators
this.
The land owner gets a value.
is making the Averell o'ryan
Tax.
That is collected.
With our system of taxing
agriculture land.
of the property so why wouldn't
that particular value that it's
making under a conservation
program the where the value was
Of what would happen it would be
at the time of the use of the
land.
So for example if
produced or what is not being
produced or what the land is
being used for.
rural and not in the bill
itself.
that how how will that tax
department determined that and
and want to say that Mr
ever do this I mean this is so
complicated it's just impossible
to do I believe this may be a
whole lot more complicated than
what I'm presenting in a little
through the tax department taxed
right of the would determine
what the value of it would be or
it would just be simply the
Senator Gonzales Mr president
Would be to.
Yeah and and the deal is you
know we live in a very
competitive market with this lan
and.
where there's much talk about
drawing up farmland much talk
in so we are this plays right
anymore taxes on it so
the concern of guide is to the
local government and I hate to.
and and I understand there's
some there's some national
programs through the federal
government's conservation
reserve programs different kind
they can charge more for that
land then the land before it was
put into that program and they
actually take half of that
So it's it's there's there's
already presidents of of how
some of this stuff is done so
hopefully in the rules written.
there's some huge ranches that
are bought privately.
And when they are brought.
There's no cattle put on there
are certain ranchers and things
the same agriculture right on
them as we do when we put last
of cattle in my objection to
anybody working on those
wrenches anymore and and I've
got objections to that
would love to see the rule.
On how we're going to charge for
this.
Before a vote on it which is
much thank you senator was any
further debate centers we do
have further debate Senator
Diamond.
Thank you Mr president of the
sponsor please yield Senator
lands from from our local tax
rules so sponsor could you could
you confirm Mister president and
senator removing.
local property taxes correct.
Senator Gonzales.
Mr president no Senator no it
would not.
be valued for the livestock.
On going.
If the land this is followed.
You know from to farm crop
Thank you Mr president and
senator if I think about my my
area of the state is quite that
vast and has a large area of
mainly ranching land.
from the land there are indirect
impacts not just local hardware
stores but very valuable jobs
that are offered here working
working on these agricultural
What what we've done is we've
allowed them to have to have a
discounted tax rate a break
where we are incentivizing them
to take take you know food and
fiber out of production the
nation moving and so by
increasing that by broadening
this definition there is not a
direct value back to to the
huge or a ranch Ted Turner down
Sierra County I don't I don't
stand apart in New Mexico Senate
to fight for tax reductions for
Ted Turner and to take
speaking for farmers and
ranchers and certainly not in
the best interest of rural New
Mexico where there's a lot of
agricultural land to take this
out of production that thank you
Thank you Mr president and
members
I move the Senate bill three
ninety three do now pass and I
show ends Senators we're voting
to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Diamond voting no.
So Mister president.
Senator Gonzales I apologize.
a cultural in value.
Thank you.
Seeing no objection Senator
Kernan voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Burt voting no.
Five of twenty six in the
affirmative twelve in the
negative Senate bill three
bill sixty six as amended dear
to distribution a certain
entities and audio to Senator
what's.
Senator Woods are you ready to
that all the actions taken for
placing.
Senate bill sixty six once
amended.
on final passage has been taking
President of I've spent a lot
of.
A lot of time in the Senate.
Talking to you and talking to
what that effect has on local
governments.
The local school systems the
local hospital districts the
So I came up with a way to get
the state of New Mexico.
To pay local governments.
the way that Council services
came up with is gross receipts
tax.
So in my bill I have.
money they would be losing for
the property tax but there that
a private land owner is paying
today.
And the one of the questions I'm
So it's not a hard way to figure
it another question was well how
in the world is the state going
property changes hands in that
courthouse and this is going to
be an easily.
They all to walk over to the
county assessor and ask them how
much money that they might need
total breakdown of that tax and.
This is what is a I am proposing
and with that Mr president I
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president will my
good buddy mothers can is sealed
Senator Woods DO the happy deal
know and that's what you know
what you love to quote on why we
should consider it but not
withstanding that lineage
nope Mr president senator I have
some concerns with the bill that
we talked about it before and I
state government purchases
privately and that is generating
property tax takes it in the
state then the state shall remit
Senator so we are to tax a
monthly distribution of G. R. T.
tax so Mister president how
center how is that G. R. T.
estimated I'm not quite sure how
twelve increments so it would be
the state part of the gross
receipts tax as you know the
state gets gross receipts the
started talking about this bill
Mr president and senator I
wanted it to come right straight
out of the budget of an agency
that bought the land because I
To do this and it might
influence them to do to purchase
of land but I found out.
present senator have you done a
calculation for example of what
what this would have cost if we
had had this one a year ago
based upon the amount of
Center what's.
There was some talk in one of
these half ours about the L. bar
ranch and I'm sure that's what
you're talking about and off the
off but anywhere somewhere in
that neighborhood and that would
be a reoccurring cost.
But for now.
Now you're gonna ask me.
A. N. dollars million and we're
talking about ten sixteen
thousand now if we can afford
lot of money.
and I didn't know actually
although I should have that that
L. bar was what although you
were talking about this before
the L. bar but I think you are
state park for example which I
believe was a private property
before it became a state park I
would venture to say that
acquiring certain assets in this
private property and so I think
when we automatically ascribe
that this is a negative thing
and that we now need to pay off
You know use another example Mr
Mr president which is let's say
that it's a veterans center.
I understand you might be losing
unintended consequences does
this in any way create a
disincentive it doesn't seem
like it's a lot of money so I
mean at the end of the day maybe
it's not a big deal from that
replacing that private with the
state park is now bringing in
big time Bucks we help that
community and so so I'm not sure
I can support the bill but but
thing that's been out there for
years about.
You know the value of public
lands to.
Two of local governments into
taxpayers and.
it's automatically negative in
it and it often is not may well
just leave it at that thank you
for answering those questions
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Steinborn.
Any further debate senators.
question Senator Woods DO.
yes yes Sir I would you thank
you Mr president Senator you
know the Mr president thank you
Senator Woods so this only
The the I'm I believe that's
what I'm I'm trying to say if
the state buys land now we're
not talking about the department
the state of New Mexico I can
see how how transportation
issues are such that it brings
in commerce but all up you know
buildings for our you know but
how many billing state buildings
have we got right now.
That are being used.
There's a state office building
concept that we always need more
and more.
It's not the way I see it I
think we should use what we have
If you know the thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Woods but for example earlier
this session we approved I think
we approved a one of those joint
That I assume will take that
property off of the Santa Fe
county rules under your bill
for the Santa Fe County losing
the share of the property taxes
they would otherwise have
received and what about the
schools and what about the city
I'm saying I'm saying that the
state could very easily use the
balance they have instead of.
estate buildings and yes Sir
that was a building that we
bought from I think it was.
Was from the city that we bought
Mr president and then Senator
Woods I I I don't I think it was
from the vote this trustor real
estate trust or whatever the
people that own that property
Santa Fe County for how long
would we continue to do that.
Well of Senator Woods forever
and one day the way I look at it
the obligation that the private
landowner had.
To the county and the local
government Mister president
senator Senator to subpoena so
Mr present a lot of those
to them local school districts
all of those pieces of the
property tax would have to be
reimbursed by the state the
gross receipts tax.
owner would be paying now the
state would be obligated to pay
that Mr president center Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
think that when the state.
Buys a piece of property.
That's going to add value to the
surrounding properties that's
lot of the construction it goes
into fixing it up there will be
in hence to traffic in that
neighborhood for the businesses
that cater to the employees
think we you have to look at the
bigger picture and and.
I I don't know about rural areas
in is it just seems to me that
there's going to be that that L.
think I mean I think you you've
seen a problem but I think the
if you broaden your vision a
little bit about what's
happening there really is going
to be some advantage to the
amounts of I mean you've already
said Senator Woods that you see
the value from roads that one is
clear to you well I think a lot
of us can see the value from
other aspects of state ownership
think we ought to just take the
principle that.
State ownership is potentially
of great advantage to local cut
we wouldn't expect I don't think
When the state by property there
may be a slight loss and and
property tax for the local
municipalities and counties but
there's probably going to be
support your bill but but thank
you for working so hard on this
I know you put a lot of time
into this thank you Mr
president.
Thank you center anticipate a
Senator Griggs.
highlight a couple of things
when you look at the New Mexico
especially in the in the
southern part of the state where
the federal government has shown
they have control of it Terrel
County.
Thousands upon thousands of
acres of land which is no longer
taxable.
The thing about this bill is
it's an equity thank me in that
when the state takes some of
were you might see that Mr
president centers you might see
it in in Santa Fe County in
Bernalillo county where they put
it to a a higher more productive
use.
And then put it into the public
coffers to where that land is no
longer available for a economic
And reasoned approach to dealing
with a community a county that
lugers taxable value for
property.
urge the body to to support the
senator Neville.
Thank you Senator Griggs any
further debate senators.
And you know the the L. bar
ranchers thirty miles from the
nearest highway.
So I'm sure there's gonna be
some hunters and fishers are at
least some under school over
And the example of the Santa Fe
property.
The county will have to probably
re route some roads it probably
that if that property was it
purchased there thank you had to
do so all of what the net
benefit to that county is I
don't know maybe we should
So with that.
Mister president I'll move that
Senate bill six to six once
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
thank you Sir what senators were
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no.
Senator sirventes voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
By a vote of twenty in the
affirmative.
Twenty one the negative.
Senate bill sixty six as amended
has failed to pass the Senate.
Thank you Mr president thank you
body I appreciate the
opportunity Hey thank you
senator what's going on to the
next item that's going to be
item number six.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
committee substitute for Senate
bill four fifty six as amended
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator Stefanics so Mister
president I move that Senate
floor substitute for
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
fifty six as amended to pass and
that is now subject to debate.
Senate session we did not do not
pass the original one did we.
So.
I'm I'm just confused to what
we're doing right the moment are
Or we need to go home because
I'm confused thank you Sir share
Center working we I'm gonna be
able to you.
Senator Wirth.
how to do this
and I think that's the roadmap
she is following I realize a the
other day I I think you had one
the and I yield sensitive annex.
Mr president Senator Stefanics
Raul Burciaga the director of
the Legislative Council Service
Senator so Mr president I and I
know that it it's great but I
thought that this was the script
that came from on high.
it says Mr president I move that
whatever.
think we have a script that was
I don't know approved by whoever
proves scripts so Senator we did
it we did have the script that
we used for I believe you might
have in your mail but in con
Mr president I have the the new
and improved for one that we
just showed up on my computer
yesterday.
I believe that it's the system
to the one that Senator
scriptwriter Bob for substitutes
the whole session I don't think
we're even there yet Mason says
that we treat substitutes like
an amendment so think of this as
clarification of the floor
subsidies not adopted we're back
on the original bill.
Senator Stefanics.
small additions and I hope I'll
point those out the.
Senate conservation committee
had a committee substitute
that's in this bill and then the
Senate tax and business
page two line I public health
and safety and on page three
line fourteen public health and
safety.
twenty members including the
investor owned utilities in the
first committee Senate
conservation well let me go on
to all the groups we work with
the PRC members through their
chief of staff actually came in
to consult and we change some
that is why we added the words
health and safety in two
sections this bill Mr president
members of the Senate is
the rural electric coops to file
a plan annually that shows how
working on we have also
decreased the goals so that it
was not excessive in terms of
how they would work on it.
PNM was neutral so in reserves
in my mind at this point we've
have tried to negotiate with all
parties and I would stand for
questions debate or support.
did note that there was support
for the bill which.
Did did help a bit not do
appreciate that so I'm glad to
I just would you with with the
sponsor yeah please Senator then
exhaled Mister president senator
I do yield thank you Mr
presentation of terror in and so
by those that that we were
hearing in committee.
Mr president Senator of that is
correct in fact one of the
amendments we put on and Senate
taxed businesses in this floor
senator and that that reminds me
of of one of the concerns I had
was that who's going to pay if
they can recoup that means as a
customer of of one of the
this but that when we pass the
T. a couple years ago and and
road maps were staff listing
utilities were required to to
requirements going forward so
that was a concern I had with
regard to this bill that that I
am
I'm gonna listen a little bit
but at least at it appears that
we're listen to so thank you
very much thank you Senator
Kernan we do have further debate
yes I still Mr president I yield
so
Mr president I'm trying got the
new one in an I was debating the
way to put the new one on self
the new bill I'm not sure that I
down into the weeds but right
now Mr president Senator we are
creating a great deal of storage
I mean sorry a great deal of
the energy that's being created
here and our state is not being
utilized so is being lost so
it's sometimes the energy
batteries and some are large and
some are small in the second
committee Senate tax
Representative Abbas the keel
was my expert witness who is
important but he was my experts
who could answer these questions
so if we want to discuss it
further I can bring in an expert
Mister chair Mister president
We have to amazing energy
storage keep capacities in
America today amazing a one of
through the turbines of when
it's called upon to do so.
Of gold just sits there and does
nothing until it's put in power
plant in.
call where if you want to of but
hydro collects its power from
the mountains and whatever puts
it in that damn those are our
energy storage.
So Mister president I believe so
but I'm going to request
unanimous consent to bring in my
expert witness Mr Jim day
Surcharge you please it just for
the extra when it's into the
chamber.
Senator feel are repeat the
question for the expert witness.
Thank you Mr president so the
the question is we've got to.
Would probably have a lot more
than that but there are two
the dam and it just sits there
is a lot of water behind the
dam.
Until it's called on to go
through the turbines and create
electricity.
this bill.
Mr president my experts says
sits there waiting to be turned
in to be to use to heat your
house for.
Or keep your beer cold in
refrigerator either way that's
not energy storage.
Okay well I believe it is just
really really really long term
energy storage longer than the
hydro for sure Daniel eventually
collapse Water LiveXLive
apparate coal can sit there for
So in the the.
What what what kind of energy
storage is available to us today
if we go ahead and ignore the
fact that Cole is like the best
when we have but if we ignore
senator of our energy storage
would be related to renewables
just is related to the ETA of
goals that have been set for the
state so we're talking about
Senator there might be more
Mister president senator.
So Mr president those are ways
to generate power but not wasted
to store power.
Senator CENIC's Mr president
center yes lithium and I am.
they'll have minerals that are
mined from somewhere.
So a lithium with the first one
she mentioned there do we know
we're a lithium comes from
sure you're gonna share with me
and educate me.
I love history lessons Mr
president.
and and the thing that I find
most interesting about all of
this we have to clean up the
environment stuff is that in
pit mines with absolutely zero
environmental controls.
Where the miners have zero of
personal protective gear.
The copper mines in the.
Of.
Silver City area of.
All of those environmental
As we do that well we're making
these these industrial batteries
yes they're not polluting here
in the United States they're
certainly not polluting in New
And I would I would suggest that
all of the Twitter trolls that
are now bashing me go ahead look
it up justice was pulled up on
to look for a lithium mining
depending on what kind of
battery were building and
Mr president and sponsor I'm
sure you would not be surprised
if I told you that manganese is
of the United States that also
have almost no environmental
controls.
There's lots of other things
going to these there's things
batteries Nicole ball does not
come from China cobalt's is
actually mined in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
By a Chinese owned minor.
you have mines with no
environmental controls and
miners that have no personal
protective equipment and.
That's where the that's where
the ingredients for these
batteries come from and somebody
that's one of those things we my
net in in eastern New Mexico
pretty cool we use all kinds of
environmental regulations we are
minors have personal protective
equipment of there's a lot of
Of but but most these other
countries aren't aren't doing
that we also do things like
aluminum and
nickel some of the things like
that those are not mines
comes from petroleum of.
So all of those things are
included in in batteries if
that's what we're talking about
as energy storage.
which we can money very safely
in the United States and use
extraordinarily safely and in
what used to be the cleanest
coal fired power plant world but
we we made a decision to destroy
Republic of Congo.
Where there's no environmental
regulations at all.
But we decided that that's what
We talk in this bill I think if
it's still in this bill about
investor owned utilities is that
still in this the new version of
electric coops.
So I'll use a yes I owe you I I
believe this body owes and I owe
you to the city of Farmington
but that's a separate point
utility service is owned by the
city of Farmington would that be
would this affect Farmington
electric utility.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
president that that release of
release me a lot actually here.
So.
Lithium and zinc and cobalt.
With the PRC know how to do this
survey how would they regulate
that.
If it was a new brand new
technology was presented to
about the I use of presenting
their plans to the public
regulation commission and that
the PRC would make the rules
regarding grid modernization and
not asking the PRC to turn
around and regulate how.
The I use our meeting the goals
it's asking them to present
can you establish a rule if you
don't know what the technology.
I'm confused by that so we're
gonna say okay the rule has to
that's stored or anything like
that
in so clearly batteries are an
option.
But.
But there could be other things
to use it dispensing best
practice I just that out there
is a as an example.
And so when you have a new
innovation.
You can never tested because we
Future technologies which we
know are coming so does this
this is tie the hands of the PRC
any to say oh well we can only
rules but adjusting and that was
done by request of the PRC to
include that in this bill so we
why we are asking them to create
the rules for these plans.
Senator so
Mr president we also had at
twenty twenty eight I'm looking
over here and then four thousand
megawatts in eight thousand
megawatts of storage.
on page two we did drop the four
thousand to three thousand five
hundred in terms of energy new
based upon the request by the I.
O. use.
Senator so if you so Mister
president of the committee so
the commission shall adopt a
So twenty twenty eight one
thousand megawatts of new energy
storage capacity capable of
human cumulative lead delivering
more than.
Thirty five hundred megawatts.
begin with but it's also a lot
to store.
Is that that seems like we're
pushing the engines the
technology they're just just
of the amendments we installed
in we said any type of energy
storage system installed and
operational in New Mexico after
that there are many projects
around the state that are
currently working on this we
have a some stats from PNM and
we also had some stats from
Mr president that is so
comforting because.
Two years ago they were on their
way to meeting the goals of
replacing the power from San
great confidence in PNM after
they closed the claim is the
power plant in in the in the
American probably the world so.
I'm just concerned that this is
law we cannot and we put it in
law.
But somebody still has to figure
out to do it.
And
And I just don't think that that
Is kind of strange you get
nothing nothing nothing nothing
bang something big.
And yes some technologies evolve
over time slowly but in this
those batteries can do today so
unless we have some kind of
technology change.
We either have to have a lot of
these batteries.
get of based on the current
technology obviously the
technology exists to make
batteries absolutely has for a
long time.
But can we may come to meet.
way to enforce this what if what
if the the people that and I owe
you to the city of Farmington
just don't do it.
included in this it's the only
the public I use.
Well yes I understand except
that the state has an I owe you
to the city of Farmington so
that the damage that they did
Senator Stefanics Mr president
of the bill itself does not
address any penalties.
why Senator that said if there
is no enforcement.
It's just a suggestion.
So in this particular case if
there's no enforcement and it's
just a suggestion.
this would be.
Thank you Mr president senator
of this bill sets out goals
Cadena path forward with plans
this.
Senator so Mister president.
If we can't enforce it and it
means nothing if it's just a
Batteries as we've now defined
them and we're going to ignore
other storage like hydro which
is really ninety four percent of
all of the energy storage we
have today is is hydro.
riding doesn't do anything to
you decide to turn it into be to
use.
If you if we do that then what
Nasty unsafe unsafe mining.
Because of no environmental
regulations we preferred that
China provide us with the
minerals that are needed to do
this.
Australia certainly has
environmental controls.
But North Korea does not China
does not.
Into DC Indonesia has very
is we want our PRC to direct
that the state of New Mexico.
Come up with a plan to use some
of the nasty stuff on the plate
Worldwide we're going to do a
lot of damage so that we can
feel good in New Mexico.
When we had the cleanest coal
fired power plant world just
okay you know that's that that's
If we see it that makes us feel
bad.
So not only should this be a
memorial that also is just to
feel good memorial and doesn't
Any further debate senators.
Referred to bay Senator
committee.
Thank you very much Mr president
Senator NXT ill Mr president I
yield thank you Mr president and
and the center share did dress a
lot of my my on going concerns
what I would call the American
left you know if you're on the
left of the political spectrum
so Senator on the left I'm I'm
on the right.
I have a hard time just
no emissions at the point of
energy generation.
And that's what the left seems
to prefer.
And when I look at that
I just haven't heard a a
response to that and I like to
call it the not in my backyard
Policy.
You know it is not in our
lithium mine outside of.
In those the court over return
owner so I I mean there's no way
there's no way people would
there be protests in the streets
So this presents under
What can you just it just I I'm
I'm looking once again when I
look at your position I say well
you you just prefer or that the
the energy generation point has
no emissions.
Can you talk to me about putting
what do you say to the the fact
that a lot of these things are
brought in from other countries
the environmental concerns the
child labor concerns the
extraction the harm to their
So Mister president senator I
can speak for myself I can't
speak for the various advocacy
seat is on the far right of the
chamber
but there are many things that
you and I agree upon and I think
one of the things that I am
looking forward to is the
an opportunity to transition to
other forms of energy.
And.
We all use our telephones we all
use our.
to them if you come to the
capitol one day without your
phone you're really looking for
where what do I do next
I of course would love to see
sound environmental practices
all over the world but the only
state and that is one of the
reasons we would like the I. O.
use in the public regulation
commission to receive these
plans to show that they are
Thank you Mr president and and
and Senator I and and you know I
have a very high degree of
respect you have really enjoyed
you know serving committees with
understand hi I've spent enough
time in politics where I
understand some of the general
world views behind the policy
positions that people support
relationship with the overall
temperature of the earth and and
y'all's concern for that
and it but once again you know
it's at that point of energy
hear about the entire picture
enough from from people to my to
my left and I I really would
children to have clean clean
water have a clean environment.
And and it.
But I I would like to just maybe
a lot of sincerity a lot of in
common with each other
I I just don't think this stuff
is going to hold up in in the
main reason is that just when I
You know we have come from using
very Energy sparse sources and
I'll I love windmills love
We talk about stone mills and
all that sort of stuff but the
great thing about windows is you
don't have to store the energy
right wind I don't believe was
meant to be Stewart collected
gets work done the gets worked
on that that's how we have used
that energy sparse technology.
Same thing with the sun and the
and we can talk about you know
some people may see evolution
and and you know that's that's
fine to have that but but
regardless of the position that
you take if you are an evolution
person or if you're an
Is solar energy really meant to
be are are those photons meant
to be gathered up in stored into
a huge battery I would contend
it's not so where do we see that
you're an evolutionist you can
say well you can look at that
chemical reaction state while
these highly evolved over
billions of years and a fine
plants do that photovoltaic
cells cannot do.
They can store energy Mr
president.
And store energy they just do
it.
or or a four actually that they
don't but we forced them to
we're forcing.
In using energy sparse sources
and we think for some reason we
I don't think we'll ever be able
to and I think when I trash the
environment in a vain attempt to
do so.
So you look at where we come
with wind and solar and then
out of the ground.
Right what what what center sure
so I'm out Cole is already
stored oil and gas are already
stored you know it's stored even
hundreds of thousands no I'd
center share probably knows it
doesn't matter.
But I do know you can't destroy
Energy you can't destroy matter
so from the beginning the
That's the most energy dense
source that we have so we've
gone from wind solar oil and gas
coal and gas all the way to
nuclear.
to consolidated into some
monstrosities of of batteries
that any all this is going to be
over and I don't know if we have
twenty years left it's all gonna
be over when we talk about this
there is a professor from the
university lay you know I I use
the not in my backyard analogy
you know gonna clover I I don't
know if I can find it but he he
landscape destroying our water
table.
polluting our wells.
From the university of Chile he
says this isn't a green solution
is not a solution at all.
concept that I don't think
people understand I've got a
document from the from the USDA
the biggest chunk of calories
that people are consumers or
time out energy again which I'm
oils that were manufacturing
from once again very Energy
sparse sources like working all
comes from that's called
rapeseed sunflower soybeans very
Destroy the eco diverse city of
wherever that's from by the way
the bees don't like it Senator
Oneal areas the bees like it Mr
president how would you like to
pollen this is all you get to
eat to survive and we wonder why
our be our bees the populations
are declining it's because we're
creation or once again for an
evolutionist we're never gonna
be devolution it's not gonna
happen it just won't and so we
can continue to destroy the
environment continue to decline
look at it's just it's just a
myopic crazies fighting the
basic laws of physics and so you
know I would just I would just
ask that we that we think about
is the least healthy thing that
Tufts University looked at less
healthy than frosted what
frosted mini wheats lucky charms
I mean there's the most
ludicrous stuff that's going on
that energy sparse source.
And the cattle are creating it
into an energy dense source in a
in what god designed will guide
that's why I oppose this bill
and I hope we would and I think
we will I think eventually after
we realize the mistakes were
making by by producing these
we've done a lot of damage Mr
president so I I respectfully
oppose the bill thank you.
Thank you Senator meetings we're
Senators time our next thank
thank you Mr president not only
really had and being able to use
more renewable
clean energy was being able to
store it it was the
as we move in Justin Act laws
that we have in New Mexico now
I'm as we move towards that that
that storage capacity we can
just accelerate the usage of
for your a skilled shopping have
it thank you.
Si no further debate.
We do have further debate
and madam chair I was just going
to ask you a looking on page two
line four in sharks at the end
of that line going on to I says
and potential impacts on public
health and safety with grid
modernization Senator fenics
Mr president senator thank you
for the question at the last
our attention that they were
concerned about the bill that
the PRC would have no
Authority to even recognize
accommodate the health advocates
who asked for it.
Senator yes.
Mr president H. center and I
to me.
Definition of that and he could
not could you give me a
definition be able to used as I
explained to people public
Senator Venice Mr president
Senator Steinborn this is going
to relate to the public
regulation commission in their
rules they would have a section
of definitions and they would
have the opportunity to divine
have different definitions of
health and safety so it would be
left to the public regulation
commission to include in the
rules.
that explanation earlier maybe
as we get all these bills passed
and forwarded we can start
building an understanding of
what public health and safety is
the story of a
Trainload of of battery cars the
electric cars that the batteries
it started firing in one of the
something they would have to
correct because of the public
health and safety this presents
her sense of annex so Mister
experiences would have the
opportunity to dialogue right
now they have no.
Senator.
Misprision etcetera I'd hope
the newspaper so I would think
for the public health and safety
of our state that we be open
with that with that are you.
Thank you senator Angus.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
fifty six as amended do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record shows
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Brandt voting no Senator
Senator sweeties voting no
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Ingle voting no Senator Griggs
voting no.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
I have a twenty three
affirmative fifteen the negative
senator substitute for.
Senate conservation committee
Thank you go on to the next item
that's going to be items in
senators.
Again just a point of order
because I'm sure I'm not so if
this was an amendment.
we need to wait on Legislative
Council tell us what to do
tomorrow but I would like to
look at somebody that I think
one of those three needs to
happen yes and I don't care
which one I just that's correct
I'm sorry Mr president could you
repeat what you just said so we
took action on senator
substitutes now will take action
of the adopted senator Cup
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
By a vote of twenty five
informative eleven in the
negative senator committee
substitute for Senate
conservation committee substance
substitute percent about three
thirty six as amended with
emergency clause and I yield to
center for the thank you very
much Mr president you consent to
the Senate to the record show
passage has been taking it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objection.
Center for their explained about
thank you very much Mr president
we had a problem we needed to
together to determine that we
needed our hits insurance funded
through the the the gaming tax
as well as jockey insurance and
so we got everyone to agree to a
floor amendment number one we do
have a floor amendment.
The reader to read the amendment
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
the Senator Mike they're moving
explaining them and move Senate
foreman number one Mr president
all it does is it goes to page
three and inserts that the
racing commission does have
complete full on oversight of
Say no debate on the amendment
center for the a closed on the
amendment move adoption
amendment number one Mr
president called for voice vote.
transportation business tax
business transportation
committees of the two percent of
bill.
Three thirty six as twice
amended with emergency clause
etcetera but there were back on
Okay Mister president if the
good senator to sponsor would
yield for a question or two
Was it the the owner John owner
trainer.
return rate before.
about so that's why it was so
difficult to get everybody to
debate discuss and agree but it
was primarily being paid by the
racetracks and the the the
horsemen.
tracks on loan to pay for it now
is that right Mr president
etcetera etcetera but they're
not actually Mr president this
good Senators partially correct
utilized for this purpose the
has center and sent it to keep
us with federal compliance and
the jockey insurance.
state is made whole and it
shifts the tracks picking it up
are the.
But
year period you're looking at
about one point two one point
six million dollars.
Senate.
Mr president and Senator the
Okay so it's so it's a no cost
to the track issues it's a cost
to the state of New Mexico
paying of the the withholding
etcetera etcetera for the Mr
president yes.
We had a twenty one to twenty
vote on data like that will
echo.
thank you Mr president members I
move that the Senate tax
businesses inch sex tenant tax
business and transportation
committee sub two percent about
three thirty six as twice
negative by show of hands
centers where voting.
This reminder there is an
emergency clause in the bill.
about three thirty six is twice
amended with emergency clause
has duly passed the Senate
etcetera but there thank you Mr
president members of the body
we're going to the next item on
the calendar that's going to be
for placing Senate bill four
thirty two as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objections Senator
Hamblen to explain the bill
energy movement this allows this
by enabling on site net energy
metering for qualifying low
income building projects it
allows tenants to receive the
benefits of the twenty percent
adder on top of the thirty
conversation and bringing this
bill forward in the tax business
and transportation committee was
the conversation agreement
amongst committee members that
if we are going to say we really
believe that folks who are in
much more to do Mr president but
this bill targets the available
federal monies from the
inflation reduction act to
maximize using the available
We do have debate.
Thank.
Senator Woods Senator Jewish
innovative Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
president center.
So what's the incentive for
land.
The owner of a real rental
property.
Mister president senator you
know for many years putting
solar on our homes was up for
those who could afford it and
that's the the conversation
we're having here today because
fifty percent off in essence it
cuts the cost of a solar system
on a housing development at the
half the right it's it's
And president and senator you
said fifty percent off is there
a of.
for asking that question this is
based on the monies that are
available right now in the
inflation reduction act so this
is not something that is long
term this is something that we
really want to take advantage of
You know currently.
So Mister president senator are
those systems available right
now.
Mister president senator we have
solar companies that are
available to do that and working
So it's a rebate on the cost
that you.
But you have.
Senator Mister president senator
tax credit which is authorized
by the inflation reduction act.
Senator Wirth.
Sure it's a tax credit so you
that tax rebate after the system
is purchased.
Senator Wirth Mister president
senator is that a is set up
do I have to pay taxes and then
the credit comes in so that I
can substitute some of this
credit instead of the tax up pay
Representative any information
so I do ask at this time
unanimous consent to allow my
experts to join me on the floor
that'd be Christopher Morley the
director of public policy of sun
run and Jim determine the
you please escort our expert
witnesses into the chamber and
find them sitting.
Takes the tax credit.
And then uses it to buy down the
cost of the system.
project developer is not the
land.
The property owner so explain
that to me Mr president Senator.
Senator Hamblen absolutely Mr
with that project developer to
go ahead and have that system
installed.
Senator Wirth and so.
Who pays for the.
developer and he's the one that
gets a thirty percent tax
credit.
Mr president Senator.
Mr president Senator yes that is
Is what's in it for the the
building owner any that less
expensive.
Utility costs.
Our meter to him.
Is this behind the meter or
before the meter Mr president
Senator said.
Okay first question.
Is it before the meter our
behind the meter.
Senator Woods.
Okay and Mister president if I
may add and and sometimes it is
And the landlord rents a
property.
And the utilities are included
early select Christie is
Solar panels.
Will it be to be charged to the
customer to the landlord to the
owner.
the.
To the utility our doesn't is it
meter.
To the landlord to the mashed
before the master meter
consumption on site and also
reduce the energy bill that the
landlord and the the tenant
would be experiencing Senator
was.
Mr president Senator there is a
meter that is tracked by the
utility.
Mr president then it's a net
Isn't a net metering meter and
it allows for the consumption
with in that building to be
taken off before the utility
Receive his payment.
For the like Christy that the
building use.
from the building owner.
Well I hope so but how does he
know how much he gets to to
charge the building owner Mister
landowner for the building owner
and the project developer that
is all worked out in the
contract details that they they
agree upon when they signed an
agreement like this.
amount of electricity over a
period of time than the renter
before and and and so may not be
totally occupied so how do you
take care those variables if
Mister president senator I'm
gonna give this to you in chunks
the cost of the electric
generation on site.
In the system generates.
Then the value I understand the
value part in the contract that
you're going to say there's this
how do you determine the unit of
production.
Per unit if it's a master meter
how do you to turn for the whole
unit of production.
I'm sorry Mister Mister
is something that is equitably
distributed amongst the tenants.
And so their usage is they're
all paying the same amount in
I'm afraid it's not real clear
in my mind but oh well mine's a
little foggy so that's fine
thank you very much Mr president
and senator Mister president
senator I appreciate you thank
sure I quite understand
everything Senator Hamblen
detailed yes Mr president I
yield thank you and and senator
is there anything in the bill
this all this bill exclusively
devoted to the multi family low
income units Mister president
senator you actually you nailed
in law absolutely Mr president
center and there's one other
question Mr president Senator
Hamblen
Many times for rural housing
project this with this these
provisions applied to the total
overall
housing development or apartment
complex or just to those units
that are affordable.
senator anticipate we do have
further debate with center Greg
was followed by Senator many us
than senator Morris Senators.
discussion if you had a four
plex twelve hundred square foot
home in one facility one is a
single mother with three kids
dialogue earlier let's say all
of would have the same electric
right is that how that works
if we are talking about three
different units it would be
thirty three percent thirty
three percent thirty three
percent.
Mr president center with the
four that I described in SB
individually metered homes so
the resident pays the electric
bill not the developer the
owner.
So I'm going back in discussion
with Sir would so the purchase
of the solar units would be done
the landowner of the of the
building.
Senator destruction Sir by
Senator Hamblen center gave us.
provider of the solar unit and
the owner of what benefit does
the owner receive Mr president
Sir Senator Hamblen.
agreed upon between the project
developer and the building owner
in terms of the cost and the
benefit is that they have
reduced utility costs.
morning we're gonna do one more
Senate bill which is Center
Hermio number nine and then
we're going to the consent
calendar and that'll be it for
the day so we'll do this first
up in the morning and just
Senator is a return to the bill
in the morning you'll be the
first on the list thank you Mr.
We're going on to item number
nine that's going to be Senate
health of public affairs
committee says two percent about
three fifty seven I yield to
bill three fifty seven on final
passage has been taken that it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objections center have a realtor
explained about Mr president
two the effective date for this
would be July first twenty
twenty six and I stand for
questions senators are debating.
Anyone wishing debate.
you said that if they had to do
with the age of the student
we're going to move a teachers
licensing to level two is that
to a level to this last year and
Mr president it was a whole lot
harder than deciding what age
group gets cities teacher.
say no further debate
centimeter close on the bill Mr
president I move that that
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill three fifty three three
hands Senators remote into your
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
the next order of business thank
you Mr president we're going to
go to the consent calendar and
so I would yield the Senator
Diamond Senate consent counter
number one Senator Diamond.
and I would yield to senator
o'neil Senator o'neil.
I consent calendar.
I thank you Mr president thank
the health effects and
effectiveness of acupuncture
specifically neuro acupuncture
in the treatment.
Senator Senator Neville is
present move that and Center
made of of go ahead and explain.
Senator this is about the neural
acupuncture is to really if
affective way and very extreme
voice situations with a
Howe testified in and **** and
and he's a local he practices
here in Santa Fe as well as in
Albuquerque and it people come
that I stand for questions
Senator as we're debating
Senator or fifty to anyone
wishing to debate.
Pardon.
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands Senators we're
voting to your seats please.
Yes.
I have affording their feminism
the negative seven one fifty two
has duly passed Senate
Centerville thank you very much
subject to debate amendment or
substitution and I will yield to
Senator Shendo no objections
etcetera etcetera of explained
the bill thank you Mr president
governor of the state will allow
the deal to secretary of to
suspend
Thank you Senator Shendo.
Senator debating house bill to
send in one motion debate
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield.
declare this emergency and wave
the loss.
Mr president we need the.
been having this you know
emergency going on for almost
three years now actually for
three years now are we getting
are we just opening up a whole
nother area for the governor to
Has a time limit already want to
say thirty.
Three days.
Senator Brandt is present
I believe she could extend I
don't believe it comes
legislature.
No Mr president Sir I have a
huge problem with that.
That we should be pulling back
that authority to the
legislature instead we're going
to expand that authority.
you Mr president the reason why
we're doing this sort of thing
about the fires and and and that
it happened and food emergency
water all of these and needs to
whether it's vehicles back holes
the escalators everything that
needs to happen and so forth so
I believe it's this item is in
the public interest.
We have a governor who literally
continue to extend an emergency
quote unquote for over three
years.
After the president said the
And now we're gonna change this
and give more authority to the
governor.
And I just I have a hard time
with that I don't think that's
authority only be able to do
this for thirty days before a
hundred fifty percent.
But we seem like governor misuse
that authority already.
we want to be able to do this.
But not with this car blunts
unlimited authority that I do
not I cannot support you will
will make that call.
Mr president on the governor
makes the emergency it gives the
department of health the
authority.
To continue to extend.
give that to the department
transportation.
I can see situations where we
would want this I absolutely do.
to Senator Diamond.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill two to six on
final passage has been taken and
body house bill two twenty six
really talks about the
opportunity of making sure that
supplies are are able to be
year twenty school districts
charter schools and private
schools received probation
through the instructional
materials funder the IMF fund
which required fifty percent of
allocations to be purchased from
code and removes the requirement
of procurement instructing
materials through the state
purchasing agent this bill does
not and contain an effective
date and as a result we're going
Say no debate center Hamblen to
close in the bill.
Excuse me Senate I'm in the
clothes on the bill thank you Mr
president I move house bill two
to six do now pass and I ask
vote no please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative the negative house
bill two twenty six has duly
labor House labor veterans of
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety nine on final passage has
been taken and it is now open to
debate amendment or substitution
Etcetera etcetera etcetera just
explain what the bill does.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent for two expert witnesses
Scott Scanlon with.
Thank you Mr president once
again this bill sets a framework
to begin inspections of
elevators in the state of New
Mexico it'll be two years before
Senator Brandt followed by
Senator Pirtle Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield senator Sanchez G.
L. Mr president I do.
Mr president Senator at this
time no the only time to get
inspectors were there installed
years ago some residents are
these the elevators in this
building are never inspected.
President maybe if we start
getting these ones inspected I
would get stuck in the elevator.
We do have for the debate
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president sponsor yield center
Senator Sanchez.
Mr president yes.
Thank you Mr president I I would
disagree with that but I do have
if it's a skyscraper twelve
floors that you do have to have
it inspected senator Sanchez.
Mr president senator it'll be
Senator Sanchez Mr president
Senator yes at this time there
is no inspections all right
thank you Mr president Senator
Senator Sanchez deal.
Mr president I yield.
Mr president Senator.
that only applied to one element
elevator company because it was
the only elevator comic could be
used so we want to be careful
sometimes where we go so I'm
just hope that doesn't do this
Senator such as detailed Mr
president I yield Mister
presence enter what does it cost
I I have elevators and some of
my buildings and they're
expected every quarter with an
elevator certificate so what is
Mr president and Senator.
There is no current thing there
is no inspection only when it's
installed the first time when
the building is being built it
is inspected by the fire
Marshall I believe and that's
office or the used to be in the
elevator I expect I expect money
every quarter and so what
buildings are state state
buildings are elevators are not
Mr present but what elevators in
the state our inspector right
now our our state elevators
inspected or none of the
elevators inspected Mr president
center none of the elevators are
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety nine do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that all those who voted in the
affirmative except those voting
The house labor if.
House Bill to ninety nine as
amended has passed the Senate
with twelve seconds to spare the
one of those in before the day
got away from us thanks center
pirtle center such as thank you
Mr president Senator Diamond
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
who would you like to yield to
senator.
Thank you Mr president this bill
is just an expansion of services
that are already provided with
this does it is expansive for
you state cultural access for
our foster families that now
we've also got New Mexico game
and fish department who came on
board to offer free licenses to
use and we have the New Mexico
expansion of the services the
FIR estimates that at a high
level if this if all of these
that services were utilized it
would only cost the state an
to show ID ideas are available
through CYFD to prove fostering
families and without it would
stand for questions.
this bill sooner I love this
bill I think it's terrific I
heard something about fostering
connections which I created a
couple years ago what does that
mean from the ages of eighteen
to twenty one do they have this
access to our state services.
Thank you I think this is
outstanding I wish I could just
signed on to it but that the I
strong support with that Mr
Padilla you'll Representative A.
L..
Hi do you Senator Pirtle Mr
president center how many bills
re signed on to already.
Senator.
More than one.
it be actually a sign out of
this so it's it's not broadband
so be branching out a little bit
as presidents Senator.
Senator Pirtle amen Mr
president.
the great New Mexico outdoors
while helping our folks foster
families so with that Mr
president I move that house bill
thirty five do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all those present are shown
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty seven in the
pharmacy on the negative house
bill thirty five is twice
amended has duly passed the
Senate center diamond thank you
Mr president that concludes the
consent count calendar Senate
business messages from the
house.
The reader to read.
house amendments respectfully
submitted Lisa and Marty's
McCutchen chief clerk the
journal so that the message from
the house has been received.
seven as amended by the Senate
Senate bill forty three Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
or T. Smith catching chief
clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
eighty one as amended by the
house house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty one and requests
the concurrence of the Senate
Mr president I am directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in gross copies of
amended House Bill three seventy
House Bill three seventy seven
as amended have been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the house in open session and
and I'd like to announce to the
members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session house
bill seven as amended house bill
one twenty five as amended house
I want
the reader to read.
President I'm directed to inform
submitted Lisa and Marty's
McCutchen chief clerk the
general show the house the
message from the house has been
received and I'd like to
announce to the members of the
body that the officers the
that the house has passed Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
forty seven as amended by the
The journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Your now to Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth to take
us to the next order of business
thank you Mr president unanimous
for Senate bill nineteen and two
fifty two has had it under has
had them under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
all the committee reports in the
General flecked their act upon
individually no objections to
reiterate Senate bill one
seventy do pass house bill eight
those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted.
And the General Fleck that
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Katie and do have chairwoman
center how to mail Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
eighteen do pass and that's
referred to the Indian role and
cultural affairs committee
Senator Mario sixty four do pass
Senate Joint Memorial one do
Katie and do have chairwoman
Center Hotmail Mr president I
move adoption of the committee
report.
Centers we have a motion to
adopt the committee report all
This president George Disher
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty seven
as amended has had it under
consideration reports that same
have been duly enrolled in
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report we have a
motion to that the committee
report on all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take is that next
order of business thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation or
in that order business
introduction legislation the
commission to convene a
statewide gun violence
prevention task force to study
gun violence in New Mexico and
to make recommendations for
addressing the issue Senate
Mario sixty seven.
Senate memorial sixty eight
introduced by Senator Lopez.
More and more real requesting
the developmental disabilities
council to convene a working
Senate Education Committee that
sent memorial sixty eight.
Senate memorial sixty six
introduced by Senator Campos a
memorial recommending that New
seven moral sixty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee that
some more L. sixty six.
House bill two eighty eight
television programming to
provide closed captioning
requiring the Attorney General
to enforce the closed captioning
Act providing penalties house
introduced by Representative
Chasey and others and act
related to municipalities
amending procedures and
penalties for nuisances house
introduced by Representative
Garrett.
And act relating to health care
creating the else I'm is disease
and other dementias by re
council requiring the
house bill four seventy one
house bill four seventy one
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee that's
house bill four seventy one.
immigrant juvenile cast
classification act provided for
jurisdiction of special
immigrant immigrant juvenile
classification declaring an
emergency.
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee that's House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifteen.
House labor veterans and
we hired firefighters creating a
firefighter recruitment fund
required distribution oversight
of the firefighters recruitment
fund by the homeland security
and emergency management
House labor veterans military
affairs committee substitute.
For House Bill three forty five
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
eighty one and act relating to
public education amending the
reading materials fund to fund
elementary literacy mode
materials aligned to the science
of reading.
House Education Committee
substitute for House Bill forty
one having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
Education Committee thousand
acacia Committee substitute for
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so will be in at
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
we will be doing an evening
three thirty nine and Senate
finance he just changes the name
and I'd like to release that
from Senate finance I've talked
to the other side of the aisle
Senator have the title level.
I will in one second.
Say no objection so ordered.
Centerman yes thank you Mr
president Senate finance we're
trying to figure out what time
for thirty thank you centerman
test center to serve you know.
Mr president the Senate.
Health and public affairs
committee will meet at for
major caucus meeting at six PM
in the Senate loungin we will be
having dinner serve their six PM
Senator Senator Stefanics thank
burritos so could be your first
or your second breakfast we have
only a few bills on the agenda
thank you thanks Senator Banik
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president will Senator Wirth
Thank you very much I just got a
couple text this is for people
who were a little confused as to
whether not the evening session
would be tonight or tomorrow
night Senator Wirth I thank you
Mr present as I announced to
will come in tomorrow at eleven
o'clock in the morning and we
so we will be back on the floor
tomorrow at eleven and then
tomorrow evening we'll have a
floor session I appreciate are
you asking me that to make sure
offsite caucus meeting at six
o'clock thank you senator rand
Center o'neill thank you Mr
president your Senate Indian
River on cultural affairs will
be at the call of the chair
president thank you members with
that unanimous consent the
Senate stand in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
see no objections the Senate to
Senate recess for eleven AM
tomorrow.
