Senator Burt.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator my S. here.
Senator o'neill.
Senator to the Pino.
Senator Padilla here Senator
Pinto.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Here Representative and now with
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart here senator Tom
in.
Senator Wirth.
senators to the chamber we're
lacking a quorum.
All senators to the chamber
we're needing a quorum.
I'll senators to the chamber
we're still lacking a quorum.
You now have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you an asset everyone
please rise for the invocation
to be led today by Reverend
Pledge allegiance in this I
don't have it at today by
Senator Sedillo Lopez and the
salute to the New Mexico flag to
be led today by Senator Kernan.
brief passage from James and
then pray for us this morning.
Who among you as wise and
understanding by is good conduct
he should show that his works
but his earthly and spiritual
and demonic for there is envy
and selfish ambition there is
disorder and every evil practice
with the wisdom from above is
pure then peace loving gentle
We know that wisdom comes from
god and is shown to us in the
sun Jesus Christ as our lord and
savior.
As per the chart have wisdom
this morning so if you'll join
me in prayer.
The loving kindness shown to
those who we disagree with do
not always see eye to eye with.
Were pre chewed.
Be glorified in this issue that
are made.
process Griffin was then they
need to do that.
Also your son's name Jesus
Christ amen.
Indivisible.
No more of that hello bendita
the Los estados Unidos that
ceiling go live there I use the
step out of those.
I salute the flank of the state
of New Mexico.
president happy Monday everyone
good to see you all unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seen objects aware that order
business announces miscellaneous
week
you know wisdom peace love let's
just keep everything keep those
in mind because again we're
headed into in our final three
unanimous consent to remove
Senate memorial thirty five
which is City of Santa Fe day
and place that on the
president's table seeing no
objection will remove Senate
memorial thirty five City of
quick vote so they should be
down shortly and we'll get to
that a what she is down Mr
president unanimous consent
staff here with me for three
days he is a junior at UNM
majoring in political science
with a double double minor in
philosophy and entrepreneurship
deputy chief of staff for many
years
Dana was a law school classmate
of mine so it's fun to see Mason
back his family has a long
sister work for both Hillary
Clinton and Michelle Lujan
Grisham in Washington DC he
plans to also work in Washington
before eventually returning to
New Mexico to work in business
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president we also have some
Milken educator award eighties
do that when we get get to that
point
we don't have any events on the
calendar so ideal to other
members to introduce guests and
us consent to introduce my
guests no objection proceed
Senator thank you thank you Mr
president with me today I have a
group of young ladies with wild
friends but they are from to I
Gabrielle done and done done
done they grow highly Barboa
blown sonata secretarial.
And this Friday there's a couple
that will actually be playing in
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and I
just want to thank my pastor who
led us in prayer this morning
his wife's parents were Tania
and ice pastor in the nineties
and so we didn't even realize
that until we call Jesse to come
Thank you senator rent.
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr president are
unanimous consent to introduce
my guests no objection proceed
secretary of the UNM college
Democrats and that will forgive
him for growing up in Colorado
but he's been here for the last
five years and actually his
family has deep roots here are
switchboards back in her day and
his mom worked in the the house
of representatives in the
eighties and in the future he's
plan on going into public
service through nonprofit work
me welcome.
We have center how to meal
followed by Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Senator Ortiz Pino
and so I can't wait for the day
that I can help him run his
election and I can vote for him
Dominic's on the violence is the
twenty twenty three the all of
the Tory and Espanola valley
past summer he's also served in
the state student council office
and was most recently accepted
to Vanderbilt University in
Nashville Tennessee where he
will major in political science
Santa if you can please welcome
Dominic's on the vine.
have a sense I mean this two
tenths UNM and she's going to be
my shadow for the next three
days she has a double major in
international order
international studies and
political science she wants to
Portuguese and she's currently
an intern for the United States
for S. I am and assumed the
refugee and migrant secretary in
addition to all of that she
gonna live so I can say I can
hardly wait to vote for her in
the future interest is
international law immigration
law and she's gonna be doing
great great things I hope for
president like to introduce to
the Senate this morning my
shadow for the next three days
Michael Peters he's the one of
the group of the college
And the originally from Los
Alamos and his sister is also a
student at U. N. M. although
she's a little younger than he
is.
he's going to give it a good
pondering and and clearly you
know map out some things that
may or may not work in the long
run that will bother them too
community they've done food
drives they they organized a
debate high school debate
tournament and provided the
judges for that tournament.
the members of the Senate help
me welcome my shelter for the
next three days Mr Michael
Peters of viewing them.
I see no further announcements
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business.
Thank you Mr president so we're
waiting for Senator Rodriguez to
when we go ahead and do some of
the work but unanimous that we
go about our business committee
reports we're in that order
business credit reports the
reader to reader point.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
do passed as amended
respectfully submitted it Joseph
said about this chairman.
Senator.
Mr present ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two twenty three as
amended do pass.
Senate bill three thirty I do
pass.
Senate bill three seventy four
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Joseph
Those opposed make the eyes have
internet porn has been adopted
in the journal will show their
act on individually.
The reader to read.
Mr president your rules
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg sure chairwoman
Saturday Mr present ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
Senate joint resolution to pass
and that's referred to the
conservation committee.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee for has been
adopted Senator Wirth Mister
president so let's just let's
hold off on doing the rest of
these reports at this time we
got committees we got committees
Rodriguez sent a more thirty
five the business third reading
of legislation center this
percent or thirty five thank you
Mr president members of the
third time in full preparatory
to its final passage.
Hearing no objection centers we
just explain.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate this is a memorial
today we've got several people
here with us and we're just
looking forward to continuing to
talk about how great the City of
smiles out there in the rostrum
already that's how it is here in
Santa Fe and IBM also want to
let you know about the nice
citations but tickets are little
they're whatever they're called
little plaques I guess you
column that that you get to be
be able to to do it how we need
to park for meetings and so on
and not be subject to law to
having to pay all these fees and
citations that sometimes we just
read the certificate as we go on
thank you the reader to read.
Senator more thirty five
memorial Representative
proclaiming for February twenty
seven twenty three City of Santa
Santa Fe has hosted legislators
from across the state to create
the laws that support state
government and the people of New
Mexico and whereas from the
fortunate to be the seat of New
Mexico's government and such a
historically rich city and
whereas the city of Santa Fe
continues to welcome a diverse
celebrate diversity value the
environment treasure respective
cultures and honor southwest
history and whereas the
residents culture and economy of
the City of Santa Fe greatly
elective if elected officials of
the city of Santa Fe salute the
dedicated efforts of governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham and state
legislators working in
experience in Santa Fe and
enjoyable one by offering access
to various city facilities and
services and whereas the
Mexico that congradulations be
extended to this.
City of Santa Fe for being the
great capital city it is and
that February twenty seventh
mayor and city council of the
city of Santa Fe signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator Nancy
Rodriguez Senator Peter Wirth
president I move that memorial
thirty five
do now pass and I just got
unanimous consent of the Senate
that that we have other speakers
other stock about how beautiful
the City of Santa Fe is and our
officials here from the city
thank you senator there is we
have Senator.
different days and realize how
our local communities play such
a key role in our state and I
certainly can say that here in
for folks that come and you know
we're here round the clock
especially now again the city's
been incredibly welcoming and I
really appreciate that and I'm
very very honored to be able to
represent the city on to have
all of you here working in this
make up here.
Have big consequences at the
local level and I I know we're
doing a much better job these
days and often in the past
officials and all of our all of
our areas but I just want to
stand in support and good to see
the more and all the counselors
here today so thank you Senator
to the chamber no objection
center for the and peace has
returned and the U. S. consent
Mr president to excuse Senator
Here no objections Santa cameras
are to be allowed only the
Senate chamber Senator by the
thank you very much Mr president
you know I I when I first
arrived here I thought I think I
appreciate having an opportunity
to speak about because the
parking passes are beautiful
thank you so much for that you
know I'm about two or three
pounds heavier Mr more because I
haven't had a chance go to the
of people come to Santa Fe for
this thirty day or sixty day
session or for any other reason
to come to interact the state
government and the way that the
City of Santa Fe works so hard
the planet to participate in
this exercise just like I come
from Albuquerque and they get to
see all the wonderful things
about New Mexico and about Santa
Fe and then and they they get an
tranquility and the wonderful
agency of Santa Fe and so I just
want to think of the city
officials for everything they do
to to bring Santa Fe to the
highlight it is one of the
finest cities on the face of the
really does highlight New Mexico
so thank you for doing that as
well as want to make that
comment thank you Mr president
thank you senator there we do
have for the debate will have
council here from being a native
son of the Espanola valley
councilman Lee Garcia went to
Pojoaque valley high school so
we were rivals in high school
but it's great to work alongside
him and the others when it comes
to decisions for northern New
our Spanish ancestors that my
family for generations have come
to see Our Lady of peace in the
cathedral and she's heard lots
of generations of predators and
whispers of intentions from
twenty seven year old veteran of
the Santa Fe police department
who we lost most of us remember
him from leading the bike patrol
on the plaza and of the members
of the Senate could please rise
Thank you Mr president it give
us on the fact.
forward but also the leaders
here of Santa Fe and of course
the the people of this great
community the city different as
we talk about things that have
region added here in Santa Fe
but also when we start talking
about things like on the air
with a lot of S. and his country
and we start talking about the
here the ambiance there's so
many things here the majestic
attractions and then one of the
things that really strikes me
over and over because I've spent
culture and the arts and of
course the food but tying it all
together means that Santa Fe is
not only our capital city but
it's the place where people from
those people that have expressed
their artistic abilities here or
lastly as they move forward to
go ahead and grow new families
along with that infrastructure
that regardless of where we go
we can enjoy a good meal we can
join a good conversation and we
can enjoy.
president thank you Senator
Campos we do have further debate
with Senator Stewart.
Thank you so much Mister
president so glad that we have
But retire is not the right word
my brother in law is now at one
of the best tour guides he put
together a chocolate to our I
there were spies in Santa Fe in
their secret pathways and of
course the history tour and then
Representative wrote two books
one of the most Santa Fe in
nineteen eighty another one is
just been really fun to see
Santa Fe from their eyes.
said they lived all over the
world in the speak five
languages so to Santa Fe to them
that Senator Wirth reiterated so
up thank you and it's great day
to celebrate Santa Fe the the.
Thank you Senator Stewart we do
stand up in support of this is a
memorial
I love Santa Fe ever since I was
a child we used to have picnics
alongside the river but I also
wanted to point out that Santa
in Los Lunas and lived in
Valencia County for a few years
and then has a teenager move to
Santa Fe her entire family moved
to Santa Fe and then the rest is
history has you know she was
woman to run for Congress has
Republican and then she was the
a superintendent here in Santa
Fe and there are schools around
here named after her so I'm very
proud to stand in support of
is a son data and she was able
to show her work at Our Lady of
Guadalupe church when they had a
display of what a loop is that
memorial and thank a Senator
Rodriguez for bringing it.
Thank you Senator Lopez Senator
Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr president
to to thank you all for your
hospitality you all live here.
and then we kind of come in and
take over and then disappear.
the entire city and and and
everything that happens
it is also as as
center how do you put it out.
Although we all want to say it's
the City of holy faith.
That is that is in the name of
of of Santa Fe is one of we are
one of two cities major cities
you Mr Stewart asked San
Francisco right we've got four
Santa Fe.
And and so anyways I just but it
In the nation by Google thousand
feet.
R. it is you know it is very
true that we make laws with less
oxygen than anybody else in the
country.
your leadership in the city and
and and you know every time I've
I've had to work with somebody
from the city of Santa Fe we had
someone in the mayor's office
into their work and so thank you
all for your service.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto we
have any further debate.
Say no further debate Senator
course with the mayor and mayor
pro tem people who work
extensive hours literally doing
the people's work and we're just
betterment of this beautiful
city that we have there is just
and work is greatly appreciate
it and we're so happy to have
him here Mister president I move
Seeing no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
on the negatives Center moral
thirty five City of Santa Fe day
has passed the Senate center
there yes thank you Mr president
Carol Romero Wirth councillor
Michael Garcia cancer Rene yes
we have councillor Jamie cast
that cancer Lee Garcia city
thank you so much for all your
work.
Thank you center the biggest
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
educator award he's being here
but I haven't seen them yet so
we're just gonna play that by
year and at the right time
If they do come we may take a
through items one through nine
in that order we'll see how
we're doing but that's kind of
be on deck assuming we can get
that far so just before we.
president on it is my honor and
privilege to introduce my
special guest today he'll be
with me through Wednesday Mr
president his name is Andrew
Shue many standing right here by
moderating a debate that I was a
panelist on and I was so
impressed that I went to miss it
much come work for me during the
session and I found out he had
already been invited by multiple
members so that's just how it
and this is very important for
the body we were very honored to
have him here because he is one
of two finalists for New Mexico
for the Truman scholarship
Mister president I think that's
going to serve him well for all
Thank you senator there any
further announcements Senators.
Say no further announcement
Senator Peter Wirth tickets the
next order of business thank you
Mr president so I think we'll
Senate bill sixty eight is twice
amended Senator is aware that
order business they're doing
legislation center could
Hemphill thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
substitution.
Seeing no objection Senator
Collett explained about thank
you Mr president so Senate bill
sixty eight will allow for
electronic signatures on car
burdens to the taxed Rav
Department amendments have made
the bill better with more
clarity and I appreciate the
help of the Senate tax committee
Just say no debate center could
Hemphill to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
that Senate bill sixty eight
twice amended do now pass and I
Senators tier seats all senators
to your seats.
By a vote of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is there the name is
Senate bill Sixtyeight is twice
amended has passed the Senate
center could Hemphill thank you
Mr president thank you members
that are Milken award
recipients have come to the
chamber and eyes Senator guy
Aigles
Let's do this actually let's
Yes I am aware that order
business they're doing
legislation center city a locus
thank you Senator two twenty
that list for the the bill in
first test and then we'll bring
in the expert witness.
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objection
Senator Lopez to explain.
I.
just to give you the background
in acting Senate bill twenty
four of was it is necessary
because
dollars for medical support and
about.
In two thousand sixteen the
federal office of child support
enforcement stop requiring
parental medical support orders
welfare but this I said it cost
seven hundred forty one dollars
for HSD to establish and enforce
a collection of sixty dollars
And and really save the
department a lot of money.
Thank you Senator Lopez centers
we're debating Senate bill two
twenty four Senator lovers would
objections sergeant ours LX
scored the expert witnesses into
the chamber.
Valuable to Senator Brandt thank
you Mr president need to excuse
order but are we letting loose
McCracken into this chamber
right now as the expert witness
I just heard that correctly.
Senator Moores I believe that
was the expert witness that was
Thank you Mr president.
I know this is going but I do
want to point out that once
again we've got unrelated
every time we come in here and
we say Hey the taxpayers of New
Mexico should pay for something
else.
That troubles me.
The troubles me I know they're
of New Mexico with even a little
bird we should be trying to
recoup that money from the
person responsible for it the
person responsible.
keep piling on pallet on piling
on to unrelated taxpayers so not
a question Mr president just
wish we'd stop piling on.
Senator share any further debate
Thank you Mr president.
Enacting SB twenty four to
twenty four will align New
Mexico with the federal
modernization already embraced
by most of the other states.
With that Mr president I move
that Senate bill two twenty four
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
I'll Senators tier seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Moores already know
center share voting no Senator
Baca.
Voting no.
Has passed the Senate Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Pete awards tickets the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go out of business
to have here in our chamber and
they're here because they are
the recipients of the Milken
educator awards.
performance in the teaching
profession for those of you not
familiar with the award it's the
nation's preeminent teaching
recognition program often
referred to as the Oscars of
awards are based on exceptional
educational talent demonstrated
by effective teaching practices
and student loans student
learning results exemplary
accomplishments beyond the
three guests this morning to
introduce and I will start I'm
honored to introduce first
received this ward of last year
I know that because I was there
when she was awarded and I will
tell you it was the coolest
thing in the world because it
happen and slowly but surely it
was revealed.
That this individual was a
recipient that reward which
comes with a twenty five
thousand dollar scholarship and
students a love of learning in
her third grade class she turns
the word school work in the
school fund at Halloween she had
feedback direct from their peers
and during the pandemic when
teaching was being done
virtually Gabrielle set up for
classroom in her home from which
she taught her students by zoom
giving them as much of a
virtual kids club so her
students could listen to and
talk with each other on things
outside of academics this is an
amazing teacher who is going to
do great things has done great
Mr president with her this
morning is her father Anthony
his award he sent us thank you
Mr president Senator Wirth you
didn't excellent job explaining
the Milken educator awards but
it and it's been said that their
models of future belongs to the
educated and we're really happy
that we have someone and loving
that is a receive this warden
regardless of their backgrounds
and consistently and Justice
practices to meet their diverse
needs.
science it's a hundred percent
former students often thank you
for preparing them so well for
college science classes.
He believes educators need to
stay ready so you don't have to
instruction from eastern New
Mexico university it is my high
honor to be able in addition to
the Senate that asked you to
help me welcome and
You Mr leader present with him
is Haley his wife in as with all
of us understanding if we don't
Thank you able to senator
centre Bill cels thank you Mr
New Mexico's classrooms his
students build problem solving
through engaging activities new
this is fourth race no
technology initiative newness
let the school's efforts to
demonstrate to the state that
the iPads were being used
effectively instruction guiding
students as they used I movie to
create videos on curriculum
lessons learning objectives
newness uses research based
strategies to enhance
instruction for all students
especially English language
learners and analyzes data to
their own understanding of the
concepts with green yellow and
red stickers in the after school
program C. eight students
conduct interviews right human
acted out for their peers Unisys
students excel growing from
seventy percent to one hundred
percent proficient on the I.
ready math assessment and ending
the year with ninety two percent
newness champion the idea of
dividing the screen into six
houses to strengthen connections
among students in different
grades each house has a focus
for example team vision
brainstorm new ideas and
encourages collaboration well
team atlas centers on loving
has shepherded the adoption of
new textbooks just enormous
social studies lead and works
with colleagues on data analysis
and backward planning units
participated in the Harvard
university's partnership in
accessible for all providing
extra zoom help for E. L. A. and
Matt intervention groups in
creating highly interactive
lessons using breakout rooms
fosters an environment of
respect and trust he's a leader
in the in implementing cinemas
restorative practices working
with students to talk about and
find solutions to complex
student driven and committed to
elementary education in two
thousand nine from New Mexico
State University if you'll help
me a recognizing Christopher
newness is one of our milk and
him is to resell and Teresa was
one of my students in algebra
two back when I think you were a
sophomore at the time and
government there and so very
much show up family affair and
we have lots of those in New
Mexico it's great to be able to
welcome and recognize some of
our outstanding teachers thank
Mr president thank you members
for just taking a little pause I
just having teachers of this
caliber here is so important for
us to recognize each one of you
unanimous consent we go that our
business third reading of
legislation ideal to Senator
Kernan for item number three
Senate bill one fifty just twice
amended see no objection where
bill one fifty just twice
amended on final passage is been
taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
counseling training substance
abuse treatment or other
services and did addressing
underlying factors that may
jeopardize the safety or well
being of a substance exposed
recovery act by hospital or
freestanding birthing center
after substance exposed infants
born in brief this ensures that
bill one fifty just twice
amended we do have debate with
Senator Brandt.
The amendments and contacts and
looks like you've had actually
several amendments to this the
one on have a little bit
concerned about is where the.
The Senate health public affairs
we move that back to a may two
move to an investigation of
would probably not be in the
best interest at this point
not need to do an investigation
which is a very in depth process
and procedure that may not be
needed at that point the family
so at this point we don't want
to require a shelf for an
investigation we want to be able
to be sure that fat that eyes
are on that family and do an
report available to anyone to
report to see with the page does
trigger report to sky which then
could lead to an investigation
so we're just asking for the
family assessment to make sure
that all is being done to make
may do that family assessment
this makes it where they have to
which I completely agree with
and then they shall provide the
referrals for counseling so my
Mr president center yes that's
correct so when investigation
could always occur after the
family assessment I believe it's
important to have that first
doing any of the services when
they do not comply are they do
not accept the plan of care
we're we're gonna look at the
family and find out what's going
on and then from that point
I think we need a lot more bills
that bring accountability to
CYFD so I will completely
support the bill we'll continue
to watch and see if there's some
What we know is a lot of
children our state have lost
their lives or staying in
abusive homes because CYFD isn't
child not about keeping them
with family not about any of
those other things but the best
interests of the child we've
lost too many children in the
state and too many children are
thank you for bringing this to
good first step I think we have
a lot more steps we need to do
and look forward to seeing other
bills are bringing
accountability and look forward
with family that is not the best
thing for them if they're being
abused in the home thank you Mr
president we do have further
debate to a center Duhigg
followed by Senator Ortiz Y.
this is a a real common sense
approach to making sure that
that we have eyes on on the most
Mr president Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino thank you Mr president and
thanks Senator Kernan for for
sponsoring this I too supported
I I do think that we've created
a very.
way it works now the hospital is
supposed to come up with a plan
of care then the.
Care coordination is supposed to
come from the MCO.
just it is like a relay race for
you you've got a slippery baton
too many opportunities to drop
it my own preference would be if
Would have immediately a case
worker assigned or AFP it
doesn't have to be a masters in
social work you could be a a
community service worker.
then make sure that that there
is some kind of follow up but as
it is now with three separate
entities each responsible for a
piece of it by the time there is
intervene by the time eight by
the time CYFD knows about it it
may be too late so I I I I think
this is a good step I still
family whose child was born with
fetal alcohol syndrome or drug
addiction to try to to make sure
that the family gets support if
we're not going to remove the
child and that's what Terrazas
you Senator for this I think it
is a good first step I think we
just need in the future to get a
lot a lot more realistic about
how it's going to be carried out
first time that someone from
outside the home sets eyes on it
for for a while it may be the
last time and if there's a red
flag that that there's been any
sort of a abuse during pregnancy
Course of action for that child
to grow up in a much better
environment instead of being
more reactive in the future so I
just want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this forward and
Kernan to close on the bill Mr
president I'm is that Senate
bill one fifty just twice
amended.
Do now pass and ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
to your seats.
We're voting if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty seven
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill one fifty as twice
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that all acts replacing.
Senate tax business and
substitution see no objections
Senator Stewart to explain the
bill.
I thank you Mr president so this
bill eliminates cost sharing for
care sexually transmitted
infection care is defined as
preventative and treatment care
including screening testing
examination counseling the
dramatically increased locally
and nationally in recent years
the CDC reports in January of
twenty one at twenty six million
lifetime medical costs
sometimes these infections are a
symptomatic so people don't know
they have them and it really
president we work with the
insurance industry to ensure
that they could support this
bill and we left out some things
bill one thirty two we do have a
floor amendment reader to read
the amendment Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
amendment as.
So Mister president the Senate
tax business transportation
committee substitute on
intentionally excluded members
federal rules so this amendment
just claim set up to clarify
that plan members can receive
cost sharing STI testing and
treatment before meeting their
stand for questions senators
we're debating senator member
number one to send a tax
business transportation
committee subs two percent of
health public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
amendment number one to this
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute percent health public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one thirty two
been added to Senate bill one
thirty two we are back on the
bill.
Senator Moores on the bill thank
you Mr president would Senator
Stewart yield Senator detailed I
testing Connery or chlamydia we
do pap test in cytology so no
one's COVID talk to me about
this bill so I wanted to make
sure miss present senator are
no came to talk to me about this
so this is this is news to me
can you walk me through.
When you're saying costsharing
I'm assuming you're talking
take away co pays so that
preventive care which is often
also treatment can continue can
happen without copays that's all
amount proton about uninsured or
I can see why insurance
companies on a problem this but
what I'm looking at it as from a
prevent providers from being
able to collect from the
patients Mr president settlement
program Senator Stewart.
really an overtly left out I
believe so it just says there's
no co pays and the amendment was
based on the insurance industry
so I'm not quite sure I've
something in there that if
someone presents or has
insurance problems and we'd run
the STI testing along with the
pap test
family hopper providers around
the state they sent to the
laboratory we process them if
they come back positive report
those positives to the patient
laboratory work in for the test
so would we smart Mr president
madam pro tem still be able to
bill uninsured patients or is
would like to ask for an expert
witness at some is Kayla hearing
works for Planned Parenthood.
Moores yield re restate the
question.
Thank you thank you miss present
thank you madam pro tem and
expert witness if you have been
hearing your your clinic
provides direct patient care
tem that gets these from
providers around states
hospitals and we run these tests
as the arts and I apologize I
wasn't part of the conversation
We get the process lower by the
provider notify the state notify
the patient if they come in
uninsured you're able to build
insurance data Mr president
chair Mister president as
senator Morris my expert tells
me this this only applies to
those people with insurance you
can certainly bill people
attention really quickly thank
you thank you senator Morris we
do have further debate we have
centers committee.
Thank you Mr president just a
everybody hostage by as the
gatekeepers of modern medicine.
when the patients do not have
the money when the money has
already been taken from you at
the first of the month.
ask who's being
disproportionately impacted by a
bill like this and it's women
young women.
Girls.
Who are systemically oppressed
And women are supposed to in our
social contract that was written
by men.
They're the ones the girls of
the ones that to take the
hormones in the society the
feminist leader sure there's two
books written this past year by
radical feminist Christine emba
called rethinking sex and the
case against the sexual
revolution by Louise Perry who
in our society and so this
furthers the oppression of women
in our society because when this
was presented in.
know that their daughter is
engaging in sexual activity or
may have contracted a sexually
transmitted disease.
One of my proposing instead of
bills like this Mr president I'm
sacrificial way that we are all
called to and we are called to
commit to women in stop
objectifying them day after day
after day in our society.
debate we have Senator Ivy Soto
followed by Senator share than
center how to meal.
Senator Ivey Soto thanks very
much this president and the
happened a couple years ago
Representative because then I
care to build.
To make sure the copays on
And and so you know this.
Likewise this bill is helping
people with insurance.
to look at the various places
that we have reduced a copay for
excluded a copay to make sure
that uninsured people for all of
is in terms of of the copays on
insurance and I and I think the
sponsor for the work that she's
done on this issue.
We do have for the debate Sir
sure.
that I see with our society in
general is that we have gone out
of our way to destroy families
were ripping families apart.
natural support system that just
comes.
Ripping apart.
Every day and this is just
another example of that we're
just tearing families apart
But no because we don't trust
parents so which Representative
the child away from the parent
have the child do things that
No idea what they're getting
into and we're to presenting
presenting the parents from even
knowing that something's going
to tear families apart.
I don't understand why we have
to remove parents from the life
of children.
I don't understand why we have
because in the H. M. P. H. can
walk in.
Wow.
families again and again and
again and again.
But the insurance companies
going yes absolutely the
insurance companies are thrilled
Every single person that matter
if you have children or not.
Your premium is going to go up.
Because somebody has to pay for
this still.
Laying another huge burden.
On the people that actually pay
the bills.
of Bucks a year but it's still a
couple of Bucks a year.
On top of a couple of Bucks a
year on top of a couple of Bucks
of here on top of a couple of
Bucks a year because we can't
And I believe that it's exactly
the same reason because we've
ripped families apart now we
That encouragement.
Tears our society part.
And then we wander around here
go we need more money for mental
They're inside the family unit
that's what we need but no we're
turn to search our selves part.
We're encouraging those of us in
say we need more money more
money for mental health more
money.
Instead of more parents.
There does seem to be one one
particular organization it's
probably going to make a lot of
money off this deal.
One particular group.
children are going to pay we are
going to pay.
Insurance companies will be
fine.
In this one group national group
is going to make a lot of money
even right a lot of things I
think coming here is great ideas
with the best of intentions this
isn't even a great idea and I
don't think it has the best of
intentions.
And we'll be back here begging
for more money to fix it.
Mr president.
This encourages a lack of self
discipline.
Which ultimately encourages.
families away from any kind of
of help or aid.
And the more passed the more we
go down this path.
The less.
All the time all worked up about
the the threat to our democracy.
Well the threat to our democracy
according to them is that I
exist.
without self discipline and here
we are encouraging encouraging
your responsibility encouraging
your responsibility not just
Why are we destroying families
no.
This is not even a good idea
with the best of intentions this
is a bad idea I think with bad
certainly thank you Mr president
for those listening on zoom some
of us know this but not
everybody dies is an SCA the
same as an STD Senator Stewart.
sexually transmitted infections
we used column STDs now it's S.
T. eyes because it's more
comprehensive.
So Mister president the problem
with S. T. eyes is that you can
have them for years and not know
it.
ruined there are so many issues
that they're born with in
addition if you have committee
of for several years and you
don't know what.
You become infertile.
last several years twenty six
million new infections in twenty
eighteen so this bill attempts
to have.
that people without insurance or
people of that can't really pay
for copays are protected and get
the screening so yes the
infection and you don't.
You don't pass it on because
these are you don't have to.
Get is the STI through through
know we're not changing anything
since the nineteen fifties we
trusted our young people to
manage and access testing and
support of your bill because
this bill removes barriers to
accessing STI health care by
ensuring that New Mexicans did
not have to bear the burden of
cost sharing with insurance
Thanks and have a meal seen no
further debate.
Senator Stewart to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president this is
that pregnancy and infertility I
help the body can support it
with that Mr person I move that
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate health
all Senators your seats where
voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Woods pony now.
Senator Brandt voting no Senator
Baca voting no Senator Pirtle
voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
as amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate we will go on to
the next item on the calendar
that's going to be item number
action for placing Senate bill
seventy on final passage has
been taken and it's now subject
to debate amendment for
substitution see no objections
to be sent out over four years
to hire a skilled individual to
assist the southwest council of
governments with water project
applications and project
water projects and Grant County
catching County Hidalgo County
Luna counties so this bill is
going to assist southwest
portion of the state to get
where demand is Senate bill
seventy.
See no debate Senator Diamond
debate.
Mr president I don't need to
sponsor to yield I just wanna
central areas of of New Mexico
as well this is money well spent
an expression the in response to
their much needed recovery
efforts that we're gonna need to
see with the flood and fire
results of the black fire so I
See no for the debates Senator
Hemphill to close on the bill
thank you Mr president this is
my lucky day yes I move that
Senate bill seventy do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that the rules been called in
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty nine the
Fuhrman is in the negative
Senate bill seventy has passed
the Senate Senator Hemphill
thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate.
from PRC and I yield to senator.
Senator feels it's what's in the
bill.
saying no objection senator bill
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president of the bill we passed
through the Senate and all the
way through the house it got to
the floor on the final day and
of ran out of time and we didn't
recall Mr president we may have
a who are in the past we've
moved insurance out of the PRC
we've moved cope corporations
out of P. Garcia I think there's
been some other things this is
location this moves the
transportation functions that
are currently under PRC
regulating taxis and tow trucks
and those of those kind of
things moves them over to the
I think that's the gist of what
it does I defer to my co sponsor
senator Wirth he'd like say a
few words Senator Wirth deals Mr
president I'm happy old and I
I and I will say that really the
way this works is the division
just moves from PRC that
department transportation and
we've worked with the department
transportation they know it's
Senate bill one sixty we have
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chair.
R. Mr president.
It talks about interest on a
late fee of fifteen percent.
president center page six is
that correct yep page six line
two line two.
Fifteen percent as opposed to
penalty
one might argue it's high I
can't address that Mr president
Senator.
Well Mister president centered
been so many times in this
chamber that that people talk
about these excessively high
interest rates that we wanna not
guess if nobody else is
concerned why should I Mr
president thank you.
Thank you senator.
Any further debate centers.
those present voting infirmities
of those voting in the negative
by show of hands Senators tier
seats please more voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Yeah.
By a vote of thirty in the
formative zero the negative
Senate bill one sixty has duly
Schoolbased health centers you
know you'll to center the as.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
this bill does nothing more than
codified into statute school
based health centers as we
currently have them today they
are not statutorily protected so
puts in in statute thank you Mr
president members of the Senate
thank you senator is Senators
we're debating Senate bill three
ninety seven as amended.
will yield.
Thank you Mr president center
can you can explain to us why we
need these in statute when it's
already permissible for school
districts to do them.
but the school based centers
provide an enormous amount of
health care for our students
throughout the state especially
those that are poor and need to
access medical care
realize that they're not
codified in statute.
We do want to make sure they can
continue to provide the services
that they do we're not expanding
services we're not changing
The the the bill says that they
have to be on school property or
within a safe walking distance.
why do they have to be on school
the public schools there
specifically for students so
this closer they are to the
school the the better for
students to be able to access
these are for parents asked if
they can their child could be
seen in these health centers Mr
president Senator Brandt none of
that changes here in this bill
merely the the minor consent
doesn't touch on that.
So Mister president center can
you help me understand what
those are.
The those a parent have to give
the school boards and the
schools themselves make
decisions as to what is offered
for each particular school and
So madam president Senator I and
I'm I'm not getting an answer
except that it's governed by
minor consent laws I'm not sure
what those are okay thank you Mr
president mass Senator I do have
are you a lamb who is the policy
director if I can have unanimous
consent thank you I also have
Kristin.
Arroba sich thank you see no
Senator Brandt to feel restate
the question par excellence is
thank you.
Thank you Mr president senator
Parents do provide consent for
their children to be seen at the
public schools the school based
health centers.
And second.
If they don't have a consent on
file then parents would be
called otherwise parents do
give permission for that are
provided by school based health
centers.
Okay thank you yes for primary
care and and the.
Yes for primary care okay this
school based clinics provide
primary care and preventive care
services Mr president Senator
and so what was your question
Other care the parents don't
give permission for.
For children you know here there
there's no other there there's
no other services provided if
you're referring to reproductive
health care and things like that
abortions for example in our the
school based health centers or
even any referrals
Situations like that so they
provide specialty services they
can refer to a specialist if you
and if you have a a two sake and
they need a dentist for example.
Notified.
For children over fourteen years
old yes Mr president Senator.
it's a suicide issue or suicide
prevention issue and that the
child has disclosed to their
their mental health counselor at
the school based health center
that they're suicidal with the
If they're suicidal there would
be a plan put in place where it
very well may include parents
the the notified but.
trying to to help the student
center address the situation
center right just reminder to go
to the chair.
Senator Brandt.
overall concerns me in our state
the parents aren't involved.
a lot of the issues could be
resolved especially if you
brought parents ended family
psychology which is my degree.
health care behavioral health
care and we're not even
involving the parents I just
don't believe that anyone under
the age of eighteen especially
when their parents are paying
our schools it doesn't involve
the parent is harming.
That relationship between the
parent and that school.
I also have a strong belief that
the.
with way too much and I don't
think that providing health care
at the school is an answer.
I think providing some kind of
referral service yes.
When we are quit piling on to
our schools and thinking there
the answer for everything let's
let him get back to education
which quite frankly they're not
doing a very good job of in our
state.
Twenty three percent.
Can read.
And yet we want our schools to
do everything for everybody
school is not the place.
I'm not qualified to deal with
so you need to get him in to see
a mental health counselor.
That would be great.
Asking the schools to be
in opposition to this bill it
really bothers me that care is
being given to students without
parental permission.
and you mention reproductive
referring young girls
reproductive care but have
actually been transporting them.
And so I maybe it's against
federal law and maybe the
we do have further debate we
have center share.
Followed by.
Senator.
The first Mr president and
senator if if you'll you'll for
up question of course thank you
Mr president Senator share I
clinics were closed five years
ago and the need for these
gone to and urgent care or
emergency rooms if they didn't
have this and the suicide rate
has continued to increase
classroom instead of having to
leave for a week or two if they
can be treated there for illness
and injury which is the most
prominent things we see students
Okay so Mister president it
wasn't like a group of parents
one around chanting bad things
in the clothes that way was just
money.
Mr president now there's no
appropriation because the
probation already with and the
department of health.
Its in house bill two for the
department of health as is
usually the case.
Mr president my understanding is
The nurses are responsible for
educational health
Thank you they have physician
assistants and nurse
practitioners at the health care
centers Mr president Senator
share.
Senator so.
Mr president.
places or the school employees.
Thank you Mr president the
school gets into a relationship
with the medical provider for
example a federal for all the
before this is not adding or
changing or taking anything from
what we currently do of what has
been done since school based
health centers were established
that I'm aware of.
Thank you they are seventy nine
in the state and fifty four get
funded by the department of
health.
Thank you Mr president in how
schools and eleven multi grade
schools.
Okay Mister president we have a
lot more schools in the state of
Because Mr president Senator
because they are the ones that
applied for funding to the
department of health.
To continue to exist.
Senator is yes one second if
they provide primary health care
and preventive health care
included on there a sixty eight
primary care visits are for well
child checks five percent for
primary care visits for sports
they Senators Senator.
Okay
Mr president.
So before my wife had her her
So in this case when it was the
school nurse and not a health
care facility of.
She with her parents knowledge
by the way information.
the appropriate time with the
appropriate amount.
So.
It didn't take a a doctor or a
PA it just.
Certainly took immediate action
for injuries okay so you know
there's there's things that you
have to do
something bad happens you have
An ambulance came in.
And took that that student that
patient a way where they can get
better care but but that
immediate first aid was there.
bleeding restore breathing and
treat for shock it's are we
putting splints on broken bones
are we are we.
Of the what are we doing to
based health centers do not take
the places of nurses that will
remain as has been and so the
nurse will be able to do the
don't fully understand your
question Mister chairman Senator
if there's anything else I can
answer I'll be happy just to
try.
nurse took care of students for
I don't know a hundred years or
so.
And and prior to that the
teacher took careful of those
You said and so why what we
treating that that couldn't be
treated with just the school
nurse.
Mr president Senator share
Agence schoolbased health
the students that need it during
the school during when they're
in class and and doing school
activities that whatever they
may be doing in school besides
for our students.
For it to get health care.
So Mister president you talked
about preventive medicine what
we preventing what kind of
medicine are we talking about
their.
temperature they'll do the five
percent our primary care
business are for sports and
physicals and and they insure
Children and adolescents are
athletes are ready for their
chosen activity to get back to
to school from their injuries
for example there's many other
things but I'm just bring in a
preventative is I you do
insertion.
Are you do insertion that's not
that's not saying.
You know I don't smoke that's
all school districts provide
those services that you're
indicating but but if there's a
relationship between the the
school boards and the schools
prohibited things that are
prohibited by federal law you
know the schools can't find if
they choose to do that
Just health care in general.
mental health issues thank you
Senator so Mister president.
I have concerns.
parents out of things and if
this if this really was the
person that could do the fiscal
before you played football okay
We went to our family practice
doctor usually to get the fiscal
before we were allowed to play
baseball.
Or football.
I don't think we played soccer
when I was there.
probably make sense.
if it's really about taking care
of.
Ongoing issues like.
probably makes sense the that
somebody be on campus to deal
with those kind of issues and
there's a lot of those kind of
issues out there you know I pick
diabetes but there's other
things that are out there.
When that happens there's not a
lot you can do but you can try
to help prevent that you can try
to deal with it after the fact
especially if they're some kind
of injury of that happened that
We're using that.
To this job to yeah I can't say
that words big work.
To hide.
We're gonna go around parents
because.
If.
Mom or dad has to take the kid
to the doctor will they know
because they have to take to get
And they're doing things like
that and that could even I
assume.
prescriptions is there.
And we know that now you can
even charge anybody for some of
these prescriptions.
Because this is the last bill
To make sure that the parents
don't know anything about their
children and and right now they
can't.
They can.
of mental health medication so
not just talking to somebody but
all let's give them their
medicine to treat their ADHD and
so now they're.
what the health clinic thought
was best.
That doesn't feel right to me.
That's one of those
conversations that.
Displayed ADHD tendencies.
Because that's what boys do.
calm and dignified up there and
so somehow you got over it maybe
I've missed the boat but but you
got over Mr president.
Because boys are boys we used to
understand that now we
understand the Boise drugs.
To not you know.
Mis behave.
Can these things be.
Done by a licensed health
practitioner in the state of New
Mexico.
Today.
services are needed of any any
form of specialty they re they
can refer basically to to a
specialist as I said I made an
example earlier Mr president
not gonna be taking care of
their at the at the school based
health center it'll be they'll
be referred to go to a
some things really have to climb
up the chain
it where you end up with
With Dr committee.
Looking down your throat.
Don't require that but still can
be done.
By a what is in essence a family
practice.
Those don't require any real
high level of expertise those
can be done.
So there's a lot of things like
I see is the real effort is just
to destroy the family a little
bit more.
the PA at the schoolbased
clinic.
I agree with this let's let that
let's let that doctor PA
whatever.
Do the physical before you play
baseball.
I'm okay with that I'm okay with
the with them being there.
I'm not okay with with them
being fair and avoiding parents.
I think yes this is probably a
good idea probably a good idea
to have in essence.
A family practice.
think it's a great idea with the
best of intentions.
But it's the things that are
underneath there didn't really
have me worried.
line what you want to do in a
school.
But it also includes birth
control pills it also includes
plan B..
Of bills.
to tear families apart again
because Hey that seems to be
what we want to do here this
year is just terror.
Families apart again.
So.
That this is a good idea without
dragging along all of the other
consequences whether their
intended consequences or on
unintended consequences so I I
on here that would say okay the
consequences the unintended
consequences we can we can deal
Thank you Mr president Senator
share
we would not at this point
except amendments like that
because first of all the
flexibility is already built
into the bill we don't mandate
in their vicinity it's so for
that reason it's it's flexible
it's like all a local they have
to have a school based health
center.
So Mister president senator so
you said they they have
flexibility which means today.
They can contract with the
clinic.
They no longer have flexibility
they are tied down for the rest
of eternity is that is that
correct.
Mr president thank you center
these five schools are closed
they closed because there was no
funding they were lacking
funding the for no other reason
than that we know of it was just
they can not have one of these
clinics up to them.
But under this bill.
They will have one of these
clinics with no flexibility they
if there's just not mandating
anything it's merrily keeping it
where it's always been with the
flexibility of the school
district determining whether
Mister president senator.
When you started you said this
is what like just now codifies
what's already there.
Which means even if there's a
change in the demographics of
the school a change in the
school board the changing
everything else it's going
Thank you Mr president center
share what we're doing is
codifying D. O. H. is the
department house
responsibilities to these asked
district to do anything at this
other other than what basically
there are they have the
flexibility already to do as
they deem necessary that this
Operation happening on the
screen.
So what we're are we taking away
our ability to appropriate money
the O. H. says because the O. H.
now has decided that.
Well we're probably too stupid
to appropriate the money too so
DHS to has to tell us exactly
the appropriators Hans.
Not the school board's hands.
Mr president center sure no it
Mr president center share merely
puts his statute the
responsibilities in the
relationship with the department
the school boards the school the
school districts and their
providers that's that's where
it's at today thank you Mr
president.
Can one or all seventy eight of
these be closed can any of them
be closed.
into statutes so that we know
that we can continue to provide
health care for our students at
schools based health centers
because that's why the five
schools Mr president closed
Mr president and senator can the
school can the school board say
that this was closed we don't
want it anymore.
So.
Mr president so the school board
can close it we can close it by
not signing it.
school board about but
protecting the services that
they offer is that what we're
really protecting must present.
Mr president center share this
would ensure that when they're
president Senator share so
Mister president and senator.
Right starting on page one down
down the bottom.
In schools within the boundaries
of the school campuses so school
based health clinics shall be
established shall not maybe or
What you're saying is I don't
think consistent with that
because what we're talking about
is they can be closed either by
the school board or by us but
the location basically it's in
schools and where they're
located which is within the
boundaries of the school
campuses or within safe walking
distances from the school.
relationship and the related
relating to Mr president center
share.
If you have one at all is that
is that what you read that now.
Mr president yes or adjacent to
or within walking distance to
make it
So.
Mr president again.
So children.
Can walk to the doctor's office.
guard I'm assuming that's what
safe walking means.
So it shall.
The right there.
Thank you Mr president Senator
share it's my understanding that
the schools and the school based
health center operators they
And
And it's not the department of
health and and they don't
contract with the department of
health and I make clarify that
the contract with the provider
money through the through the
school is that is that correct
Mr president.
Mr president center share yes
the subsidized a proximate Li
Mr president it came as I looked
at so school based health center
shall provide services shall
provide services shall
including primary health care
emergency psychiatric care okay
so so.
They shall.
Provide referrals to Planned
Parenthood I think that's what
all.
The deal with abortion no laws
at all of this in your wisdom in
trying to uphold the rules of
With no clean tools that's where
we are today so it is kind of
specialized but but they shall.
Refer.
shall refer for specialty care.
Mr president center share the
answer is no there's no medical
referrals for anything relating
care can be almost anything yes
it maybe pancreatitis it may be
oral health.
But there's no limit doesn't say
only.
the mental health care.
Of that one kind of bothers me.
just because I go back to that
that you can you can give the
with parental consent with that
that that solves a lot of my
issues anyway.
H. okay we'll find this.
I'm just I'm just concerned that
so much of this school based
health centers shall provide
services.
Including all of these things so
But it doesn't say with moms
involvement.
So does that really mean they
shall.
Mr president is that a question
Senator share a yes Mr president
I think his shall mean that they
cooperation with schools and
school districts but if you look
at pay at line twenty four on
page two where it says or.
That hopefully will answer your
need specialty care for they can
provide referrals.
But they don't have to provide
all of the services listed
depending what the needs are of
each individual school district.
Primary health care preventative
health care including
comprehensive health assessment
diagnosis treatment of minor
acute and chronic conditions
Or only have one other referrals
as necessary for treatment
including in patients specialty
care emergency psychiatric oral
care oral health care and vision
that what you're saying we got
this this whole bill that says
you can't close these things
they have to do certain things
they have to be certain places
that'll shall.
they don't really have to do
anything.
Mr is that correct.
They're asking if that's correct
explains that they can do some
of these things about they don't
have to do all of them or they
can provide referrals as
necessary for additional care
that kind of those services
federal law prohibits that so
schoolbased health centers do
not do that they provide
referrals for that and it's not
are done or or are not done and
they need to provide referrals
for additional treatment because
it's impossible Mr president
center share to decide and put
down in writing of what could be
Mr president I get that you know
kids get sick you know they
throw open the classroom
whatever okay so that's
obviously a reason the goal
somewhere besides the classroom
One of the assessment forms that
I read does talk about how you
do insertion condoms birth
control hormone blockers.
It says are you do insertions
those are dramatically different
reasons to go to the doctor.
you know my attention up here if
it really was.
Treatment.
Things that happen the kids at
school you know.
And that's that's that's the he
and I'm looking for a way to to
say okay I get it we don't have
to do anything weird we can but
So.
It's just because of those
things Mr president that I
really think there's something
fuzzy Mr president on why any of
this has to be in statute
unless somebody is worried about
losing their contract and they
We gotta put this little in law
so that somebody doesn't lose
their contract and I'm not sure
who that somebody is.
But I also believe just because
of the other stuff I'm looking
Doing other things but also all
through this that somebody don't
have to talk to mom.
Ever.
She are least no.
Even if it's a state we decide
not we just don't trust mom
enough we're we're not going to
ask for permission.
acknowledged earlier now with
the bill that we just passed a
moment ago.
That if you have a.
STI.
the insulin but mom certainly
doesn't have to be involved for
the STR is because well that's
what the last bill to set and
now we're going to treat that on
campus.
potentially mental health
pharmaceuticals potentially SP I
pharmaceuticals.
Potentially just strep throat
penicillin.
didn't feel right to me.
In fact Mr president I think my
mom my mother.
Would have lost her mind if she
I think this is a terrible way
to do business.
But.
We're back to we have to protect
these clinics.
Are we protecting them because
contractors gonna lose a
contract.
Mr president center share no not
at all it has nothing to do with
that center I can assure you
school districts offer those
school districts that decide to
apply for a school based health
center and decide to have one.
flexibility they have to do it.
That's the way I see this they
have to.
Because if we get is programs
can close at the school board
But if the school board this is
want to do it anymore.
And we're saying we got to
Something else is going on here
and I don't know if that
something else is a contractor
protecting their business.
By putting themselves in law.
Because it doesn't make sense to
me Mr president.
Why we need this.
I'm okay if if was a school
list.
But you know us a clinic.
In some small community might be
a great idea in fact it might be
the clinic.
everybody could show up there
especially if the state's paying
for.
That might be a good thing for
Roy.
So having a clinic there's
probably useful.
But but but having clinics and
other bigger cities I'm not sure
If we wanted to fund a school
based health clinic for rural
eight.
I think I can go for that.
Because it's a long drive to Las
Vegas specially if you're truly
injured okay.
So that might be a good idea.
to be protected and I'm not sure
protected from what.
I'm just not getting the answer
there.
Protected from what.
you the president I do yield
senator Senator so.
Mr president and senator can you
give me the location of.
I don't know the three largest
schools.
The largest one of them is
Albuquerque high Manzano.
And in Los crucis.
Okay so Mister president had I
had I stayed where I was living
in Albuquerque at the time I
would the next step for me was
months on a high but then we
Probably within walking distance
of months on a high now maybe
not was crossing guards but
they're certainly health care
facilities all over Albuquerque
including in the neighborhood
So so that leads me just
question even more Mr Mr
president what what are we doing
and why why are we afraid to
allow.
you say that the school board
still can close it if they want
to.
The
grants out there that were that
were applying for.
We want something else we want
something bigger or better.
Or we want something that
doesn't cost us anything at all
one of the one with the other.
But this is this is.
numerous times what we're
protecting it from.
If we're not protecting it from
the school board and we're not
protecting it from the
legislature because we so we're
So can you help me with that.
Mister president senator.
Senator yes Mr at president
question the schools can manzana
for example you're referring to
can in fact terminate their
existing arrangement with school
based health centers they can
do have an option to do that is
it's completely flexible for
each school district to have a
schoolbased center not to have
it for how long they want to
have it in what services they
us back to they shall provide
mental health services.
So if it's going to be there.
Then we have to provide mental
The services that are provided
we're not protecting the clinic
itself but if the clinic exists
we're protecting the services
that have to be provided at that
two where we talked earlier line
twenty four where I indicated
that they can't find these
services listed some of them not
They I can't stress enough how
much this bill does nothing
different than what's been
existing over the many years
since the schoolbased south
department of health so that in
the school based centers can
exist without the fear it and
again if school districts decide
to have them without the fear of
bill does Mister president
senator share.
So Mr president so we're not
protecting them from the school
board which certainly can be
political.
like most of our votes recently
used to be that way used to have
a lot more love with each other.
But.
We're not telling them what they
have to do.
For what they can't do.
So we're not protecting them
from that.
You got you got.
Vending machines at schools
schools are paid for by the
school there there.
So again I don't understand so
we talked about protection from
political.
Changes political changes in the
wins.
the same school board is
nineteen eighty five which is in
same school board is today to
make up what they're worried
about how they think about
things we used to think about.
politics on the school board.
So we're protecting them from
politics.
Which comes right back to the
not fund them because we are
political.
And.
While I'm I want to have this
great debate I want to even have
I don't understand if this has
to be in law so that the school
board can't do anything has to
be a law so that the the
They might they could maybe they
shall maybe do things that's
that's weird to me but they
shall maybe do things.
And we're trying to hide it from
everybody.
To me that is the only reason
that this bill could possibly
exist I just don't see another
reason for it.
Boggles wondering why.
Why.
But when you see the list.
Are you do insertion.
involved anywhere in fact
clearly I believe precludes mom
from any intervention.
From any knowledge from any
consent.
Those are my real true honest
concerns about this bill.
What are we hiding in here.
Subtle quiet.
I want people have access to the
doctors.
I think that's important.
Because kids do things.
They break things.
I had my share of stupid things
which is why I am sure the
school under this clinic would
want to put me on.
Eighty H. eighty eight.
So.
Those things really do scare me
it's scares me that the that the
teacher can say while little
Things like that just freaked me
out because I don't understand
how this bill.
There's something in this bill
about.
Either one of them should not be
done.
At a school health clinic.
Those are things that are to be
I think I've now achieved my
goal.
Thank you Mr president we do
have for the debates we have
Senator Gallegos.
In center I had a great
conversation hall with your two
expert witnesses and I will not
be as lengthy as my neighbor to
federal statute requires
parental involvement is that
what I heard Mister president
center.
Mr president Senator no what I
things of that nature that's
what I said earlier Senator
Mister president.
Mr president center I apologize
I wrote that down wrong then
bill which brings me by my fear
last time in in committee it
Planned Parenthood shows that it
advertise no parental
of what your bill does or what
they sell out in the state would
you have any reference on that
then Mr president Sir.
their views different from what
I've heard here Mr president
center thank you Mr president
center no I have not had
discussions with them about the
about that since I have not seen
it first or visit with them on
this thank you Mr president
Senator thank you Mr president
centers then my next question
teen pregnancies by forty
percent Mr president center you
know if that's reality.
its Senate bill sixty seven
which is in your bill but it
claims a school based clinics
can reduce teen pregnancies by
forty percent.
know I wouldn't doubt it because
they provide good mental health
care they that behavioral health
services and so on and and
Thank you for that Mr president
center a is action the FIR
percent bill sixty seven but
that bill gives two million
towards of schoolbased
clarification is present with
that are you.
Si no further debate.
Senator Kernan the Jewish debate
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
receive Department of Health
funding is that correct Mr
president yes Senator Kernan as
we explained in committee thank
you and so Mr president it's my
understanding that if they do
Mr president Senator Kernan yes
that is the way this thank you
Mr president and certainly in my
area we're fairly conservative
services are provided and and so
I just want to make sure of that
and so even if Mr president the
department of health does fund
statute according to the
department of health or do they
have flexibility.
The operator of a school based
health centers work with the
school board to determine what
health center not request for
one not to have one and
currently I understand your
situation as you explained it in
committee so nothing would
change from what's happening now
and you would have the full
change in other words with that
school board have the ability to
set the parameters Mr president
at absolutely if you even if you
president that that clarifies
that I think every community
should be able to make the
decision on what services if
they do choose to have a have a
the bill Mr president I move
that Senate bill three ninety
seven do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that the role
has been called and all those
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Woods voting no Senator
Pirtle voting no.
Senator Moores voting no Senator
Burt voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Center by the thanks very much
Mr president consent to skew
Senator when you know simply
returns the chambers of the
purpose of call thing no
objection.
as amended has passed the
Senate.
Mr president or other yes yes
thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate we'll go
on to the next item on the
calendar that's going to be item
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate
Education Committee substitute
for Senate bill twenty four has
been taken it is now open for
debate amendment or
substitution.
separate rounds of federal
funding over ninety percent of
those monies went to school
districts and charter schools
for really a wide range of
potential uses.
funding received for both the
first and the second round
they've expressed intent that
they will be posting as for
three although L. E. S. C. has
reached out to PED and they have
already part providing to PED to
post online so that students so
that teachers so that taxpayers
can see exactly where their tax
remaining balances the data
outline progress towards the
program goals that they have
already provided PED an analysis
of those accomplished goal.
and with that Mr president I
will stand for questions Senator
Diamond centers we're debating
sanitation Committee sits two
percent a bill for twenty four.
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent to the right of the
Senate but the record show that
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
call say no objection.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Moores voting no.
twenty four has passed the
Senate.
Thank you Mr president members
of the body.
negative.
That's correct.
Thirty six in the affirmative
two in the negative percent
We're going on to item number
nine.
That's going to be Senate bill
eighty three and I yield to
senator Clemente.
placings Senate Bill number
eighty three on final passage is
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment.
For substitution.
man in black.
The.
Okay I'm a.
These present this bill this
bill Mr a.
its infancy that was back during
the so called second generation
of wireless service.
To G. as is known when people
use flip phones that were used
multiple at the apps today voice
is just one of many services in
which our phones give us access
we also use them to watch videos
nine is that kept pace with the
changes in wireless technology.
under that bill's the customers
could not choose to have
services like video streaming
statue by an enabling customers
to authorize charges for Anand
communication services on their
telephone bills.
It is important to note that on
That concludes my remarks at
this time I'd like to thank my
co sponsors Senator Diamond for
her assistance I also Mr
president at this time I'd like
to give an opportunity to make a
ago what it did is provide
important protections to
consumers because it prevented
charges unauthorized charges to
be added to that telephone bill
authorize those charges from
actually having it added to
their telephone bill I believe
were the last in the nation to
to make these changes the bill
authorise changes are added the
PRC still has the power to
investigate and to penalize for
that I do want to refer everyone
to the FIR it's important to
for that we stand for questions
thank you Mr president thank you
we do have debate on the bill
Center do have followed by
Senator Ortiz Pino Senator here
thank you Mr president and and I
don't need the Sanchez to yield
and slamming such it was
originally
done as a way to protect
consumers this bill would be
using that statutes to actually
offered.
The Disney plus for free for for
for the year or H. B. O. Max or
something like that.
and the reason that companies
then T. mobile comes out with
this great deal I and I want to
switch to T. mobile but now I
have all these services build
through Verizon and if I want to
likely to change companies to do
something is probably in their
financial best interests
so that's what this bill does
and and and frankly adding that
to the cramming and slamming
now here's some things that that
the folks behind this bill could
have done are they could have a
built in something that would
have a continuing benefit to
bundled things they want to do
that keep that are going to make
it less likely for you to cancel
your contract with them maybe
you have a built in a permanent
discount on those services that
could have been something they
the consumer as well but but
that approach was not taken so
Mister president we can already
use our phones to stream video
stream video we can already use
all that this bill will do will
make it so that the telecoms can
bundle those services in a way
that is done specifically with
the aim of manipulating consumer
Thanks Senator Stewart center
participate now.
You Mr president and
If.
things add on to it but I guess
is that because I get my bill
from a.
From an internet company and not
from a telephone company.
for multiple services but they
explained it that I'm paying
towards the app company if that
makes sense it's not Verizon on
my cell phone bill who is
actually offering those services
So Mister president Senator
Diamond and then what is the
advantage to the ordinary user.
Of this if we can already get
Senator Ortiz P. now this would
allow us you know budget could
be offered by a cell phone
company I would compare it to
the same ways that I drive a new
Ford pickup truck right now that
Verizon if I choose Verizon
right now is offering free
Disney plus for X. amount of
months if it's a benefit for me
to choose it's a it's a it's a
sales way for them me to choose
able to cancel at any time.
So Mr president would be safe to
say Senator that it's it's just
basically is is something that.
public.
Mr president Senator
I I would disagree with that
also for example I'm a Verizon
user right now and I'm paying
separate for the Disney plus the
then to use the the benefit of
Verizon rather than paying it
separately on my TV and internet
bill.
Thank you thank you Mr president
thank you senator I'm and I'm I
if one of the sponsors would
deal to this question not sure
which one wants to so I just
wanna make sure I understand
what's to what we're trying to
accomplish here with this
ammendment here for this change
what the cell phone company
wants to charge me to stay with
that company because I've
already got three or nineteen
things coming through that cell
phone whether it benefits me or
be getting to my new cell
company the way I would you know
teleport my number over to
another company we made that
change Senator about a decade
over decade ago can I take those
with me or or not.
Time and since I don't since all
I have served now I I have built
on my telephone Senator Diamond
Mr president Senator Padilla I
believe that would be between
you at that the contract made
reality is if you were leaving
Verizon and you purchase let's
say two different a sort of sort
of accounts that was built to
your cell phone you're going to
have to you're gonna have to
make arrangements to pay for
And so there in lies the problem
Mr president so I I believe so
would it would there be anything
prohibiting myself company from
taking my cell phone bill up by
you know any number any amount
prohibiting them from increasing
my right.
Mr president Senator Padilla
they cannot increase your rate
they cannot increase it costs
Thank you Mr president I think
that's that's why I can have an
issue with this particular the
change that is being attempted
to be made and and while you
brought it up I what I did was
on something like this so that's
that's very interesting.
Mr president center to put
Senator Padilla I would refer
you to the F. I. R. that that is
They further note current
language is problematic with the
FCC communication has clarified
brought services and non
telecommunications services in
twenty eighteen okay they just
statutes should be updated.
I appreciate that Mr president I
I can't I was also surprised
that this was something that is
being debated at the state level
considering these are companies
Mr president and and senator
piazza if the reason they're
debating at the state level is
because our state act prevents
them from allow it from adding
those services on because
for the debate Senator Ivey Soto
thank you Mr president Mr
president would Senator Diamond
you'll please Senate I'm in the
field.
Mr president I do.
I can subscribe to Showtime I
can subscribe to HBO Max through
the roku channel.
But of course I guess if I get a
fire TV I'd have to consider
provide when you went to another
provider you would then need to
purchase those services from
different providers yes Sir and
our agency president Senator
almost all the same services
through Xfinity another
broadband company not a not a
telephone company but is that
basically the same thing we're
talking about already.
television service services is
an outdated telephone Act.
Thank you Mr president Senator
I've been told so basically
everybody else's led to do this
not you know services we've come
a long way since nine you know
for twenty four years the
services weren't available over
telephones like they are today
we're just trying to simply keep
up with technology.
we're trying to for broadband
actually is make sure they're on
a level playing field with
everybody else this seems to be
a similar sort of thing in a
different way thank you.
Hey Senators auto.
To point out that we are the
very last state to pass the
legislation enabling consumers
to authorize charges for non
communication services on their
pass I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that these records
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in a negative hi show of
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Moores voting no Senator
McKenna voting no Senator Baca
voting no.
The Senators souls voting no.
Senator quite a Hemphill voting
no.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative eleven the negative
Senate bill eighty three has
passed the Senate Sierra.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that a business
messages from the house we're on
that order business message from
the house to retrieve.
the officers of the house in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
one house joint memorial three
as amended by the house and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
eighteen as amended by the house
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
forty two as amended by the
for house bill one fifty three
and request the concurrence of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
and rolled and grossed copy of
Senate Joint Memorial twelve
with the certificate of
correction has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
Senator show the message from
the houses received.
Senator Peter Wirth takes the
next order of business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
referred Senate bills for ninety
four has had it under
consideration and research
reports same with recommendation
that a do pass as amended
respectfully submitted senator
vote on on them with one motion
and that the general reflect
that they were acted upon
individually see no objection
the reader to read.
Senate bill two seventy do pass
respectfully submitted senator
George when you lost chairman
Senator yes thank you Mr
As opposed may the eyes have it
the committee report has been
adopted in the journal show
they're acted upon individually.
Three hundred.
Mr president your Education
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
William P. sold chairman Senator
souls I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
finance committee.
House bill one eighty one to
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator William P.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee board has been
adopted the journal reflector
acted upon individually the
reader to read.
Mr president your rules
committee to rural has been
the conservation committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman
Saturday Mr president I move
Mr president your rules
committee to who has been
referred house bill four as
amended.
As has had with the
consideration and reports with
submitted Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator.
Mr president I move adoption the
committee part Senators there's
a motion to desecrate report all
those in favor signify by and I
All those opposed may.
The I. seventy committee board
has been adopted.
legislation the reader to read.
Senate Joint Memorial eight
Joint Memorial eight Senate
Joint Memorial a having been
read twice by title is ordered
print and referred to the Senate
rules committee that Senate
Joint Memorial eight.
and the twenty fifth anniversary
of the Good Friday agreement day
in the Senate Senate memorial
sixty one Senator more sixty one
having been read twice by title
introduced by representative
representatives lentic corolla
and at a Sarinana and Christine
Trujillo a joint memorial
joint memorial three.
How strong memorial three having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Education
Committee that's house joint
memorial three.
of the state to convene a joint
task force to study employee
classification and compensation
systems and budget practices
memorial one.
House bill one fifty three
separate offence of livestock
Larson's the house bill one
fifty three.
The reader to read.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
