Senator Padilla, go ahead and
proceed.
Madam Chair.
Yes. Can I just thank the staff
publicly, uh, for what they did
to me this morning. Sure, go
ahead to to you or for you?
Oh, they're gonna do it to you
tomorrow. You can do
it
you can see what they did.
Oh
yes, you're, because clearly
Senator Block, you don't drink
nearly enough coffee. You are.
We were just saying.
All right, Senator Padilla, go
ahead. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair and Madam, Mr. Vice
Chair and, and uh ranking member
and members of the committee,
um, Senator Michael Padilla, and
I have uh Raja Sambandin, and he
is our chief information
security officer CISO and uh
we're here before you with the
committee substitute Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 254, as you know,
um, I was fortunate enough to
sponsor the legislation that
created the Office of
Cybersecurity a couple of years
ago. We've, we, uh, have to come
back every year, it seems, and
continue.
to clarify the function
responsibility, etc. of that
office, but the, uh, essentially
what we're doing here is we're
having a name change to the
cybersecurity office, um, to
Office of Cybersecurity, you
know, that's very important so
it aligns with federal issues
related to this topic, um, the
things that we're addressing are
state cybersecurity, the state
cybersecurity Committee and how
it's set up and who actually
serves on it. We do have some
overlap issues that were, uh,
uh, sorting out with the
substitute, the work, not
sorting out, but they're sorting
out in the substitute, so.
That that's taken care of, uh,
the work of the committee is
really duplicative at times and
this actually leads to
redundancy, and we have uh wind
up having issues there. Uh, the
solution that we've come up with
is is that the state uh CISO
will become a voting member and
um and the governor's 4
appointees will have much more
focused roles on this committee.
Um, we're empowering
cybersecurity control by passing
this piece of legislation to
complement when we created the
office by expanding its
authority a bit, uh, the use of
the state um network and then a
of policy application to just
further uh flush this out for
all of these departments. But
why this matters is that we need
consistency in terms of how we
and and what we call things here
in New Mexico, so they aligned
with federal standards, um, and
then also, um, where they sit
within the Department of
Information Technology,
substitute itself, Madam Chair,
um, I don't know if you want to
act on that. Do you want me to
explain it, do you want me to or
the changes or would you like me
to go through the explanation
now.
Stewart.
Um, Madam Chair, I move that do
not pass on 254 and for purposes
of discussion, they do pass on
the committee's substitute
purposes of how to do that.
Just discussion.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, madam uh Proton, uh, but so
essentially the substitute that
is before you today on page 2,
beginning on line 25, and I have
3 things I'll call out that and
why we had to do the substitute,
and, and by the way, thank you,
Madam Chair, for some of your,
uh, feedback early on with this
and, and we've we've blended
that into the document. Uh, the
substitute adds a definition of
state operated or state-owned
telecommunication network, uh,
the definition refers to an IT
network controlled by our do it,
our Department of Information
Technology. This change was
added at the request of Obey.
Who I think are in the room and
can signify that as well to
clarify that um
The Office of Cybersecurity has
no direct regulatory authority
over IT networks that are wholly
independent of the do it uh
network, such as our SEN and I'm
gonna ask the uh CISO to define
SCN at some point, ASAP, um,
this change also addresses uh uh
the administrative offices of
the court's request that it be
responsible for cybersecurity
for a judicial network that that
is wholly independent of any IT
network as well, which was the
original concern we had when we
created the office, some of you
that were here at the time may
remember.
The second change and requiring
the substitute is beginning on
page 6, beginning on line 24,
the substitute restores, and
this was some of your feedback,
Madam Chair. It restores, uh,
the director of LCS is a
specified member of this
committee, very important to all
of us. And then on page 7,
beginning on line 14, uh, to
qualify for current federal
cybersecurity grant funding. The
committee must be comprised of
certain stakeholders because uh
the current federal requirements
may change, the substitute will
allow the governor to appoint
members that will ensure the
committee is compos.
most of the members to ensure
that we are seeing the dollars
and the funding and the
alignment that we need. That's
essentially the substitute, and
I do have a Raja Sabandden here
our chief information security
officer is my expert today.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Did you want to say anything?
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
members of the committee, um,
first and foremost, I wanna, um,
thank you, uh, this body and the
legislative body and the
administration for supporting
the cybersecurity effort in the
last few years, ever since the
office was created, we have
grown significantly. We are not
only supporting 76 executive
branch agencies, but on a
voluntary basis, we are
supporting 189 school districts.
Um, 31 higher educational
institutions in various
locations within the state, um,
the local governments.
Um, specifically municipalities
and the counties and um we are
also actively getting engaged
with the Environment department
to secure our water and
wastewater authority.
Information systems, typically
they are associated with the
industrial control system to
open the gates, close the gates,
things of that nature. So, they
are very much lacking and we are
here to help them.
Thank you.
Thank you. We don't have anyone
signed up in opposition or
support of this bill. So I'm
gonna, uh, if folks want to
raise their hand to indicate
support, go ahead and do so.
All right, see you for folks.
Does anyone want to raise their
hand to indicate opposition.
I see that one raising their
hand for both opposition and
support.
All right.
OK. Um, and, and the, the
procedures of this committee is
you, you have to sign up an hour
ahead of time, uh, if you want
to want to provide comment.
So, um, we will go to members of
the committee, Senator Townsend,
I have you first on the list.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator.
Um
Senate Bill 254 that you're
presenting this morning has some
interesting fiscal.
Implication statements that I'm
not, are you aware of that? Have
you read the fiscal impact
report? Uh, yes, I have.
Senator.
The
It starts out talking about the
per diem and Mileage A and the
differences there.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, can you
repeat that? I'm sorry.
It, it starts out talking about
the
and mileage Act under fiscal
implications in the $45.
To.
The differences in rates. Have
you, have you read that?
And who?
What's the applicability to
Uh, of, of that to legislators
or to
Only to state employees exactly.
Who is, who is, um,
Who is affected.
A mountain chair and senator,
that's the committee that's
established to oversee the
Office of Cybersecurity, but I'm
gonna ask the CISO. Thank you,
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you, Senator,
for the question. So, uh, that
perim will apply to
Advisory committee members who
are physically present for an
advisory committee meeting.
And so far, I don't think we
have hit anywhere that threshold
because we have been holding
those meetings in
Um, collaborative software such
as Teams or Zoom and things of
that nature.
And Madam Chair and Senator, I'm
also a member of this committee
as well. I, I believe my time on
the committee will roll off of
the committee in about 6 or so
months. We've never had an
in-person meeting.
Well, I appreciate that and I
appreciate what you, what you do
for that. I'm trying to, it is
this new language that has never
Be utilized before or is that
currently used throughout the
state
Senator, you are correct. That's
for, for, for committees,
commissions, etc. of this
purpose. That's the language
that's used.
Today.
Oh we learned something new
every day around here. I wasn't
aware of that.
Um
lady
Madam Chair
Old habits from the house just
keep hanging on.
Madam Chair.
A senator.
Is industry supporting this
initiative?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
um.
Wouldn't say that I have gone
out and performed a.
Survey or whatever, but you did
see some folks that that our
industry that are in the room.
We also had the, have the office
of Broadband Access and
expansion, which I also created,
and they spoke and said we
worked with them as this was
coming together to make sure
that it jive with everything
that they're up to as well.
armchair.
Thank you. Thank you. Senator
harm you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
I just have one question on page
6, which is line 15, it's D. It
reads and this is breaking down
the makeup of the um.
Of the appointed members of this
committee, and Dee reads a
private sector cybersecurity
expert or employed by a business
offering cybersecurity services.
Would Los Alamos National
Laboratory fit into this, as you
know I represent Los Alamos. We
have so many international
experts on cybersecurity would
an appointee be able to fall
under D?
Vice chair, yes, uh, I at at at
first hearing what you just
said, but take me to the page
line one more time. I want to
make sure I'm on the right
point. Page 6 of 15 and it's
letter D, which reads a private
sector cybersecurity expert or
employed by a business offering
cybersecurity services. So the
laboratory isn't a business and
isn't part of the private
sector. But I think in this
area, if they're I don't know if
they're I don't think.
I think you're looking at. Oh,
I'm, I'm not on the, OK.
And so we did that Madam Chair
and Mr. Vice Chair for the sub.
And that is fixed on, I'm gonna
ask my expert here to take me
right um.
So it, it's fixed on page 7,
line number 4 starts at line
number 4. Very good. So that
would then cover the laboratory
if she so chooses. Sorry that I
wasn't on the sub. It's way too
early. I think I need a coffee
pot in my area. No further
questions, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Mr. Vice.
I have Senator Block next on my
list, but I just found out that
this side of the table didn't
get a copy of the sub, so.
Just pause for a beat. We, I
apologize for that.
I'm sure while we wait.
I just wanted to advise you guys
I I reviewed your um analysis
that's going around.
Well, I'm sure we're gonna
conquer the world's greatest
cyber hacks, um, 3rd grade, uh,
spelling that matters too. And
so there's a lot of spelling
errors in here, including the
name of your office. It's O F F
I C E.
But in the swelling areas, you
may wanna update that cause the
actual title of what we're
changing it to is incorrect.
OK
Madam chair.
can
Yes, sir, I, I, I just want to
make sure everyone has the sub.
Be my, my questions are a little
bit different if you don't mind
if I proceed. Go ahead. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator
Padilla, um,
First of all, I appreciate the
meme you did on me, that was
pretty funny, so going out to
27,000 people tonight.
Thank you, my friend. I
appreciate that. Um.
Madam chair and I'm sorry, sir,
can I get your, your name, Mr.
White?
Thank you, Chair and members of
the committee, Senator, my name
is Rades I've been.
And chief information security
officer.
OK. Thank you, sir. A little
hard of hearing, so I apologize.
Um.
Madam Chair, um, sir.
How much, so, let me ask it this
way.
Does this bill strengthen
Our state cyber defenses.
Chair and members of the
committee and senator, yes, the
answer is yes. Yes, OK.
So
I, I just wanna put, cause I, I
would hope that would be the
answer, um, Madam Chair and sir.
Uh, do you have this piece of
paper in front of you?
Can, can we get that piece of
paper, Senator, this is our,
that's our committee analysis,
so our analysis.
One of the, there's two
significant issues.
And the uh SB 254 sub, it says
in the 2nd 1, says, um,
Sub also eliminates state
qualifications for the
governor's appointees requiring
now.
Those appointees should satisfy
any federal or state
cybersecurity grant funding
requirements.
Responsibility for this would
fall upon the governor in
consultation with the Secretary
of Secretary of Information
Technology.
And the state Chief Information
Security Officer, I believe
that's you, correct?
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So when we're,
what, what state qualifications
were we eliminating because in
the sub here.
The one word that comes out that
I see in here that is really
troublesome to me.
And when I read the bill,
was the word minimum.
It was on, on this, and I hope I
have this right, uh, the bottom
of page 3, line 25.
For the Office of Cybersecurity.
Created cybersecurity officer
duties and powers, that's
Section 2.
And then number 2,
Under section B.
It says develop minimum
cybersecurity controls.
Managing and protecting
information technology assets
and infrastructures for all
entities that are connected to a
state operated.
state-owned telecommunications
network. Why would we put the
word minimum instead of why not
just say robust.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, um,
Senator Block, I, I
at this a little bit, and I
think the word robust would be
very difficult to define, that's
one reason. Second, the, the
word minimum is, these are
extremely high standards to
begin with or controls, if you
will, so we just want you to, if
you meet these minimums, you're,
you're good to to conduct a
transaction with the state of
New Mexico. If you don't, and
you don't get to pass go and
you'd get to come in the barn or
out of the barn. That's why we
want these minimum set of
standards, um, I've never seen
the word rope, I've tried to put
the word robust. Boy have I
gotten feed?
back on that before. So that,
that's one of the reasons. OK.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Then.
Why not
Ensure, why not just say, ensure
we
We develop
Controls meeting cybersecurity
requirements.
Why don't we just say that?
Because you just said we're
trying to meet the requirement,
what saying minimum, why not
just say developed cybersecurity
controls meeting.
Required
Uh, cybersecurity measures for
managing and protecting
information technology, Madam
Chair and Senator Block, I think
that might be another way of
saying it. I think we're both
saying the same thing, and I
think that that minimum will
change over time. And that's why
we wanted the word minimum to
meet these minimum set of
standards as set by this office.
I, I think you're saying the
same thing in in in another
fashion. Well, I I don't, I
would respectfully disagree,
sir, and Madam Chair, because we
want to meet the requirements.
That's, that's a word that is a
strong word when we're talking
cybersecurity, that's a word
that I know very well.
Developing requirements.
stringent requirements, uh, in
my line of work. When we say
minimum, it just doesn't give me
a warm fuzzy, um, and we can.
Talk later on, on that one.
Um
Madam Chair,
Sir, do you know how much?
Cyber hacking, um, has caused,
New Mexico.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I'm
gonna let the, I'm gonna ask the
CISO to to mention or to discuss
that, but I will tell you that
we have had in my time in the
legislature, uh, the largest
school district, um,
Albuquerque, the 2nd largest
school district, the 3rd largest
school district.
The regulation and licensing
department.
The Office of the Superintendent
of Insurance.
And, um, city of Albuquerque,
the county of Bernalillo, that
I'm, and those are just the ones
that I'm aware of. I'm sure
there are others that the chief
information security officer can
discuss, but
It is, it is very difficult to
put a dollar figure on it, but I
will tell you it has been more
than we're able to stomach, and
that's why we wanted to do this
100%, sir, Madam Chair,
Highlands University was also
one of those that uh.
I had some serious issues as
well, uh, Rio Rancho has had
some issues in Sandoval County
got the county government too.
Um, you know, globally, it's $8
trillion.
$8 trillion for cyber hacks.
And one of the things that is
near and dear to my heart, not
just as a.
A legislator here in in the
great state of.
New Mexico.
But in my
In my, uh
private background, Madam Chair
and sir as a
As a former Air Force officer
doing nuclear work, nuclear
requirements, and as a
consultant dealing with our
nuclear systems and looking at
gaps in vulnerabilities and
trying to find the right skill
set to those people.
Uh, which leads me to my next
question, uh how do you, sir?
Um
What types of cybersecurity
certifications do you have,
because when you look at some of
these certifications.
You have the certified
information security manager,
um, you have.
Like
You know, I, I'm looking at
close to 2 dozen different
cybersecure uh security
certifications, and I know Los
Alamos has a lot of them as
well.
Um, how many people are in your
office doing cyber offensive and
well, I don't know if you do
offensive cyber operations, but
defensive cyber operations. And
Senator, we're we're getting off
the point of the bill here. The
bill deals with cybersecurity.
This is really specific to this
advisory council. So while,
while it would be great to have
a conversation about
cybersecurity overall at some
other time, you, you're, you're
out of order if you're getting
off the bill. So let's, let's
stay on the bill.
That talks about cybersecurity.
Underlined here, which is
Gravely important to the state,
so I'm just curious if Senator,
there's there's no question
cybersecurity is important to
the state. This bill is about
the advisory committee.
So, it's not about
cybersecurity, generally in New
Mexico, so you need just need to
stay on on the bill.
OK, well, thank you, Madam
Chair, in, in the up on page 7.
7
We'll talk standards of
cybersecurity.
When it comes to the
appointments, which is where I
was going with this.
Online
14
Section 7 there.
In relation to cybersecurity
standards, which this talks
about.
Uh, 4 members are appointed in
all these appointment people.
In consultation with the
Secretary of Information
Technology.
And the state chief information
security officer.
Provided that these members
individually, collectively shall
enable the committee.
To satisfy any federal or state
cybersecurity grant funding
requirements. Hence my question.
What type of cybersecurity
certifications or standards.
Uh, do you have in your office
at the
Security officer.
Madam grants.
Madam Chair and Senator Block,
you know, I have to agree with
the chair on this one, actually,
it's not about Mr. Sambandins or
his staff's qualifications or
certifications. It's about the
committee that will be comprised
of the advisory committee. So
those advising and I want to get
to your point, I, I hope I get
to to where you're trying to get
to, uh, at least I think, um,
the members on this committee
will need to have the
certifications that are
commensurate with what align us
with the federal standards for
cybersecurity and that.
That's simply all this paragraph
says.
And so just to get a little
further into the weeds and they
would have to be a CIO or a CISO
in order to serve in these 4
positions here, you can't
appoint someone that runs
nothing wrong with the person
who runs the coffee shop, but
you're not gonna be able to be
on this this advisory committee
if you're running a.
Coffee shop without a and it has
not been a CIO or a CIO that's
exactly the answer I was looking
for. That's where I was getting
to. Um, so because it is
underlined here and it's new, so
I appreciate that.
And then.
And I believe that strengthens
our cybersecurity with this bill
for the state, even though
you're still going to get
hacked.
I can change that.
So with that, I, I will support
the bill 100%. I think you have
a very difficult job.
Because you're under attack.
24 hours a day, 7 days a week,
and I appreciate all the work
that your office does. You get
my complete support, sir.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I don't have anyone
else on the list.
Uh, Senator, I appreciate you
coming with this, uh, um, I just
want to to make clear.
The language on page 3 defining
a state operator or state owned
telecommunications network.
This cover the, the judiciary.
Um,
so, Madam Chair, um, great
question in the first iteration,
we exempted them from this
office's responsibility because
they have their own protocols
and their own things that they
need to.
And so are they
So
So Senator, are they still
exempted because, cause they
should be. They are still OK,
all right, so the first of the
creation of this office.
OK, great. And so,
So the telecommunication
networks that are controlled,
uh, that the judiciary's
telecommunication networks are
not controlled by the by do it,
right? All right. Thank you.
Thank you, I heard a concern
about that. Um, otherwise, I, I
appreciate you, you.
Restoring the, the director of
LCS, um,
pardon? Yeah, and,
and I think I like I think
you're, your approach to
Instead of listing out those
qualifications for the governor
appointments, I think this makes
a lot of sense, the approach
you're taking here. Um, I'll,
I'll address, uh, an issue with
Senator Block raised about the
word minimum, and we see
throughout that this, the
minimum, there are minimum, the
word minimum is is is existing
language throughout this because
you are setting the minimum
thresholds for folks to meet,
which means that they could do
more if they wanted to. If this
is not the minimum, then it
would be, they would be capped
at that. We, we want.
I assume, Senator, the
The reasoning is that if, if
certain agencies or groups want
to go beyond that minimum, they
should, you'd want them to do
that,
do so thank you, madam.
This was a huge debate back and
forth when we created the
office. We thought, well,
there's probably 178 ways to get
in and out of the state
government, and if you leave
that tiniest little bathroom
window open that we kind of all
had in our houses back in years
ago, um, and, and the bad guys
and gals get into the into the
building, they're in there.
But if you have that absolute
minimum set of things, and we
know for sure that the entire,
even if someone does leave a
window open that it's protected.
Um
Yeah, so I'll just stop there.
OK, thank you. What is the will
of the committee?
But we do pass.
All right. Well, I'm sorry, did
you have a did you?
Yes. So, so I think you, you
move a do not pass on Senate
Bill 254, and you move a do pass
on the Senate Rules Committee
sub or Senate Bill 2. All right.
Uh, is there any opposition to
that motion?
See, please show all members
present voting in the
affirmative, and Senator, you
have a due pass. Thank you.
And Senator, you stay there, uh,
Senator Trujillo, come on up.
We're gonna go to Senate Bill
42.
We also have the, uh, cabinet
secretary with us today as well.
Yes, come on up.
Chair members of the committee.
Um, I'm here with uh Senator uh
Trujillo, and she and I do
these.
Routines every couple of years
together.
And here we are again. And um I
have a cabinet secretary Teresa
Casados of the Children, Youth
and Families Department. Uh,
we're here on Senate Bill 42,
the Comprehensive Addiction and
Recovery Program Act, uh, the
Act amends the state
administered program for the uh
federal uh comprehensive
addiction and Recovery Act.
In 2016, the intent of the CAA
Act is to provide early
intervention services for
infants exposed to substances.
In utero or in utero or at birth
and their families uh substance
exposed infants is a public
health issue and a public health
emergency right now, and best
managed by the state's public
health experts in the Department
of Health, which is where this,
uh, will, will reside, uh,
currently, Kara is attached to
HCA, however, HCA is not a
service provider. The act
creates care and navigators,
professionals, uh, employed by
the Department of Health, uh,
to, uh, in, uh, to provide
intensive case management, uh,
linking families to resources.
needed to support health and
wellness within the family, and
navigators collaborate with
families, hospitals, community
providers, and care provider,
the coordinators from MCOs to
optimize the services provided
to the family. Um, I will say
that uh we do have uh we have we
have a we have a substitute, and
I believe we gave that to you
yesterday.
Yes, and, so I will move the
Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42
for the purposes of discussion.
Actually, I think I'm supposed
to say one movie do not pass on
Senate Bill 42 and move the
Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate rules
first Senate bills 42 for
purposes of discussion. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I'm just
gonna ask my co-sponsor here to
please walk us through some of
the biggest changes in the in
the sub versus the original
bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee
for allowing us to present this
today as my um uh wonderful
friend, senator to the right of
me has said this is an
emergency. This is an emergency
in our state, and so what the
substitute does, first I want to
just give a little background on
it. There is a House bill 205,
that's already been introduced
in the house, and yesterday I
introduced Senate Bill 458,
which is a very large
comprehensive, um, amendments to
uh CYFD and children and there's
a portion of this substitute
within that bill. If this bill
passes and this committee, and I
will likely pull it out of 458
so that we don't have confusion.
The difference with 458 is that
458.
Um, had the healthcare authority
as the um agency instead of the
Department of Health, and it
didn't have, it doesn't have a
mandate, um, that there be a
plan of care, and so, however,
HP 205 and Senate Bill 458 were
endorsed by the LFC during the
interim in the last month of the
um interim, and so I introduced
the bill trying to hold on to
the fidelity of that, but
recognize that the governor's
move and the secretary's move
and um my dear friend, uh
Senator Padillaz moved to keep
it at the Department of Health
where it's been moved to is a
much more reasonable, it just
makes more sense. So with that,
I just wanted
to give you a little bit of
background of how this all kind
of came about. So the changes
here, I'm not gonna walk through
all of the changes that were in
the old bill, but I'd like to
just give you some, uh, you
know, just a brief explanation
of what this new substitute
does. We have left out a lot of
the detailed specificity about
what the plan has to include
because really most of that can
be done in rule by the
Department of Health and having
those kinds of provisions where
you're doing the implementation
of what needs to be in the plan,
how the plan needs to work.
Unless you're just talking about
the overall structure of it. The
Department of Health should have
the authority to nimbly change
rules as they need to, to adjust
to things that we learn. There's
one thing that we all know,
particularly if you've worked at
a state agency, that sometimes
the statute has unintended
consequences that the
legislature can't conceive of
when legislation is being
passed.
So section one is definitions.
And again, I just mentioned,
this is just amendments to the
Children's code. So this whole
thing is amendments to the
Children's code.
Um, section one is some
definitions.
And it's a long section because
we're not making much change to
the definitions on page 6,
you'll see that we're also
adding in that the plan of safe
care and we're changing it from
plan of care to plan of safe
care, um, also extends to
individuals that to um or to
provide prenatal or perinatal
support for a pregnant person
dealing with substance abuse
disorder. So this makes it so
that that plan of care.
If uh a pregnant woman is at her
doctor's office and, and there's
there's the either the self, um,
uh,
Self-admitting. I'm trying to
think of what the word for that
would be, self-disclosure, thank
you. Um, or whether or not they
find it through blood tests or
some other way.
The plan of care can be the the
structure of it and the support
of it can be applied to those
individuals too.
We did add the word safe in
several other locations as well
just to make sure it all lines
up.
Thank you, thank you, I
appreciate that. Um, so section
2, Madam Chair, is really like
the plan of safe care, right?
This is, this is it. This is the
plan.
And it has, um, it includes
guidelines for it, the creation
of the plan, the data that we're
gonna want to have collected and
the training that's gonna be
required.
Um, again, most of what's
included in this section are
rules that the guidelines for
the rules that are going to have
to be adopted by the Department
of Health. So you'll see um
throughout that section, just
look at the bottom of page 8,
where it says rules that covers
most of what we're gonna look
at.
So on page 9, it gives
participation in the plan of
safe care development process,
which includes these um
entities. It could be uh a
medical visit. It could be prior
to, um, uh, you know, the child
being born, but it shall be
completed. This is where it's
mandatory, shall be completed
prior to the substance exposed
child's discharge from a
hospital or birthing center.
And then it goes on to say what
that plan of care has to
include.
Again, there's not a lot that's
been changed. There's some
clarification here. Uh, you'll
see in B lines 12, excuse me, I
got a frog in my throat. 12
through 18, really give an
explanation of what that um
Air coordinator would do, and
you want that information to be
part of rules instead of in
statute, because we don't want
it to be limited to that, and
sometimes, um, you know, you can
look at the law and you can say,
well, this is limiting, this is
all they have to do. We want
them to do what needs to be
done.
Thank you.
So the rules.
On page 10 have to include a
requirement that all hospitals.
Birthing centers and prenatal
care providers use the screening
brief intervention and referral
to treatment program at all
prenatal or perinatal medical
visits and live births.
This makes it a requirement.
This means that it has to be
done at all points along the
way.
And I, I would, I would defer to
the secretary when we're
finished looking at this to
answer any questions about what
that tool looks like.
On page 11, again, we're still
talking about rules, so the
requirements for the Department
of Health.
is to ensure that there is at
least one care coordinator
available at each birthing
hospital in the state.
One person at each hospital in
the state.
They have to ensure that all
substance exposed children who
have a plan of safe care,
received care coordination to
implement the plan of safe care,
and they have to provide
training. This is the Department
of Health has to provide
training to hospital staff.
Birthing center staff and
prenatal care providers on the
screening.
The brief intervention and
referral to treatment programs.
So paragraph 5 goes on to who is
the agencies that need to be
included in this process.
This is the part that I really
like. This is probably my most
favorite sentence in the whole,
um, in the whole bill. Line 13,
page 12, it shall include home
visitation programs. And we know
from information reports that
have been provided to the
legislature that our home
visiting programs are very
successful when they're followed
through on.
Making them part of the Kara
plan requires that they have to
be followed through on. Now, the
goal, and I think the secretary
would, would, would agree to
this, is that you want parents
to volunteer for this. You truly
want parents to be volunteers,
but if they're not willing to
volunteer and follow through
with it, then our next
protection is that we're, we
need to protect.
And so I would like it to be
voluntary, but it can't always
be voluntary.
So, um, it and it has to include
substance use disorder
prevention and treatment
providers, and then it may
include that next list.
Those are may include that next
list. The first two are
mandatory. Page 13.
Implementation of plans of safe
care.
That shall include requirements
for a care coordinator, and then
it tells what the care
coordinator basically has to do.
Again, we want any further
clarification to be part of
roles.
Look at the
An attempt to make contact with
persons who are not following
the plan of safe care using
multiple methods. I, I don't
want to read the whole thing,
but I just want to point out to
you that the, the care plan is
required before they leave the
hospital, and if they're not
following through with it and
contact is absolutely necessary.
And it's not just the person
you'll see in that paragraph
that it includes family members.
This is the Department of Health
trying to get as many um in that
child's circle involved in this
plan, so that multiple people at
multiple points have the ability
to help support the family, help
make sure the child is safe and
then to help find the child, if
that's necessary because the
plan's not being followed.
On page 14, there's a
requirement, and I think um I
know in Senate Finance, this is
something that everybody always
looks for. I suspect Senate
rules is the same. Um, this is
the annual report. We want to
have reports out. We want to
know how this program is
working, um, and the department
of, uh, or I'm sorry, but the
legislature will get those
reports as well as other
individuals. And the list below
that is just the information
that at a minimum.
Um, we'd like to have available.
Let's keep going. I wanna go
over to section 3.
This is the requirement um to
notify CYFD.
In the event that a plan of care
is not complied with.
At the point that the hair is
the plan of care is not being
complied with. That's when the
Department of Health has the
responsibility, um, I mean,
there's a whole list of people
there, a managed, uh, a Medicaid
managed care coordination
insurance plan coordinator.
Anybody who's evolve in ensuring
that that plan is followed, has
a duty to report to CYFD when
it's not followed.
CYFD CYFD will um.
Uh, then take up making
determinations as to whether or
not the child is in imminent
harm, um, and then the
department will do what they're
supposed to do.
Section 4 is simply amending the
general duty to report child
abuse. It's not necessarily
specific to the plan of care.
This is just the section that
teachers and counselors and
everybody has a duty. It says,
who has a duty when you have a
duty and why you have a duty to
report, um, suspected child
abuse or neglect.
So
Let's turn all the way to page
2, and what I want to point out
is that.
We're not changing anything in
the law that says look at
paragraph G please. A finding
that a pregnant woman is using
or abusing drugs made pursuant
to an interview.
Self-report.
Clinical observation or routine
toxicology screen shall not
alone.
For a sufficient basis to report
child abuse or neglect.
to the department.
That's CYFD pursuant to
subsection A.
Again, it goes on, we're not
changing any of that.
The, the, the drug finding in
itself is not an indication that
that child is being abused or
neglected.
But on page 21.
We then do have the requirement
that
Um, the hospital.
does have to notify the
Department of Health.
And I know you all were sent out
a discussion draft yesterday.
This is one place where I had to
get the um drafter to change
because it said department, and
when you look at who the
department is under that um part
of the law, it's CYFD. We want
the Department of Health to be
notified when a care plan is
provided. So I had to clarify
that last night. It's in the
substitute that you have right
now that, that you may have
noticed last night that it
wasn't really clear um who was
gonna get that report.
It's the Department of Health
that needs to be notified by the
hospital, the care provider that
a care plan has been
implemented.
And then the last thing is just
section 5, which is the
effective date, July 1st of
2025.
And, uh, Madam Chair, I will add
for the committee also that uh
Representative Armstrong, the
minority house, uh, leader.
House minority Leader, excuse
me, did sign on as the um.
As my my co-sponsor as well on
this, and I'll ask the secretary
to say a couple of words and
then we'll work with whatever
direction you, thank you,
Senator, members of the
committee. Good morning. Um,
we've worked, you know,
consistently on this carab bill
since last year, as they said,
it is a crisis, it's something
that we're addressing at the
department, we've made internal
changes, um, specifically to the
plan of care to change it to a
plan of safe care to um ensure
that we're really looking at
services for individuals and not
just supports.
Reports are important for them,
but that should not indicate how
a child is gonna be kept safe
when somebody just selects a
support, so there's been work on
that plan, um, as they said,
they changed the name in the
bill to be a plan of safe care,
cause that's really what we're
all trying to do is ensure the
safety of that child. Um, and as
you mentioned, we're working
across with other um legislators
on other bills, um.
Senator Trujillo um mentioned
House Bill 205. Um, there's also
House Bill 343 and House Bill
424 that have aspects of Kara in
those, so we're working
currently with those sponsors to
see what are in those bills that
are really important that we
haven't covered in ours so that
we can have one comprehensive
bill, so there may be additional
amendments or substitutions as
we move forward. But I think the
amendments that they've covered
have really given it a very
strong chance that we
will be successful, that kids
will be um taken care of, that
they will be kept safe and that
we will be providing treatment
to families as we move forward
through this process. So, um, I
just want to say thank you for
all of the work that's gone into
it, to everybody who's working
together for this and um I have,
if there's any other additional
questions specific to it, um,
I'm available to answer those.
So thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we did not have
anyone sign up in opposition or
support members before we uh get
started. I just want to note for
you in your analysis at the very
bottom of the first page, it,
it's talking about a definition
that was removed in the sub.
So
You, you can ignore that.
That point that is being made
there.
Uh, that continues on to, to the
other page because that
definition is, is no longer in
the, in the legislation that we
have before us. Uh, first on the
list, I have Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
S
Is this enough?
I mean, even today in the
newspaper, we
Read of a child in Carl's bed
that was
that died was buried in the
backyard, um.
and all again is involved.
I look at statistics and we're
spending about
58 $60,000 per person.
And I'm trying to figure out
Is this enough? Are we doing? I
know this is better than it is.
I'm not arguing that point.
My point is,
It's just enough.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, I, I.
I don't think it's ever gonna be
enough. But, you know, this is a
scourge on our community and.
I think this, but I do believe
this is a move in the right
direction. Well, um, Madam
Chair, let me just
What questions did I marked, um,
On page 11, 8.
It talks about at least one care
coordinator is available at the
furthering hospital in the
state. What exactly does
available mean?
How often, where are they?
24 hours a day.
On the phone, what does that
mean?
Um, and secretary, if you would
like to move to.
Or maybe Senator Padilla can
scoot over like you both have
your own bushy mower, you'll
know.
And I'm sure, thank you, um,
Senator Townsend, um, what that
means is that the, the care
coordinators that are in each
hospital, those are separate
from the department and the
navigators that Department of
Health will have to address this
issue. Those are through the
MCOs. So alongside the nurses in
the hospital that are doing
those assessments, the MCOs are
required to have a care
coordinator that is available to
do this plan of safe care, so
they may not necessarily be in
that hospital 24.
7, but they're available for
that birth if there is an issue
or a situation that arises where
a child's screening comes back
as positive, then they would be
there to meet with the patient
and work on that plan of safe
care, um, and ensure that that
gets completed prior to
discharge.
Madam Chair, secretary, Senator.
Well
Will there be any testing other
than
On the child.
Well there, will there be any,
what, what investigation, I
mean, if you go on to page uh
Um, 13 line 7. It talks about
this implementation of the safe
care plan will include the
child's parents, relatives,
guardians, family members,
caregivers. How do we get there?
I mean, there's so many.
There, there's so many times
that a child is put in danger,
not
Oh, not necessarily because of
a, a guardian or a parent, it's,
it's people, other people that
are in the house. How do, how do
we protect the child when we
know there's
I mean, when the
When you get a test back that's
positive.
How do you screen
Make sure that that child is
protected.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, unfortunately, it
would be impossible to touch and
screen every person that touches
that child life. That would be
an ideal situation that would
help to eliminate so many issues
that we see in the state. Um,
but initially the screening at
the hospital would take place
with anyone who is going to be
going home with that child, so
if the child is gonna be um
going home with mom after a plan
of safe care where they deem
that there is somebody, say, a
grandparent.
Grandmother or an aunt that is
gonna be taking responsibility
to ensure the safety of that
child, all of those individuals
would be screened in a home
assessment that is done by um
the car navigators when that
child is going home.
Well, what caught my eye, if you
look on down in um.
On line 15 through
22 of page 13, it talks about
when
When family members or
caregivers are not following.
Uh, the plan of safe care. I'm
trying to figure out how do you
get to the point that you know
they are not following that
plan.
Madam Chair, I don't mean to
interrupt the senator. I'm going
to ask Senator Burrs to sit in
my seat for just a moment. I
need to run to a.
Break and I I'll come right. OK.
that we've put in there, um,
there are many different touch
points and so.
Currently, the way we have it
written, and I need to really
study the amendment because I
heard something that was.
Kind of caught my eye in that
amendment that it just gets
reported to DOH, but currently
it gets reported when a plan of
safe care is completed through a
portal, notification goes both
to Department of Health and to
CYFD so we know that there's a
plan that's been created. The
way that this is specifically
being laid out is then DOH with
one of their Kara navigators
would make contact alongside the
care coordinators from the
hospital with that individual to
ensure
That there's somebody available
to work with them on that plan
of care, so that engagement with
that individual and that support
would then be able to notify
CYFD quicker if they're not
engaging in services if they're
not going to those regular
meetings that they're scheduled
or, you know, whatever they have
agreed to in that plan of safe
care and it would give the
department quicker notification
when they're not engaging for
one of our family navigators to
work with them and.
make a determination if in fact
more efforts need to be made
from CYFD, um.
Or better safety for that child.
Madam
Chair, secretary.
And it
We have a fiscal impact report
on the committee substitute.
as senator, I, I don't think so.
I think we're barely getting
fiscal impact reports on bills.
That's another subject that we
can talk about, but.
Um
I'm in favor of this. I'm, I'm
not, I'm not.
Suggesting that I'm not what I'm
trying to figure out is.
is
First and foremost, is it
enough?
Is it a move in the right
direction, I think so.
Do I have concerns that we're
still going to have issues,
absolutely.
But with the expanded care
that's in, I just wanna make
sure that I understand what the
physical impact is. I'll, I'll
continue to listen. Madam Chair,
I appreciate it. I, I.
to support the effort. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you guys for being here.
We all support the effort. We've
supported it for a number of
years.
And it hasn't made it across the
finish line for one reason or
another, so I want to thank
Senator Padilla for bringing
this bill forward, but I want to
thank a number of champions who
have put really child welfare at
the top of their list this year,
including our pro tem.
It was identified that through
the interim in this year of
making it a priority, including
Senator Doha, who's carrying a
number of bills.
I think this is a nonpartisan
issue is that we have got to
come in and save New Mexico's
children, and I, and I want to
thank you Secretary. You've had
a large presence. I have often
been a very loud critic of
clearly the agency.
And, and as a result, that is,
that has fallen on you as well,
and I think that this year with
the agency coming proposing
solutions, this all being at the
table. I, I am optimistic that
we have a real chance to make a
difference.
Specifically to Kara, the reason
why it's the most important bill
is because it's the first step
in a in a broken cycle. It's the
first time and the most
important word, we fight in
judiciary over words and I've
never understood.
The the value and the importance
between the word may and shall
more than the example of what we
did in Kira.
Um, you may have a drug addicted
newborn baby, and we have said,
you may get treatment.
85% of them don't.
Because we didn't mandate it.
LFC reported that 40 of them
didn't even know they had a
plan. You may get treatment, but
unfortunately from the state's
perspective, when we send him
home with that baby, often we
never see that child again until
they're 5 years old or in our
school system and at that point
we'd had 5 years to provide
cause this doesn't just have to
be punitive. The goal of this is
not to take the children away
initially from parents. It's to
create and to invest.
All sorts of resources to get
that family and specifically
that baby on a path of success,
right? Substance abuse treatment
programs that maybe the mother
needs to get in. They have
healthy food or they receiving
medical care? Do they need to
vest in domestic violence
intervention, whatever it may be
to, to change.
Not just the babies' lives, but
that the family's lives.
It's alarming to see that that
they anticipate that this.
Carra rule will impact 1200
newborn babies this year.
Drug addicted babies in New
Mexico. That's 6% of all the
babies born in this state.
I, I think there's never there
there may arguably be some
pretty important bills that
we're dealing with this year.
This may be one of
The most important, and we've
seen it introduced a number of
ways and a number of times and
quite frankly, I don't care
about the details, as long as
we're putting the the the baby's
interests first and how we're
gonna get early in invention.
I, I do have a very
Specific concern in here, and
that's really just the
presentation of this bill,
Secretary. We are moving the
responsibility of this Kara over
to DOH.
But you're here presenting the
bill, we're removing it out of
your agency, why is DOH not
here?
When there was
Thank you. There we are I'm
sorry. Thank you. DOH has a
major role to play in this
because we're moving the
responsibility. Can you guys
speak for just a moment because
this is what it all comes down
to.
To the accountability between
the handoff of these agencies,
the accountability of this
program and who who we turn to
to really hold responsible that
these plans are one getting
issued and 2 being followed
through on.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Brantley, yes, I think we can
both speak to that, um.
I think that there's been a lot
of collaboration and
coordination between the two
agencies about what exactly this
looks like, because it will take
both agencies for us to be
successful. I think our initial
thought is that this is a public
health issue, and they are our
public health entity to ensure
that they're out there, um, you
know, providing information to
individuals to really build
those programs to work closely
with HCA on capacity and
ensuring that we have the
treatment facilities in our
state that are
necessary for some of these
individuals. So absolutely, they
have a huge responsibility. But
at that same time, when families
are not following that and we're
making it, they need to have
that plan of safe care when
they're not, there needs to be
that immediate coordination
between Department of Health and
CYFD so that we can ensure that
we get out there as you know,
Senator Townsend said, sometimes
we're too late. We don't know
that. And if there's a lack in
communication between the two
agencies when something happens.
And CYFD is not notified timely
enough.
And we're going to continue to
have these horrific instances
and so it's really we're handing
that off to them as a public
health.
Issue for them to train the
hospitals, but working side by
side with them on accountability
and ensuring that babies are
safe. And so, I'll turn it over
to my colleague to, um,
Secretary de Blasi.
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
thank you. It's a really
important question. There has
been as we're moving the um Kara
program over to Department of
Health. We've been having daily
meetings with CYFD and the
teams. We're working with the
navigators that have come over
to the Department of Health, in
addition to that, we're
coordinating with the managed
care organizations we're we're
sitting in on weekly meetings on
case reviews with the managed
care organizations, um, and
then.
we also bring in ECCD because
there's a home visiting program,
so we're taking this as a public
health approach where setting up
kind of a um standards of
practice on, uh, with the Kira
navigators as the baby is born,
and we are notified, we're
working alongside the managed
care organizations for those
that are on Medicaid and those
that don't have Medicaid because
many some of the babies that are
born also have commercial
insurance, so they may not have
an MCO, uh.
care, uh, coordinator involved,
that's when the Department of
Health becomes that care
coordinator and that care
navigator. The plan of safe care
will be much more than a
referral based, uh, plan, it
will really be understanding
what the root of the issue is
what is the intervention and the
referral look like and where's
the follow up and that would
fall on the care navigators from
Department of Health. We'll be
doing home visiting, and if we
are at all concerned at at any
time when uh have notification.
or were recognizing the work
that we're doing, we will, um,
that there's noncompliance will
immediately engage with CYFD,
um, we're looking at having
really intensive case management
and also having case reviews of
every active case, um, on a
weekly basis of of the
individuals that are wrapped up
in the care program.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
We're fortunate to have the two
of you working together, but we
all know that the statutes we
pass and the policies and the
programs that we put in place
outlasts longer than any of us
in these roles, and so I would
turn to you guys to make sure
that whatever sort of
coordination policies are in
place are strong enough that
that outlast your service here
because I would identify that as
potentially the biggest um
concern and potential crack in
the system is gonna be right
there and it's gonna be
important that while we.
implement this, that you guys
make sure that that coordination
will outlast your terms in these
roles, just, just as our work in
these statutes do. Um, I, I'm
gonna support this all, all day
long. I have for a number of
years. I think you guys both for
supporting it too. I think, I
think the champions have come to
the table, this session to make
sure we get some things done. I
think that is as legislators we
have a duty to represent every
New Mexican.
And I think as, as a mother, and
I think as human beings we have
moral responsibilities to
protect the most vulnerable of
our population and it would be
hard to argue that there is
anyone more vulnerable than a
drug addicted newborn, and this,
this is an important piece of
legislation. It's the first step
in a lot of different changes we
need to make within CYFD, but I
will wholeheartedly get behind
this, and I think you guys for
coming to the table and doing
that this year. Thank you.
Thank you. Senator Harmio. Madam
Chairwoman, thank you. Good to
see all three of you this
morning, Senator up there for
the other senator, I might have
missed this, but in my area
we're having an issue with
grandparents who aren't the
legal guardians of the
grandchild, and so parents who
are leaving the grandkids with
the grandchild. And we're seeing
that there's a support unit of
how to provide services to the
child with this group of
individuals, even if it's family
members who are caring for the
child.
If the mother is the listed
guardian.
But doesn't respond and the
child's with the grandparent.
Do the services then go to help
the grandparent, even though the
grandparent isn't the legal
guardian.
Um, madam chair, um.
The meal.
Um.
So yes, there are programs
available to help the
grandparents, um, they would be
supported by the department. I
would just like to say, you
know, for those grandparents
raising grandchildren, not just
in this situation, but in many
situations, you know, our office
of advocacy is really working
with them to identify how do we
expand those services so that we
can better support them. So I'd
love to put you in touch with
Don to talk about that, but
specifically for this, the child
would not necessarily go home
with the mother if she hadn't
agreed to engage.
services, so at that point in
time, if she is not engaging in
services and they feel that it's
not safe to send her home, then
the grandparent would be
designated as the individual to
care for that child and we would
do wraparound services about the
grandparent at that time.
Got it. So it's designation, so
it doesn't have to be the legal
guardian. It's designation of
taking the child. Perfect. That
answers that. And I want to just
make one comment that I'm
thankful about our home
visitations, because when you
think about poverty is linked to
drug abuse and use. And so if
you think about rural New
Mexicans when we talk about
needing them to come into a
hospital if Espin is the only
hospital, but you're in Savoya,
which is almost an hour away.
Transportation becomes a major
issue. So I'm happy to see that
home visitations is
be taken into account so that
way transportation isn't a
barrier to ensure that these
children are checked on. So
thank you so much. Uh thank you,
ladies, and thank you, senator
for this bill. No further
questions. Senator Block,
followed by Senator Stefaniks
and Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Senator, and, and
thank you secretaries. I, I love
seeing both secretaries here,
that's called integration and um
I very much appreciate that.
Um
I, I've been on this bill, I, I
got a
I wanna say it's a complaint.
I support the bill, by the way.
But I just want to see if
We can uh
Get a couple things going here.
This was not socialized from
what various lobbyists have told
me, uh, with, with hospitals.
And um
On page 11.
On the underline there, starting
on page 5.
I love the word requirements in
this one. That means a lot to
me.
That is just minimum standards.
Can you tell me on page 10.
Um, requirements for the
Department of Health to ensure
all that all substance exposed
children.
Who have a plan to safe care
receive care coordination to
implement the plan of safe care,
what, what are all?
Substance exposed, what, what
does that mean, does the state
have a list of all these
substances that the hospitals
need to know.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator B
block, um, yes, there are
several substances that are
listed that are of concern, um,
and they do have that when they
are doing that plan of safe care
when they're testing, um, they
have a list of those that
they're looking for.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Do we know how many there
are and and can you name them by
chance or do you not have that
information? If you don't have
it, that's fine, but I just
wanna know roughly how many
there are and if, if you do have
a list that the hospitals are
aware of to comply with this.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator B
block, I don't have it, but I
can get it to you, um, Secretary
Delasi may know it.
I believe there are roughly 7.
Substances including um
nicotine, methamphetamine, um,
marijuana.
Other opioids, alcohol.
No
Fentanyl
Um, so yes, and just to also,
um, Madam Chair and and Senator
Block to answer your question.
One of the goals at the
Department of Health, and we're
uh starting to organize that now
is training across all the
birthing hospitals. So I'll be
working extensively with that
question's coming up. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, so, Madam Secretary,
nicotine.
Really?
So
You got a mother who's a smoker.
Who shouldn't be smoking when
she's pregnant because that's
just a really stupid thing to
do.
Or she's taking nicotine patches
or or something like that.
Um, or maybe she chews. I mean,
I, I don't know what people do.
Um, are you testing just for a
certain level, is there a
certain certain threshold on
the, the other drugs I totally
get, I'm, I'm good. I is there
I mean, you pick up nicotine in
the blood and then they're
automatically enrolled in this
process.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, yes,
there will be if there's
exposure to the baby, and it's
been identified, we will move
towards a plan of safe care and
what it may mean is that we just
work with the mother, the
family, um, you know, on that
nicotine exposure. Thank you,
thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So you, you would agree
that all 7 are not going to be
treated, all these cases, these
mothers are not going to be
treated equally based on
nicotine versus fentanyl.
Madam Chair, Senator Block,
absolutely. OK, thank you for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, let's, let's talk on line 13
there. Provide training.
The hospital staff.
Who, who is doing that?
Madam Chair, Senator Block, that
would be Department of Health.
Thank, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
When is that going to start to
start, uh, because how I see
this.
As you will probably want to
what we would say in the Air
Force, Madam Chair and Madam
Secretary is train the trainer.
So you're gonna go in Rust
Hospital in my district, or
Loveless West, West Side in my
district.
Um, or SRMC in my county, and
you're going to.
Go there in person.
And provide training to 1 or 2
individuals who are going to be
responsible for carrying out
this training to the staff to
comply with this. Do I assume
that correctly?
Madam Chair, Senator Blo we'll
be working directly with the
hospitals to identify the best
approach for each of those
facilities. So we would want
them to have, um, you know,
either 1 or 2 people within
those units that they have
identified that would be held
accountable or responsible.
So it's going to be standardized
training across New Mexico. Do I
understand that correctly?
Madam Chair, Senator Ballo, yes.
OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
We're this, this training is
this off of, is this developed
locally at the state or is it
like a hybrid from state and
federal training or is it taken
from other states that have um
You know, a good track record
dealing with this uh this
tragedy.
Madam Chair, Senator Block.
Yes.
To that question, so it's all of
the above. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
Real quick, walk, walk me
through real quick, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary.
When a parent
A mother and father or a mother
or whoever the guardian is in
this program doesn't comply with
home visits or these these
plans. How do you remove the
child out of the, the, the care
of that parent because you have
in the bill, uh, underlines
imminent danger.
So tell me about the process,
how that works to remove a child
from a home.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
so if there's noncompliance with
that plan of safe care, that
would be a notification through
our central intake, um, that the
child.
I believed to be in danger
because if somebody is not
complying with their plan of
care, um, and if it's an
exposure, if it's nicotine, it
might be handled a little bit
differently than if it were
fentanyl. And if they're not
complying and it's um a drug
that is concerning, we would go
in and do that assessment to
ensure that that parent could
safely take care of that child
and the likelihood if they're
not complying with the treatment
of that happening, um, would
probably
Probably create a high risk for
that child or CYFD would then go
in through an investigation and
determine if the child needed to
be removed, um, or if there were
a safe caregiver that was going
to take that child, but would
not leave the child
and um
Madam sure and
Madam Secretary, let, let me ask
it this way.
If
You're gonna have to make some
serious assumptions.
Um, if
Very serious assumptions because
if you're not, and you talked
about it here in the bill that I
read.
But not being able to make
contact with the parent.
And, and I would, I would argue
based on that parent's previous
behavior, if you don't have
contact with that parent over
I don't know.
A month or 2 months.
You know, the exposure, the risk
of exposure to that baby, I
would think it would be great. I
mean, quite frankly, the baby
could be dead already.
Um, how do you
How, I'm still trying to
understand how you are like,
stay focused on this parent to
ensure the safety of the baby
because if you're noting on
their door 2 or 3 times.
And they're not answered, you go
get a, a court order or
something to go.
Break the door down to go get
that baby or something. How, how
does that work because I would,
I would argue the safety of the
baby is the number one priority.
Um, yes, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Block, I think the way
the program is being designed at
Department of Health is there is
constant communication with that
family, it's not just, you know,
we check you got home, we're
good, we'll see you in a month
or 6 weeks, it is constant
communication with that
navigator. And when there's not
engagement is a trigger point
for Department of Health to
notify CAFD. We would then go in
and do an investigation. So our
investigators go in, um, if they
get to the house and they can't
get engagement.
At that point in any
investigation, then we include
law enforcement to come in and
help us to gain access to ensure
that we have eyes on parent and
on baby. OK, thank you for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, because,
I mean, let's face it, and the
reality is, um, I think Senator
Jaramillo touched on this with
grandparents raising their kids,
so you have a, you have a young
mother.
Uh, addicted to drugs.
With a baby or babies, um, young
children.
And then
Mom and grandma get into a
fight.
Mom leaves the house, takes the
kids.
Um, now what the hell do you do?
Because mom calls CYFD or calls
the police and says.
She's gone
She's still using
And now
Now do you call the police to do
an investigation of trying to
find out, you know, through cell
phone towers and other.
Other, uh, investigation tools
to go find this person
immediately cause that that's a
trigger where you gotta go.
Get this, uh, get this kid or
these babies or uh immediately.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
yes, that would be called in as
an emergency, um, to CYFD when
the parent calls in that she is
absconded with the baby, um, if
we know that she is at high risk
for being able to keep that
child safe.
OK, and just
Uh, Madam, 3 more quick things
here on page 11, I'm sorry, page
13, line 11. I always see the,
the, the phrase evidence-based.
Um
I, I never, I mean, it's been
explained to me before and I've
gotten different answers.
What, what does that mean to you
in here that's this, uh, part of
this new law, new bill.
Um,
madam an evidence-bas.
Intensive care coordination
model because the court, these,
these um care coordinators like
Senator Townsend said are gonna
be at the hospital, they're
gonna be trained up.
But what, what type of evidence
based tools are, are we talking
about there? Um, Madam Chair,
Senator Block, there are.
specific programs that have gone
through, um, a regimen of.
Review and analysis to determine
that the program is sufficient
and the evidence shows that it
is um a successful program.
I prefer typically in New Mexico
for us to use evidence informed,
because some areas don't
necessarily have a provider that
has gone through that process
and it sometimes limits the
ability, but we'll work with
providers across the state that
can provide services to families
so basically those programs have
been reviewed and validated, we
know they work. That, that's a
better.
Where I think saying that for,
for me anyway, on page 15 here,
um, I
And I talked about this in
Senate Bill 12, and 3, with
Senator Antoine Cedilla Lopez
when we were.
Uh, working on the bill.
Uh, together to tighten it up a
little bit, this.
Uh, starts on page 14, but this,
um,
Following aggregate statistical
information related to the
creation of plans of safe care.
In these reports.
The annual reports to the LFC,
the one thing that I, it just
irks me, um, that I don't think
is very helpful what this is
missing is at the very end, it's
recommendations. It's telling us
what's working and what's not
working.
That, that to me, if we don't
have to make the amendment now,
but I, I would like to see,
cause this is gonna come to the
floor and I'm going to vote for
it.
But when these people are doing
the reports, they gotta give us
a recommendation.
Of what's, and you're shaking
your head in agreement, that's,
that's gonna happen on here, and
I'll.
I'll make the amendment on the
floor, um, to get that done. So,
would you, would you quickly
just uh agree, yes or no, if, if
that's uh would be friendly to
you at a later date. Um, Madam,
Senator, yes, it would. OK,
thanks. And then lastly, Madam
Chair.
Madam Secretaries.
On page 2 and senator, if you
want to make a an amendment, do
it now. Don't wait till the
floor, and that's what we're
here for. I know there's other
people who want to talk and I,
we, we can do that. I just
wanted to kind of quickly get to
the next bill, but.
OK.
So
I, I would like to propose.
And I got, you're catching me on
the fly, Madam Chair, so let's
work through this together and
uh I could use your help.
On this one. So I would propose
an amendment to
Uh, Senate Bill 42.
After line 5.
00, I'm sorry, page 15.
After line 5, and Senator, how
about this? Why don't you, why
don't you tell us what you want
your amendment to do, and then
maybe I can suggest what the
what the language should be
fine.
It's all yours, but, but it it
it is hard to do these, these
amendments on the fly and so if
you want to describe what you
want, I would say something to
the effect of
Um
Develop
Recommendations.
Uh
Uh, describing successes.
Uh, gaps and needed improvements
and improvements.
Something like that, if that
would be friendly.
How about develop
recommendations.
Or needed improvements.
Well, I would also want to know
if successes.
Because I think that's important
to know, uh, what, what, what
we're doing well.
So we can maybe
Build on that.
And Senator, I, I think that
they can tell us their successes
without us saying in statute,
tell us your successes. I think.
I, I, I don't think you need to
say that. I think if what you
want are our recommendations for
changes that should be made. I
think, I think that.
That makes sense to put in
there. I don't think you need
to.
To require them to report their
successes. I have a feeling they
will gladly do so
without a statutory mandate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. How
about recommendations
identifying gaps.
And needed improvements.
So when I'm gonna, yeah,
this.
On 14 and 15, 12345 are the
following aggregate statistical
information related to the
creation of plants of safe care.
So I'm not sure that what is
proposed should go right there.
You know what, Senator, I wonder
if.
We should put it
The report shall include.
Recommendations identifying gaps
and needed improvements and the
following aggregate statistical
information.
So Senator Block, I think what
your amendment is, is on page
14, line 19.
After the word include.
Inserting
Recommendations identifying gaps
and needed improvements and
Is that accomplish what you're
seeking to accomplish. That's
very friendly.
I, I think, I think it's for
them to say if it's friendly is
for me. Well, we'll, we'll ask
them, but yeah, for me, I'm, I'm
very good at that.
All right, so that is Senator
Block's motion that he is
moving, is that friendly?
Madam.
All right. Is there any debate
on that amendment?
Is, is there any objection to
adopting that amendment. See
now, that amendment is adopted.
about you
Um
I'm sure you made me lose my
place.
I, I blame you. All right. Oh,
here I am. Uh, last, last point,
Madam Chair, page 21.
Uh, the on line 17, the
underlying piece there, the
Department of Health shall be
responsible for ensuring
compliance with federal
reporting requirements related
to plans of safe care.
So what, what happens?
Um, if we're not in compliance,
what is not being in compliant
means? I mean one hospital is it
I I don't understand what
noncompliance would mean here.
And would we be at risk of
losing federal dollars if we're
not compliant.
Madam Chair, Senator B block, I
don't have an answer to what
would happen if we're not in
noncompliance, I will have to
get back to you on that, um,
Gina, do you have?
Madam Chair, Senator Block will
have to get back to you.
OK, cause it's written here it
says shall.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Madam
secretaries.
Um, we, so we have, uh, uh, I'm
curious why we put that in there
if we don't know.
What we mean by that.
I'm, I'm willing, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretaries, I'm, I'm
willing to let that one go and
if you could just send me an
email or something, let me know
what that means, what
noncompliance means, is a
certain threshold where the feds
are like.
You're not complying with
pulling money back. I, I, I have
no idea what that means.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
I will send you an email and I
will actually send it to the
chair as well if anybody else
wants to know what noncompliance
is, we'll get it to you.
OK, I'm happy to support the
bill. Thanks for being so
friendly today on my, uh,
memory.
Thank you so much. All right,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And next, uh, the
nurseonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
question has been answered about
the substances, and I plan to
support this bill. Thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I, I am
just so happy this bill is here
today. I really appreciate it uh
sooner Brantley's comments, but
You know, cinder block, you
haven't been around before this
bill has been carried by Senator
Gay Kernan for many years. We
passed it out of the Senate. It
got bogged down in the house.
That'll be a familiar refrain
that you'll be hearing from now
to the end of the session.
Look at Senator Townsend, he
knows exactly what I mean, so
the changes are just so
significant, it seems to me, I
do have one question, uh, Madam
Secretary, it seems that the,
the only difference really
between the bills that Senator
Gaer has carried to make this
mandatory instead of a
voluntary, but is that it's now
in the Department of Health. Is
that the only change?
Basically, um, Madam Chair Prote
Stewart, yes, basically that is
most of what that changes is it
makes it mandatory, but yes, a
lot of what she had previously
put is incorporated into that.
So I just, I think there's 3 or
4 of these bills around, I
really like this one, so I just
wanna thank you for listening to
us these years and understanding
that we just had to change what
we were doing. I know a big
worry is workforce.
You know, we're requiring now
Department of Health to do a lot
of work around this issue and
workforce issues are everywhere,
but uh we still have to try to
do it. We still have to make
this mandatory and help these
kids, so thank you so much for
the bill.
Senator Gallegos.
Go ahead, Senator.
Incomman chair we're in
discussion over some of the
wording language, uh, I do have
I'm sure.
kind of secretaries, um, some
concerns or some questions. Uh,
first off, um,
No, you talked about earlier in
testimony that you're looking to
uh add in some other bills into
this. I just wanted to touch
base, so, uh, 343 the CYFD
plants for safe care for certain
children, is that one of the
ones that you're actually
looking to that tune that I'd
like to
Um, proposed, uh, to roll into
this if you guys looked at that
bill.
us and our house about 343.
Madam Chair, um,
The guy goes, yes, we have. I
met um.
Alongside some of my other
colleagues with um
Representative Armstrong on 343
we agreed on language that was
in there that needed to be
incorporate, but the majority of
what that bill had was already
in this bill, um, they just
wanted, um, more strengthening
on if there were concerns of
specific drugs such as fentanyl,
methamphetamines, heroin and
cocaine, I believe, were the 4
that they were concerned with
that there would be a more.
consideration given on a child
being at risk with the use of
those drugs, and so it's
something that we're looking at
incorporating. I think we've had
conversation about that here
today about how we're going to
look at that differently from
maybe nicotine, um, but other
than that, I believe that
everything that she had concern
with on 343 has been
incorporated either through
amendments that we've made or
through the original bill.
Thank you for that, Madam Chan.
secretaries is the other one
that I have concern on rolling
into this is House 424, the
pregnancy and Family Care Act as
there have been discussions on
that being a part of this.
Overall, when you go forward.
Um, Madam Chair, um, guy goes,
we have not had conversations on
4 did you say 424? Yes. Um, yes,
so that is we've identified
where there are differences,
there were not many of things
that needed to come in, but we
have not yet had those
conversations. My hope is to
take the final with the
amendments on this and be able
to propose it and have
conversation with anybody else
who's carrying, um.
Tara, and I know there are some
bills that are very broad that
have a portion of Kara in them.
The hope is to really be able to
strip that out of those bills,
have one comprehensive bill that
we can then get through the
Senate side and really help to
push through the house. Um, so
it doesn't get bogged down there
and that we're able to get this
bill to the finish line. Thanks
for parents and secretaries, uh,
that's sort of one of my
concerns is the protein brought
up bogged down in the house, uh,
you basically have 29.
days, get this through the other
chamber and back for us to
reconsider those changes, uh,
but I, I do want to go back to
uh somethingen Block was looking
at, and it goes back to that
page 21, and this was just in
testimony. I don't have anywhere
written down I looked for it,
but during testimony, uh, uh, it
was said that if plans not
followed, then.
The Department of Health would
report to CYFD.
Is that not correct? I, I, I'm
wondering if this federal piece
here, uh, the way it reads the
health the Department of Health
shall be responsible for
ensuring compliance with federal
reporting requirements related
to the plan of safe care.
If that is not done.
Does that come back to see YFD
for consideration, or is what
would the, the next step be?
Um,
madam chair guy goes, I believe
that this is the requirements
for reporting for federal
funding that we're in
compliance, um, there's a
separate requirement that if
there's noncompliance that the
department would notify CYFD.
OK, my turn.
Madam Secretary, thank you for
that clarification. Then what
would as she responds to you of
noncompliance, what is CYFD's
job then with that issue.
Um, Madam Cheer guy goes, we
have implemented through CYFD um
what that would look like if it
comes in. So, um, as I stated
earlier, if it is an.
Concerning
Where we feel that the child is
at imminent imminent risk, it
would um be an immediate
priority investigation through
our um protective services
department. If there's
noncompliance and it is for, I'm
gonna use nicotine cause I think
that's the easiest example that
would then come through our
department for noncompliance,
um, we wouldn't conduct an
investigation, but we would do a
family assessment through our
family services bureau to just
go out, have eyes on that child,
assess the.
situation
provides, you know, um, support
services for them through family
services, but also give us that
I, you know, those eyes on that
child through a different lens
to see if there are other things
contributing, um, that we felt
that there should be an
investigation.
Thanks for that,
Madam Secretary, this be my last
question. So it's using the
nicotine. If they're
noncompliant.
What do you as a department do
after you've done a secondary
evaluation.
If they're still not
Compliant. What are the teeth in
the policy to be able to force
him into compliance. I'm just
thinking I've got a gentleman
right next to me sort of
addicted to coffee.
Uh, you know, uh, it's not
nicotine, it's caffeine.
But just thinking through the
theory of that, some people
can't get off of nicotine, so
I'm just wondering what for the
safety of the child. We're not
talking fentanyl or anything
else, so it's um.
Worse as you go up the um drug
chain, but if nicotine is the uh
topic we're talking about as far
as the department, what do you
have?
And you told it that allows you
to adjust her thoughts or their
thoughts.
Uh, on, on not being in
compliance.
Um,
madam, I think that that would
depend on, you know, what it is,
but really the bottom line is,
is the child safe.
Right, we all have our vices. I
probably drink too much coffee
as well, but what CYFD would be
looking for is, is that child
safe or is the use of that
nicotine causing harm to that
child or potentially putting
that child at risk. Um, if the
answer is no, if the child is
not at risk, if there's not harm
to the child, then we would just
again provide support services
to the family, but the carer
still remains a voluntary
program with now um certain
require.
environments that you know, give
us more opportunities to engage
and then provide services or
remove children, but.
If the child is not safe, and
there's no harm being done.
Um, then at that point, there
would be no further involvement
from CYFD on trying to
reduce their nicotine intake.
just said, I think you might
have misspoke. I think you might
if the child is not unsafe, and
there's no harm being done. I
think you accidentally said if
the child is not safe. I just
want to clarify that.
Right, OK. But I appreciate it.
Yes, I intention to that Madam
Secretary, that, that's the
primary if uh the process uh
Highlights a Charles' safety and
their needs and, and I'm good
with that. I, I appreciate the
bill and I appreciate you
looking into some of these
others that need to be rolled
into this. I just want to tell
you, the sooner the better.
Uh, we've had a bill that we
start in July, took me 7 months
to get my bill dropped.
Um
I hope you have better luck with
rolling everything in by
tomorrow so we can go forward.
house,
so and
and you'll thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Stefan,
for a 2nd time, followed by
Senator Townsend for a second.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you everyone for being
here, but I want to clarify why
we're talking about nicotine.
Nicotine, uh, effects on fetal
growth and development, low
birth weight, premature birth,
growth restriction, effects on
brain and nervous system
cognitive and behavioral
problems, increased risk of ADHD
changes in the brain structure
increased risk of sudden
infant death syndrome,
respiratory problems, skeletal
problems. I think there's plenty
of reasons. They include
nicotine here. Thank you very
much.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you
Um
I'm there.
Secretaries
A couple of questions. One is
amber alert used when
An instance as
Senator Block
described in a child is.
Missing
And unaccounted for.
Is Amber used and
And why not, if it isn't.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, there are very
specific federal guidelines for
when an Amber Alert can be used,
um, so we do notify state police
or law enforcement if a child,
if a parent has absconded with a
child, um, at that point, it is
up to the local authority or
state police to determine if it
meets the criteria of an Amber
Alert. There have been
situations where CYFD has called
in a concern and an Amber Alert
has been issued, um, there have
also.
been times when that doesn't
rise to the level of the federal
requirements for an Amber Alert
and it is not issued.
Madam Chair
um
This is out of my wheelhouse of,
of.
Life experiences, but
It just seems like that is a
tool that works.
And has had great successes.
And the state is constantly
Um
Setting procedures.
At the state level.
I mean, why, why do we, why, why
is the federal
You know
Why do we say, well, there's a
federal.
Oh guideline, I mean, why don't
we just set up state guideline
if we're trying to protect kids
and say, hey,
Let's do it.
Um, but I'm sure Senator
Townsend, I agree with you 100%.
We are having conversations,
they haven't happened in a while
now since the legislative
session, but I was having
conversations with Secretary
Bowie about exactly that, like
what are those requirements and
how can we ensure that we can
get that information out, um,
timely, and so, you know, we did
talk and say if things needed to
change in the requirements or
the regulations, um, it was
something that we needed to look
at. So we may be bringing that
forth at some other point in
time.
So, um, Madam Chair, I, I just
think it's an important issue. I
mean, we have seen
I believe if my memory's right,
we have seen a at least a couple
of deaths.
Or we knew a child was.
No, I don't know if that's the
right term to use missing, but
unaccounted for, not where
they're supposed to be or
whatever, and we knew it was a
problem.
And
And in the end, we found that
the child was deceased.
Maybe if we had used amber.
And people knew that amber was
used.
Family members would be
immediately notified that a
child was at risk. Is it, is
that logical?
Um
Madam Chair, is it?
If I, I'd like to know why.
She said it was a good idea.
I think it's a good idea,
madam, madam chair, but a
kidnapping alert, I mean, unless
we we're gonna send a kidnapping
alert every time an addict had a
baby.
Apply to Kira, but I think in
the broader conversation of CYFD
alerts, maybe, I don't know if
it'd be considered an amber
alert.
And, and I don't know if it's,
it's a great tool that has shown
successes.
Um
I hate to argue with my my peer
to the right, but if you say
it's a good idea and I'm, I'm
here to protect child.
to use it, right, and that there
aren't regulations that prohibit
that, um, you know, but I don't
believe that every situation
requires that, I think maybe
it's more education about if you
see something, say something. I
think sometimes family members
have a concern or a worry or the
public, but they're not quite
sure and they hesitate.
and sometimes then it prolongs
and makes it too late, but maybe
it's a better education campaign
just across the state on keeping
Madam Chair.
Senator, I'll, I'll leave it
there, but you probably will
hear it again. Um, and so I
would, uh,
I would suggest you.
Consider how to incorporate it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
I don't have anyone else on the
list, um.
I have a, so,
They er one I think you have
signed on to this bill, is that
right? Or, or you're, you're
planning to. So, so thank you,
Senator for bringing this bill,
um.
I also, I also want to thank the
secretaries, uh, you know, what
the sub that we're seeing here
is a different approach than the
original SP 42 was taking. I
appreciate your flexibility. Um,
So I'm looking at, so, so when
under this bill, there is
If there's a notification of
noncompliance with the, the plan
of safe care. Then you do this
family assessment, which is what
we see defined in existing
language on page 17, starting at
line 9.
And that assessment.
Looks at the likelihood of the
imminent danger to the child's
well-being, child becoming
abused or neglected, shrinks the
knees of the child's family
members and, and others who are
around the child.
Um, with respect to the health
and safety of the child.
What if and and and and I've
been, we've been, what we've
been talking about so far is, I
think that that notification
would come from these care
coordinators, these, these
navigators who are are working
from the family who would make
that notification.
What if, what if there's a sky
report made that.
That, uh, so, uh, someone else
calls in a report that shows
that that that there's
noncompliance with the plan of
safe care with the same.
Family assessment be done.
Um, Madam Chair, it would depend
on what was said in that sky
report, if somebody calls in and
says, you know, um, my neighbor
came home with a newborn baby
and, you know, there's.
Currently
Several people at the house and
they're engaged in activity in
smoking fentanyl, right? Then we
would not go out and do a family
assessment, we would go out and
do an investigation because that
would in our mind, put that
child at imminent danger
immediately. So that would
trigger an investigation through
Sky, um, you know, if they
called in and said our neighbor
came home, she's previously was
known to um use drugs and she's
home with an infant, um, and
we're concerned.
Right, then we would go out and
we would.
Maybe then do an assessment to
determine if she's still engaged
in that? Is she engaged in her
plan of care, because sometimes
people don't know the efforts
that somebody's making, but if
she's still engaged, if she's,
you know, meeting the
requirements under her plan of
care if she's actively going to
treatment, um, then we would
just ensure that she has
supports and probably go
through, um, one of our, um,
family. Thank you, I I
appreciate that answer I.
And so, and I just wanna make
sure that
That if the department is
finding out.
No matter how
That there is a, a child who
might be in danger due to
exposure that they'll get the
same level of investigation.
Uh, whether it's coming in
through sky or uh notice of
noncompliance with one of these
plants.
I, yeah,
of how that information gets to
the department, um, if we
believe a child to be in
immediate danger, we will
immediately go out and
investigate.
Great. Thank you.
Um, secretary, you mentioned
that you're looking at a number
of bills and Gallegos had
mentioned some house bills, I
was just looking at them as he
was mentioning them, um.
I would, so you go to Senate
Judiciary next. I would, uh,
It would be wonderful if, if,
uh, senators Padilla, Bergmann's
and Trujillo would come in with
a sub to Senate Judiciary with
all of those, anything that
you're wanting to pull from
these other bills. Um, and that
we have it at that point. Uh,
because I think it's gonna,
exact.
Because of, you know, what
Senator Stewart mentioned, I
think we want to have this.
As in, in as good of shape as
possible as early as possible,
um, to ensure that
We're getting something that's
gonna pass through both chambers
and, and make a, a fix that I
think everyone is in agreement,
needs, needs to be made.
I'll make that a priority.
Great. Thank you. Uh, what is
the will of the committee,
Senator Stewart?
Um, Madam Cha move uh do not
pass on Senate Bill 42.
But a due pass on Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 42.
Just for the new folks, you
don't say as amended, because
this is our substitute and
whatever we do with it just
becomes part of the substitute.
So, and then if there's an if
there's a substitute judiciary,
uh, then it'll be the judiciary
Committee substitute for the
Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42.
All right, um,
um, just one question, um, was
Senator Stewart a teacher?
How could you tell Senator? I
can't help myself. It is, it is
lucky for us that we have her
here teaching us all how to do
this correctly, um, all right,
so we are on a motion for a due
pass, uh, is there any objection
to that motion?
See none, uh, show all members
present voting in the
affirmative. Thank you,
secretaries. Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, could you announce
the vote for the webcast.
Sure, so that would be 8 in
favor and uh 19.
9 in favor and 1 excused.
All right. Thank you.
All right. Do we have Senator
And, and members, I, I just want
to let you know, members
that
OK,
folks, if folks can keep it
down.
folks can keep it down while you
while you leave so we can
continue our business, uh,
members, I wanna let you know
the next two bills are, are
really straightforward. Uh, we
don't have separate analysis on
those. We do have the FIRs there
for you, uh, sums it up, so.
In case you were searching for
your pink sheets on those.
Welcome, Senator.
Cleared the room. Thank you for
that.
Go ahead, senator on uh SB 447.
The reason I brought this bill
forward was, was
Because, uh, in another
committee, I tried to
Uh, roll back some EV.
Uh, mandates on the automobile
industry, of that bill failed in
committee, so I thought we've
got to get infrastructure built.
And
There's, there's
Several of the legislators told
me they was looking to buy
electric cars.
So what this bill does,
It requires us to put charging
stations.
4
The parking around our capital.
Simple Bill
Just
You know, trying to do my part
in infrastructure here.
So, uh,
I think it said, you know, and
I'm just asked for 43% of the
vehicle parking to match the
mandate on the
Industry to bring 43% of the
inventory into the state.
So, um,
You know, I, I, I don't see.
Anything wrong with this, uh,
They say the equipment costs
range from
1.128 million to 5.2 million.
I don't see anywhere in here
that the General Services
Department thinks that we need
to increase any electrical
infrastructure other than just
by the stations.
So
I think we'll do that.
And with that, I'll stand for
questions.
Alright, we didn't have anyone
sign up and support our
opposition. Um, we have one
lonely soul who is still in the
room, uh, but he's he's
security, all right, uh, Senator
Townsend, followed by Senator,
uh, a block.
I know Senator Stewart.
Just can't wait for this to come
forward, but
Go to say something.
Well, thank you, sir.
Uh, this is just so much fun to
read.
Uh, so I do have a uh
Ford C Max's a hybrid plugin.
Uh
uh Chalo did a uh
huge expose of me plugging it in
underneath the parking. So I had
a retired electrical engineer,
figure out how much it was
costing.
Uh, I will tell you that
I am lucky if I get 12 miles.
A day
out of that charter, he said it
was 23 cents a day.
So, uh, I think it was a couple
of years ago, so I gathered up
up my money and uh uh put it on
a Stuart Ingle's desk. See here,
I'm paying for it, and then he
came back to me and said, you
forgot the GRT?
So Peter said, well, get about
$1.05 pennies and throw it on
his desk so.
So anyway, I, I appreciate this,
um, I, I think it's important
moving forward. I'm glad you
think so too, and I wanna just
move it to pass, but I'll wait
for other people.
All right, Senator Townsend.
Madam Chair, I know, Senator
Stewart will be shocked, but I
have a different.
And, and although, um,
We all have laughed about it.
It's not very funny to the
industry.
Um, and I appreciate what you're
The points you're making, I
mean,
In, in Artesia today, you know,
we had Senator Sos passed the
bill last or tried to pass a
bill, I think it was Senate Bill
77, if my memory's right.
Which would have required
electric chargers to be built in
all new homes and commercial.
Establishment and it failed.
But then what happened is what
happens all the time.
And um
some uh
stretch of the imagination, the
department secretary decided
we're gonna go around the
legislature and we're gonna
start requiring it.
So CID and regulation licensing.
Instituted a rule that
This was going to occur.
Now, in our tea, Senator Stuart,
we have uh
A building going up, um, it's a
new civic center.
Um
That the increased cost.
To
person building the building.
From James construction, I mean,
it's a legitimate cost.
$283,000 that that person is
going to pay the, the, to
install.
Chargers in there.
On top of that,
He is, or is that, that.
will incur a demand charge.
Of 18.
50 amp breakers on the low side.
Forever.
They're not 18 EVs in Artesia
there.
And I bet you we don't have 18
go through every day.
And so we have all of these
buildings going up all over the
place and these costs are being
incurred, and that's the point,
Senator Wood's trying to make
is.
I think, and.
And I, I mean, I honestly
believe this that everybody
should have the opportunity to
buy whatever kind of vehicle
they wanted, and if there was
the need for those vehicles in
the house, I would vote for it
to get them installed, but it's
a waste of money because, quite
frankly, we're absolutely
decimating an industry out there
right now of car dealers across
New Mexico.
And
And I mean, they're complaining
to me all the time, you guys are
killing us.
We can't sell. Nobody wants
those vehicles.
And the point that Senator Woods
is making is
This is a silly rule.
could never occurred.
And it would be even more silly
if we spent
Whatever it is, a million bucks
putting them in the legislature,
because for many districts.
Our legislators couldn't get up
here and back on an EV chart.
And it just doesn't make any
sense, but I appreciate it. I, I
appreciate the, the bill and the
Opportunity to talk about it, I
would hope sometime legislature
would wise up and let the people
of New Mexico have a choice
instead of trying to mandate
what they ought to do. Thank
you.
Thunder block
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Whip
So, let me
Let me just ask you a simple
question here looking at the
bill. I want to make sure I'm
reading this correctly.
You're a lot smarter than I am.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Whip.
It says here on line 18, page 1,
section A.
The Director of the Legislative
council service shall ensure
that no later than December 31st
of 2026.
At least 43% of the vehicle
parking spaces in the parking
facility located beneath.
That's the word I have a problem
with.
Beneath the building.
In which the legislators housed
are equipped with an EV charging
station.
Why, why is it only in the nice
Secluded
Warm
secure
Elite
Parking spaces.
For the legislator, legislators
and key staff.
So let me, let me make sure I
have the question right.
Why
Does the legislature expect to
have
Better conditions.
In
The parking judge.
Then the general public does.
Outside of the parking garages,
it's that kind of the, the
question you're asking me,
Chair, Mr. Whip.
Why would you discriminate?
Against all the other parking
spaces that are state property
around the roundhouse.
But you were kind enough to give
the legislature.
Legislators and key staff.
This opportunity.
You know, that's a dang good
question.
You know
Why should I limit it?
Why shouldn't I put
I shouldn't I amend my bill to
include.
All state property in the state
of New Mexico.
At 43%.
And stood at just beneath the
roundhouse.
You know, that might be a good
amendment.
Thank you Mr. propose it.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
um.
You know
I, I appreciate Senator
Townsend's um.
comments and.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, um, you
know, I.
As an American, I believe it's
my choice what kind of car I
want to buy, and quite frankly,
I think I'm not sure if I told
you, but I, I bought a Tesla.
It's delivered in March.
I can't wait.
Let me ask you just a couple of
infrastructure pieces here to
your bill that excludes
everybody else, Mr. Webb.
Except
us
The plugs downstairs currently
or in this bill, are they plugs
that can be used for different
EVs like Senator Stewart has
some type of other car.
I got a Tesla, someone else can
have a different.
Electric vehicle are all these
plugs, do they have a
standardized plugging station
that would charge all cars.
In this bill
Um
Chairman
I did not bring an expert
witness with me today.
Uh, I regret that at this point
in time.
So I, I'm gonna have to plead
stupidity on that particular
question because I don't know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
lastly,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Whip.
We're talking about this
building.
So if I want to.
For some reason, these chairs.
are bad
They're worn out. There's so
many people sit in them 30 days
a year, 60 days a year.
And they get worn out. Do we
have to have a bill?
To say we're gonna replace
chairs in different committee
rooms. Do we need that, Mr. Mr.
Whip, is that, would that be
appropriate for a bill?
the facility.
chair
Mr Chasen block, I believe
that's the.
Capital
Planning commission.
That I've been lobbying to get
on to.
To, to take care of the
infrastructure of the
State capital building. Thank
you, Mr. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, so.
Would, would this not
under that
Capital thing you just
mentioned, Mr. Whip.
Well, there's a good possibility
this is plumb out of order, all
right? Yes, I'm, I'm sorry I
couldn't hear you
first Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
uh, it's a good possibility this
bill is completely out of order.
It should be done by the capital
Planning Commission, but just
saying.
That, uh, it's your prerogative.
To vote up or down on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Webb. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, so.
I, I guess if
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Mr.
Whip, if you've been lobbying to
get on this particular
commission.
What type of projects are on
that infrastructure because
we're talking about
infrastructure for the building
here.
Are there, are you aware of
other infrastructure projects
that are on that commission that
are not bills.
Well, I know that, uh, Mr. Chair
and Madam Chair and, and Mr.
Senator Rock and
Committee, the biggest uh
Project
That is being talked about today
and that
Commission
Is a new
Executive office building.
That is being held up right now.
Because we've got
To conceit that's in the uh
realm.
Of the city of Santa Fe, saying
that they are
Historical sites and
In order to build the planned
building that we're talking
about.
We need to
Do away with those two casitas.
So, and
Why I bring this up is
There's an a by the executive
for 150 million to move forward
with that project, but we've got
about
84, 85 million set in a fund
right now.
That is completely blocked by
negotiation.
To
The city of Santa Fe and the
General Services Department
comes to me and says, 00, no,
no.
We need an extra 150 because I
need to let a contract because
if I ever start, I don't want to
stop.
But the problem with that is,
Senator Block and I'm getting a
little long winded here. I
apologize, but the problem with
that is,
Uh, when we change
administrations,
The whole plan may change.
So, so
I'm kind of in the camp of not
committing another 150 million
right now.
On that, because
I want to see
Another year down the road,
whether they get, they win the
fight.
With the serious.
Thank you, Mr. Webb. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And Madam Chair,
uh, since, uh, the whip doesn't
have an expert witness with him.
When I read the title of the
bill on 9/11 relating to the
legislature requiring the
installation of electric vehicle
charging stations.
I, I don't know. I generally
don't know what the rules are on
facility improvement if it has
to be a bill because it reaches
a certain threshold of dollars,
so it has to be a bill.
But I mean, if we're going to be
installing.
If this said relating to the
legislature requiring the
installation of
Oh,
You know, monitors.
300 inch monitors in the
chambers or.
New computer stations in the
offices, would we still have a
bill for that, or would it not
be covered under some facility
infrastructure budget line item.
I don't know, but I'll tell you,
uh, Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
Mr. Whip is.
For you to leave out in
discriminate.
All the other people.
Outside the building.
On this
Um, I, I, that's one reason or
two, I just, I can't support it.
Um, because you're just only
Doing this for us.
And um
I appreciate you being conscious
about, you know, trying to take
care of your fellow legislators
and staff.
But um
I
I, I, I think there's too many
questions here. We don't have a
witness to answer some of these
infrastructure pieces on the
thresholds and the rules, so,
um.
Mr. Whip, I thank you for your
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Stewart.
Um, I've moved the table.
That's a non-debatable motion,
uh, let me ask this, is there
any opposition to that motion.
I don't like. All right, let's
go ahead and do it, well, let's
go ahead and do a roll call
on the motion to table, uh,
Senator,
Senator Bergman, yes.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly.
Go into
Senator Gallegos. Oh man.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Towns
quite low.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig. Yes, and with that
the bill is table of Senator
Brantly to explain our vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator
Woods, you're a man of few but
meaningful words and in cowboy
idioms.
What, what is the expression,
what's good for the goose is
good for the gander me.
Maybe you better say that one
more time for the goose is often
good for the gander, meaning
that we should probably treat
situations and people fairly
correctly, including good ideas
and bad ideas. So we received
your point well taken. Thank
you, Mr. uh.
Thank you, Senator. I am
dismissed you are, you are.
Thank you for, for spend time
with us. We're. Thank you. We're
grabbing Senator Cervantes, and
then we will
You, you, you have a better
crowd than Senator Woods did,
and it was just security,
um say you look better.
All right,
I of the justice component
because I thought that gave us
much greater scope of the issues
that were actually before us in
that committee, and they, they
oftentimes went beyond just
courts and certainly beyond
corrections.
The the history of that interim
committee, I think also probably
originated out of the prison
riot, uh, the infamous state
prison riot where there was a
lot of attention paid to
corrections for a period of
time. But the scope of that
interim committee has changed
quite a bit. So the bill before
you propose is to do a couple of
things. It proposes really just
to simplify the name, I think to
recognize the expanded scope of
what we're dealing with in that
committee, and those of you
again, that are serving there,
that are new to the committee,
Senator Brantly, you know,
there's no, we're dealing with a
lot of different things.
So it's, it's to really expand
on that, on that, uh, title, not
with a real consequential
difference, but the real
consequential part of this bill
is to do two things right now,
that committee is a um not a
standing committee during the
interim. It is, it is a
legislative council create a
committee. I think it should, I
think it deserves because of the
branch of judiciary being a
separate branch of government.
It deserves a permanency, and we
should recognize that 1. And 2,
I think that that committee
really does need to have
subpoena authority, uh, subpoena
authority principally
be able to obtain records and
documents, but also to compel
the attendance of witnesses, and
we watch uh Congress in
Washington DC using that very
effectively, I think, and so I
won't go into the specifics, but
we've seen investigations of
various parts of the executive
branch, and even the judicial
branch in Congress by being able
to subpoena and bring uh people
to compel them to testify.
And so that's the really the
principal authority that I'm
asking for here right now, we
don't have that authority, and
we've had administrations in the
past that I've been, I've been
here for, and we've asked
cabinet secretaries to come to
our committee and they just say
we, we're not coming, right?
And, and what, what do we do at
that point?
In Congress, of course, they
issue a subpoenas and then if
they don't comply with the
subpoena, they go to court and
they get a court order and they
still don't comply, they go to
jail, uh, in, in contempt of
that order. I really do think if
we want to strengthen our
legislature, we talked about
modernizing and
professionalizing ourselves. We
had to take that authority that
Congress has, um, and be able to
bring people when they don't
want to be here, or give us
documents when they don't want
to give them to us. And that's
the principal authority. Right
now, the subpoena authority
resides only with legislative
council, number one. And number
2, the other problem is
The subpoena authority only
exists sometimes by a vote of
the entire chamber. So, for
example, in the past, I've been
asked to chair impeachment
inquiries, and for example, I
was asked to chair the
impeachment of the former PRC
commissioner, many, many of you
all remember the scandal where
he was using his credit card and
selling gas at the gas pump and
so forth. Uh, I was asked to
impeach him, and we couldn't get
any subpoena for documents until
we could get the whole house
together, uh, in a chamber to
get everybody together and vote
on it. And, of course, that's
pretty.
effective and efficient to
expect us to do that during the
interim. So that's really the
purpose and goal behind this
bill, and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator. We didn't
have anyone sign up in support
or opposition on this, members
of the committee.
OK
Townsend.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Just a quick question. If you
have subpoena powers. Does that
also put the risk of those that
are
Under that subpoena.
To be sworn and have perjury
restrictions on them.
Um, Madam said, yes, that could
be the case, so for example, of
an individual is subpoenaed to
appear, um, and they refused to
do so, then they began began a
kind of a cascade of events. So
we would presumably go to court
and ask the court to compel the
subpoena and and at that point
in time, you're right, they
could be put under oath and be
subject to perjury.
Uh, the, um, again, the power
seems very onerous, I think
maybe to the non-lawyers, but
every lawyer in the room here
has that authority. I can issue
a subpoena this afternoon for a
case that I've got, because
we're entrusted as officers of
the court, I can subpoena you in
a case of, again, you have a
remedy, you can move to quash
the subpoena and go to a judge
and say, Mr. Cervantes has no
business compelling me to do
anything. I've got nothing to do
with whether he's concerned
about and a judge can be
persuaded there too. So there
are remedies uh for an
individual who's subject to a
subpoena, but
That usually means having a
judge hear both sides
requirements in the legislatures
might be a big beneficial.
Oh, addition to the legislature,
so, madam chair, uh, senator,
thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Bergman is followed
by Senator Stewart. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Just a quick
question. I'm just wondering why
you arrived on the composition
of 8 members.
Um, Madam Chair, and Senator,
again, whenever we create boards
and commissions, there's always
some level of.
Of, uh, reliance on what we've
done in the past. So we have
some boards that I think are way
too big, I have, we have some
boards that I think are way too
small. And this is like a little
bit like Goldilocks, you know,
you're trying to find it just
right, and, and the goal here is
also to try and assure that in
the number, there's an
opportunity for the minority
party to be represented on, on
any endeavor, um, and the
majority as well too, and that
we have equal appointments that
make some sense uh from both
sides and it's a fair
reflection. So the the the the
this kind of authority does not
become abused, really, that's
The idea behind that is to
spread that out a little.
OK, thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I appreciate this. I want to
support it. Um, I'm going to
support it, but I have a
suggestion.
And that is when you have 8
members, and it's
proportionality. It's 6
Democrats and 2 Republicans.
That seems a little short on the
minority. If you did 10.
You would have 6 Democrats and 4
Republicans, which I think is
better.
Uh, so, uh, you could certainly
make that amendment in the next
committee if this gets out.
Um, I, I appreciate the smaller
number because some of these
bigger committees can move and
cannot do anything.
But the smaller you make it,
unless it's truly proportional.
Uh, so it's just a suggestion.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
And you wanna make that
amendment here, I'll make that
commitment to you. I think
that's a good amendment. You,
you uniquely as the present
Senate know what it is to track
with these committees together.
I remember working with Senator
Pain when she was president
looking at the board, what's
called the board, you all would
find this fascinating, there's
little pieces with your names on
them and they're moving them
around in the back room, trying
to, and it's really hard. It's
a really hard job to get it all
balanced out and to be fair and
consider that. So I, I think
that's a good amendment and I,
I've Madam President, and I've,
uh, again chaired this in the
past, and I think that's, I want
this to be a robust committee. I
really do, and I think it
deserves to be given the
increased role we're seeing
today, we're going to debate on
the floor competency and um
clearly the court's role in
competence and behavior health.
We've done that with the
behavioral health we're bringing
the court in a very robust role,
frankly, in terms of behavioral
health. And so, we're gonna have
to start looking.
their budget, uh, their
staffing, and that oversight of
of us of that separate branch of
government, I think becomes more
important.
So, Madam Chair, uh, I move that
we amend page one of Senate Bill
456 on my 23 strike 8 and the
certaint in lieu thereof. 10
online 24.
Strike the number 4 and insert 5
online 25, strike the word for
and in cert 5.
Alright, is there any debate on
that amendment, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator Stewart. I, I
really like that idea, um.
You, you mentioned earlier about
a large group having some some
issues if we kept it at 8 and
you still had a difference of
53.
We might be able to get a little
bit more done with that, would
that be something, uh, you
would, um,
Favor, if not, why?
So, uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, it doesn't work 53, got
the same amount from each.
Chamber
So if you have only 4 from each
chamber.
With the proportionality, it's 3
Ds to 1 R.
If you've got 5, it's 3 D's to 2
R's, a smaller it gets, the
weirder the proportionality
gets, so you can't do 5 and 3,
it doesn't work like that. You
gotta have the same number from
each chamber to get the
proportionality.
Thank, thank you, uh, Senator
Stewart, Madam Chair, I
I, I understand the math,
unfortunately all too well.
But I was looking at um.
If we had 4 and 4.
And you would have a, you would
have a different amount of
senators and reps, we have more
reps, I would be inclined to
accept, you know, um.
5 reps and 3 senators, but when
it comes to.
You could take the
proportionality out of here and
what I'm trying to get at is I
think a smaller number.
Is a lot more efficient and
better than than a group of 10,
I'm willing to accept.
55 Dems and 3 Republicans, um,
and getting rid of the, the
proportionality to make that
amendment, uh, cause I, I'm not,
I mean, I don't know what my
other.
fellow senators think about
The senators having less members
on this.
than the Republicans, I'm seeing
a shaking no from the chair, but
I was just trying to keep it a
smaller number still a margin of
2.
Um, and, and go from there.
Thank you.
All right. Any other, any
further debate on the amendment?
I'm sure I'll know that those
notes come from a former county
commissioner, uh, and I was a
county commissioner too. It's
really nice to be on a board of
5, right when you're county
commissioner, it's pretty
efficient, but here I see the
issue, and I hope you do too,
Senator, that, that the what the
president of the Senate is
talking about is we're gonna
have equal numbers from the
House and the Senate.
And so if it's 8, you're gonna
have 4 and 4 from each chamber,
and you're not going to have the
house put two Republicans and 2
Democrats, or the Senate 2
Democrats and 2 Republicans,
they won't do that. So it'll be
a 3 and 1 of each chamber, and
if you put 3 in 1 of each
chamber, you're going to end up
with 6 and 4 and and or, you
know, you're gonna have that
imbalance 5 and 3, or my mouths
off, 5 and 3, so I, I think this
is a better balance when you
kind of play it all out. And I,
and I think that's a better sell
for the House of
Representatives. You're never
going to get the house to agree
to have fewer members on this
committee.
Um, then the Senate and the
Senate's never going to agree to
have fewer members in the house,
and that's the way our system's
supposed to work. We're supposed
to be equal balanced.
All right, uh,
100 on the amendment.
I would just, um, I'm here
bright new ice and say Senator
Stewart, and I agree on this.
Heck, the other day Senator
Scher moved to DuP pass on one
of my bills, he could knock me
over with a feet.
All right. Uh, is there any
objection to adopting that
amendment?
See on that amendment is
adopted. We're back on the bill
as amended.
Du Pas has amended.
OK, center block. Thank you.
Before we do that, uh, I'd just
like to ask Senator Savantis a
couple questions. Um,
So I understand the 10 now, the
proportionate, so that's, that's
taken care of on.
Page 3, starting with section B
on line 2, sir, it's the courts
and Justice Committee has the
power to conduct, well, the
courts and justice committee, is
there going to be additional
staff needed to support the
committee.
Well, Senator, if you look at
the last page of the bill, yes,
I'm right on section 5, page 4.
You'll see the staff is provided
by legislative council service.
They've always staffed this
committee, they do a good job of
it. Uh, we always have more than
adequate staff, uh, to do this,
so I, I'm confident we can do
that the way we always have.
OK. Thank, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yeah, I,
I did read that, but I wasn't
sure if it meant more staff or
the same level.
Increased level of effort with
no staff. Sounds like it's an
increased level of effort with
no additional staff.
Um, I, I don't, I think the
increased effort will be to de
minimis, I mean, we, uh, so
again some of many of us have
served on the interim committee
before. I hope you'll ask to be
on it and I hope everybody here
will ask to be on it. Um, we
have voting members and then we
have non-voting members, of
course, but the Legislative
council, just so you may, you
may or may not know, they staff
all of our interim committees
and so the staff upstairs will
sometimes serve on, uh, staff
for multiple other committees,
and so we'll see some of the
same faces, uh, on our various
interim committees that, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
The online 9 here in regards to
the subpoena, um, same page,
page 3.
On line 9, it says uh.
The committee, the subpoena
shall be made by a sheriff.
Does, is it your intent to
include a deputy in that, or is
there some type of statute where
it has to be the elected
sheriff.
Uh, um, and so that's kind of a
common way to serve a subpoena,
I think law enforcement doing
this is probably the right way
to do it because they're usually
very professionally trained and
there's no suggestion that
they're gonna.
Be improper or, or exceed their
authority in doing so. So this
is what they, they do it
routinely issue subpoenas and I
think that's the right way to do
it. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
better chair, because I, I've
seen deputies, uh, do the
subpoenas in Sandoval County, so
I just wondered why.
That was um left out. I
appreciate the explanation. And
then lastly, um, same page, um,
Line 20 on the subcommittees.
Well, what
What type of subcommittees, how
many uh are we gonna be doing,
what are the names of those
subcommittees?
Um, I'm trying to think of good
examples where we've had
subcommittees, and I know we
have on that interim committee.
I'm trying to remember what they
would have been on that there's
uh Stewart, the president is
nodding her head so she maybe
remembers what one of those
subcommittees may have been,
they came out of the legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee, which is a statutory
committee with a very small
number of people on it. So
they've created a numerous
subcommittees of behavioral
health subcommittee, a
disability.
right subcommittees, so and
those subcommittees.
Uh, uh
worked for several years. We
continued to approve them for a
number of years. Uh, we did in
the last two times, you know,
COVID is just cut down on all of
our work.
Yeah, I met him, uh, chair and
uh president in response to that
the the example, uh, Mr. Laterre
just reminded me of, of this
particular interim committee
it's now known as the court's
Corrections and Justice
Committee, we have had a
subcommittee, they're no longer
working, I think, but they
worked for several years. It
involved, uh, Representative
Chasey and represented Maestas
on a rewriting of the criminal
code and their task was to kind
of go through the entirety of
the criminal code and look at
the things we look at all the
time, which is our, our
penalties in line with.
Uh,
essentially internally
consistent. This is the problem
we run into oftentimes is we, we
have everybody coming in here
saying we need to increase the
penalty for this, that and the
other, and if you let that go
without some thoughtful process,
you end up with penalties for
one crime that are are excessive
of what they should be in
relationship to other crimes,
and so the goal here is to look
at the whole picture and there
was a subcommittee working on
trying to do that right. Thank
you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I yield.
Right, we are on a motion for a
due pass as amended, uh, from
Senator Stewart. Is there any
objection to that motion?
They show us that Esophonics,
voting no, and
1234.
78. And with a 8 yes, you do
pass on. Thank you.
OK.
All right, so nurse Scott, come
on up. Town and I don't know if
you want to go down there with
them.
Right. All right.
We're going on to Senate Bill
423. Uh, this will be our last
bill today.
Go ahead, Senator Scott.
I
Ready when you are.
Now the chair members of this
committee are bringing.
The committee this morning.
Senate Bill 423.
This is piece of legislation
dealing with
Legislative approval.
Of agency rules.
Bill does 3 things.
Or any rule that is predicted.
To
Past the state.
A business
Or an individual more than $10
million.
And then there are some other
parameters.
That would
All 5
A rule as a major rule.
Uh, that rule requires
Legislative approval.
Now
If the rule is put forth during
a time period when
Legislature is not in session.
The governor has the authority.
To implement that rule on an
emergency basis where it would
Remain in effect through.
The next
Legislative session.
Finally, the third thing that
the bill does.
His sunset.
In 5 years.
All rules.
That are not enshrined.
In statue
And with that matter chair.
I will stand for questions.
Right, we did not have anyone
sign up and support our
opposition on this, members of
the committee.
Center Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
There she got
Um
How many states?
That you're aware of have some
form of this type of
legislation.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend, I
believe.
I've discovered that in the FIR
and that number is 41.
41 states of 41 legislator
legislatures.
Have thought that this was
A good idea.
Um
In some form or another.
Uh.
got
um,
One of the issues that I know
that you and I've talked about
on this is.
is for the um
Political accountability of
rules.
Because sometimes rules are
Or
viewed by many as being
politically motivated. How do
you believe this rule would
Bring some accountability.
Madam Chair, Senator, what?
And I drove home the need.
For this piece of legislation
and
The ill before this last one
would have been a perfect segue.
Into this conversation.
Is that
We passed or were unable to
pass.
Through this legislature, the
California Clean car 2.
Rules
That were then implemented by
This administration
Which requires
43%.
Of the vehicles sold in the
state.
Bye
I think next year, maybe a year
after.
To be either
Electric
Or plug in electric. Now the
market penetration of these
vehicles today is about 3%.
This rule was passed.
And is currently in force after
2.
He
There was one in Albuquerque.
There was a public hearing in
Santa Fe, and there was a zoom
meeting.
Which left completely out of the
conversation.
The rural communities.
In New Mexico.
Where this mandate.
I looked upon with.
With an extremely
Squinty eye
The folks in my community.
Absolutely do not feel.
It is
is an appropriate mode of
transportation.
And the car dealers.
Who had
Virtually no opportunity.
Or input
Or
Up in arms, if you will.
Because they fear.
This mandate.
Will cause their customers.
You go someplace else.
At this
At this been vetted through the
legislature. I think we would
have had.
Significantly different outcome.
And more importantly,
We would have had
Political
Accountability
Environment Department did this.
Unelected bureaucrats.
That they're not accountable.
To their voters
This bill
Will make us.
Politically accountable.
For the rules.
Which have the force of the law.
That we're forced.
Liver
There's got, I, uh, Madam Chad.
And know you're aware. I don't
know the center Scotts aware
that.
Um
Cervantes that just uh
presented.
has made numerous comments in
Uh
Both conservation.
I think in
right,
conservation predominantly where
He has said that this
legislature had um
Disarmed itself and weakened it
itself by
I, uh, giving away our
authority.
And, and I think that this is.
I think he's exactly right. I
think the legislature has
Given away our authority by
allowing some of these stuff.
Like you just described to
happen.
But I have been a proponent for
And, and I know you stand for it
too, is
Not
What is politically
strategically good today, but
good public policy, whether
Republicans are in charge or
Democrats in charge. What is
good public policy.
And, and, um,
I think what you're, I think
this bill.
That you have brought forward.
tries to substantiate the role
of the legislature.
Um
The strength of the legislature.
Because they'll come a time when
we have
A governor of one party upstairs
and, and um a legislature that
has the majority of the opposing
party, and what you want is
Yeah
The legislature, and I've said
this to
A previous governor didn't go
over real good, but legislature,
you know, governors come and go
and legislators live forever.
Legislatures live forever, and
what I mean is that that role of
The governor is, is, is a 4-year
term.
And, and that comes and goes,
but
The the power of the legislature
is, is equal to the power of the
courts, and we shouldn't be
giving it away. So I, I, um.
I think the bill of the that you
presented and I signed on to is
a is a good deal. I think it
meets the needs of the people of
the Mexico.
41 states do it in some form.
Um
The ethics committee, uh, I see
says it's unconstitutional and
And uh
That, uh
I don't believe they're right.
I think, I think it's wrong, and
I think it would be wise to
incorporate some form of this in
our, in our body. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next, I have Senator
Bergmans.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, and thank you,
Senator Townsend for raising
that point. I just wanted to
give you an opportunity to
address the
The mentions in the FIR of the
unconstitutionality of this
idea.
I brought my constitution with
me and studied Article 5,
Section 1.
At some length this morning.
And it appears to me that
That particularly just
referencing that section,
calling it unconstitutional.
It's quite a reach.
And
The fact that
At 41 states have done this.
With
I think somewhere around 30 of
those.
Either
Oh
Taken these rules.
Into statute.
Or
Approving them by resolution.
Tells us that we're not plowing.
Any significant new ground here.
This is
Something that most
Half an opportunity to uh most
legislators, legislatures have
an opportunity.
Thank you for that response. I'm
also curious if the.
to mention in the FIR is
included in
House Bill 2.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
cannot answer that question, but
I. OK, thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, uh, thank you for uh the
information about, you know,
really the, why you did this,
uh, the clean car fuels.
Uh
What I want to say is that it,
it's just too broad and there's
too much of an overreach. If you
look at your definition on page
13.
Uh, where
The annual effect is 10 $10
million or more.
Uh
That's all the education rules.
Every rule we have in education
is attached to a huge amount.
Uh, it's a, a billion dollar
industry education.
So, I, I don't see how this
could actually work. Uh.
You know, I used to pass like
3-page education bills, and out
of that I'd get 25 pages of
rules. I mean, we have rules for
everything. Um, but if you're,
if you're gonna
Stick with this definition.
You've just captured way too
much.
Um
So, I, I don't see how this
could work on education,
especially, you know, 5 years
the rule goes away. I mean, that
makes no sense uh for education
in particular, I'm not talking
about clean car standards which
You know, you, you brought your,
your issue around that. I'm just
saying that you, this is a huge
broad overreach and covers every
aspect of what we do, and it
just won't work.
I would submit that.
The rules that remain relevant.
Even though they were passed
many years ago.
Will
Sail through
The review process.
Those that do not remain
relevant where there are
Questions from
Either side of the aisle as to
Whether they have outlived their
usefulness.
Those rules, I think.
Will
Get the attention.
Yeah.
That they, that they would
rightfully deserve.
And I'm sure you're having the
legislative finance Committee,
be the one that does all this
review of rules.
Madam Chair, I too was surprised
at the fact that LFC only in
their
In their analysis only required
2 staff attorneys.
To stay on top of this. I
thought the number would be
higher.
Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Senator Bradley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think you're gonna have a
because of the the
constitutional issues that are
brought up in, in this, I think
you're gonna have a hard time.
This is no surprise to you
getting out of this committee,
but I very much appreciate the
messaging of that, and that is
that the legislator often
relinquishes our authority over
to bureaucrats, the same
bureaucrats I know that.
that wrote this, you don't have
to look any further than the 180
day school school rule, right?
That it was not the intent of
the legislator, PED took it upon
themselves to create rule, and
it was overturned in court. What
a process, but I, I, I will say
that um I often think that these
agencies undermine.
The legislators quite often, and
I would say moving forward that,
that perhaps we need to make a
commitment as a legislative body
is to hold agencies more
accountable when they do that
because the, the message of what
you're bringing forward is loud
and clear, and that is that a
lot of the decision making that
happens, it has such a direct
impact on New Mexicans are not
done by the legislator, but the
bureaucrats instead that are
running these agencies. And so I
hear it loud and clear, thanks
for, thank you for bringing that
message.
OK
All right, I don't have anyone
else on my list.
So Senator
Uh,
There are 4 states who have
adopted.
It's kind of an approach, not
41.
Uh, there's a number of states
where it has been introduced a
number of states where that
legislation has been killed.
Um, but only
Let's see, Kansas, Indiana,
Wisconsin, and Florida.
That's, um,
And uh I and this is, this is an
Alec bill.
Um, so I'm not sure.
Where the, the 41.
Number came from, but, but I
think it might be taking a
liberal interpretation of, uh,
of legislative oversight over
agency rules to get to 41 there
you to the FIR.
Second paragraph under
significant issues.
And that's where that number
came up.
Mm. Wow, senator, uh, you know,
I've had a lot of FIR concerns
this session, and they're
definitely not getting resolved
by this. That was about a 3
minute Google I did to find
that, um.
Who is writing our FIRs. So, um,
I think this is
unconstitutional.
You are.
We are, we are co-equal
branches, but you are now
saying, giving the legislature,
uh, explicit authority over
agency over agency rulemaking.
Uh, you are giving the governor,
uh, explicit authority over
independence executive agencies
that she does not
constitutionally have that
authority over.
Um, there's a real separation of
powers issue here, uh, and one
that creates more bureaucracy.
Not less. Um, so I, I feel that
I often hear from from our my
colleagues on, on the right side
of the table.
We need, we, we need less
bureaucracy. We need less
government, and this would would
create more, which I don't think
is, is your intention, um, but,
but I think it would be the
effect. Um,
Some of the language in here.
I'm looking at
Where is it? Page 6.
This is one of this is talking
about what a major rule is.
And you know, you list 4 things,
and number 4, which starts on
line 18 on page 6.
Significant changes in social or
cultural relations among
citizens.
Including significant impact on
religions and ethnic, racial or
gender populations.
Who
makes that determination. That
is, that is so vague.
Um
The relations be among citizens,
I mean, that is.
That that went to court. I think
that would be, be stricken for
vagueness. Um,
I think this whole thing would
be stricken.
As unconstitutional.
But I, but it also in, in
looking at on that same page on
6.
You're looking at just the
costs.
Um
And there's no consideration of
the benefit. We do cost benefit
analysis here. Uh, if you look
only at cost. So, so Senator
Stewart was talking about the
fact that all every education
rule is going to
To exceed these limits.
Automatically, and there's no
consideration whatsoever.
For the benefit.
That they are providing to the
students of New Mexico, um, cost
alone is not
Shouldn't be, shouldn't be the
only consideration we need to
look at.
The impact
Of what it's doing, not just the
cost of it. Um, but, but
overall,
I think you have an unsolvable.
constitutional issue here.
Um, which I
I realize and
In Kansas, Indiana and Wisconsin
and Florida.
They might not think so. I'll
note that uh this was vetoed in
both Kansas and Florida, and
then there was a veto override.
I in both those states.
Um
Uh, one of the only two both
Kansas and Indiana, this was
just last year that they have
adopted it, uh.
So I don't know what challenges
will be brought and I and I
don't know what their state
constitutions say.
But I think under our
Constitution.
This is
And, and even not just
specifically our constitution
under just the concept of
separation of powers.
This, this violates.
The, the core tenet of, of
separation of powers. Um, so I,
I appreciate the.
The intent behind it, and I
appreciate every intent,
everything that is looking at
empowering our legislature. I
am, I am usually a huge fan of,
uh, I think.
Our power, our legislature, we
in our three legged stool, uh,
here in New Mexico, um, the
legislative leg is, is cut off
halfway. Uh, we do, we are, we
are under empowered, and we have
overemppowered our other
branches as a result and, and
every time we are last in
something, uh, I think, well,
that's because only two of our
branches of government are
operating as they should be, uh,
and the branch that is
responsible for essential
oversight, uh,
As has never been
professionalized in a way that
would allow it to do that job,
that its job. So I, I definitely
appreciate your
Your intent of, of making us,
uh, of, of making our branch, at
least as strong as the others.
But I, but I think you have
unsolvable constitutional issues
here that, that don't allow this
to be the approach that, that we
can take.
Oh go ahead. If we look on page
4.
Evaluation clearly requires
costs and benefits associated
with the rule.
Madam Chair.
We have
Four levels of public policy.
Starting with the Constitution.
Then we moved to statute or
laws.
And we moved to rules.
Then we moved from there to
executive orders.
Now
Those rules.
That are
Developed
By agencies.
Sometimes with very, very
limited input.
Carry the force of law.
So what this piece of
legislation does.
I recognized that.
An elevate.
That
Review if you will.
To the same level as we would.
With any statue.
And I believe
It
That is exactly the process.
That this legislature is
undergoing at the current time.
This whole session.
It's been about elevating.
The governor's executive orders
and a statute.
Thank you
A thorough hearing.
And wants an active, there are
much, much harder.
To modify
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
just know that, so our, our
state rules Act requires public
hearings on all ruled options.
So there are, there is, there's
an opportunity.
Or people to weigh in on the
rules built into our law, and it
is incumbent upon us to take
advantage of that opportunity.
If we are not.
Participating in those hearings,
if we are not, uh, make voice
Participating in those hearings,
if we are not, uh, make voiceing
Participating in those hearings,
if we are not, uh, make voice
scene, uh, objections and
concerns on rules, then that's
on us.
Uh, but we, we have that, that
possibility. Um, also note that
one of the and this, there was
the, the Chevron doctrine got
struck down at a federal level,
uh, not too long ago, and
With that, with the Chevron
doctrine had said was agencies
have the expertise.
None of us up here, we might be
experts in one or two things,
none of us are experts in
everything. We do not have the
level of expertise that our
agencies have, which is why we
want, when you're working out
the nitty gritty of rules. We
want the experts to be doing
that.
Not us, um, and so this would
take away this would undermine
the agency expertise. This was
would essentially be trying to
do, get rid of Chevron doctrine
on a state level.
Um, right now, that is only true
for for the feds. Uh, but I
think in our state, we there is
value to uh listening to and
honoring the expertise of our
agencies, and if we and and
you're, you're absolutely right,
Senator, that we have a number
of pieces of legislation this
year that are uh seeking to
codify some executive orders,
which tells me we already have
the ability if we, if we want to
to preempt one of those
executive orders or those agency
rules.
Uh, or we want to codify them.
We can already do that.
You just got to bring a bell.
Um
We, we can do that without this,
uh, without requiring it on
every single uh rulemaking or
rule that that happens or that
would meet your, the definition
of a major rule. Senator
Townsend, did you have something
you want to say? Yes, ma'am. Um,
Madam Chair.
Uh
The opposing point of view that
I believe
My constituents have and and um
Some of the others are this is
we're elected by
A
50,000 people in our districts
to come forward and maybe we
don't have the expertise.
I didn't have the expertise on
the CYFD bill.
Exactly a while ago, I think
many others may not, as well,
but we are elected to come up
here and jointly review those.
And then vote our constituents.
Position on those bills.
I think saying that we should
Um
Respect
An agency.
Particular expertise, that's our
job.
To make sure that when we as a
Especially in this rules
committee, when we
But forth
A person that we have inspected
by as a committee to the Senate
floor to be a
A secretary of a particular
department. That's our job to
make sure, but that doesn't
relieve us of the responsibility
of making sure that what they do
is appropriate.
We don't give our authority to
anyone.
And what Senator Scott has
brought forth is a bill that
allows us the opportunity to
review, not to not to override,
but to review and put in statue
or or verify by by deposing that
particular department to see if
what they're doing is in the
best interest of our
constituents.
I do not believe, and, and I, I
feel pretty strongly about this.
That we should not give that
right to anyone because I, I
honestly believe, and we have
seen it in Washington today. The
worm will turn.
And what is looked at as being
good for one political party
today.
It's going to look like our ox
is being gored tomorrow.
And we should be very careful in
what we do in setting public
policy to make sure that it's
good for the whole, not just for
a political party at a
particular time.
Thank you, ma'am.
bottom of chair, I moved to
table. It's a non-debatable
motion. Let's do a roll call.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly, not a table.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Duha. Yes, with 5 in
favor of bills table. Thank you,
Senator.
Thanks. And uh members just
before we, before we adjourn,
Senator Stewart, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. We are joined today
by Wild France. It's a statewide
organization of our students
that care about wildlife, they
come up almost every session uh
to bring a memorial or a bill,
um, I don't know where
you all are from? Can you tell
us?
All right. And are you at that
one particular school?
What is it?
What is it Monte Vista. All
right, in the middle of
Albuquerque, so I just want to
welcome you. I, I miss doing all
their memorials, I had to let
other people do them, but, and
Sue George is also here as the
fearless leader at UNM.
Thank you, madam chair, Senator
Bergman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just want to quickly say I did
wild bread when I was in
elementary school and middle
school in
In the Edgewood Moriarty School
District, and that's probably
one of the reasons why I'm
sitting here today. So thank you
for what you do.
Thank you all for coming and
visiting us today.
