Senator Gonzales.
Etcetera grex.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Center my Estes here.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator midis.
Center city on this.
Center share.
Senator Shendo.
Etcetera Tommen.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth here Senator
Woods.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given today by chaplain
dippers solution all from
Pledge of allegiance and Spanish
to be led by senator Pete Campos
and the salute to the New Mexico
flag by Senator Diamond.
To be with you this morning I am
delighted to offer a prayer for
each of you and I thank you in
advance for your service to all
love and protection on each of
the servant leaders gathered
here this morning.
Guide them their god with your
sisters across party lines to
make New Mexico a stronger and
better state for all of its
people.
In order to better understand
and work with one another.
Help them to have the courage
and ability to initiate repairs
Give them the grace to forgive
quickly and help these dedicated
leaders to keep the focus Google
elector fully on what is in the
in abundance to in order to do
their jobs especially your love
your peace that passes
understanding your kindness and
joy.
which is truly the land of
enchantment and that you want
the best for our nation just as
you want what is best for all
people of this close.
of the United States of America.
Let's go to senator Peter Wirth
for our first order of business
thank you madam president good
morning to you and to the other
members unanimous consent we go
thank you chaplain Shinn alt for
your words I will assure you
it's our honor and privilege to
have you here as well and you
really highlighted something
days and being able to forgive
quickly is super super important
and I always say to all of all
the members you know trying to
Meaningful to me and I think all
of us so thank you
a couple of things a reminder
about bills Monday is the last
bills is Thursday of next week
February sixteenth so Monday the
thirteenth at five o'clock for
drafting Thursday the sixteenth
for introduction.
halls of history
madam president I would ask
unanimous consent that we remove
Senator Morial seventeen which
is earth citizens day from the
president's table in place on
today's calendar.
Thank you madam president that
will be Senator Rodriguez and
not right away Senator Rodriguez
just a heads up on the Senate
after we have taken the vote on
that our Senate rules committee
should be down shortly there's
three confirmations that we will
conference and cocktail social
at the Santa Fe community
convention center today
conference from seven thirty AM
to five.
invitation and the New Mexico
cannabis chamber of commerce is
hosting a legislative reception
at meow wolf from six o'clock to
nine PM by invitation I know we
Senator Padilla for
announcements and miscellaneous
thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent to excuse
Stefanics until they return to
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered and then present also
asking is consent to introduce
some guests this morning.
actually here with their
superintendent who got it very
early make sure that they were
all here and and was hoping to
put some ties on and this and
that they just look fabulous
each high school in the district
they meet monthly with the
superintendent APS board of
education to advise them on
issues impacting the district
from calendar changes to the
year I'd like you to in the body
to help me recognize from la
Cueva high school Erica ho if
you want to call your name if
you'll please stand Eldorado
high school Marcus Stewart
thank.
president Cibola high school
Victoria about LA.
Highland high school hi to
Martinez also from highland high
school as I am on this.
the chamber to please help me
welcome the student APS student
by three council members.
of the body Senate finance staff
is kind of back here in the back
row is moving around the room
with the questions if you have
questions on their capital they
stayed up to about one in the
aware agent Adrian make maybe
guys could raise your hand so we
know Phelps is over there I
think this can raise your hand
is as we move through the room
and.
I'm sorry I junior I'm sorry
it's on junior
things are right we don't want
any vetoes are going to make
sure that money goes where it
needs to be in goes correctly
and we're working with DFA to
help us make sure that happens
so thank you madam president
David guy egos and a bill part
except for the purpose of call.
Seeing no objection is so
ordered.
Other announcements
she had me for a P. psychology a
few years ago she now goes to
New Mexico State University
where she's majoring in
communication disorders she is
here and doing great things in
this plan for graduate school to
begin that I think next fall is
that right so if you'll help me
welcoming Soviet so for the
Seeing none will go back to
center Peter Wirth.
I thank you madam president so
just to give the members a sense
we're gonna do the memorial
Senator Duhigg slash Lopez and
we'll get to that after we get
confirmations down so with that
madam president unanimous
unanimous consent we go that our
business third reading of
order of Business third reading
of legislation Senator Rodriguez
thank you madam and I move that
Senate memorial number seventeen
declares February eighth twenty
twenty three IST earth citizens
day in the Senate of the state
of New Mexico the earth citizens
movement was created to promote
was begun by the founder of
brain education a body and mind
practice that promotes mindful
living natural health in human
Senate memorial seventeen a
memorial declaring February
eighth twenty twenty three earth
citizens date in the Senate
whereas everyone is living on
this earth and thus everyone is
earth is facing challenges like
never before including global
warming pollution public health
epidemics and toxicity and we're
just changing this trajectory
cannot be done without changing
in consciousness begins with a
widening of perspective and an
acceptance of earth citizenship
as a shared identity and finding
common ground to work together
and whereas the earth citizen
people in the spirit of birth
citizenship and whereas one
hundred million earth citizens
comprising approximately one
percent of the US population
sustainable lives inspiring a
ground swell of others to do the
same now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
shape hope and coexistence and
to be it further resolved that
this declaration demonstrates
New Mexico's leadership and
commitment to sustainability and
together with open hearts beyond
the borders of nation or
ideology and be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to the
founder and president of the
Morales president Jerry Delon
chief clerk New Mexico state
Senate.
Senator Rodriguez thank you
madam president and thank you to
there is and how much peace we
can have in working together and
prosperity this is really where
it's at when we put everything
co existence in peace and this
one earth that we all stand on
today and and hopefully continue
to preserve and protect that's
what this is about madam
to amplify the super important
memorial madam president will
the gentle lady my the sponsor
from Santa Fe County please feel
for questioning COVID.
messages for the session and
people are busy doing other
things and we're we're busy
doing lots of things here.
But you know nothing I know we
share the belief that.
we can have this public
servants.
Is to preserve our vulnerable
ecosystems and to pass on to
future generations that which we
And and unfortunately with what
we have right now with climate
change what we have with the
species collapse that we see
happening in biodiversity
collapse.
actions we can take to preserve
our planet for future
generations are wildlife do you
know madam secretary Senator New
most diverse bird species and
the top five for plant species.
And yet we have a department
that we manage them like an
eighteenth century resource.
issues there's so many issues
the plastics problem that we
face of contamination so we have
a great bill to.
To help cut down on plastic
because what we do here today
and everything we do will have a
long lasting amplification into
the future so thank you again
for your always being in line
was really important to thank
you madam president Texan thank
you next to a debater common as
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much madam
senator Ortiz is not taking the
time to care for Mother Earth
and to bring legislation of some
kind some sort whether it's a
memorial or a piece of
legislation that's focused on
Thank you any other a debater
comments.
I see none Senator Rodriguez to
close thank you madam president
So we aren't unanimous consent
to the forty three if we can
build on this please.
All right well let's hope that
Senator Rodriguez wanted to move
for the show of hands thank you
madam president yes I move that
of hands right senators who are
on final passage of Senate
memorial seventeen to your seats
please if you do not wish to
vote for the memorial please
I the twenty nine in the
affirmative one of the negative
Senate memorial seventeen has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Rodriguez and then I'll go back
come right back to Senator
Brandt explained his vote thank
you madam president and and
You know the fact of the matter
is that that scripture.
good stewards so that part I
agree with and but I think
there's a line that we have been
crossing.
I think that we have gotten to
to protect what god has created.
And make sure the the the the
earth continues.
And that we are not part of the
this memorial when I cross that
line thank you members thank you
back to Senator Rodriguez to
introduce our guests thank you
thank you then we've got income
coal and as I mention your name
please stand up thank you all in
that Kastoria.
In gene Porteous where there we
Thank you madam president
members of the Senate thank you
senator Senator Peter Wirth I
thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go back to
time.
Senator Baca.
Thank you madam chair.
Pleasure to have you presiding
noble she's a nineteen year
veterans teacher with a master's
in biochemistry biology and
education please stand as I
introduce you up in the gallery.
She finds a way to make a
County she's been instrumental
in garnering support for stem in
the of in in large amounts of
requests and and just for
research she's also CPT of our
city's golf team for Los Lunas
high school employees on the sun
country junior PGA tournaments
and has been awarded many grants
research student council in
drama club at the school outside
the school she's involved in a
K. Kharadi part of the girl
scouts and also enjoys volley
environmental community and to
tackle environmental concerns
and global patterns Porter
hassle he's a ninth grader he's
also with this he's involved in
science challenges and spelling
bees Porter was part of the team
that won five thousand dollars
and twenty twenty two for the
governor stem challenge this
madam chair what we're gonna do
is to the committee report from
the rules committee on the three
confirmations of just just those
Canadian reports then we'll do
Madam president your rules
committee has under
consideration Senate executive
letter number twenty five dated
January twelfth twenty twenty
three and what's the governor
three and expiring December
thirty first twenty twenty eight
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment respectfully
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports.
a term commencing on January
first twenty twenty three and
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty six your committee
recommends that the Senate
Frederick Ellis and junior as a
member of the public regulation
commission for a term commencing
on January tenth twenty twenty
three and expiring December
hear chairwoman Senator two
madam president I move the
committee reports were adoption
of committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go to that or business
confirmations and I would be
credentials of Joseph o'connell
who has been appointed to the
public regulations commission I
now yield to Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo thank you madam
confirm the appointment of
Patrick J. o'connell to the
public regulation commission.
Senator Shendo to debate the
confirmation of madam president
The utilities gas water and
wastewater utility so area he's
a graduate of the university
Mexico college of engineering.
PNM with public service company
as well as the gas as well as
the waste water for the city of
a song with a crystal water
from the City of Albuquerque
public works I came to work the
University of New Mexico and a
college of engineering two
months after Pat graduated but
when I when I met that years
I present Mr paddock on to the
Senate for confirmation thank
you senator is there debate on
the contrary.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
we've all received I think lots
of communications indicating
that we should oppose them
because there's a conflict of
interest because he worked for
PNM.
working on both sides of the
issue and so I really think that
that there's no conflict of
interest we thoroughly
questioned him about that this
morning in our hearing.
it's clear that his ethics will
not permit him to enter into a
situation where he violates the
public trust in this regard I
think I think everybody was very
impressed with this presentation
senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president I also rise and
support
you know I think some of the
criticism has been really unfair
thing he's someone who
understands what the PRC does
and so you know it just it felt
like it was almost getting
the conflict of interests issue
I thought a lot about you know
we appoint a lot of judges we
appoint Supreme Court justices
you know all of us as lawyers
and weigh the issues I think we
have someone who is extremely
qualified here who will serve
well and so I am very happy to
stand up and support thank you
and I'll just speak on all three
of real quick I appreciated the
the the candor with which the
answer the questions as we went
the end of the conferees I felt
like all of those holes would
fit been filled in all of the
boxes have been checked I think
we have a all right well rounded
Commission here that that has
president they will will set a
new mark for the state on how we
distribute distribute our energy
entity it here to the word of
law thank you madam chair thank
on on how a lot of this went
down but we what the result was
we ended up with three very well
qualified people to sit on the
board and there are gonna be
well and what's the measure of a
person is how they handle them
and and I think Miss conferee
and his openness coming forward
and just putting it all out is
exactly what we need to see more
free seeing none Senator Shendo
to close.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that the rule has
been called and all those
present voting the firm except
By a vote of thirty one in the
affirmative three and the naked
of the appointment of Patrick
Joseph o'connell at to the
confirmed by the Senate.
Thank you madam president and
I'd like to know us Mr panicle
o'connell to stand to be
reckoned by the Senate
graduations.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Gabriel Aguilera who has been
appointed to the public
January twelfth twenty twenty
three I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm appointment again
give a Gabriel Aguilar to the
public creation public
regulation commission.
these are all really good PRC
commissioners when we had doubt
about what was gonna happen I
think that the gentleman and
while I'm doing this amended all
want stepped up to the plate and
they're gonna work hard with
that man present at one
introduced Mr Gabriel Aguilar to
the public right regulation
commission he grew up and down
the Ana County and I was raised
He has fifteen years of
regulatory experience with the
federal energy regulatory
commission in Washington DC
which worries moving from most
of us experience is on Western
for also as management skills
and leadership experience as a
regulatory agency and knows what
it takes to hire and develop and
train reasonable regulators
said told me cannot wait to move
his family to New Mexico but
given his qualifications I'm
honored present this honoree
madam chair and I know his wife
and children were trying to
taking care of the kids and
working which is very hard when
when we leave our families and
and go off to pursue other
careers he is planning on buying
a house in New Mexico and that
Senator Michael Padilla I thank
you very much madam president
want to thank senator Munoz for
bringing this a concrete to the
on their agenda for review and
this and that and primarily as
you know madam president related
to telecommunications leading
into broadband and all that
other stuff and I will say that
make huge contributions in in
the areas of telecommunications
for state and which leads as we
all know madam president to
economic development and many
other things thank you.
and as I said earlier I mean
these are three great gentleman
that the resume speak for
themselves they committed their
life to what they believed in
what they they let him down that
complete bio and it was like a
two minute by a reading and I do
apologize to him with that
settlement present ask the
Senate do by care confirm the
appointment of Gabriel thank you
raise your hands if you wish to
vote no.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative zero in the negative
the appointment of Gabriel
thousand twenty six.
Has been duly confirmed by the
Senate.
Thank you madam president with
Senator had a meal madam
president I hereby submit the
credentials of James F. Allison
Representative isn't exactly
message twenty five dated
January twelfth of this year I
move that the Senate do I
confirm the appointment of Mr
interesting Mr Ellison has a
degree get this in physics and
political science at Clemson go
Tigers right master's degrees
affirmative to approve his
nomination.
Is there debate on this
conferees.
consent that the record is show
that the roll then called and
all those present or the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senator is we are voting on the
By a vote of thirty two in the
three and expiring December
thirty one twenty twenty four
has been duly confirmed by the
Senate Senator Schmedes.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
one more committee report from
the Senate rules committee
that's on Senate bill three
sixty four that is Senator
Baca's Bill on the Legislative
business committee reports.
Seeing no objection more on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read madam
president your rules committee
to whom has been referred Senate
Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator think madam
president I move the committee
report on adoption of a
favorable committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we got out of
his mouth was a miscellaneous.
We're back without objection
we're back on that business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you madam
journal show all those present
at this morning session are
present in this afternoon's
session.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Madam president I ask unanimous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent that
we place Senate bill three sixty
four that was just read out on
today's counter.
I think Senator Campos you're
going to be up first we're going
to items one two three and then
we'll do the fourth item that
just got read out of the rules
committee that'll be Senator
Baca so it's Senator Campos
counter seeing no objection
we're on the order of Business
third reading of legislation
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam president I ask
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
There's no objections Senator
Campos to explain the bill thank
you madam president but before
The state no objections just to
define who your experts are
thank you very much madam
president with us today would be
John Romero with the New Mexico
security and I also understand
madam president that
Representative Castellano and
Representative Sanchez who also
represent the area that was
allow Sir composters experts to
come on to the chamber.
Sir Campos to explain the bill
thank you madam president and to
occurred not only throughout the
state but in particularly
through the hermit's peak calf
canyon fires that recently
occurred we know that that was
the largest fire that has
those people that not only were
affected locally but those that
were affected across the state
and frankly across the globe
because all these individuals as
together that's been very
important to us so in essence
the bill's an appropriation of a
hundred million from the general
fund to the local government
permits beacon kaftan fire the
funds would be distributed in
fiscal years twenty three and
twenty four with any remaining
balance reverting to the general
to replace to repair
infrastructure damaged by fire
flooding or the debris flows
the funds to execute a contract
for the loans and that that'll
be limited in the amount of the
approved of federal public
assistance grants and along with
that the loan reimbursement
we definitely have urgent need
within the area that was
adversely affected by the fires
secondly FEMA has already
FEMA resources to become
available secondly as we move
forward with the local
governments as an example when
we start talking about the city
along with that we really not
sure in the long run what
adverse effects this is going to
have to the population of that
area in the motor County area
problem right there is there is
an urgent need for us to replace
electrical poles and electrical
system does need the upgrades
them the opportunity to apply
for those resources and get to
work so that we can help people
to restore their lives.
madam president members of the
Senate or available for
questions thank you.
Thank you senator there is
debate of first will have
Senator Pirtle.
thank you madam president thank
you Senator for bringing this
forward I I know quite a bit
about the the hermit's peak half
canyon fire
subdivisions is there anything
within this legislation for the
the private citizens that state
lost fences had entire herds of
cattle burned up in the fires or
anything in here for them.
south and attempt to take care
of our our animals but along
with that he does have a home in
Las Vegas and he too is affected
by this but madam president
behind that of course is the
anti donation clause thank you
very much madam president.
And thank you madam madam
president senator but it's my
understanding that that these
violate the anti donation clause
madam president senator is that
correct.
Madam president Senator Pirtle
yes you're correct this will not
violate the anti donation clause
feet that are within the purview
is of what they serve.
And madam president and and
senator is there any indication
from the federal government the
responsible
another point well taken the
bottom line with that is the
federal government has
indicated that they were the
with through FEMA that the
resources that
we do need will be coming
directly to the affected area
thank you very much madam
president.
and and summer and and I just
hope that you know I think this
is a great step forward but I'd
I want the body and and those
watching at home to remember
that there was the black fire
moving forward we can remember
those areas as well it's it's a
huge hit not just a personal
property but the the the long
lasting effects of these fires
Thank you senator next to rural
here from Senator Padilla.
I thank you very much madam
president I I rise in support of
Senate bill six I know that
good debate and Senate finance
on this.
End of the discussion that there
are other things that have
happened to New Mexico we need
to continue to have open mind to
all of that and I think that
this is going to help lay the
that they have worked incredibly
hard as well madam president to
get this done for their area
this is a move in the right
direction the area is speaking
to be devastated for decades
to restore what can be restored
right now what we sort through
all of the bigger items thank
you and I fully supported I
don't have any questions for the
sponsor thank you madam
president thank you the next to
devastated at what I County San
Miguel County and there's so
much help that needs to be at
taking into account and done in
those areas when we start
funds.
I want to also talk about the
families of the representative
on the land grants we have been
there for hundreds of years who
have lost ancestral homes and
friend and as a piece of who
they are as people and I just
want to thank the sponsors for
this bill and I stand in strong
support of Senate bill six thank
you madam president.
couple questions maybe you could
answer for me do you know has
the state's Attorney General
taken any action to file a
lawsuit against the federal
All right heels so did you hear
the question I did madam
president and just to let you
know that I'm working very
closely with our Attorney
doing and he's not moving in a
very
rapid way he wants to make sure
that the information is gathered
because definitely he is
representing the state of New
had caused this fire so for that
reason madam president Senator
Brandt he is directly involved
working closely with us and very
Thank you madam president center
I I appreciate the answer I
think it would be great if the
Attorney General would let us
they lit fires left one of them
four months unattended.
Which picked back up in the
management I don't know what is.
We cannot manage the for us you
know we just did a memorial in
here earlier.
About nature.
duty to manage the forest in our
state.
So much so that it is affecting
sued and this one still hasn't.
Taking action against the
federal government who should
have come in immediately.
they should go to jail maybe we
could all go up to the Congress
and rest of all and put him in
jail for their mismanagement and
they're in action the fact of
the matter is they're liable.
We tried to take part of that
back in actually control
ourselves.
New York the push back because
we don't have the ability to
manage it.
just contract with the Mescalero
tried to come in manages.
Right they know how to manage it
and maybe work with some of our
tribes in our state who know how
to actually take care of the
earth.
Miss manage are forced to the
point.
That.
In the twenty years that I've
lived back in New Mexico we've
The need to like still isn't
usable.
These cause damage and the
repercussions are gone in a year
or two.
thirty years to come back those
trees can take up to a hundred
years to go back to the size
they were.
In our answer is just let the
forced over grow and then we'll
burn it down.
So thank you for bringing this
it's absolutely necessary but
it's absolutely necessary for
our tourney General to take the
federal government to court for
debate on the bill senator Peter
Wirth thank you madam president
with the sponsor you'll just for
a couple questions madam
president Majority Leader worth
happened but now we're here and
I just want to say right up
front that I do appreciate the
fact that our federal delegation
our president and our governor.
understand it and I just like
the Senator Campos if you could
kind of let us know.
Why really again just reiterate
why this is necessary because we
have a federal government has
Madam president the majority
leader worth you're correct so
as we've gone through the
travesty and particularly from
aspects of this that have
affected human lives the animals
within the area and of course
the structures that have been
burned or destroyed by by
floods.
adversely and directly affected.
But this is already been several
months down the road and as
we've dealt directly with FEMA.
number one the second aspect of
this and again we applaud the
work of our federal delegation
because through their efforts
working directly through the
have occurred.
Unfortunately those resources
are not available to our
political subdivisions right now
even though they've been
to they have to be addressed
there are so many of these
aspects of just trying to get
people to some level some level
if you will of normalcy.
resources right now are not
directly available if this bill
was to pass as with the
emergency clause and the
governor wants to sign that and
our state government to ensure
that our citizens have been
taken care of to the best of our
ability.
But within that the rationale
services water and sewers
streets our roads.
The basic infrastructure that is
needed so that people can get
back to their properties and
We need this piece of
legislation we have a lot of
help at the federal level we
have a lot of help at the state
level but we don't have the
resources to go to these
cobbles for explaining that and
why this bill is necessary I
just want to reiterate that you
know not only was our governor
there throughout the whole
that's good but they're not here
and so just as you say this is
an important bridge and this is
the state stepping up and I
think that's the reason the
results of of the leadership
from the governor and from you
Senator Campos and the reps
who've worked on this issue and
again I just think this is a
infrastructure so thank you
madam president I certainly
support this effort.
Thank you the there's further
debate Senator creeks.
tragedy of of what exists today
is it's not over for those
people who who were affected by
this fire
It takes a long time to recover
from issues and and instances
like this show I mean I'm
hopeful as we move forward we
can address the front end
somewhat as we're trying to
part of the state to lost as
well so thank you madam
president thank you center.
Thank you senator any other
first during the summer and the
interim we went up there the LFC
did we are in a little fire
committee and and chairman
to commend their combos for
something because he was going
to some health care issues but
he showed up with this at a damn
along with the our center Ben
about one thing.
If you have to leave your house
today.
And take everything in twenty or
thirty minutes and then having
young kids with you.
lifestyle and what's happening
and and that's a critical issue
we have here today I think our
congressional delegation needs
to to push a little harder to
the good Representative in the
center you know for caring about
the district and caring about
people but the number one thing
is this is going to continue and
as we move forward in New Mexico
in the north but they had in the
south and Senator Griggs is
right and and we need to help
everybody New Mexico not just
one wait for that other bill
comes into finance and haven't
they're still other devastation
that we need to handle and in
New Mexico but the best thing we
can do in New Mexico in this
time with this amount of money
is set funds up when this
but we need to look to the
future as this goes for so thank
you madam president.
Thank you any other debate on
our chief executive to the
cabinet secretaries to the
members of the various
departments I want to thank each
and everyone of you because you
have stepped forward for all
it the second part of it is each
one of you has taken an integral
part to ensure whether it be the
fires that we're talking about
now those that have occurred in
talking about what is the
Attorney General going to be
doing and he's looking at these
things very closely so along
with that of the legislation as
we deal with some of the issues
burns so they're going to be
several bills coming up that are
going to deal directly with not
only the probation of how we're
going to move forward but how
we're going to address all of
affected by fires as well we're
gonna work together to ensure
that we have those resources and
in talking to the experts there
indication as this could take at
but we know that's not the case
so we need to prepare New Mexico
for.
Or it not only the future in
terms of everything that we're
dealing with but those future
helped so many people because of
your encouragement and your
whole to move forward and this
is what we're all about so most
of our media or no phone media
Senate bill six with the
emergency clause do now pass and
I asked that the record show
that the rules been called and
all those present voted in the
emergency clause to your seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hands.
returns to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
Saying no objection it is sort.
Senate Senator Campos thank you
very much Mr president along
with that I want to also add
senators to fed ex she's been
very instrumental and everything
that we've done in to each and
bill seventy one Senator Brandt.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that all action
Brandt to explain the bill thank
you madam president and and this
bill I we we passed out of this
chamber unanimously last year
And we do have an amendment that
should be getting passed out
here in just a minute but
literally that's all it does is
make sure that anyone who has a
disability can't be
discriminated against this is
I I refer to this is glorious
law we didn't put in the bill
because Ross was for that kind
of stuff in our bills but she
has a heart defect and several
bill does and so if there's any
questions on.
A suburb Center Pratt want to
move the amendment.
Thank you madam president
Debate on the amendment.
I don't have it well I have a.
President you got it first it is
contacting me last night also
the national down syndrome
society contacted me asking us
to to do this ammendment
everyone gets the memo have the
reader read the amendment
percent.
Can I see not anger yess Sir
show of hands okay thank you
senator Sanchez.
rise in opposition to the
proposed for amendment we we
with this would've been
something good to have consider
the judiciary level and while I
appreciate the Sanchez
commitment to an important issue
injunctive relief shall be given
priority by the court in heard
in an expedited manner that's
what's well but first problem
because very frankly we see
these bills all the time where.
issue within three or five days
it didn't take very long before
you do that upon do that upon do
that embers built where the
court is really forced to of
fail you're more tell the court
function when we tell them they
must have a hearing on a
specific issue and make that a
priority over everything else
and so I think that that's
problematic when we when we do
something like this so this
just says it's given priority by
the court and heard expedited
matters really mean the court
should or should heard any
particular time frame so I I
really don't think that
may award reasonable attorney's
fees and costs for complaining a
violation of the party prevails
this it is compare contribution
what we call the American rural
attorney's fees to a prevailing
party simply because it has a
chilling effect on litigation I
know some may think that that's
of a positive thing but a lot of
what is accomplishing in these
twenty fees again some because
very frankly if you're an
individual who believes you
suffer discrimination and you're
suing a large corporation if you
take the risk that you're going
to get pounded by that
we've adopted what's called the
American rules different English
English role has businesses with
a new the Brits do etcetera I
know you you know you're not
trying to adopt the brit model
that for that mistake and so
what we in the American model we
want to make the courts
accessible to all people not
just those who are wealthy and
runs counter to a lot that those
of us that attorneys are
practicing have to rise in
opposition but want to strongly
support the the goal of this of
this particular bill four voting
for it without the amendment
Seeing no other debate Senator
Brandt close.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body I while I
things that that he's stated
we're just because he's quickly
reading the amendment
this is not the British rule
because this wouldn't rate the
attorney's fees to either party
bringing it and the priority you
know what you think about what
we're talking about here time
out organ donation.
These decisions sometimes have
to save the life and so in any
case in our law where we should
have an expedited process it
should be in the case of a life
originally you know they have
put actually a time frame we did
not do that because we do want
to give some leniency to the
Social incentive grant with the
motion to to pass the amendment
I miss madam president's been
awhile since I've done this on
number one to Senate bill
seventy one
With the emergency clause as
amended do now pass and ask for
a vote by show of hands.
Senator Servan tastes is voting
no Senator Steinborn votes no
no votes no Senator McKenna
folks know Senator Sedillo Lopez
folks know Senator Hickey folks
know senator Wirth boat snow
Senator Shendo votes no senator
rod Regus votes now Senator
Stefanics both so Senator
know Senator Stewart photo.
The sixteen in the affirmative
Thank you madam president and
and I appreciate the the vote by
the members of the body doesn't
hurt the bill so the bill still
very important bill and so I
Seeing no debate Senator Brandt
close.
Madam president I move that
Senate bill seventy one.
With the emergency clause as
voting on Senate bill seventy
one as amended with an emergency
clause to your seats please
raise your hands if you wish to
vote now.
Thirty six in the affirmative is
president thank you members of
the body on behalf of the all
the disabled persons in the
state of New Mexico as I am one
I thank you for this and thank
thirty one Senator Duhigg.
Thank you madam president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing second
Judiciary Committee substitute
Thank you madam president in
twenty twenty this body passed a
bill to create subs federally
subsidized kinship guardianships
Where should in the children's
Cutler and as a result no one
has been able to access those
federal subsidies that that this
around what's called voluntary
placement agreements or VPA is
and changes on the language to
align it with S. PA which was
acknowledge might my co sponsors
on this bill US senator Linda
Lopez I will will yield to her
and and senator Crapo.
this was in response also to try
and assist families who are.
How the state bringing under
their care and they're taking
was intentionally made to but we
proposed what was passed again
was to allow families
To work with the department in
that would help them to support
the child has a voluntary place
agreements and the money's of
course will come through forty
our discussion this afternoon
thank you very much.
Thank you.
US senator Kerr Hemphill.
Thank you madam president I just
piece of legislation and as a
mother of a child who will need
care for the rest of his life
this is incredibly helpful for
individuals with disabilities
senator share Senator share to
move the amendment thank you
madam president I move Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one let me just check to
All right Senator sure to
explain the amendment thank you
madam president so this is this
is an important bill.
But there was a section in there
actually related to or some kind
of relationship that is family
like.
But the definition in this bill
had a had a flaw I believe it's
on intended to what those
Can like.
even recently so that's what
this bill does right thank you a
debate on the amendment first
A seeing no other debate on the
amendment Senator share to close
on the amendment madam president
and senator everybody on the
side of the aisle is wondering
what just happened.
everybody's happy now so with
that I move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
Judiciary Committee committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one and ask unanimous
consent that the record show
slide show hands.
Hi I'm sure this could be a
voice for business implementing
yes.
number one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty one signify by
saying hi.
we are back on debate of the
amended bill is there any
debate.
going to help a lot of people in
New Mexico and I with that I
move that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty one as amended do
Senators we've voting on Senate
Joint Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one as amended
if you wish to vote no please
I the thirty seven in the
you members and thank you
especially Senator share.
Right so I think our next order
of business is Senate.
placing Senate bill three six
four with the emergency clause
on final passage have been taken
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
we talked a little bit during a
announcements the other day
madam chair of where we are
addressing and Roni is opinion
that was issued by the ethics
problems with the original
statue but we made it such that
any money can now comprehend
what we are trying to say madam
madam president and so with that
care of this we're talking a
letter had and I find it ironic
with all the ethical issues and
problems and conflicts of
interest that are in New Mexico
that the ethics commission is
officials are trying to turn it
over to the ethics commission to
do so I I hope that if they have
don't have the time to actually
focus on the ethics issues that
are prevalent The New Mexico on
their scope of power elsewhere I
think when you really need to
consider that as we move forward
with the proposals and I that's
one of the many reasons I'm
standing in support of this
madam president thank you.
feelings about this bill I think
that Senator Ivy Soto made a
really good point the other day
which is our legislative ethics
committee has looked at this for
this this issue came up during a
session so we do have a chance
to fix it but what it does it
come up in April you know we
gonna just stop doing our jobs
and I just wanna flag something
that I think.
Do you know makes me pretty
unhappy which is a tweet the
ethics commission sent out this
morning that said as follows a
legislator should not be able to
this body is demanding payment
for constituent services I mean
there's a point here where basic
common sense needs to be
followed and you know I
have been addressed again you
know we can pass the statute
here to fix this but there's a
side of me that says you know
what's.
I think we were right in the
Senator Baca about that and I
guess you know he and I could
kind of lead the charge here and
and for gasoline what on a
dumpster fire that's been
created over this issue but here
this come talk to us you know
let's figure this out together
issuing an informal one lawyer
inching informal opinion like
this that prevents us from doing
based on where we are right now
in this limbo is what I call
that it is a limbo so again I
just the.
Understand why we're doing this
where you're going and and one
final thing I I'm just there's
apparently a lot of agency
reports coming from the ethics
commission opining that certain
proactive approach causes me
some concern so I just think
that let's let's follow basic
common sense you know we need to
fix this so there's no issue for
Make sure that that we're
helping the ethics commission
focus work needs to be focused
thank you madam president.
Thank you an extra debated
Senator Pirtle and thank you
bill up the stay in your lane
bill and I I think maybe they
could they could learn quite a
bit from from that discussion
they're gonna have this
afternoon but in all seriousness
in in doing so I mean we would
render ourselves even more
ineffective we would we would
basically be
useless to the state and that's
getting paperwork approved or
whatever it is and we're able to
help them do that so that we can
ensure that our state runs
efficiently and it's just very
troubling that one unofficial
opinion could basically
Thank you madam president I just
stand in strong support of this
bill and I'm really grateful
that for the clarification of
thank you next hear from Senator
Kernan.
Thank you madam president and
you know when you think about
this it was during the ethics
and so it's important that we
take those training seriously
I've complained a little bit
about some of them that at the
end of the day that's kind of
where this came up and so I
yield.
The president yield.
Thank you madam president and
senator does this does this also
cover I know we've talked about
about picking up the phone and
calling a department whether to
secretary or staff for someone
and using our terminology this
is a Senator and could you
the term senator when we contact
agencies and and and people that
we reach out to on behalf of our
constituents.
Thank you madam chair and thank
Morris pointed out the indicia
of of of what we give as
legislators so in this that
would mean that it is not
restricted to use really any
as those two elements are met
madam president and senator you
can use any method whether it be
indicating that over the phone
letterhead or otherwise via
email.
use our letter head right now
but we also have to be very
careful about reaching out to
anyone in any department at this
point they know we're Senators
I made about needing help for
constituent and I'm not going to
respond at this point because I
do think it's a little bit risky
and so I'm anxious for this to
get through and I hope I know
we have our ethics training
because things will pop up and
then all of a sudden here we are
thank you.
Thank you next we'll hear from
senator Munoz thank you madam
in a far ethics commission in
this body determines there's an
on ethical issue why would we
not then that and let the state
ethics commission do that and
work that we can do it in our
ethics body will set the rules
and the the ethics commission
will be able to overlooks.
trying to do in this bill is
simply address communications
madam president between
ourselves and state agencies on
behalf of a constituent I think
opinion and many many others
opinion in this room that
opinion that was issued by them
that informal opinion was
actually Roni us and it was just
as stated by my co sponsor the
idea was tossed around just to
basically say you know what
we're going to continue doing
what we've been doing for many
many years which is help the
writing the letters what we have
the authority to say that's the
final determination and and the
ethics commission has no say in
it because of that bill be
amended to say that.
ethics committee within the
Senate and so these are two
different complaint processes
and obviously within this body
we've had no issue above with
Thank you Mr president I guess I
guess we could have been down to
writing up page in the paper so
that the the the people that
constituents we represent and
mean tweets that are apparently
going out.
Thank you madam president.
Thank you so we have to debate
Senator Steinborn then Senator
you madam president Mr leader so
you know I'm a little if I read
the plain language of the bill
H. is it kind of seems to talk
when you read the FIR goes
beyond that and it talks about.
You know as long as it is being
able to represent yourself as a
legislator in support of a
is for a constituent as your
capacity in your capacity as a
legislature so that is found on
things you can indicate to HSD
or otherwise that you are a
state legislature and and that's
you know again that's what most
be a appearance before a
tribunal on behalf of a
constituent in your area it
would be improper and under this
matter on this case that would
be an example of that and that
part is contained in section C.
which is a.
Inapplicable I think to most of
the body but to some people
letter of support for
constituent to a state agency
using your letter had or is that
not an issue here really.
menu are restricted so as long
as you were just doing those two
two things it is permissive
without compensation for the
benefit of constituents in that
I am writing you on behalf of Mr
Mrs constituent.
Okay thank you madam president
thank you later.
I'm sorry I'm looking back at
the section that that Senator
Baca was just looking at and
those two requirements that has
to be without compensation and
for the benefit of a
the amendment or not for me by
Senator Baca because I think it
should be or not and I I
frequently have folks come to me
behalf to a state agency are
nonprofit is not in my district
the people who run it are not my
constituents but it's an issue
that I am very involved in and
and would like to be able to to
have a so first asked for him to
yield thank you madam president
Senator Baca deals.
I yield.
Thank you
thank you madam president thank
you Senator Stewart bringing
that up this is been brought
brought up previously to me
I you know.
is without compensation and for
the benefit of constituent okay
so.
We don't want is doing something
for the benefit of a constituent
for the benefit of the
constituencies been madam
president and senator if you are
doing it on behalf of a
nonprofit or on behalf of really
not a legislators constituents
and so I think it covers it I I
would prefer to stick with this
all I'll leave it to you madam
that our state ethics commission
will also take that same
reasonable reading thank you
that's all I have chair thank
you a Senator run to just.
given that commitment to attend
ethics training and we had a
very extensive presentation on
ethics this is an area where we
need to be cautious because
Senator my nose and I had a
my mind and frankly I think the
better language would be to
delete delete the entire
reference to the benefit of a
constituent I should be able to
represent
that I should need to have to
have a constituent to go to a
state agency I think this will I
should build a city engineer I
think what you're doing is
wrong.
And I shouldn't have to identify
a constituent that I'm
senator and do what I think is
the right thing to do.
And and so I I would have the
members consider that as a
proposed amendment.
But even more challenging here
the attorney general's opinion
with regard to this particular
section in state law.
I'm gonna I'm gonna take a
moment to really notice because
serranos and I brought this with
In the attorney general's
opinion says this is says that
this particular area the law
precludes.
Means it's unlawful precludes a
a director a member of the
legislature.
Hello so I ask you I don't know
many of you all serve on
nonprofit boards.
violation state got conduct act.
And this is the issue the centre
millions and I brought up with
the director of the ethics
commission and that was
consistent with his presentation
any contract with the state or a
state agency.
You have violated this area of
state law you violation the
ethics laws of the state.
should be and or or I should
need to constituent to be able
to advocate for the state agency
thank you madam president.
So Senator Diamond did you want
to debate.
want to say I like the new
photos of the floor leaders.
So does everybody have the
amendment.
Senator Sanchez all right
Senator Ivey Soto to move his
president up till a couple
things with regard to the
section actually we generally
like to express things in the
positive instead of in the
negative and I think it makes it
actually easier particularly for
the lay person to understand.
Except as provided in subsection
C. of the section a legislator
may appear for Representative or
assist another person and a
And so it removes the language
of for the benefit of a
constituent.
It makes clear it's without
fall upon are an attorney or
other professional who is making
that appearance based on
compensation.
So so that it that would be the
Press.
accomplishes what senator do X.
concern with it was Senator font
this and that seems to be a
friendly amendment.
Right any other debate on the
devil's advocate a little bit if
you are a professional and you
appear for state agency now
without any precondition that
you're serving a constituent
correct what this is intended
to.
To protect against is somebody
profiting off of their
legislative title so as long as
they're doing it without
compensation.
billed for that hour that you're
doing it.
I mean so you're not getting
compensated for that hearing but
otherwise you have a client just
playing devil's advocate would
I think I think that would give
rise to an appearance if nothing
else of impropriety and would
come would be covered by other
part parts of the criminal
You know I could be came a
little bit I don't know what the
solution is and I just throw
that out there as.
As a.
Potential you know we're always
I'm sure there's a few words
that could be added that would
clarify it but.
I'll be right there thank you
madam president.
Thing then present so it as a
physician if I have a patient
that comes in and says you're
my.
Senator.
You know and and on the note
from the prior Khamis's make
reference to my legislative
capacity so I knowledge and say
President and on center street
is you would not because because
I'm assuming that you're
constituent is not a state
agency.
Madam president
is the section C. subsection C.
is only referring to my
communication with a state
agency is that correct.
appear for Representative or
system the person or matter
before a state agency.
And then we have the new
language and see.
Which is similar in the lines
this is what it's intended to
deal with that conflict of
interest since we're state
legislators and and madam
president centers committee let
me just hazard.
And and they're also your
patient the building did not a
certain drug.
And they're your patient if
you're trying to get.
If there's a policy issue about
how things are being
interpreted.
Then those committed that that
is separate from from that
patient.
Are there rules properly in
terms the statute.
Then that would be potentially
Senator Griggs committees making
that communication.
would we have any problems with
the doctor patient relationship
if some it let's say the
Certainly madam president
centers committee up so that's
that and and and again that goes
exactly to the the distinction
of would be gradually these M.
D. or senator Gramm committees
talking about a specific patient
would not be talking about
anything that would violate
doctor patient relationship
would be a policy question
that's being implemented.
Couple things I I think we there
were missing something in the
amendment number one the title
line sixteen on page one would
The way that the current laws
drafted in the governmental
conduct act you know as senator
Ives of the was trying to change
it from a negative to a positive
and there's some concern being
just ask Senator autism center
Ivey Soto visit for just a
second because I think we get
this right we need to get it
right we need to get the title
in both we may be able to do in
a simpler way that doesn't raise
puts this out of you just as a
sense of on days and just see if
we can't get a simple way to do
this that accomplishes
everything we need to do would
be good.
So we could madam chair I just
It's just resting place for a
few minutes.
So we should have a new
amendment passed out if everyone
will.
You want.
Madam president I ask I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
to withdraw the previous
president I move senator
enrollment number one.
Senate floor amendment number
one has been moved the reader to
read.
And I'm standing in his place
but by Representative.
Okay Senator Ivy Soto to explain
Senator Cervantes amendment
thank you very much madam
president so so this.
and at the end of that line
strikes line fifteen so that it
just a straight up.
Except as provided in subsection
C. of the sexual legislator
shall not appear for
Representative recessed on the
Right.
And that I'm sorry yes and that
and the time is change we strike
and for the benefit of a
constituent thank you.
Right debate on the amendment.
I see no other debate on the
amendment Senator Ivy Soto to
close on the amendment thank you
madam president madam president
three sixty four with an
emergency clause all those in
favor of the amendment signify
by saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
and also thank you to Senator
Vontaze for his assistance on
this.
All right we are back on debate
of the bill
any further debate on the bill
Thank the members you said you
saw madam madam president of
some of the fine work that we do
in Judiciary happen on the floor
here this was a fast track bill
I also wanted to to think of my
co sponsor for the work he put
in and and attending to this
matter along the way I did not
know about the tweet that came
tweet and I'm offended that the
ethics commission would put
something out like that
insinuating that there is some
corruption when helping a
constituent within this body I
so with that madam president I
move that Senate bill three
sixty four with the emergency
clause do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules be suspended with
the record show that the role
Senate bill three sixty for us
amended with the emergency
clause
if you wish to vote no you must
be at your seat and raise your
hand.
Senate bill three sixty for us
amended with the emergency
clause has duly passed the
Senate Senator Baca.
committee reports will move
seeing no objection were on that
order business committee reports
three to read.
Madam president your Education
Committee to whom has been
committee respectfully submitted
Senator William P. souls
chairman Senator souls thank you
madam president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
Senate bill two twenty seven do
passed and then referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two thirty one to
pass and that's referred to the
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
This post may.
Committee report is adopted and
the journal will reflect that
they are acted upon
individually.
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
eight do pass respectfully
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
read all the committee reports.
business and transportation
committee.
Conservation committees to
measure for Senate bill one
eighty to do pass as amended and
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Well posed may.
Then the report has been adopted
in the journal reflect their act
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted to Senator Shannon D.
motion and that journal reflect
they were acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports Senate bill two fifty
another option of the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those opposing.
The report is adopted nice try.
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
were acted upon individually
this objection the reader to
read all the committee reports.
Senate bill two fifty Senate
bill fifty five do pass and
Senate bill sixty six do passed
as amended and that's referred
to the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
They eyes have a committee
report is adopted in general
reflect their acted upon
individually reader to read
to signing by the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen Senator
cleft R. Pirtle co chairs.
Those opposed nay the eyes have
a committee report is adopted.
I would like to announce to the
body that you're Senate memorial
to has been signed in open
introduction of legislation
without objection we're on
introduction of legislation
reader to read.
Senate bill twelve introduced by
amending certain requirements to
be eligible for the tax credits
amending definitions pursuant to
workforce and vendors and
maintaining sustainability
increasing distributions of
development training funds to
provide training for that
industry creating the film and
read twice by title Sir printed
referred to the tax basis in
transportation tents to finance
Senate bill twelve.
Senate bill three seventy three
introduced by senator guy it
establishing the powers and
duties of that office providing
for the establishment of the
chief child advocates election
committee amending and then
Judiciary tents to finance
Senate bill three seventy three.
Senate bill three seventy four
bill three seventy four have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
introduced by Senator Griggs.
bill three seventy four be
referred to judiciary sense to
finance Senate bill three
seventy four.
period requiring landlords to
maintain evaporative cooling in
good and safe working order
prohibiting owners from
attempting to remove residents
by interfering with air
and public affairs committee
since two Judiciary Senate bill
three seventy five.
Senate bill three seventy six
introduced by Senator Campos and
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Committee sense to finance
Senate bill three seventy six
integrated substance use
disorder programs and clinics
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three seventy seven Senate
bill three seventy seven have
been read twice by title Sir
and activating to severance tax
bonding providing for a minimum
just distribution from the
severance tax bonding fund to
the severance tax permanent fund
committee thanks to finance
Senate bill three seventy eight
Senate bill three seventy nine
introduced by Senator Woods and
act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
seventy nine have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to Senate
health of public affairs
committee thanks to finance
Senate bill three seventy nine
Senate bill three eighty
increasing the maximum Benham
penalty for a violation of water
law providing.
For an annual increase in
penalties for violation of water
law to account for inflation
eighty Senate bill three eighty
one introduced by Senator
Rodriguez and Representative
small and act relating to
severance tax bonds changing the
one pertaining to the bonding
capacity allocation for the New
Mexico housing trust fund
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three eighty one Senate
bill three eighty one have been
read twice by title is for
introduced by senators moon
Jooss and Hickey and act
relating to economic development
making the bioscience
development fund a non reverting
by title is ordered printed
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee thanks to finance
Senate bill three eighty two.
Senate bill three eighty through
history record checks requiring
confidentiality Senate bill
three eighty three.
Senate bill three eighty three
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate Education Committee
to school activities prohibiting
coaches for McCurry students to
play sports at a different
school prohibiting schools from
restricting participation in an
athletic activity when the
student transferred schools but
may only compete the following
semester allowing eighth graders
to play high school sports
without losing a season a season
public affairs committee Senate
bill three eighty four.
Senate bill three eighty five
introduced by senators Ingle
serve on this and Stuart and act
university to support operations
of educational broadcast
television Senate bill three
eighty five Senate bill three
eighty five have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act making appropriation to the
board of regents of the
university Mexico to fund the
medical Spanish education
program at the university of New
Mexico school of medicine
twice by title is ordered
predator referred to the Senate
Education Committee thanks to
Judiciary Senate bill three
eighty six Senate bill three
eighty seven introduced by
a student prohibiting the use of
mechanical chemical or prone
restraints on a student
requiring a written summary of a
review of any use of restraint
thanks to Judiciary Senate bill
three eighty seven Senate bill
three eighty eight introduced by
Senator o'neal and act relating
to children raising the age
twice by title Sir print and
referred to the Senate health.
The public affairs committee
thanks to Judiciary Senate bill
three eighty eight.
tourism department changing the
membership of the sports
advisory committee Senate bill
three eighty nine Senate bill
three eighty nine have been read
twice by title sword printed
introduced by Senator Diamond a
memorial declaring February
fifteenth twenty twenty three
chilly day in the Senate.
Senate memorial thirty four.
memorial thirty four.
Senate memorial thirty five
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
and memorial proclaiming
February twenty seventh twenty
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not referred to
committee placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial thirty five.
plaque in the state capital
presented by the New Mexico
state organization daughters of
the American revolution to
recognize the significance of
the one hundredth anniversary of
House memorial to has been read
twice by title is ordered
referred to the rules committee
fence to Senate health and
public affairs committee.
relating to health coverage and
acting sections of the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico insurance code the health
maintenance organization law in
house bill seventy five house
bill seventy five and then read
twice by title is ordered print
disorder referred to Senate
health of public affairs
Sir Peter Wirth thank you madam
presidents unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection or on no
spend some miscellaneous senator
Wirth thank you madam president
African American we have a joint
session so most likely we will
not do third reading on Friday
so we'll be do some bills
tomorrow but probably not on
Or whom I I don't know.
So so you have to tell so it's
from so we get to that order
business.
Then president unanimous consent
we go about our business
Okay so seeing no objection were
on that brief message from the
house.
Reader to read.
Madam president I'm directed to
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
the journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
objection we are on that order
of Business met announcements
miscellaneous entering us thank
you madam president I want to
make sure we sure everybody will
go up and double check your
will go in full or at about
that's going about two thirty
after right after the floor and
then which Santo Daime and
she introduced a chilling
memorials have a question for do
you know who the chili king in
the chilly queen our New Mexico.
Madam president my best guess
thank you madam president thank
you next for announcements for
messages Senator Pinto.
Thank you madam chair the seven
Indian rural cultural affairs
would ask unanimous consent to
move a committee assignment from
one committee to another.
Okay so tell us what that is and
Last last Friday I guess and if
I had originally asked to go to
Judiciary because there is some
that it be it go to the tax and
business committee for for
examination of that tax credit
feature of the bill and so I
would ask that we moved it from
Right so seeing no objection
we're gonna move Senate bill one
thirteen.
Out of judiciary and go to tax
this is transportation instead
the Senate the Senate health and
public affairs committee meeting
will be at two thirty room two
eleven lengthy agenda however
dinner will be served around
great center Maestas thank thank
you madam chair in your
mailboxes you will see a a flyer
for West Side day tomorrow as
west said the first time brought
up.
Senator do ich Senator Lopez
myself Center masses Senator
o'neill Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Senator by the and Senator pope
and will be having a town hall
here in the Senate floor from
Senator run this.
Thank you madam resumen present
your moment ago there was a
question my sentiment knows
about the chili king or queen
but but I'm we know what we're.
We.
Yeah that's an inside joke.
If there ever was.
of the right pronunciation right
spelling is what we call P. keen
which I hope will are gonna
learn about and so Senator
Diamond rattle more hopeful talk
about should be keen to the team
jalapeno very very hot pepper
and so you know certainly knows
I think we're going to adopt a
new nickname for you was are
calling in Chile became because
Judge of the chili.
Madam president.
Yeah to Senate Judiciary full
meeting at three o'clock this
three o'clock and will be out of
there by at five thirty thank
you madam president I know
better than to turn over the
might consider but I'm done
thank you other announcements
on missile
we hear about this website thank
all members I just want to say
Barton health drop me off a big
box of those at home COVID yes
if anyone wants one there my
office so just come by one of
office just in case no one knows
members I'm gonna get you in
personally but it is one oh nine
right out the store thank you
all right other announcements
and madam lied about me this and
then this both are students of
the master's program which is a
charter school right here in
Santa Fe their dual credit
students not only doing their
and how we shape policy and what
we do is Senators so madam
president and members of the
Senate if you can help me
welcome my two guests today.
present there someone in a black
vehicle parked in there that has
four flat tires in the parking
lot thank you members of.
All right seems like we're
I thank you madam president so
with that said thanks everyone
for a good day of work on the
floor the Senate's thanks to our
