Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Senator my S. here Senator
McKenna.
Senator Mars.
Center to the Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator develop just.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sells.
Senator Wirth.
Senator what.
You do not have a quorum and Mr
president senators we need all
basketball squad also returns to
the chamber.
today by reference to cockroach
to Reno hema springs community
Presbyterian church.
Albuquerque police department
chaplain please remain standing
for the pledge of allegiance to
be that today by Senator crystal
No no.
I would like to begin from the
with the sacred texts from
various scriptures some eighty
founded them let's just pray.
Well great spirit our creator
god we acknowledge your presence
in the midst and ask for your
people with energy.
Intelligence imagination and
love.
For the land that simmers with
We are humbled and grateful holy
one do you have entrusted the
care of this land and its people
them of their common call in the
amendment to a greater unity.
May our prayer for guidance be
more than contemplation in our
hearts and course on the lips
We knew us with the spirit the
state that we may easily bring
all our gifts to strengthen this
community through it our beloved
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business.
Thank you Mr president I good
morning everyone unanimous
consent to go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
for your blessings again for
putting this all in perspective
it is important that we kind of
check in with what we're doing
here and remember why we're
today is early childhood day in
the halls of history we have a
presentation of the national
Blue Ribbon school award
eighties that Senator Woods
president unanimous consent we
remove Senate bill fifty six I'm
sorry Senate memorial fifty six
New Mexico architects state from
the president's table in place
a stable and we placed on
today's calendar Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president I'll be
Senator serve on days when we
get to that point we also have a
certificate of recognition today
are former secretaries here and
so at the right moment we'll
figure out when to when to do
that and it's just a certificate
so it doesn't need to we'll do
that I think once we get done up
Sir Michael for the I thank you
very much Mr president good
morning units consent to allow
cameras inside the Senate
chamber.
See no objections cameras are to
Further announcements Senators.
Senator huh Bill.
Mr president I ask unanimous
Mexico and they were excited to
hear about Senate bill four
which means free breakfast free
lunch and with that market
Montoya and on a stress test
Madam the students I want to
biggest and elisa Martinez so
Mister president if you can help
me welcome my preschoolers their
teachers and parents to the
Senate chamber.
consent to introduce my guest
and no objection proceeds are Mr
president I'd like to introduce
Jonathan Longoria he works for
the UNM college Democrats he's a
hopes to build a large
organization to better inform
students on campus of what's
going on politically in order to
bring about the change in the
state of New Mexico for members
of the chamber if you would
Any further announcement
Senators.
Say no further announcements
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
me and he's also a UNM student
and part of the young Democrats
and we had a fun day yesterday
he's getting to see some pretty
interesting stuff it is been in
members doing this let's give
Mason another round of applause.
Senator Michael thank you very
much Mr president I also would
moderated a debate that I was
panelist on and I was
immediately struck by his grasp
of the issues and and stuff so I
invited him to come up and join
us he's actually had some time
with several of our members
on some issues related to the
bill before comes down here to
the floor and he's been jumped
all over that needs in a
phenomenal job he's been Johnny
on the spot so thank you very
much and and I did mention
We do have further announcement
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
Mr president and I just wanted
to I wasn't going to introduce
Michael Peters and Michael spent
yesterday.
Again going to every single
meeting imaginable he was in the
Senate health and public affairs
state of overwhelm condition but
he's also helping us analyze
bills and one of the things that
the the analyst for a committee
of done is to show him how to do
my shadow from the college dems
Michael Peters.
Any further announcement
Senators.
so I would you know Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent to to introduce and read
senator Senator the biggest
vegan explained or not right in
the state of the certificate
we're gonna have explanation
other senators would like to
speak on that center the biggest
explained thank you thank you Mr
president yes I asked that we
just say a few things about
Debbie Romero which I think all
of us no we know to Debbie is
and how she's worked and what
she has done but we never cease
and long term public servant
that she has been over the years
cabinet secretary Romero I don't
think we're ever going to to
call her former cabinet
Romero and she was she retired
justice last year after forty
seven years Mr president members
of the Senate forty seven years
administer but Debbie did it and
did it well.
You heard right Mr president
forty seven years of state
government Debbie spent most of
her career working at the
Debbie Romero establish the
infrastructure capital outlay
process for local governments it
was so hard I remember thank you
Debbie she created the state's
has worked for nine different
gubernatorial administrations
how she did that I don't know we
so many politics involved and
she participate in more than
received many accreditations
during her career with the
latest being the New Mexico
outstanding community
development service award for
her lifetime commitment to
today to honor and appreciate
show Debbie we appreciate her
and and just a certificate of
honor and appreciation and
recognition Mister president
I'm sorry Mr president I thought
this was something else
apologize.
Senator Munoz.
home stories and Bobby's gin
rather than she is right now
but what a great couple and a
great family to be around I mean
should I is getting married this
listen to I may have.
Low on that party but you know
you just appreciate people that
come into your life and the way
they act the way they do things
and you never forget a menu and
what she taught me and how she
taught me and and the way we
work together I really
appreciate my life so thank you
Debbie thank you senator you'll
want to say that you know in
addition to all of Debbie's
awards and experience in
education and accolades my
grandma taught me something when
that mean grandma you know her
name is my Lucius criminal see
what does that mean and she says
no matter what that person's
going to stand up thick and thin
there might be a dust storm
decibel going on out there and
educational sometimes called use
that term but it's been
incredibly helpful and it's been
genuine and I just want to thank
her for all four years of
service but you are when a hand
thing I want you to know that.
to the secretary and all the
other positions that you've held
within state government over the
years of having you in you know
for me Mr president what was so
state of New Mexico is just
phenomenal I'm so proud of all
the work and thank you for your
dedication because the work that
you've done over all the years
the state government has not
for ringing this recognition
forward and I wish you well in
whatever the rest of your
journey maybe sometimes we
retire and it's not just
retirement just moving on to
Any for the senators would like
to speak on the certificate.
two employees here at the state
city county anywhere because she
showed that upward mobility can
paychecks to take home or less
amounts I would say but she
stayed with it she persevered
because of our commitment and
her loyalty to her work and the
people of the state of New
big heart shines and I just I
can't say enough about that you
know Debbie and her family have
been through extreme hardships
in their life in losing their
you know that.
Through all of that she has
remained resilient and somehow
gets through all these hardships
with more and more faith and so
we will continue to want to
your hardships and still
continue to support your work
your stress that you've been
through and the great work that
you've done for the state of New
Mexico we miss you very much and
Senator is we can go ahead and
introduce the Debbie and her
family and all the guests who
have joined us today in the
gallery and on the floor thank
proceeding and then her husband
Bob but Bob Shinn I about it her
daughter.
granddaughters.
And the precious and other
guests in the Senate for for
certificate to be here to
support Debbie Katrina how trump
transportation Deborah Garcia he
could be able cabinet secretary
for cultural affairs and Robert
do **** cabinet secretary for
general services Donna can
governor's office so let's
congratulate a mall for being
here Debbie thank you is never
enough.
thank you the tenant governor
thank you members of the Senate.
Thank you Mr president members
so next up we're going to go to
the presentation of the national
Blue Ribbon school award ease
then we'll come back and
introduced the guest afterwards
also Senator souls I believe has
some folks on this as well we'll
do those introductions in the
back and unless you have an
private elementary middle school
and high schools based on their
overall academic excellence or
their progress in closing
achievement gaps among student
subgroups every year the US
ninth cohort of awardees the
national Blue Ribbon schools
program has bestowed more than
ten thousand awards to over nine
thousand schools with some
schools winning multiple awards
families and communities in
creating safe and welcoming
schools where students master
challenging and engaging content
the national Blue Ribbon schools
receives a plaque in a flag to
fly over the school and with
that I'd like to yield to
Senator Woods to talk about the
Texaco middle school.
Full of hopes and dreams on the
rural high plains of eastern New
Mexico you'll find Texaco New
Mexico home of the fighting
louver rains the community of
New backs our staff which allows
for high academic expectations
to be the only acceptable option
Texaco middle school finds
established in the classrooms of
Texaco middle school you'll find
master teachers bringing years
of experience to their
instructional path practices are
Texaco is not designed for
students to sit in get
instructional practices are
supported with technology every
additionally our teachers bill
academic relationship with
students that create a
respective atmosphere for
are the true reasons that
students are successful and
thriving thank you Mr president
thank you senator.
and honor today to talk about
and then honor two individuals
from the Albuquerque school of
excellence Albuquerque school of
excellence model is rigorous and
preparing students for college
relevant by reinforcing math and
science skills and supported by
building a strong culture
based learning A. S. C. teachers
provide collaborative
opportunities to create gauging
learning experiences that build
life skills further students
interventions teachers utilize
technology in the classroom to
create equal access and support
through various educational
curriculum in software
to excel through advanced
sections of call courts with
teachers who are specialized in
their content.
Further the A. S. C. is a multi
community promote staff families
students working together to
help every student have the
tools needed for a successful
of the Blue Ribbon that you are
going to receive shortly and I
will introduce my guests after I
turn it over to senator Wirth
elementary school which is here
in Senate district twenty five
it's one of our small historic
schools and a little fun fact
did a whole number of schools
here in Santa Fe and it over the
years it's been super exciting
happen when you're able to
educate in a in a space like
this with the size like this and
it is a special day when you can
after navigating through COVID.
All the schools I mean every
school in our district has been
through so much and so it's hard
to single certain schools out
Madre and will introduce our
special guests in just a minute
by the back to centre souls and
then we'll do the gas Senator
souls thank you Mr president New
Mexico schools are filled with
strive towards being Blue Ribbon
schools and these are some of
the very best we've got in New
Mexico this year New Mexico
three Blue Ribbon schools a
report the word recipients will
introduce the special guests
that you have today please do so
Senator Woods thank you Mr
president today I have with me
and has conserve the school
district and her for Texas
Florida New Mexico and is now
with Texaco.
Mr Blake has taught English at
I've known her since she was
very young lady so thank you for
being here the right Mr Robert
Brown please stand up Sir.
presently and Texaco New Mexico
he earned his undergraduate
degree in eastern New Mexico
university and his master's
might mention as president.
My grandkids go to the school
thank you Mr president.
Senator Hickey.
Albuquerque school of excellence
with staff I it.
He has led the school to the
prominence that is being
recognized today and again being
helping us and hopefully you get
a few doctors out of that group
to
I also want to present Vicki
getting kids interested early on
is such a challenge in the stem
sciences and being able to do
that and move them by the third
year into a special program is
the award from you thank you
very much thank you Senator
Hickey Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so I have three
guests here are superintendent
principal of acequia Madre and
Dr deterred the missing here who
is the current acequia Madre
principal and I just I have a
excitement you feel the students
taking ownership of their
learning and that's what this
day is all about and I just I'm
happy to recognize these three
schools I encourage all of you
get out.
Visit the schools spend the day
in the schools teaching spending
it with kids you will be
even him he gets to help take
over these wonderful schools and
provide support for them and all
of our other great schools to
thank you so much for being here
and for all of the great work
again and the Senate to help us
welcome and congratulate the
wonderful work they've done.
next order of business.
Thank you Mr president just
before we go to the memorial
Senator Cervantes will do I just
wanna let the members know the
plan to do today's two items one
consent we go to that order
business third reading of
legislation I yield the senators
serve on days percent memorial
fifty six New Mexico architects
say we're on that order business
read the third time in full and
preparatory to its final passage
the reader to read.
Senate memorial fifty six a
memorial declaring February
experience and professional
education and solving some of
the state's complex issues in
the built environment and
whereas to Mexico architects are
specifically trained and
work as architects in New Mexico
including seven hundred twenty
three licensed architects who
called New Mexico home and
whereas these architects improve
the lives of individuals and the
sustainable design and we're
just community sustainability
goals are fulfilled in part of
an architect's ability to create
practical solutions to the
Mexico architects recognized
that the time for climate action
is now and that architects play
a crucial role in mitigating and
adapting to climate change
mitigation by conserving
resources and reducing carbon
emissions and whereas architects
recognize the building
support the goal of achieving
net zero emissions through
energy efficiency is the same.
Sustainable material choices and
and property damage and more
effectively and efficiently
recover from adverse events
helping to ensure a communities
ecological economic and cultural
to day practice of architecture
to achieve a zero carbon
equitable resilient and healthy
built environment and we're as
architects strength in society
including knowledge of building
and safety regulations local
planning regulations and
restrictions construction and
historic preservation and
be it resolved by the Senate of
the state of New Mexico that the
state recognize that New Mexico
architects design better
buildings communities and public
spaces that benefit the
Senate and be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to the
American institute of architects
of New Mexico signed and sealed
Senator wants to move the
memorial the Suazo present is
present I move that Senate
memorial fifty six be put on
final passage subject now to
since nineteen eighty eight I've
been a licensed architect and
it's really one of my proudest
of accomplishments my dad was a
civil engineer you die this last
year and and and my dad wanted
me to become an architect not
knowing what he was talking
what I'm talking about.
My for my family encouraged me
to go to your amendment for
architecture school back then
you and Ms architecture school
was not in that beautiful big
building that's on Central
architecture is a beautiful
marriage of what he knew as an
engineer the the calculus and
physics in the moment diagrams
sculpture classes in painting
classes and drawing classes
because architecture is an art
form.
I was terrible.
And over the four years at UNM
into years of graduate school in
California I really began to
love what this profession
representative and and I'm
that I know all of you all do
she's up at two and three in the
morning the way you all remember
doing that and look at look at
the smiles on their faces I mean
of you have I'm privileged to be
part of your profession still
and it's a passion of my own I I
liked on folks that I've managed
to stay married married for
construction.
Always tear down this wall
change this one to look at the
faces of the folks up there they
know exactly what I'm talking
about you're never quite
satisfied are you and there's
always more you can do it it's
thank you Senator want this we
are debating Center more fifty
six and we'll begin with our
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
story is my grandmother was an
architect as well and she
actually came with a commission
of his he had a commission to do
the fine arts center in Colorado
they ended up getting married
R. and so it's just a neat story
about architecture in our in our
world and our lives I get to
live in an amazing house that he
the big pieces of the history of
architecture in the fabric that
it creates and so I always
appreciate Senator Vontaze thank
you done this before different
versions of this and it's just a
build and all these different
ways to avoid architects and
it's just it's good to kind of
take a step back sometimes and
just let the creativity flow and
much Mr president Ms unanimous
consent to skew Center
Antoinette Sedillo Lopez.
See no objections center by the
and just real quick if the
Sanchez deal for just one
Senator about this do you wish
to answer.
Senator you have to help me out
what to the triangle state to
the circle thank you thank you
Mr president I just on a trained
architect would you're so
Thank you for the debate.
I see no further debate Senator
what is the cause of the
we go to lunch and we'll go to
fund the will will pass by the
cathedral will pass by these
beautiful buildings here let's
never take them for granted the
work in let's not ignore the
fact this building.
And I think we all realize this
if you look at this building
from above it's in the shape of
the Z. assemble.
lot of people crazy has its own
magic to it right you're always
running into people you're
always circling around we have a
rotunda where people from all of
in this environment we find
ourselves in everyday should
never be taken for granted these
are creative geniuses and were
among them here today
represented by my profession so
no objection by a vote of forty
three in the affirmative zero
the negatives Center more fifty
six New Mexico arctic architect
state has duly passed the Senate
Senator on this thank you Mr
president agency present the
Mexico chapter this is the
professional organization which
represents architects around the
country just now but again she's
a project architect with H. two
issues she's joined by Chris
calorie of the twenty twenty two
president of the American
instead of architects the
current past president she's
from Albuquerque and the founder
sustainable and energy efficient
designs she's one of the first
L. E. D. a credit professionals
in Mexico that's of a
from Santa Fe and he's the
founder of Andrew's architecture
in two thousand nine is a past
president of the A. I. A. of
Santa Fe.
We also have Barbara Felix the
twenty twenty three state
she's known for her culturally
sensitive design and work with
public communities she's an
advocate for getting women into
elected office.
Clint school of business and
Burt birch college C. U. N. Y.
in last on the list I have the
free Rep Rehema who's the
guests today and I'll just tell
you all when I was at UNM it was
Tony pre docked Adan Schlegel
you all know the names icons in
their day and they're all still
with me everyday so thank you Mr
Senate majority floor leader
rate or to take us to the next
order of business senator Wirth
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
number twenty six which is
Senator Brandt on the Joint
Memorial before we do that I
think we'll go ahead and do the
messages from the house and the
committee reports just to get
me today is Kylie the human
donor should please stand she's
a junior at more high school it
she is supposed to be a freshman
she skipped two grades she's
currently the for H. president
there and more county so ladies
and gentlemen if you please help
me to welcome Kylie to the New
Mexico state Senate thank you.
another guest with me St of Ivan
tors is the director director of
students for policy change to
the northern division lead for
students demand action of New
Mexico and he's also a district
speech and debate team if the
chamber could please welcome
I've been to the floor.
Senate floor Majority Leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business.
Thank you Mr president is that
we go about our business
amended by the house House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five.
House Bill to ninety eight as
substitute for House Bill to
sixty eight and request the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted the same
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
consent we go about our business
committee reports.
We're in that order of business
committee reports the reader to
read reports and I do just ask
if committee chairs of you can
have your scripts available.
condolence certificate number
ten to the following family and
friends upon the death of former
representative Jay Paul tater
the conscience of the
legislature and directs the
chief clerk to prepare suitable
Mr president I move adoption of
the committee report centers we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report Mr president
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
with them with one motion and
rest of the reports.
Condolences certificate number
eleven condolence certificate
number twelve.
Recognition secretary
certificate number twenty four.
Appreciation.
Certificate number nine.
to adopt committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted in the journal reflect
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman.
Senator about this.
the Senate with the re to read
all the committee reports that
we act on them with one motion
but that the jury reflected they
were act upon individually thank
you Mr president apologized
seeing no objection to retreat.
Senate bill three twenty to do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman Senator month just
been adopted by the journal show
they were acted upon
individually three trees.
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
thirty nine do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I
individually hearing no
objection the reader to read the
report Senate bill fifty one do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three sixty nine two
passed and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill for twenty five do
Senate bill three fifty nine do
not pass but that Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill three
fifty nine to pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
fifty seven do pass and thence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill three fifty do not
pass but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report have a
motion to adopt committee report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
The reader to read.
Is present your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate memorial thirty
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have sign
in open session Center memorial
thirty five.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so we're getting ready
to go to a third reading of
legislation again items one
through eight and then the Joint
Memorial we are waiting I think
we not Senator my assist would
you like to make an
announcement.
Thank you thank you Mr president
thank you Mr leader before we
get to the announcement
announcement of another another
amounts we're joined by
Indian school McKinley middle
school south valley middle
school south valley high school
lost him at a high school
capital high school month to the
Senator my SS thank you Mr
president also Friday the Friday
the word is out on the Senate
side slope might the word may
not be out on the house side so
tell your.
They're on the house side remind
them will have tickets one part
of a wine bar thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Maestas we do have further
announcements with senator
Michael Padilla center for the I
thank you very much Mr president
members of the body I do have a
effects of New Mexico I served
on the board of us special
affects Mr president for about
six or eight years of I recall
when I first met her in every
interaction I've had with her
little better so who did I call
I called Randy mask relative
come out to Silvercity to help
me take care of some stuff and
motivate the team and and then
of course we kind of I don't
know we just kind of didn't talk
be recognized by the New Mexico
Senate.
And that we also have a partner
enforcement together across the
state prior to these the.
Special the summer games every
year they do literally run
across the state and share the
Thank you very much Mr president
thank you senator Michael for
the Senator Brandt is present
I'd like to excuse center more
Moores except for the purpose of
go to that order business third
reading of legislation and I
would be able to Senator hot I
meal for item number one Senate
bill three twenty four county
bill of three twenty four on
final passage has been taken
that it's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Clyde ward of the assessors
affiliate.
Seeing no objection sergeant on
Argyl export the expert
witnesses into the chamber.
of pay and this does two major
things that serves as a career
pipeline of the assessors office
and it also ensures that traded
qualified individuals who are
critical to the any assessors
this remains a County option and
not a requirement and has a zero
impact to the state general fund
with that Mr present all
entertain questions thank you
senator is just a reminder we
with the sponsor yield Senator
had a more detailed Mr president
I yield first of all Mr
president the the Senator you
questions today so but seriously
as far as
And this goes when I read the
bill it really doesn't apply to
the county assessor himself
right it's it's his employees
but that is not a huge amount of
money
would apply them to the county
assessor also so I read that
wrong.
Mr president that's correct
Seeing no further debate center
how to more to close on the
bill.
President.
In
drafted but for some reason and
it never made its way down I do
have a little bit of an issue I
brought this up in committee
in ten years we're gonna have to
be back Mr president just to
raise this limit again why are
we putting a limit if if we want
to counties to be able to
and based upon the education of
the assessor.
Center how to Mr president this
was the amount that was agreed
upon by the assessors affiliate.
they've they needed to to pay
them for being qualified and the
county commission of Eddy County
wanted to pay somebody with a
certificate one additional
fifteen hundred dollars annually
counties in larger counties
could afford this right a larger
counties wouldn't be poaching
them from those smaller counties
in the assessors office.
Senator Pirtle Mr president I do
legislation as well
but Mr present I wish as a as a
state sometimes we were putting
these caps on things because
then we just come back in ten
further debate senators.
Si no further debate center how
to meet a close on the bill.
bill three twenty four.
Do now pass and ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty the Fuhrman
is here on the negative Senate
bill three twenty four county
assessor certification pay has
duly passed the Senate center
how to mail thank you Mr
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
acts replacing Senate bill three
oh seven as amended has been
taken it's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
affordability scholarship this
bill just immense it slightly
this is designed to create more
teachers in the pipeline what
for their masters so that we
continue to educate our teachers
so we continue to have teachers
be more prepared for you from
teachers are working and it
might take them a little bit
longer and they can't do have
time while they're working so
that's what the bill does I'd be
happy to answer any questions
See no debate Senator Stewart to
close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president I
appreciated that robust debate I
move the Senate bill three oh
hands all senators to your seats
please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five the
affirmative zero the negative
Senate bill three oh seven as
amended has duly passed the
diversity action all you'll to
Senator Lopez.
I thank you very much Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill two to six
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate.
what's Senate bill two to six is
proposing is to enact the
And what the agent it will
assist agencies to develop
building and implementing
policies to meet the challenges
of institutional racism here
Mr president members of the
Senate there already are
Of entities specific training
put in to CPO state personnel
office to begin the process of
hiring someone to fulfill and
and be in this position there is
office Mr president what I'd
also like to do is to yield the
floor to my co sponsors on this
legislation and I would first
like to yield the floor to
Senator Pinto.
relations creating awareness
integration process is to create
opportunities.
And reduce biases.
aspects of not tackling some of
these issues so I'm in full
support of this bill and it was
also something that was worked
Lopez and Mr president thank you
Senator Lopez Mr president I
would also like to yield the
floor to my our our co sponsor
Pinto on this I think it's
important that was already
stated that some of this work is
already being done at our state
agencies but we need to have
that leadership at the top to
need to have the opportunity to
serve in our state and they need
to have access and have the
opportunities that everyone else
does and that's what we hope
Senator Lopez I thank you very
much stir president thank you
senators Pinto and pope Mr
president will stand for
You know every year I sed I
stand here and I think you know
show me the institutional racism
clearly there's racism in the
world there's racism in the
this one the one before that the
one before that what's the race
of the lieutenant governor this
one the one before that what's
the race of all.
Well until this last election
senior senator we had.
Where's the institutional
racism.
And why do we have to do this in
New Mexico New Mexico is
Absolutely in the world.
Yeah we keep bringing this up.
I don't want to keep this one
bringing things like this to the
forefront.
Things that I believe are
To America they were signed to
set Irish need not apply now she
was from Scotland so she could.
Certainly there's been racism in
in in in New Mexico certainly
one Coronado marched up to this
place right here.
In slavery almost always not
almost always comes from the
week dominating I'm support the
strong dominating the week
It happens today in Africa and
in the Middle East.
In most cases it's not about
race but here in Coronado showed
up absolutely.
Runner couldn't out run the our.
It was certainly some racism
going on there absolutely.
revolt which happened in sixteen
eighty.
We're pueblo leader per pay he
he organized all the pueblos to
resist the Spanish.
again racial conflict absolutely
a racial conflict.
But after they drove the Spanish
out.
Because they couldn't stand
against them either.
And part of the reason they
couldn't stand against them is
because they were not a United
force anymore each Pueblo had to
We're of people that we today
would call indigenous peoples.
But the Navajo or not the Apache
other indigenous peoples who are
attacking them.
Then the Spanish returned.
Fe were they prepared to fight
with a worried about a fight yes
but you know they they sure I
can't remember the number now
something are hundred fifty
Found it was hard to get rid of
the Spanish influence and why
was it hard because.
The tools that the Spaniard said
left.
items that helped integrate the
cultures together.
When the Spanish came back there
was a lot of negotiation going
on.
around they wanted in Northern
buffer in and this was it right
here.
So they negotiated with pueblos
and and and and it became a
peaceful.
mostly in our marriage.
Intermarriages what happened
mostly in those two cultures
combined.
It was a good thing.
Did they bring in the Spaniards
bring institutional racism yes.
During the Mexican American war.
The north Americans as they were
called at the time from the
people living here marched in
the city general Kearney marched
What's a contact what they found
was the north Americans just
weren't really that racist.
They wanted to do business with
each other.
three cultures because.
General tourney's army was not
all.
British.
Try to join together there and
did a good job of joining
together actually.
And then during the civil war.
The south.
Nation.
And so they marched.
An army appear.
It turns out the to do New
Was a huge fight.
In fact it's often been referred
to as the Gettysburg of the west
this was a significant battle.
But it was the New Mexico
volunteers.
That sound.
The self supply trains.
And destroyed them.
But they were cut off from
access to California and the
point where they thought they
could bring stuff in to support
the war effort we did that we
did that as a United.
But in his army.
There were plenty of spent what
what gets everybody Spanish
speaking but there were plenty
he had a black soldier not I
don't know about that.
But I would have been surprised
to learn one way or the other.
We came together.
You know.
The long walk for the Navajos.
You thought they were signing a
peace treaty what they didn't
understand what the Americans
playing straight up didn't
understand.
Was they were not signing a
And so they rounded up the
Navajos and sent them to the
other side of the state in
miserable conditions.
And we're to race involved in
that absolutely absolutely what
the Americans were trying to do
at that moment.
and that ended up in a terrible
terrible thing.
Terrible thing.
And it's kind of sad.
to teach about Coronado in full
pay.
And currently all those things
are to be taught in our schools.
Then.
cavalry was just parked outside
Columbus not far away and they
had machine guns.
Machine guns made all the
difference in the world and then
America and we've only been a
state for for four years at the
time.
But that happened.
Yes there were white people
there.
And they were Apaches there.
After that.
New Mexico had another couple of
really big things that happened
here.
An amazing amazing amazing group
of people.
It came together and fought for
the United States know they
couldn't vote the United States
yet.
He was a proud U. S. marine and
a proud American.
Did he suffer from racism along
his life absolutely.
training to learn to love
Senator John Pinto.
We learn to love him.
This is a great man.
nineteen sixty six could be
wrong but.
The salute to the New Mexico
flag nineteen sixty three I
salute the flag of the state of
And why not well because humans
are human okay humans fight.
What do we strive for in the
For that unity that perfect
friendship among United
cultures.
We don't need it.
What we need is to break bread
together which we don't do
anymore and I've said that a
lot.
together as United cultures I'm
not saying that you have to be
like me or I have to be like
you.
history of the heinous Pueblo
because it have written language
if they had written language we
have that history to we should
learning what we have or the
stories.
But at the same time history is
so huge that we can't wrap our
mind around it.
I don't know how many
a good tribes.
But we also learned some New
Mexico history absolutely we
don't need to be ashamed of that
or hide it I brought up the long
walk because that is part of New
Mexico history.
You always make it right now.
No.
You Mr president.
there I was one that did could
talk to him and he managed here
to a lot of folks but I was
still is friend but one night in
a debate I touched a nerve with
senator Candelaria.
Because I was like is only for
left.
It made me feel terrible.
on this for all time to hate is
a proud Hispanic again then this
is what I think.
That didn't offend me.
absolutely but as an institution
I don't think so.
Individuals absolutely.
Individual people.
And I still want to be friends.
Even though I may disagree.
Every vote it's taken.
may disagree with hair color had
whatever I disagree with that
doesn't mean you're my enemy.
And shouldn't be.
But I also don't see
bad things in this country but
not New Mexico.
Not in New Mexico.
My email and Twitter and
whatever else is lighten up
about how I'm a racist because I
dared to stand and speak.
What that tells me is if all you
Can we disagree on a lot of
stuff yes can we point fingers
to certain things yes can we
point fingers to certain things
that happened decades or
centuries ago absolutely.
But the difference is Mr
president.
That as you line it cultures
we're moving closer to each
other until we bring up stuff
like this.
room wants that I don't think
anybody in the state wants well
as three people in the state The
probably want on who they are
but I'm sure they're out there.
cultures are much broader.
In the three that that we
generally think of here.
Correa summer from Japan and if
you look at the battles that
they fight against each other
they're not exactly United just
like.
The civil war was mostly free
white men killing other free
But in New Mexico I believe
which we're making the way.
We're leading the way.
I think puts a wedge between us
we don't need that which.
We don't need that which.
I don't mean any insult anybody
trying to get that right because
we change our names all the
time.
We have a significant.
Population now.
all over New Mexico and the
military United States military
is hundred percent integrated.
I work for general Powell and
Let's break bread together.
Let's talk.
Or that the state has to have so
many of these in one of those
and nine of them I don't know if
that doesn't work for me.
comes up which were memorials in
the past now we have a bill that
we're going to make law.
And I know people are going to
We're very diverse as the state
government.
We should also have friendship
Senator Lopez and I have a lot
of things that are in common.
And when I think senator John
Pinto.
For giving me a sister I meant
that.
And I think we do.
Sometimes we fight like a fight
with my own family.
But it's not it's not lasting
And I'm sure I've given the
haters on Twitter and Facebook
and whatever else enough to talk
about now.
I want us to love each other.
I don't want to do a law that I
How do I Center participate
obscenities thank you Mr
president with the bill sponsor
please you.
Senator Lopez yield Mister
president just.
Sections three in on.
I'm on page four of the
definition of underserved
community.
systematically denied full
opportunity just want to make
sure I understand what that
means with with this include
be included in someone who's
been systematically denied
opportunity.
I'm Mr president Senator when we
are talking about what you're
state of New Mexico and in my
community that I represent I do
have a very strong immigrant
community and yes they have been
denied services have a night
children first generation is
such have suffered also.
Thank you Mr president sender
and I certainly would would
I'm getting at is let's just use
a specific example
you know I noticed that you said
Asian Americans are in here who
have been systematically denied
they have the highest median
household income at least as a
group which I don't suggest we
should treat people as these
large groups but because it's in
the bill I'm I'm have to use the
subsets of Asian Americans are
underserved but if we just take
them as a group according US
Census there I don't know if we
say over served but they have
president thank you senators
committee
within each of the groups that
are listed here there are
differences amongst each of the
persons again within those
groups so it could be economic
Albuquerque there is explicitly
where they are unable to
participate because of economics
Mr president we've also had
have also been been listed along
with many other of those who are
on on the bill.
Thank you Mr president center I
this higher household income and
I I think we're we're in danger
so when we use these very very
broad groups
of of communities we're we're
think at the individual level
you know everyone is created in
god's image everyone is an equal
valued person but when we
continue to look at these bigger
that outperform almost every
other group that is listed in
this bill for example Nigerian
immigrants.
league's you look at CEOs of
large corporations and Nobel
laureates
you know all sorts of folks even
in medicine investment banking
this bill says black of we group
all those people together we we
overlook some of these subgroups
of people that that once again
this is not me tracking this is
and Colin Powell for example
when I say when I use of the
phrase African American I use
that phrase when you're we don't
have a parent or grandparent
Okay and so they they lease had
one parent okay either
Jamaican or canyon and so we we
we have to we have to really
And so I I would I'm gonna move
on from that definition of two
more but I I think underserved
communities if we just blanket
Lee say black Latino native
American Asian American there
because it was it was brought
out in a very public stage in
some very public books and
reports and studies that they
were over represented with with
so this is the second one is is
diverse city Mr president
etcetera maybe just a comment on
this one for interest of time
but I I you know when I look at
diversity and I and I think the
sponsor would agree with me on
this I mean we're really I think
looking for more of a diverse
city of of thought I mean that's
what's really mostly valued but
I think how these things play
stories that need we're driving
out conservatives from some of
these groups.
but lastly this last one Mr
president Senator the last
I I wanted to bring to the
attention of the body maybe a
different perspective.
so page three institutional
have been tempted into using the
word you know lessor decreased
or something because some of
these communities are they have
diversely off officer looks into
this.
maybe some other folks have
comments on this but what about
what about predatory fast food
marketing junk food marketing so
that target underserved
communities
and I think when I say
underserved communities in this
regard I would I would define
that as people as groups of
people that have low health
gonna we're gonna redline you
into the the school I think
that's institutionally racist
school closures which which we
debate no debate whatsoever
that that was institutionally
racist that that actually not
not the intent of the executive
but the result of that policy
black and Hispanic communities
you look at their math and the
reading scores their way way
down more affected they're all
down across the board with all
the debate this is what the
national director to stop
predatory gambling said just
last year's reported NPR and I
in quote that's within it
interview very recently within
PR and and I agree I think we've
a lot of regressive tax schemes
Law regressive marketing schemes
that market to these groups I
things and there's certain
demographics you cannot argue
with with the numbers you can't
argue with the maths
so I I I'll wrap that up Mr
the aforementioned reasons I
think we need to do a better job
at not broadly just such a broad
broad just say look all all
Hispanic all black all Latino I
better look at subgroups within
these so called under served
communities they're actually
doing much much better than the
average American household
dehumanize people Mister
president thank you to the bill
sponsor for answer my questions
thank you we do have further
debate with senator Ortiz Y.
ability to to.
Without notice I don't believe
just give us incredible history
of lesson on the state and and
and and I have no doubt about
This is the.
This issue of we have no
institutional racism.
Is is such a it's such a strange
exempt from from a participating
in institutional racism all this
bill tries to do is to help us.
hurt other people it just means
that unconsciously we've
incorporated into some of our
practices.
I believe systems about others
is it true that the screen yes
course on our on our educational
attainment have a have a exhibit
any evidence of of a of an
limited by institutional racism
by a bias against certain groups
bye availability of services
being unavailable to certain
groups is trying to figure out
prison and for what crimes and
is there a difference between.
Two two groups one of which
commits one the the same crime
sure that we haven't allowed
unconscious prejudices to creep
into our institutional practices
so this in no way is an attempt
flights
should feel guilty that's not
the point at all behind this
bill as I read it is to find out
are we whatever our ethnic
background whatever racial
dream and even though there can
be a Barack Obama or a
a Colin Powell or a.
every one of them they're
probably millions of others who
didn't ever really achieve the
the level of of success they
might have if we hadn't had
constantly evaluate ourselves
and that's what this bill is
about as I read it how do we
constantly strive to bring about
that unity among diverse
attack on any group this is not
saying why people should feel
guilty this is not saying we are
all races this is simply saying
if we are serious about
eliminating discrimination and
We do have further debate we
have several.
Thank you Mr president I don't
need the sponsor yield but you
know I will I will say being the
the father of of children who
afraid of of the message that's
being sent to my daughter who is
a Hispanic female that somehow
she's at a disadvantage or she's
not good enough for that she can
better faster and it's because
she chooses to be whatever she
wants to be that there's nothing
holding her back that she can be
present in the United States if
or or experience some type of
prejudice or racism I know
myself having being beat up just
because of the color of my skin
you know that's something that I
of putting ourselves in groups
we're a country made up of
individuals that as individuals
can do great things which then
move our country much pass these
because the world against you
know you can do it just do it
and that's the message that I
want my kids to hear thank you
Mr president.
have done this and what you see
are better universities.
You see universities that are
stronger you see collaboration
And and the notion of diversity
was to bring people together who
would not naturally come
together.
We're very lucky in this body
We can have greater
understanding we always recite
every day about United cultures.
aspiration that I think all of
us strive for but if we don't
bring people together and have
somebody in charge of bringing
two people together for some
very thankful to the sponsors
for bringing it thank you.
Si no further debate Senator
Lopez to close on the bill says
I'm it really bothers me because
what what what we're looking at
here Mister presents we're
looking at words on a page we're
looking at words and we object
to statute
I think that until we as a state
and as a nation come to a point.
What are we doing.
Pouring gasoline on that fire.
Continuing to build on these
divisions walls between us
things Mr president we can't.
You tell me if we have a very
wealthy child born into a white
family.
child is born impoverished.
With an IQ of a genius.
And some athletic additional
ability of some sort.
Mr president go into our
statute.
Where does it.
Level the playing field for
those two and which one of those
When we come in here with our
limited minds.
That we think are unlimited
believe me we over estimate
ourselves so often.
And we try and categorize.
I will never be able to dunk a
basketball and make twenty
million a year.
Some people will never be able
to read.
Some people are born in single
parent households some people
are born rich summer born poor
some are born with physical
Mental disabilities or would you
rather have the mental ability.
And maybe have some physical
impediment impediment and how do
we put that in here.
how do we create this.
Personnel office to determine
all of these categories and then
come back with the report.
constructed for that we get in
our own way.
We have in front of us as much
as it is decried in this chamber
job put in front of you.
I think no one would disagree.
That there should be a social
welfare system out there that
helps people with this
that this person deserves a job
more than this person and I know
we're not doing this yet before
we kidding this is where this is
going.
This is going right down that
road Mr president.
Is inhumane.
It is inhumane and is insulting
it is insulting to the people we
you in the face Mr president or
have you slap me in the face.
All we can do is to lift each
other up in the same amount.
One body one state one country.
Not a black yes not a Hispanic
that not a white that not an
It's not like that anymore why
because we've got away from that
that's when we're strong this is
when we're weak.
As one.
Check these ideas their
destructive they're hurtful.
Sure they grab headlines
Senator Lopez to close in the
bill.
And thank you very much Mr
president I would like to yield
the floor first to my fellow co
diverse city the practice our
quality of including our
involving people from a range of
different social and ethnic
backgrounds and of different
Thank you Mr president
I'm a little off.
Shocked by the debate.
This is not an attack on anyone
or call anyone out.
This is to seek answers.
And this is to make sure that we
support everyone in our
community.
With that Mr president I will
close.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much co sponsors
Mr president just a couple of
race there is internalized
oppression.
For the negative beliefs and
biases that some people
internalize and have.
There's also institutional and
Government.
Religion.
Employment.
Finance which is the banking
system.
president during my tenure here
in the legislature.
We see reports to come back to
us about under performing
country Mr president was COVID.
It shows the health disparities
within our communities and who
had access to health care who
consistently trying within the
state government to make sure
that we have health access in
rural New Mexico especially with
in Indian country we were
talking about a question that
of the most diverse communities
in the state of New Mexico but
they're lacking in a whole this
I mean the list goes on as to
what they're they're lacking.
schools don't recognize that you
have to have bilingual persons
at the front door to welcome
these families in the health
care system Mr president of the
right they have other persons
who can't speak Spanish to try
and communicate.
Mr president the list is so long
and banking.
property of course it changed
where we where we currently have
built out there not allowed to
purchase a home because they
were redline Mr president.
Because I don't make enough
a home.
Mr president there's been
testimony on this floor over the
last fifteen years that we've
been trying to get something
like this passed and signed by
the governor.
country the president's that
exists in the world.
And what we are attempting Mr
president with this legislation
is to begin the process as my
colleagues have mentioned to
And I will remind Mr president
for those of us are in this body
we have a privilege that we
bring to the table.
I am privileged to be here to
And that responsibility Mr
president I believe with our
state tax dollars is to make
sure that everyone.
colleagues over the years to
bring this type of legislation
forward.
It's a privilege that comes at a
privilege that we have to own.
And to make sure that there are
to six as amended.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
and when you listen to the
anshan until they return to the
chamber except for the purposes
of call and then they are now
thank you Mr president say no
objection.
Please raise your hand.
Senator committee voting no
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Thank you we're going to the
next order of the forgotten
excited I just want to thank all
the members on both sides for
that debate and the decorum
those maintained.
Present ask unanimous consent of
the Senate rule be suspended
records show that all action for
pricing Senate bill two ninety
seven on final passage has been
bill the original more active
created the Martin Luther king
Commission was passed in
nineteen ninety one.
And
I was here then it passed the
Jane Garcia Gloria house those
thirty years ago and we have
funded this commission ever
since then and we
commission.
And
It's four members appointed by
the governor one member by the
president pro tem one by the
minority leader.
director Human Rights and the
chairman of the New Mexico PRC.
Anyway Mr president that's what
this bill does increases the
Senator thank you Mr president I
want to thank the prize sponsor
Santo eagle on it on this and
allowing me to co sponsor this
is some important funding that's
nonviolent social action you
know and and I think we need
more of this every day with what
we see what's going on in our
country
Anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere.
And so I stand in strong support
and I hope everyone in the
chamber supports this as well
see no debate Senator Ingle to
close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I now move the Senate
bill two ninety seven do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
this year states we're voting
resident Senator Padilla thank
you Mr president consent to skew
Center Oneonta returns the
chambers of the purposes of the
call saying no objection.
passed the Senate Senator Ingle
thank you Mr president Mr
president when this first was
passed in nineteen ninety one it
passed the Senate twenty nine to
four.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of all the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill three oh one on final
bill thank you Mr president SP
three oh one.
Addresses what has been
happening in my district of
place of a very want wonderful
town called Rio does so is been
having the same problem Mr
president and that is free
roaming horses that are in and
some years ago these horses were
abandoned.
And where they are not
they're not wild actually there
there've been accidents on
highway one sixty five implicit
us and my co sponsor
Representative McQueen and I are
Mr president what the bill does
is it removes some undue burdens
in the way of DNA testing for
horses
livestock board to contract with
the our expert and that expert
can help our leaders around the
state to determine if a horse
reproduction and to ensure that
they are fed.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you so we're debating
Senate bill three oh one we do
I've actually got a amendment
that's coming down from
Legislative Council but I didn't
quite get it here in time so I
guess I'll talk a minute about
I have tried in the past to get
a bill passed on on these horses
because simply.
Where this thing was written.
called the particular
organization at U. N. M. that
were supposed to be the the
this but I could never get the
legislation passed to change any
of this.
Senator McKenna put together a
I finally dropped out of the
group for the simple reason that
I didn't think it quite went far
populations are taking this
ground down to bare ground it's
taken every bit of the
vegetation all.
realize that their spots where
these horses over grace.
And you may notice when the wind
The school is gone.
And if you don't believe what's
the difference in the inside of
the the pastor with the horses
are an outside.
of the fence close to the
highway and you'll see how much
more vegetation there is.
So I think everybody realizes.
And this bill.
Actually has a a manager of our.
Expert to come in.
Health.
The.
Last out border whoever is in
control of that area.
certainly the production of
Mother Earth but there needs to
be less horses out there.
And the option for these horses
Are to the slaughter now the
amendment that I want to offer
Mr president that I don't have
in my hand.
Has to do with the BLM.
and I had it written up but when
I went to talk.
two Senator McKenna and she in
The place that I inserted the
information.
The information simply says.
on set on page seven.
nothing in this section shall
affect the federal bureau of
land management's authority to
manage free range and horses
that are not subject to the
Including the federal bureau of
land management authority to
gather removed and sale free
Ramon horses in accordance with
one of the best adoption
programs there is out there.
They actually had a an adoption
set up in Clovis.
an adoption and Levelland Texas.
And you might ask why am asking
for to do in Levelland Texas
during the COVID outbreak.
facility there and they sell
some of these horses through
that auction fifty sixty seventy
thousand dollars a usual well
trained horses high powered
washers really good horses.
high priced horses going through
and then I may see some of these
these adoptable free range
horses come in.
Therefore you know I I really
think that is an excellent place
to take these horses and and to
adopt it
want to get in the business with
BLM and trying to tell them what
to do with the horses that are
on the federal lands the BLM so
wait for an amendment here but
I'm a I'll think of something
else talk about just a minute
I'm not as good as mine my
friend in front of me that
condition.
Mr president.
I've got a good friend across
the way right next door over
here Representative Jack
Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield was a
bill wrench gavel I don't know
how many of you know about the
historic bill ranch.
But the historic bill ranches
just.
It's such a big ranch should to
have camps that they have their
their.
Kind of their can't managers
livia and those can't managers
pastors and then as they they're
the one the last places in the
state that actually sends.
wagon out to Brander kids.
And those cowboys go out there
and and stay with that wagon
slate beside that wagon and they
get the cattle in that pastor
As you know it's real hard to
find labor out there in the in
the country and Chatfield tells
went out there and stayed at the
wagon well the first morning of
the H. rope to our and.
course this okay I'll recap what
he does state owned it and wrote
it to stop an and then he will
get the rest of the day.
This particular older cowboy had
left the bills and when he came
back the only jobs available Mr
president was.
A well then to work on windows
But back to the horses we we
really need this bill Paxton and
I I'm sorry that I'm holding.
To the managers and the B. L.
M..
They need to maintain their
abilities to to take care of the
horses on the federal lands and
it's
me you know what this federal
law it takes precedence to state
law on and we just can't be
ordered the federal people
around in.
this stuff but I know I guess I
could just Senator McKenna a
couple of questions if you would
Ox monthly how many horses are
in that proceed to this area.
Mr president Senator it's my
Senator Woods and that area is
You know the good part of the
deal is they do not have to trim
their lawns they don't have to
contacting me and some of those
people are afraid of those
horses and you've been around
people that have been afraid of
dogs well you can imagine eight
hundred nine hundred pound
Roman and and Senator McKenna
thank you said this earlier but
I believe you said that there
was a vehicle animal collisions
or has been
in the late time Mr president
Sam can.
Thank you Mr president and
senator thank you for the
earlier where that's really
upsetting and we don't want any
of the horses to die and have to
be euthanized what we're all
they have injury or or worse
thank you Mr president Senator
Woods thank you Mr president it
and also there's another group
Area number Rio dosa can you
tell me approximately how many
horses are Roman down there Mr
president and.
Mr president and senator I'm not
sure the exact number but my
the grass on the golf courses
and so the leaders in Rio does
so are quite supportive of this
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill three oh one
amendment number one to Senate
bill three oh one for the
purpose of discussion see no
objections Senator Woods if
you'll explain what your
amendment as.
the state in New Mexico when it
has to do with these free Ramon
horses.
There's a.
There's two colonel horses on
Well of course in New Burrel
Act.
To but there's more forces that
fences or are people.
Feel like much like when they
turn dogs out in the country
thank in their funded great home
grazing the land and the B. L.
M..
Has to manage sources I got to
pick them up and they've got to
take care of the got adopt them
out they got to do something
they have in place right today
Mr president and I think that
explains it and I would be happy
to have any questions on that
thank you centers we're debating
senator member number one is
For the debate on the amendment
with senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president senator
that so your amendment basically
says if it if the horses on BLM
land they would be responsible.
serious either private or or
tribal land if it's not be a
lamb.
That then the let's state
livestock board is responsible.
Is that is that correct.
you know we also have the State
Land.
And we also have
tribal land and we also have.
What what are called private
exactly the same thing I am that
the horses that our own BLM
lands.
Will be managed by BLM and the
horses that are on.
like that you know Albuquerque
has got a big open space land
there Representative proceed to
sell so so you know it's it's
that kind of land also so that's
about though is I mean mostly
that land I mean it may be on a
map it's nice laid out.
This our which is been on BLM
land for the last eighteen days
is now gradually is it looking
for grant moved over onto State
the horses on to one parcel of
land or another how do we handle
that.
Senator Woods and an agency
president and senator to speed
And if they been cut because
some body wants so horses to go
lands state lands or any other
kind of lands but when you get
what I'm talking about a lot in
New Mexico is what some people
I know that I Kate I hate to
keep bringing this particular
issue up especially with my
friend set not set out here but
the the L. bar ranch for example
The the actually it is the duty
of the least seed to keep the
fence up.
And on that particular wrench.
if I got free pastor across
there in the previous owner of
the L. bar wasn't concerned
there wasn't any much water up
there so if a few cows got in
about the the beautiful state
park that we have up on the on
the heinous the viral can their
park and fair and in federal
forced and the leases on that
forced some of those cattle come
finger at the least see you over
on the endorsed in the endorsed
as saying Hey that tree was on
your side that fell over that
fence so finances are a problem
cutting those fences I'm not
saying offense won't go down I
actually missed president I had
a neighbor called me while I was
in Senate finance yesterday
animals cross but in a rural
that we're talking about here it
is a designated area that these
animals predominantly are on.
itself to the to the forage on
the land their their grazing to
to close you know what we're
talking about.
the damage you're doing to
prepare in areas now you would
think if we told those cattle we
didn't wanna mon that area that
quit when.
stab list and it's out there on
BLM land in big pastors Mr
president Senator and and so
Mister president Senator Woods
will remove horses from BLM land
if they're over grazing and they
have a system for doing that.
several years ago ever removed a
single our from that land but
the BLM does do that and so if
we adopt your your amendment.
You know
I think what what I'm I think
the question I'm sorry I think
Right there proceed this proceed
yes there is B. L. M. land right
there.
And and the fences are down.
they were going to put him out
for adoption all right.
They never followed through.
The reason I didn't follow
through because.
together if the bill M. what is
simply put the fences up and
keep them up.
Then the horses will either stay
But as as I've had some of the
attorneys in here state New
Mexico all New Mexicans don't
always follow the law.
Surprising.
As a.
Truth all the time if that makes
sense to you Mr president and
senator sentence bureau.
the BLM we'll be doing much more
than they've already been doing
but at least somebody will be
response it will be written down
in our law that they are
Senator was to close on the
amendment.
Mr president on now move
amendment number one to Senate
Those opposed may the eyes have
it Senate bill three oh one has
now been amended we're back on
the bill Senator Kernan on the
so and they are definitely a
grazing on the grass in their
very healthy looking it's really
kind of fun to watch them I
remember going downtown Rideau
so one day and had to stop
plan for these horses but I'm
wondering because an alto where
many of the courses are there
there is a real love of those
worry about how are you gonna
get that done so I'd I do want
to support this in and I think
that we have to start somewhere
I don't mind them being in my my
horses so have you had
conversations with those in if
the sponsor will yield Mister
chair Mister president with that
community to see how they feel
had direct conversations with
the leaders of Rio dosa Mr
president Senator I have heard
secondhand from one of my
colleagues in Representative
a good start and we'll see where
it goes from here
I think the transportation of
the forces might be a little
difficult I don't know enough
think I think it's going to be
challenging thank you.
We do have for the debate we're
Senator Brandt followed by
senator Byrd center Brandt thank
low for our is when we brought
over populated and star.
So you know.
Fact is a cell the needs to be
done so something that we need
But I think we learned a lot of
wisdom today from Senator Woods
and I think that Senator Woods
we should do a book of of
wisdoms by Senator Woods we
learned that cattle can't just
be told what to do.
glean from Sir was and and one
thing we learned is that not
everybody follows the law.
And I was shocked by that one
because I was pretty sure that
in New Mexico you just make a
law on everyone follows it so
don't stay in one place that was
kind of by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
answer would so I I just want to
thank them for all those
wonderful things I learned
and so I think Senator Woods and
Surtees opinion of what this is
an important bill we need to do
something about these things I
think the amendment was really
I see no further debate former
close I yield to senator Michael
Padilla.
I'm sorry senator Byrd center
Burt thank you Mr president.
the center for bringing this
bill forward.
Back next last year in the
summertime we met with the or a
group of folks from Lincoln
at the county we looked at the
calendar so ciation the problem
was in no one wanted the
responsibility quite frankly and
it already is fenced off we
could put these forces on that
and and we would have to pay
someone to at least probably
possibility to this in the
think this is a great start to
addressing this issue raising
the awareness of the issue
because you're actually right to
Senator Kernan and it was
very meticulous with what they
do to those grounds and they
really keep them up and so
they are probably primo grant
that they want to go in and
to see and I think by the way we
were talking about numbers the
last number here somewhere two
hundred fifty to a hundred
eighty
them grazing right downtown
would also practically so they
are a of it is a hazard is a
problem and we need to do
something with them so I think
further debate centers we have
further debate we have Senator
Diamond thank you Mr president
with the sponsor please yield
senator Kennedy yield yes Mr
presently please to yield thank
responsible for managing free
roaming horses on U. S. Forest
Service lands.
Johnson and his Jessica Johnson
with Senator she is a chief
government affairs with Anil
protection New Mexico.
Seeing no objection is a
sergeant Garcia please escort
Senator I'm.
Thank you Mr president Senator
and and welcome to her guest my
question is Senator Pat Woods
Senator Mr president and senator
it's my understanding the U. S.
Forest Service does.
And what this bill change this
Mr president and senator it's my
understanding the U. S. Forest
Service will still keep their
stray cattle as we know when you
just for service just came in
this last weekend without giving
proper notice to the state of
New Mexico and began Ariel
slaughters this weekend of
authority of the astray laws of
the New Mexico livestock board
so I would I would caution you
that moving forward if the US
Forest Service is still claiming
and aerially assaulting and
slaughtering horses and leaving
carcasses out just as what's
taking place and he left today.
And without there's no question
president you consent to skew
Senator Sedillo Lopez my Estes
and Pinto into the return to the
chamber except for for for
purposes of the call seeing no
objection.
opening remarks and Mr president
that is thank you my colleague
Senator Pat Woods because if
some folks remember he and I
carried similar legislation in
has been instrumental in having
the dialogues with all of us who
want this legislation for of the
folks of New Mexico and our
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Explain why of.
to the negative Senate bill
three oh one as amended has
passed the Senate center to
subpoena to explain as a thank
you Mr president and Senator
very.
The depleted looking horses in
plus he does because there's
just not enough forage for them
which suggests to solutions to
the problem one let's build a
care of the issue that way you
Mr president services if you
know seven cannot.
Thank you Mr president and the
body appreciate it Senator is
we're going on to the next item
Padilla thank you very much Mr
president I answered and consent
of the Senate that the record
show that all action for placing
Senate Bill to ten
to just twice a minute with
emergency emergency clause.
so US Senate Bill R. to ten
essentially takes our national
guards men increase the National
Guard death benefit fund with
approximately two million
dollars to go into the fund so
essentially creates a five
hundred thousand dollar death
benefit whenever this tragedy
may occur in those in those
lines of of a support for
community in the Senate Public
that they would determine who
their beneficiaries would be and
then in the finance committee
Mister president we did add a an
Thank you Mr president this you
know this is an important bill
to bring that parity but it's
also taking care of our national
guardsmen they've stepped up
when we needed them not only in
our classrooms with a stepped up
thank you Mr president thank you
for the I thank you Mr rose will
stand for any questions Senator
is rare debating Senate bill two
ten twice amended with emergency
clause.
folks that helped us get this
done this year and thank you
senator Poe for being part of
the effort with that Mr
president I move that Senate
bill two tennis twice a minute
with emergency clause do now
pass and pass instance into the
Just a reminder does have an
emergency clause so two thirds
majority is needed.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is here on the native
Senate bill two tennis twice
We have number seven Senate bill
two fifty four as amended
gamefish licensing fees and I
yield to senator Neville.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president ask unanimous consent
Senate Bill to explain what the
build us thank you Mr president
this is a adjustment in the
license fees for the game and
fish department pretty much
across the board there's a few
simple math of HB sometimes is
to present this time today but
anyway it's been a a number of
years since I've had an increase
of the game department is an
enterprise agency they do not
with not having an adjustment
for some fifteen years or so of
their needing to adjust those
fees we still have state
employees that work for the game
know over the last couple years
have gone up dramatically all of
the expenses that an agency
encouraged operate they have to
pay out of their license fees
and this suggests that
everything it's a relatively
of course Centerville thank you
very much for including me in
this particular piece of
legislation a couple of things
that I'd like to go ahead and
that as we continue to take care
import many of the game fish for
New Mexico when we built a
warmwater fish hatchery and we
continue.
forward and so within that as
part of the support for this
we're hoping that if this were
to pass into to signed into law
that at least for the next ten
important to those people that
enjoy if you will fly fishing
that enjoy hunting and again
this is going to be valuable to
all New Mexicans as we move
Thank you Mr president sponsor
yield Centerville detailed are
you and thank you Mr president
list of take me a minute to pull
that up but it's
It looks like element please
stand.
Looks like the senior resident
does not have a handicap does
not have an increase it looks
resident bighorn sheep does not
have an increase you that's for
the ram and the you do one of
those.
looks like have a lean for
dealer.
junior trapper.
senator I do see I mean there's
just a few and I I don't.
Really know why we wouldn't
raise the Fianna bighorn sheep
Mr president senator I think
why we didn't raise Mister
president senator the the
bighorn sheep fees.
Mr president Alaska unanimous
Management Division director and
they'll join us Mr Lai they will
join Senator Campos on that side
of the room saying no objection
if we can have a sort of ours
please escort the expert
witnesses with the chair
Senator Pirtle wants the extra
ones get settled in if you'll
restate the question please yes
would you.
Thank you Mr president Senator
bighorn sheep Mr president
center many may not know this
but the hot one of those
privately within the United
States is going to cost anywhere
between fifty and a hundred
definitely just for for trophy
why we wouldn't raise that to to
an amount that would really
match their value.
Mr president my expert tells me
with what other states are are
charging for that same license.
And and thank you Mr president
Senator for that but you know I
I I'm sure I'll mess up this
quote but it's something like
of these licenses that I'm
looking at or cal L. court just
strictly for me they're not
really what you would consider a
trophy hunts and we're raising
Mexico the the cow well cons
within unit thirty six that
those should stay down because
those are actual meat hunters
where those that are hunting for
protect the poor that if you are
hunting for meat to feed your
family your cal L. permits going
to be ten dollars as opposed to
forty but if you want a trophy
hunt it's going to it's going to
such an issue with poaching and
I I think this is is going to
that simple I I will not support
this bill because I think for
trophy animals as we should and
and for that reason I'm going to
oppose this thank you.
Thanks in part of.
one to Senate bill two fifty
four as amended amendment
sponsored by senator Jeff
Steinborn Senator I want to move
thank you Mr president
colleagues Mr president six
senators I I hope this is a
friendly amendment I I I shared
it with the sponsor sitting
behind me because it really just
does not do and what it asked
the department to do is to
report annually.
The levels of species managed by
the department now this is the
species namely and it would
require them to report I'm
annually the population levels
of the species managed by the
department the prioritization of
the department spending to
is something that's long been
sought by and Long frustration I
heard on all sides of the aisle
just about kind of a lack of
transparency about how money is
being spent being spent on what.
Mr president colleagues it's
important note that in twenty
twenty the LFC did a program
evaluation of the game and fish
department.
It was a little bit tough.
reflect game and fish
populations.
A bit quote basic metrics like
animal populations and
allocation of all tax private
landowners issues.
It goes on to say that none of
the measures directly show the
population levels of fishing
game animal populations even
though the statutory mission of
the department is to provide to
wildlife resources and
determining usage of species and
the ecosystems setting harvest
limits and methods protecting
wildlife habitat educating the
doing a good job and.
We can all follow what they're
doing with all these millions of
dollars for being asked to
appropriate with that happen
stand for questions thank you
senators we're debating senator
good this is data that goes far
beyond what the game and fish
department actually collects
this would not be readily
available and it would be fairly
expensive to do that to be very
expensive to do that and of the
additional comments Senator
thank you very much Mr president
of course Senneville a couple of
things and again I respect if
you will the sponsor the
not just measuring this by
numbers were also measuring this
by habitat and within that a lot
of resources go into this that
are if you will for the people
so again it creates if you will
one of those issues that is not
totally measurable so I I
believe this is an unfriendly
amendment thank you Mr president
senators we're debating Senate
floor amendment number one
expect it to be friendly Mr
president and this is why we
continue to try to do these
things because this is been
sadly a department resistant to
change
should be collecting should be
reporting just to do their own
work so we should really reject
their resistance to transparency
I do not move a that that floor
amendment number one do now pass
and of and those voting in the
affirmative by a show of hands.
Voting in the negative I
apologize slide show hands
Senator Campos voting no senator
bill voting no.
Senator Ingle voting no.
Senator Montessori now.
Senator Griggs voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Burt voting no Senator
Gallegos voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
schools voting no.
Senator where Hemphill voting
no.
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
By a vote of ten in the
affirmative twenty five in the
negative Senate floor member
Thank you Mr president in the.
With the the sponsor yield.
Senate Bill detailed I would you
Mr president.
alignment with the other western
states.
Is it that I get that correct.
We Mister president senator
their only operating income and
it's time to raise these fees so
that they can continue to
operate of the the amounts that
we chose our they chose are
has certain has the amount that
they've been bringing in gone up
or down.
Mistress in senators remain
roughly level.
you know it's it's not meeting
their current needs.
It's getting to that point
Mister president senator the
like everything I was shopping
for new pickups there sixty plus
includes game and fish people
so.
Ross aboard everything that
they're doing is costing more
and their revenue stream has
million remained relatively
level.
It's a roughly a twenty five
percent increase Mr present
center.
all the fees an average of
twenty five percent.
Mr president the the goal is to
try to raise the ones that were
a little under what.
Thank you Mr president senator
I have some concerns with with
thirty thirty three percent and
then you've got the
Game hunting license which got
went from fifteen to twenty five
dollars
the I think it might have been a
little wiser to make some
smaller increases you know we
want people to actually get a
fishing license but when you
continue to raise the fees
you know.
We're making it harder and
harder for them to follow the
law by making it more expensive
important I think senator
needs to be some reporting I
think this ammendment maybe just
got a little too far.
I think though that we do need
to have a reporter on the
budget.
that money we're giving them the
authority to raise that money
and they need to be reporting
back to us how that money is
being spent.
so that I think I'm I'm gonna
are are are too much in some
areas
and quite frankly
I I rarely care about what
states around us are doing so
you madam president well the
sponsor please yield.
Are you Mr Mr president madam
president sorry changed yield.
Thank you madam president
the agencies budget madam
president Senator is derived
from general fund revenues.
Zero.
And madam president Senator
Novell I think we could agree
coming forward for asking for
permission for slight moderate
increases in hunting fees so
that they continue to operate
without having to dip into our
business I would argue that the
cost of business for doing has
increased drastically for any of
us since two thousand six can
assure you that gas prices are
the same utility prices are the
Madam president Senator in this
bill there you might note that
there is a provision for snap
recipients that per card
there is that discount in a
different section is not in this
bill veterans get significant
discounts there are some things
like that probably some others
and I don't know about that to
discount for anyone who's
eligible for snap benefits there
is an incentive to actually hunt
for your food at a discounted
rate is that what I understand
for military veterans is that
still the case an allowable with
this bill.
Madam presence Senator that is
correct as well.
Thank you and madam president
that is a big ordeal their
elephant Butte which use from
all overcome it is to encourage
them to get outdoors to
encourage them to spend time
with family could you please ask
your expert if they would intend
Thank you madam president and
senator I also want to mention
that we have a bill traveling
through in which it expanded of
fishing opportunities and
encouraged any of our foster
youth to get outside that with
by offering to waive any fishing
fees New Mexico for to do so and
I I appreciate that I note on
here that there are no free
increases still for any of the
that for and and and and agency
the self sufficient he was
asking us for slight and
moderate fee increases because
they haven't come before us
since two thousand six we need
you for bringing this bill
forward and I stand in support
thank you.
Thank you is there further
debate.
you madam president and I don't
I just want to I spoke on the
amendment obviously a introduced
earlier I want to bring up a
separate point now which is to
the Sanchez would you please
feel for question.
dollars a year quote for the
preservation and propagation of
game and fish so my question is
this Senator how much would that
Madam president director says
it'll be about two point seven
million dollars for a short
period of time.
Madam president no it was not
the this is considered out there
operating funds that is
additional funding that would be
utilized for conservation
programs at the department might
legacy fund.
That is a commitment madam
president center here to hear
people all right we have it in
writing we have it on tape which
without the transparency I
respectfully just can't be in
support of this bill and.
I understand whether coming from
of the legacy fund but I think
it's time that we we get kind of
and passed out we don't have
Senator Sanchez tell me but for
body have the amendment.
All right any other debate while
we wait for the amendment.
printing on the amendment please
just a second place for a few
moments Senator Pirtle.
And I'll go for a second time
madam president of hello
Senator Neville Senate bill do
you yield I would you madam
president that and thank you
madam present as I as I was
looking closer the nonresident
nonresident the the rich that
are coming in to what they can
afford three thousand dollars
for a bighorn sheep what we're
not raising that fee.
Thank you.
In a Madam presence Senator also
again if you if you were to
honey desert bighorn New Mexico
is going to cost around fifty KA
I'm never gonna draw that Lujan
I I don't imagine as a resident
fund these why we would at least
go up a little bit there if you
can afford three thousand a
hundred fifty dollars for a
nonresident bighorn sheep I
think
amendment I can go ahead and do
that yes Sir Pirtle if you move
them move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill two
fifty four as amended and the
Senator Pirtle to explain the
amendment thank you madam
president and this is just for
the the general hunting and then
the general hunting and fishing
combo I think it's important for
about the hunting license madam
president you're actually
required to buy one of those
just to put in for the draw and
so you're paying now twenty five
dollars just for the chance to
draw if you don't draw your
don't draw that they're having
their fees increased by sixty
six percent just to participate
and that's what this does.
Senator Neville on the amendment
like a small number but when you
stand for factor that into the
major component of most licenses
that are sold by the department
is a very serious number in
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam president just very
quickly again if these
particular fees were to be cut
it's going to be over the two
go ahead and find a place for
him and that in itself is going
to be a very costly projects so
of these funds are definitely
needed as we move forward with
our providing if you will the
president Senator I I appreciate
you bringing the amendment
because I think it brings up an
important point that lot of
folks may not realize in the
bill.
coming in paying big box that
there's kind of an equity
problem with this bill this
presents senator and madam
president Senator that's exactly
instead of if the intent is to
put it on license holders and
put the fees for those who were
successful in drawing in are
actually using and enjoying then
that all of that money should be
well now yes twenty five dollars
now and forty two dollars and
basically would be better off
buying lottery tickets are or
maybe going to the Sandia and
seeing if I could do better but
four of licenses and they're not
getting increased at all.
Mr president I apologize madam
president Senator that's a
concern of mine as well and what
impacted in this bill and it
were meant were minimally not
impacted so that they would not
oppose this bill but it does
unfortunately then create that
these are people paying big
Bucks I mean ten thousand Bucks
on up for hunt who certainly can
afford it outside in New
Mexicans who are just trying to
put you know meat in the freezer
Thank you other debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none Senator Pirtle to
close on the amendment and thank
look at the two as as was stated
the majority.
The the portion that brings in
the most money is increased by
sixty six percent so I think
it's a little disingenuous to
say that we're only raising it
forward that maybe through some
good work could make it a little
bit more equitable for all
especially those that are just
hunting for food and with that
madam president move Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill two fifty four as
amended to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands so Senator Neville
Senator Woods folks know Senator
Ingle votes no Senator said Ron
folks know Senator Ortiz the
penal votes no Senator McKenna
Senator do hit folks know
senator Munoz boats known.
Senator Hamblen votes no Senator
Stewart but now.
I the twelve in the affirmative
twenty four in the negative
senator amendment number one has
failed to pass the Senate.
Senator Pirtle additional on the
and compostable close thank you
madam president one thing that
on the the last amendment I
would like to point out besides
license fees there are tens of
thousands of dollars millions of
and and trying to keep them
regional and compatible with
other states of Lujan I went
hunting this last fall to North
Dakota I don't even know what I
paid for my license the trip was
experience and trying to keep
our numbers compatible with the
surrounding area is very
important it's a.
The importance of the game and
fish department maintain
not wildlife's Senator side more
in the what are the is that
it correct for wildlife of
species we we need to maintain
that in the game and fish
department not only takes care
of game species else will take
much again for the explanations
and one of the big issues is
accountability and so with this
particular department each year
they need to ensure that they
federal funds that's going to be
one of the requirements also the
department is funded as we
mentioned earlier by hunting and
fishing license sales and not by
the general fund a license fee
change would allow the
challenges including the impacts
on wildlife from climate change
so I am going to defer back to
my co sponsor madam president
many supposed voting in the
negative by show of hands
centers we are voting on Senate
bill two fifty for us amended to
your seats if you wish to vote
voting no Senator Steinborn
voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no
the Senate Senator Neville
encompass thank you madam
president members of the body
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam president members of
the body and of course thank you
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one oh six as amended with the
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken and that
Senate bill one oh six adds to
the definition of health care
practitioner physician's
assistants pharmacists and
psychologists for the purposes
particular who have left their
positions because it was
unsatisfactory but because of a
non compete clause they left the
state to work elsewhere we have
a lack of health care
Seeing Senator Stefanics I'm
sorry Senator Padilla thank you
madam president consent to skew
madam president I hope this bill
sounds familiar we have passed
it here on the Senate floor a
few times Mr or madam president
I move that Senate bill one oh
in the negative by show of hands
Senators we're voting on Senate
bill one of success amended with
an emergency clause to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative seer in the negative
Senate bill one of six as
amended with the emergency
clause has duly passed the
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that all action
for placing Senate Joint
explain the Joint Memorial.
Thank you madam president and
and this memorial ask Congress
I just read the the little piece
according to the injury and
disability law center.
The average number days to
complete a disability related
claim was a hundred and fifty
Speaking to them they they
stopped helping with the A.
issues last year yes some other
clients to go over here just to
get their ratings so this is a
problem that's been happening
had to yield it several times
just to get the disability
rating and then ended up having
to get a congressman involved.
it came back to my attention
given a Purple Heart which
hopefully senator Ben ray Lujan
will be able to rectify for us
and he is working on it
When we went to.
This time it took over three
months even though he's on
hospice and is considered
terminal.
And that's only supposed to take
a maximum of thirty days.
their medical care for injuries
sustained while in the military
to be have those things taken
care of for the rest of their
lives
life you're tired benefits do
not pay for end of life care.
So make sure you go out and an
employee for service connected
disability so I've actually been
investigation with the VA on why
this is taking so long that's
really all that it does thank
you madam president thank you
Sir any debate on Senate Joint
in support of this memorial
understanding what the Senator
Brandt has been going through
regarding his father in law I
think of how lucky his father in
law is because he has such a
law that is going to the mat to
advocate for him is a blessing
for him but I think of all the
folks who don't have somebody
like Senator Brandt in their
president thank you other
comments or debate.
Seeing none Senator Brandt to
close.
called the all present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands Senators we're voting
on Senate Joint Memorial eleven
tier seats if you wish to vote
Fuhrman is not in the negative
Senate Joint Memorial Levin has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Brandt thank you madam president
thank you members of the body
Madam president your
conservation committee to who
has been referred house energy
environment natural resources
committee substitute for house
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman.
Senator Stefanics madam
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
committee reports house bill one
ninety five as amended to pass
to the judiciary and then just
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
To pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill for twenty do pass
and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairman Senator Stefanics madam
president I move adoption of the
committee report brought it up
some of committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
referred Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate joint
resolution one as amended has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
general reflected that we voted
on them individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
shall read all the committee
reports.
Senate rules committee
Senate bill seven as amended do
not pass but that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill seven.
Do pass.
forty seven do not pass but that
the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed nay committee
report is adopted.
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted.
Joseph Cervantes chairman
Senator fundus move adoption
committee report production the
Senator Wirth I thank you madam
president I believe I see some
messages from the house so
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from the
house seeing no objection the
racial read messages from the
house bill two fifty three as
amended by the house house bill
twenty nine as amended by the
house with the emergency clause
and request the concurrence of
the Senate respectfully
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation
seeing no objection more on
that.
Order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
for their vision generosity and
stewardship of New Mexicos lands
and wildlife Senate memorial
sixty two Senator sixty two have
been read twice by title is
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and act making
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration to fund
read twice by title is ordered
we for two Senate finance
committee house bill twenty
nine.
House bill one seventy
introduced by representatives
definition of cramming house
bill one seventy.
House bill one seventy have been
read twice by title is ordered
referred to Senate tax business
and transportation house bill
one seventy.
gaming changing the operating
hours for a nonprofit
organization gaming operator
licensee changing the net take
percentage for a nonprofit
organization gaming operator
business and transportation
house bill two fifty three.
House bill seventy six
introduced by Representative
judicial education fund creating
the judicial education services
division in the administrative
office of the courts making an
appropriation house bill seventy
six house bill seventy six have
House bill twenty five inner
deuce by Representative Lord and
act relating to families
providing to foster families
enrollees of the fostering
connections program and children
custody of the children youth
and families department free
admission the state owned
museums and state parks house
bill thirty five house bill
thirty five have been read twice
House Bill to ninety eight
introduced by Representative
Castellano endorsed by the New
Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee and act
facilities infrastructure fund
and the local government
planning fund House Bill to
ninety eight a spill to ninety
eight have been read twice by
title is ordered referred to
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen and
act relating to licensure
amending approved examination
requirements for the licensing
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen
hundred twice by title is
ordered for two cent tax
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty eight an act relating to
land grants applying the general
Merced is in state law amending
a section of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill two sixty eight.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty eight.
House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
sponsored by employee leasing
contractors house labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five.
military affairs committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty I have been read twice by
title is ordered referred to
Senate Judiciary Committee House
miscellaneous seeing no
objection more announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you Mr madam president so
we had a committee report read
journal be corrected to show
that it was read out as to to to
not agree to to so we get that
right for our clerks journal.
today for committees will be in
tomorrow at eleven o'clock or
standard times and has the time
pronouncements centerman yes
thank you madam president of
finance is going to go in and
some of all Pyle built into a
big issue bills and so when to
clean those up in the morning so
members tomorrow morning make
sure you're on time and I need
can start at six but I think
I'll be nice and say nine
thirty.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam president your
tax business and transportation
committee will be meeting today
Santo Tom in city Lopez and tall
men Moores and Hickey Padilla a
couple of times Baca Gonzales
and several others some license
plate bills as well so we do
at three forty five thank you
other announcements Senator
Duhigg thank you madam president
Senate rules will meet tomorrow
morning at eight thirty in room
we have some bills listed I'm
not sure how many we're going to
get to but I should just take a
look thanks thank you Senator
souls thank you madam president
Senate education will meet
Senator Sedillo three eleven.
Thank you madam president I I
didn't have a chance this
morning to introduce my intern
for the next three days or for
the next two days and I just
her name we will welcome.
Money who said to me this sorry
thanks.
you members with that we
unanimous consent we stand in
recess until eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning okay seeing no
objection we'll see you tomorrow
at eleven o'clock tomorrow
