In the next
year in
an endowment fund that this 29.5
million should be available to
all libraries today.
So instead of uh each library
getting 250 or whatever.
We can make close to $30 million
in improvements.
Uh, either capital improvements
or
Or uh or through salaries to, to
libraries today. I'm just, I
don't mean to go get on my
soapbox, man, I'm sure, but I
just don't feel it's right to
put 29 million and just sock it
away.
When
When, when, when we could add
this to the budget, we should
just make this a.
An annual reoccurring
expenditure to uh
To help local uh local
libraries, but, but I support
the bill. I think that we should
expand it to the 29 million, but
I do hope we, we do away with
the endowment aspect of this
fund and just make it.
Just make it a good old
fashioned fun. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, if I may
just uh briefly respond, please,
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
very much and good morning to
you, Senator Maestas as we go
forward to the entire committee.
So a couple of you what we're
anticipating and what we keep
doing is we're setting up, if
you will, the uh the trust and
we anticipate that the resources
that we put away for sources
that will be able to be used and
that that possibly would go
ahead and keep us, if you will,
solvent through some of the with
you is how do we get the money
out to the people that need it
as soon as possible.
Former senator or TCP know the
reason why I'm doing this now is
in our discussions over
particularly when he uh retired
that I would
continue our libraries.
So when are we going to get
those resources back out to the
people that pay those taxes
regardless of where the
resources come from,
so
in order to ensure that our uh
Any other questions from
committee members.
The we have a motion for due
in check.
Hello, can everyone hear me now?
We can hear you now. Thank you.
Oh, thank you. Um, good morning,
um, Madam Chair, um, good
morning, members of the
committee. My name is Breezy
Gutierrez. Uh, thank you very
much for giving me this
opportunity to speak. I am
Um, some of you know me already.
I am the director of the college
and career readiness Bureau, uh,
for the public education
department, but I have taken the
morning off and used um personal
time to um support this bill,
um.
I have been, not a lot of people
know this, but um I built a
library in Anton Chico in 2008,
which was a 5 year long process
of coming to the legislature and
having um
Huge support from um senators
and representation, especially
Senator Campos. Uh, thank you
for all your support within our
um county. Um, so I have been
the volunteer library director
for 17 years in Anton Chico. Um,
it was a fight to get the um
library built, and it has been a
resource hub for a rural area
where there is not a lot of
opportunity for our students or
for our.
patrons or for our residents.
And so I just want to um thank
you for um moving forward with
this because this can take a lot
of um
Pressure off of my shoulders
too, if we could um fund a
position because um I've had
volunteers, you know, run the
library because I have a I have
a regular job, um, but my time
has been spent, you know, um, my
vacation, my holidays, my
weekends, after work hours to um
clean toilets to apply for
grants to keep this library
running, um, also to provide
equipment and funding to
carry out programs for adults
and um youth, and so I really
appreciate, um, you know, uh,
you supporting this bill, so
thank you for giving me the
opportunity to speak, and I
invite any of you to come out to
our Anton Chico library to see
the resources that we have
available for our um community,
not just books, but computers,
uh, a workforce solutions kiosk,
um, we have
Equipment, hotspots available
for the community. So, um, it,
we are in desperate need of um
continuing that process. So
thank you so much for your time.
For Senate bills Senator Maas.
Yeah.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Pinto for the bill do
pass.
Thank you, Senator, and you have
a pass.
Next we have Senate Bill 163,
the tribal regalia at school
events, Senator Shindo.
I was ready, senator.
OK
Uh
morning, madam chair and.
Members of the committee.
Oh, is everybody this morning?
You're good.
OK, uh, Senate Bill 163.
Uh, is a bill that uh
proposes to support students
enrolled in or eligible for
enrollment in federally
recognized tribe Pueblo Nation.
Uh
We suring that they cannot be
prohibited from wearing tribal
regalia, cultural significance
objects or travel significant
footwear or apparel at gradually
ceremons or public events, so
with me here I have a cabinet
secretary of affairs, Jose Monet
if I want her to go ahead add to
the conversation.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. Thank
you for having us here today.
Uh, so, as Senator Schendo
mentioned, we have before you
the, uh, tribal regalia bill,
just to give you all a quick
update.
But the point of this, um, bill
is where the regalia at, uh,
graduation and promotional
events, and so, um, looking at,
you've got a
out there, so on slide 2 of the
handout, so uh it is seeking to
amend Section 22-5-4.3, which is
part of the Crown part of the
ass in that traditional dress or
objects of cultural
significance, uh, you know, we,
we um after some events and
incidents that have happened
recently are the people that we
last page of the slide presents
so, um, I think it's time for
New Mexic
And where traditional the things
that
That, um, really became a beaded
cap being removed with a, with
an eagle feather. We also saw,
uh, our, you know, dress shoes.
This would allow our native
students to be able to wear
their s, to wear their jewelry,
um, as they felt appropriate to
honor themselves.
So again, it matters to allow
our students to be able to honor
themselves, um, and then they're
just a little bit of background
on the number. There's roughly
41,905 Native Americans to be
able to wear their regalia to
their graduation ceremonies, uh,
and cap and gown, uh, they are
attached to the cap and gown,
but they would.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Those in the audience that
aren't.
speak, um.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
people of the committee. My name
is Santiago Hardy.
I'm a youth intern with animated
vote. I'm 19, born and raised in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I'm
Spanish, Jame and Dane.
I'm here today in support of SB
163 because of, because as a
2024 graduate from a Native
American.
Community Academy.
I can say our regalia isn't just
clothing and our identity.
16 at school ceremonies without
the fear of being denied
participation or being punished.
SB 163 protects our rights and
respects our traditions.
It ensures that schools honor to
our indigenous students and the
most important days of our
lives.
So please vote yes for this
bill. Thank you.
Cool, it's an old to my shoots.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
the people of the committee. My
name is Dmitry Smith. I am from
the senior in high school in
Albuquerque as well, a youth
intern in for New Mexico Native
vote, and I'm here in support of
SB 163.
As a young Native American man
traveled gaily and what it
represents in a powerful symbol
of my culture, heritage and
identity.
It allows students to honor
their ancestor and traditions by
allowing students to wear a
traila.
It helps to educate my peers and
foster a better understanding
about the many different
cultures around them, passing
this bill will demonstrate and
respect for the rights and
traditions of indigenous people
as well as recognizing the
freedom to practice and express
our diverse religious and
cultural beliefs.
My hope moving forward is that
future students can proudly
display their culture at the
forefront because that shaped
our multiple lives. Please, on
behalf of the students all
across the state pass HB 163.
Thank you.
Go see him at our homes
and New Mexico native also touch
uh good uh good morning. My name
is Alicia Car. I am from the
Pueblo of San Domingo, and I am
a lobbyist for a New Mexico
Native vote and in support of
this bill.
My great grandmother was only
able to attend school up till
6th grade. And so when I was
able to graduate high school, I
was proud to share my
accomplishment and walk that
stage for her. But, however, due
to restrictions from my school,
I was unable to wear my
traditional attire when I
graduated. And since my
graduation as a youth organizer,
I have heard about the
prevention of need of students
from showcasing their cultural
identity at one of the
highlights of their educational
career. Our traditional clothing
is our strength. It helps us.
to find the connection back to
our ancestors and community. Our
traditional clothing tells our
story. And today my dress that
I'm wearing for you shares with
us the story of how our
collective strength, efforts and
prayers brings prosperity to our
lands and was even able to call
the snow this morning.
It shares the cultural education
that our communities invest in
us and the language and cultural
traditions that we learn
alongside our Western
educational career when we
return home on the weekends or
in the afternoons, but all in
all, our cultural, our cultural
clothing, jewelry, and all
aspects of our culture instills
pride in us. And so we should
continue to allow for our
indigenous students to showcase
that pride when celebrating the
accomplishments and to help
inspire strength for their next
endeavors. Thank you.
a rationale.
My family is from the Four
Corners area
and also I'm a current JD
candidate at the Uni Mexico
School of Law.
very important
for that it is.
who attended.
Who attended public school
attended public schools in New
Mexico. It is very important
that not only to me but for all
native students in New Mexico.
We know that there are over
40,000 in the public schools. It
is necessary that there should
be a uniform law to allow native
students to practice their
traditions. While I was urban
native who grew up in
Albuquerque, this bill would
support both urban and rural
native students because they
deserve to to express themselves
because honor.
our culture identity equates to
academic success. Many Native
American students across the uh
nation where the tribal regalia
to honor significant milestones
in honor each other, adorning
one's headwear with feathers and
beads during high school
graduation ceremonies is a
common practice among us
natives. In fact, there are
other 18 states that have laws
that permit native students to
work does not currently have
that prediction. This bill would
allow that.
Unfortunately, an example of
this is Jannis Whitebull of
Farmington High School, who was
denied a right and was stripped
of for graduation to wear her
tribal regalia. She had a beaded
cap and a feather, and she was
not able to wear that. It was a
crisis for her, but not only
her, but many in need of the
students across New Mexico and
the nation saw this.
We do not want this to happen
again. Therefore, we need
stronger protections for native
students and their right to wear
tribal regalia.
We believe SB 163 is long
overdue, considering the fact
that there are over 23 tribal
nations here in the state of New
Mexico and there are over 40,000
Native American students
enrolled in state public
schools. The state of New Mexico
must do more to protect the
cultural practices of Native
Americans against discrimination
in school by allowing them to
wear tribal regalia and to
freely express their cultural
ways of life during school
events, yeah, thank you.
Haley rehouse Gisha to Nishna
um yeah, it's a high school in
Farmington, New Mexico. I serve
on the student ad hoc board, and
I am the student senate
president.
Along with thy have held various
positions and received numerous
awards throughout my high school
years. But like everybody, I've
had my share of struggles, both
personal and academic, and it
has gotten me to this point
where I can give this speech to
you through adversity in science
fair in speech and debate in any
public comment that I make. My
prayers, songs, cultural
teachings and ceremonies got me
through those hardships.
off the internet.
OK, we got to stand in place,
hold on.
Hello, can you hear me? OK.
All right.
Um,
madam, OK.
OK
Um, so yeah, it's it. My name is
Hayley Redhouse, um, I am a
current senior at Naval
Preparatory High School, uh, in
Farmington, New Mexico, serving
as a student ad hoc board member
and student Senate President,
um, throughout the four years at
high school, I have had various
positions, um, leadership
positions, and I've received
numerous awards, all of which
have been through naval
preparatory such as science fair
and speech and debate, um, and
like everybody I've had my share
of struggles, both personal and
academic.
So I can be here supporting this
bill.
Through adversity, my prayers,
songs, cultural teachings and
ceremonies got me through those
hardships and the power of the
water that Iran and the wind
that I inhaled healed my body
and soul for me to continue. The
basis of everything that I do
stems from the phrase a ego,
which means only you can make it
happen. It carries a heavy
weight in Navajo language
because every word that we speak
is regarded sacred, so I took it
seriously when my father told me
that if I wanted to make
make something happen. I had to
do it for myself, that
initiative is now embedded into
my identity, this strength that
I am talking about, it's not
complacent. It lives within the
Concho belt that I wear in the
ribbons on my dress pants in the
sage green sawny skirt that my
brother had made for me.
It lives in the turquoise, and
it is essential for me to wear
my traditional regalia during a
day so important. Graduation is
the event that acknowledges our
highs and lows over the four
crucial years that have been um
essential in our development
from adolescence to adults. It
is the physical aspect of our
lives moving forward of one
chapter closing for so we can go
on to explore the world for
ourselves. Myself, along with
every other proud new.
Mexico resident should be
allowed to be exactly who they
are when they graduate. Our
traditional regalia holds
essential aspects of our
identity, knowledge, strength,
and even love. For me, they
carry the spirit of the holy
people, and, and in the novel
creation stories, it is the holy
people that made these beautiful
stones and patterns you see on
Pendleton's.
The turquoise I wear now
symbolizes the spirit of my
ancestors walking alongside me
once that I will wear during
graduation, and I strongly
believe it is disgraceful to
tell someone they cannot be who
they are when that is the exact
person walking across that stage
that to earn that hard hard
earned diploma that they are
getting.
For emphasis during the 6 days I
have attended this legislative
session with my school almost
every senator and representative
that we have spoken to wore some
form of traditional regalia or
Native American jewelry. But
last year, students.
Proudly displaying their
identity during a crucial moment
such as graduate graduation in
this great state of New Mexico,
they were told to either leave
or take it off.
And I will acknowledge that all
cults that students who want to
wear their traditional regalia
should be given the same
opportunity to do so. The first
amendments of our US
Constitution talks about freedom
of speech, freedom of religion
and the great state of New
Mexico should justly represent
our Constitution by allowing
freedom of representation with
all bounds of respect.
Yeah
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Carrie
Robin Bruder, I'm the lobbyist
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. We believe that it
is extraordinarily important
that our native students at
graduation, and we believe it is
absolutely appropriate to put
this into the statute so that
all of our schools across New
Mexico are following the same
rules to ensure that this can
happen at every graduation
ceremony across the state. We
thank you for your support
today.
Madam Chair, uh, senators, my
name is Robert Apo. I'm the
lobbyist for the, uh, Apa Nation
and a Navajo Preparatory School,
um, I think I was Red House is
one of our students from Navajo
Prep, I think she said
eloquently, um, many of you guys
have had the opportunity to meet
our, our students from Navajo
Prep and he care the commander
regalia,
you know, all of you have
embraced them, so.
As a student not being able to.
Dress
In traditional attire and.
Um, as part of one of the most
important days of your life, um.
It's
It's a
I said, it's a disgrace to not
be able to do that, so we fully
support and our Shado's bill. I
hope that you pass it today.
Thank you, Man.
I thank you chair and members of
the committee and thank you to
the sponsors for uh bringing
this bill and thank you to all
the students who are here, uh,
saying the support for this bill
more eloquently impactful than I
ever could.
Uh, my name is Mike DeBrio and I
represent the Lano Foundation.
Uh, we support SB 163 because it
protects the rights of Native
American students by ensuring
cultural expression and
traditions are are respected.
It is needed to ensure that
Native American students in New
Mexico have the right to wear
traditional regalia and cultural
objects during graduation and
other promotional ceremonies.
It guarantees that school boards
and charter schools cannot
restrict students from
celebrating their achievement in
a manner that reflects their
identity, fostering a more
inclusive and respectful
educational environment.
As the former principal of a
tribally controlled school and a
teacher in schools that serve
native students. I know how
vital it is for native students
to know that they can succeed
academically while maintaining
their language, cultures, and
traditions.
Our foundation believes that
everyone deserves the right to
celebrate and honor their
cultural identity without fear
or discrimination. Thank you.
I see our helper trash. Good
morning, everyone. My name is
Katie Anne Waniko. I'm the
assistant secretary for Indian
education for the New Mexico
Public Education Department, and
I'm here to speak in support of
this bill on behalf. Thank you.
Yeah, a day at Benny, um.
Go to
I just want to say that I am the
executive director for NAVA and
for NMative vote and we received
hundreds of calls when the
incident happened in Farmington
and when the incident happened
in Cibola, we need to pass this
bill to have the opportunity for
our students to see each other
as their full selves and to be
proud in that moment when they
put all that hard work into
graduating. I didn't have the
opportunity.
you do that as a high school
student, but I did have that
opportunity in the multiple
degrees that I received in
college and it was night and day
in terms of the pride that you
have for the achievement that
you make, and I'm so grateful
and honored for the students who
have come here to support this
bill, and I urge you to please
pass. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. I'm
James Mountain. I'm the chairman
of the All Pablo Council of
Governors and on behalf of the
19 public governors, uh, we ask
you for your favorable, um, do
pass on this bill, Senate bill
163, the uh
Tribal regalia at school events.
Again, we fully support this
action on this. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Mark
Mitchell, former governor of the
Pueblo of Tasuki and former
chairman of the All Pub Council
of Governors. We to support this
bill and we look forward to a
favorable decision. Thank you.
Good morning, Yach Ain
Eugenia Charles Newton and She
A and Schlei Abi Aniche
but I did not.
Uh, be in are not on in a
Uh, be in are not on.
in a
good morning and uh thank you
for giving me the opportunity to
come here to support Senate Bill
163. My name is Eugenia Charles
Newton. I may counsel delegate
representing Shiprock community
on the 25th Navajo Nation
Council. I am the chairwoman of
the Law and Order Committee. I'm
also the vice chair for Public
Safety and Justice at the tribal
and Interior. I am also the vice
chair for the.
vol ut ion of large tribes.
I am proud to be like many.
Many of my people. I introduced
myself in my language, and I
identify with my people, my
community, and to announce to
our DND where I am.
Such
Today
I got to witness such an
American young people come up
and to speak what they believe.
To be a warrior for our people
and for our future.
Many have already stated the
reason why important to them.
I want to say that I'm also
proud I've been a New Mexican
all of my life. I've lived in
the Shiprock community,
actually, most of my life, 15
years of that, I did move away
to acquire my education.
I love New Mexico. I've lived in
so many states, but I can say I
love New Mexico because of the
various cultures that are found
here in our.
Different flowers that's.
Last spring in the border town
of the Navajo White Bull.
A young Sioux woman who proudly
wore a day of significance,
importance for that.
Her cap was removed.
For many of us who witnessed
that.
What we saw and what we
witnessed.
Wearing our traditional
clothing, honors our people.
And
Our ancestors.
Federal Indian policy once
sought to remove us as a people.
But resiliency kept our people
moving forward, and it continues
to keep our our people moving
forward. Our people survived
beatings because we spoke our
language that connected us to
our people, our culture, our
identity and our way of life.
Our people were stripped of
everything that connected them,
that connected us to who we.
I look around this table.
And I know that each of you here
identify with a group.
people, a community.
I always try to encourage our
youth, and I encourage our
people to be who they are. But I
also encourage us all to respect
where we came. Please don't
hesitate to pass this
legislation.
Let our power and let our pride
shine as we already stated, as
was already stated by our youth.
Allow our children.
Autumn
Good morning.
I'm sure members of the
committee.
My name is Earl Samuel.
And I'm the governor for the
Polosuki.
We are here to support this
bill.
Because it's very important.
What happened to the student.
It's important that
They were be allowed to wear
their.
Trial.
That's our identity.
And
Going through high school.
All the comments they meet and
this for this to happen.
You know, so.
I her feelings may have
traumatic event for them.
And it's across the state.
And I mentioned this to the
governor Luan Christian.
At the state tribal leaders
summit.
We have this bill, but
We told them that more training
is needed.
You talk to the people.
The boards, the schools.
So this is, this doesn't happen
again.
So like I said, we're in support
of this bill and thank you for
your time.
Is there anybody in opposition
to the bill, please step
forward.
Do we have anybody on Zoom?
Hello P. Williams.
Good morning, chair.
Um, this is Patty.
Turn on my video, but that's all
right. Um, good morning, Chair,
committee members, staff, and
guests. This is Patty Williams,
the registered lobbyist for the
Navajo Nation Council Office of
the Speaker, and um I'm writing
in support of this legislation,
Senate Bill 163, given the
direction provided by the Navajo
Nation Council resolution.
Adopting its New Mexico
legislative priorities and urge
that the bill come out of this
committee and that you also
supported on the floor. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next we have.
Strong family.
Can you hear me?
Yes, they, um, good morning. My
name is Valerie Belson and I am
from Sun in Puebloqueola and
I um
Acknowledge Madam Chair and the
committee members, and I
strongly support Senate bill 163
and I'm speaking
On behalf of my children. I have
2 teenagers, Jacob, 16 and
Claire, 15, and I'm I'm speaking
as a parent. A parent is a
leader role that is one of the
hardest and most difficult
things to
be there to be the guide and
that person who helps mold to
our children become. Claire is a
student at Santa Fe Indian
School and Jacob was a student.
In Zuni at twin cyber Academy
and I believe that we need to
support this bill and have it
become law because I
acknowledged all those powerful
statements made by the students,
they're presence at the
roundhouse. And I want this bill
passed because it sets a
statement not only within
Our great state of New Mexico,
but also throughout the whole
country and what we're saying is
that we see our students, we
hear our students. We recognize
our
And we celebrate our students.
And with that being said, our
ancestors are there with them
all the way to the celebrations
and to these milestones that
they achieve in their lives. So
I thank you for your time and I
hope you, you pass on you
support this bill.
I get up.
Thank you.
We have 2 more.
Carmen Lopez.
Good morning. Uh, good morning,
Madam Chair and committee
members,
Yat SA Carmen Lopez Yinni
Abiagin found that
Abiagontanilla tego, a son
initially, this regime in Rio
Rancho Denacha.
I'm here as a Navajo parent in
support of
Thank you for this bill. We live
in Rio Rancho. My daughter will
graduate from B to Cleveland
High School this May 2025 and I
have two sons that attend
Mountain View. CHS does not
allow Native American.
to alter or decorate the cap and
gown students cannot wear
traditional jewelry on the
outside of their gown, they
cannot beat or play ceremonial
feathers on the couch.
They cannot wear stos to
recognize their participation in
the Native American Student
Union, the dress code includes
wearing dress shoes and the gown
must be zipped up to cover
clothing underneath as they walk
on and off stage. Parents and
graduating seniors have to sign
a contract by March 14, 2025. So
this bill that you are
presenting is timely and needed
for us. Rio Rancho provides a
lovely senior dinner
celebration.
for students and families that
and that is where we are told to
celebrate our culture off stage.
Since 10th grade, my daughter
has participated in Nasu, and
each November during Native
American History Month, she and
classmates visit several Rio
Rancho elementary schools
dressed in their regalia,
sharing their cultural and
traditional teachings as a way
to bridge understanding among
all our peoples and in our
community and to celebrate the
unique cultural.
patrimony of New Mexico. So what
makes messages do our school
districts send when students are
encouraged to dress in regalia
and show cultural heritage in
the month of November, but then
at high school graduation, the
major milestone of our
children's lives, students and
families are denied the cultural
demonstration of this lifetime
achievement. We especially need
your help in school districts
where the Native American
student
ations are small. In Rio Rancho
School Districts, Native
Americans are 6% of the
population. I'm an active parent
at my kids' schools, and there's
always been confusion about
whether it's the school board or
principals at each high school
that sets the graduation
requirements. For years,
students at Cleveland High
School, native students had
petitioned the school
administration to allow for
regalia and they were told it is
against school policy.
For myself in the 3 times I've
walked across the stage for my
diplomas, high school, my
bachelor's, and then master's
degree. I proudly wore my
regalia to honor my family,
ancestors, and cultural
teachings. These are once in a
lifetime milestones to
celebrate. As a parent, I want
my children and all native
children in New Mexico to
experience this academic and
cultural pride.
Yeah, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Melissa Candelaria,
Attorney for the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty. We
stand in full support of Senate
Bill 163 and thank the sponsors
for bringing this important
measure. We believe that schools
should be a place where young
people feel feel free to learn,
grow and excel while being true
to their identities.
Unfortunately, this is not
always the case. Too often,
Native American students face
discrimination in schools, such
as being.
prevented from wearing their
traditional dress or culturally
significant items during
graduation ceremonies. Such
discriminatory incidents have
resulted in litigation, as the
FIR points out in fiscal year
24, school districts paid nearly
700,000 in settlement and legal
fees awarded to plaintiffs due
to litigation. This bill will
prohibit schools from adopting
policies that violate native
students' religious and free
speech rights and ensure respect
for cultural tradition.
Traditions and practices and
indigenous values in public
school settings for these
reasons, we support this bill
and ask that you vote to pass.
Thank you.
Hello?
Yes, introduce yourself. Thank
you.
Yeah.
Doctor Belinda Begay, and she,
uh, um, good.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee.
I am.
A district bilingual
multicultural education
coordinator for Central
Consolidated schools in
Shiprock, New Mexico. I'm in
full support of SB 163 as we
have primarily a large
percentage of Navajo and Native
American students, and I have
been in the line of language
revitalization and reclamation
work for over 29 years and
having our students show their
pride is a form of connection
through their clothing and we
are in a time and age where we
are trying to have all different
types of efforts.
In terms of having language
reclamation back in different
forms and are traditional dress,
hairstyle, and forms of cultural
artifacts that we wear to show
that pride, respect and honor is
a way of doing so. This is how
our young people are making
connections with their ancestors
and their cultural identity with
that being said, I think.
All those members who have made
this bill possible, yeah.
Yet I had been in any
members of the committee. Good
morning. My name is Michael
Beini. Um, I, with everything
that has been said, I support um
SB 163 as a former teacher at
NACA, Native American Community
Academy as a mother of children
at West Side, um, West Mesa High
School and um Trescas community
collaborative really um want to
support and thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward.
Um, and I
Um
And just appreciate all of the
commentary.
OK, well, we'll move on. Next we
will move on to questions from
the committee members.
paragraphs from the
the
ceremony. Of Native American
students were tribal.
Thank you.
Senator. Yes?
What is regalia for Hamus
versus.
Right, I think that's,
that's uh Madam Chair, Senator,
the respective tribe of what
regalia is because it's
different for.
s
