This is because thanks
committee.
Yes.
The setting in rural culture
this committee will come to
order and we will be getting.
Our house bill one sixty eight.
And produce to house bill thirty
so.
Thank you so.
Isn't just for Representative I
know.
Begin with your bill.
And then on that.
The action committee on the.
To the.
The visit to point that out
because of the amendment for
discussion purposes okay to to
house bill thirty five that is.
The.
You like to.
Your amendment yeah that's
basically what we're doing is
we're taking it and expanded it
to that our state I think it's
pretty self explanatory.
The food for members of the
amendment.
Of the men that I agree.
that the the Shendo seconded by
Senator right.
We'll call the roll.
Senator great yes.
Subjects yes from Senator yes.
Senator.
With that in this.
So here on Senate bill thirty
more expensive advice amended
and would like to be one of the
bill or would need to.
Planet said it's it's instead of
the free access and I do
appreciate the fact president
very program the spelling with
that essentially questions thank
you we'll go out to the on the
with this anybody in support of.
Anybody in opposition.
Those that are supported we
would like to make public
comment will start on the side
of.
Thank you chairman having
to the members
I'm the founder and executive
director New Mexico tapper's
numbers and non profit dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care for them
having brought this before the
four years ago and one of our
promises to the families and
that you place to ask expanded
to use and then also
specifically fostering and
connections young people
involved in that and so we are
promised to be that in your very
very excited thank you so much
for your support thank you.
Chair members coming tomorrow
this Jody the grammars
Department and we stand in full
support with the given amendment
today thank you.
What.
I'm sorry for we do that we just
the play that we have are you
twenty six out of the we.
Okay.
I'm here so sitting on let.
We don't have anybody zoom back
to
me but he will discuss the.
Senator.
Representative thank you so
question of the approximately
four hundred south foster
families inclusive of tribal
foster families as well or.
That number.
In the in the FIR is this with.
An active problem of the corner
of the screen take advantage
programs on my question is is
where at in them are they right
now for Madam chair for the
estimated four hundred.
Or are they.
Thank you madam chair and
senator our for my career madam
chair Senator Shendo I think
that approximate numbers under
the CYFD has the service would
expand.
So so the four hundred will be
inclusive of tribal foster
parents.
The I think four hundred
managers Senator four hundred
under CYFD in that with the
amendment it'll be more
important than the term so so.
So this number on here four
hundred it's not inclusive of
tribal foster parents if that is
your answer.
Madam chair senator from okay
any other questions.
The LFC committee offices of the
bill I move to pass that I think
that there's a new set of the of
the second second by Senator
Shendo to.
Just
eight hours in the room.
You.
Yes Sir.
Yes Sir.
Yes.
Yes.
The morning off of the.
Thank you Representative are you
have the I feel pretty far by
amended.
Thank you chair representative.
You know we all the committee.
Bill was.
Once a man.
Job.
We have rolled over committee
leaders and.
And so you'll.
Yeah and and that.
that.
Thank you madam chair and that
committee members I'm back with
house bill one six one we had
some suggested amendments and as
amendments are drafted you know
the most.
Yeah that okay.
Chair I would move out to two
five eight five.
Okay.
As such.
Programs.
Both the loading of the bill.
Yeah.
So the yes.
Senator Sanchez yes Sir Senator
yep.
Seven up yes.
So if the doctor toward
the question in this this.
And that will.
By amended bill to the
discussion from committee
members on health sixty one
twice the man who did passes
with.
At the.
Thanks.
Yes for the thoroughness of the
yes Sir senator Sanchez yes
section of yes Senator to the
yes.
Absolutely fantastic so.
Because of the president's house
bill eight sixty one twice and
then it.
Thank you John thank you madam
chair thank you committee
members I will stand personally
and education to opt for.
In
addition of food I would like to
what stands Representative
Johnson will perform.
Certain.
And one day and what we can
since she's been invited us
that's the reason I you may
regret asking is you might I
might have to be my partner at
Navajo song and dance.
Thank.
Okay committees of the house
bill thirty three the.
And the offices.
For the services.
Madam chair.
Is going to settle in and just.
Of course it's also back where
is the order.
Or would doing it are we doing
the household development.
This should be.
From weather related.
The
last four yes this for the house
bill.
South rural development grant
for the project there's
committee substitute.
This would be a good thing.
What's chapter forty one article
one.
This is the question.
Senator those are the general
visions.
Okay
so what we have to give so
they'll be governed by the
provisions of chapter forty.
And there
are questions.
Which line rents fall under.
Chapter forty nine explicitly
stated so this is for you would
you can build exposing the state
which.
Hi this.
This.
Representative approach to come
up.
I don't know if you are you the.
Expert witness yes.
Very films.
Here it comes to save the day
number six four.
It is working.
Lots of water lots of lessons
such as I just need to the
center.
Okay for those of you on
committee substitute for house
bill thirty three Senator Hermio
is presenting that.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee now
this is something you and I
visited that I mean visit with
along with Senator Sanchez.
During the interim committee
when it comes to money for us to
make sense of this bill looks to
clarify which land numbers that
are currently political
subdivisions of the state
governed by the Land Grant
general provisions now he's of
this bill accomplish its by
naming also land grants to
directly in the statute going to
place the names in the statute.
Statutes specifically five of
the twenty two land grants.
Covered by the general
provisions founded chapter forty
nine article one of the New
Mexico statutes.
That is why this change is
needed so that federal and state
agencies other local governments
and private institutions like
banks no which land grants local
units of government joining me
this morning is my expert
witness Dr focal Baca The New
Mexico land that council to get
a few words we go with.
Yeah what are you.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and thank you
for your this bill is read about
nine bill it's almost a cleanup
bill all the land grants.
Seventeen land grants they're
currently active political
subdivisions of the state most
of the state receive a
distribution Representative
systems funds so we are up to
date on the part of the
requirements they follow it for
and every other
Requirement so this bill S.
economy a mention of will
explicitly added them to statute
many land grants for the dealing
with federal agencies stating
sometimes and private
institutions like banks and
credit unions have some
difficulty because they are not
explicitly mentioned in state
law so this will allow them to
join the five languages that
part of the city did state law
and will clarify their status
is.
C..
And everyone grant that is being
added is in support of this we
hopefully have a few months ago
model Anderson if you have a
hard time signing on to this but
we this was discussed and
discussed by language
communities it was discussed
with more grassroots
organization The New Mexico land
grants Senator and the the and
the council stand for support.
We have anybody in the this is
for.
Eleven opposition.
Well on this we have a couple
phones.
Granted under Mexican authority
it was submitted and approved by
the office of the surveyor
general instability Congress and
Congress took no action for
reasons unknown to us and great
community they did not pursue a
confirmation.
Claims act and so there's there
you know they were approved by
the surveyor general's office
enforcement of the time that
there was a lot of land
speculation so Congress quit
approving Landon requests
generally after about eighteen
seventy five and so they're
there you know a very legitimate
land grant a good documentation
for the never fully pursued
confirmation so this bill is
passed years ago was to
recognize them the state is that
this as we get.
Thank you good to.
Thank you madam chair a chair.
I get that stress of Congress to
do nothing but since eighteen
eighty six.
Madam chair
is something that is that is
correct right and there were
several other land grants madam
chair and senator you so the
that the same thing happened to
them their their claim was
submitted to Congress and
Congress didn't take any action
you had a subsequent surveyors
general that and by Congress to
not.
Any requests so those were kind
of on commercial drive to set
state.
and then you also have
subsequently that claims by land
speculators that would come and
for their claim to the court by
the land claims and pipeline
projects.
So the the language communities
the heirs of these caught in the
middle oftentimes didn't know
about the proceedings the court
I land claims because the due
process the notice requirements
were which followed or they
would publish that six of this
particular centered recalled I
was quest that they publish
notice of their hearings in
Albuquerque so that anything
less for Spanish speaking
community right.
The note says resources history.
So and madam chair I'm just
curious how many let friends and
lose.
Madam chair and Senator Ivey
Soto there was once a hundred
and twenty community land grants
and right now there is an
organized political subdivisions
of the state number in the range
of twenty to twenty five there
several sub grants as well but
we lost at least you can see
seventy five community land
grants part of our existence got
it and then to the just the
board of directors.
Is land grants service as its
own board of finance
madam chair and senator a subtle
yes they can actually be their
own fiscal sponsors so they they
don't need anybody else to
receive their money's so when
they are provided monies either
through capital outlay monies
for the get monies directly
through the lack of assistance
fund the kids and and they can
also apply for state and federal
grants it also says that they
can also apply for and receive
state and federal grants so for
instance that they going great
just received New Mexico outdoor
recreation grants.
But you would have okay so it.
Any of the questions committee
members Senator.
Chair thank you share our show
to review a correction in the
San Antonio del Rio Colorado
Land Rover present.
Change that but that's that was
the question I had well one it's
not.
Yes recognized at all the other.
Through that.
Through the I.
For that.
Show reduced.
The question why is it.
Why did not recognize exactly
where they need to go through
the process of community callers
project.
Quarter of private land claims
it it didn't do that I.
So hello we actually.
Including it in such a way that
it compares to the.
Madam chair and and Senator
Griggs the.
This particular part of a
chapter forty nine was passed
one six four eight years ago
and it was because the some of
the other vehicle around Land
Grant was organized as grantees
to function as a community
of errors and that there was no
there's no way that you can get
a land grant submitted
unfortunate sentry to half of
the to the federal government
ask for a recommendation the
statutes that enabled the
surveyor general's office and
report and claims expired and so
the cares went through small
claims court and did various
actions to conserve their own
private lots of small portions
of the land grants but the
balance the communal lands
mostly became federal
government.
and so there was a vested
interest in the court of my clan
claims to us really soon or ask
land grants to pursue their
claims because it was the
benefit of the federal
government to be able to gain
all of these all of this land as
part of the public domain and so
under this roof general's office
was more receptive to committee
land grants and and large claims
included those comments and I
think there was a more
adversarial.
The federal government clients
and even had a U. S. attorneys
that argued against those claims
now for reasons unknown to where
the US economy Komodo airs
never pursued under the court.
and from what we know that the
information is complete
we don't know for sure if land
speculators pursue this either
but it was one of those requests
that was pursued by landscape we
have no the extent to which
right so this is a very special
case and this is the only grant
that you'll see in chapter forty
nine point in HB thirty three
that did not receive a path if
you look everywhere and every
one of these requests to.
Other than that requests but it
was really no fault of their own
and it was they were recognized
as we for the state of New
Mexico to recognize this
community has cracked community
even though the federal.
You madam chair and senator.
There is being surveyed at least
important.
Initial what we what we
recognized recognizing those
particular.
At.
Perfected their land we re
trying to recognize you and are
thing that sure.
Even though there's never been
in the.
Action which would perfect all
through the whole car.
Submitted madam chair and
senator grace what you're
recognizing is the entity that
is Senator that record out Land
Grant the title if you could
look at the the titles to the
properties there with this grant
their route is still within the
right so if you look at
individuals title the chain of
title begins at the grand even
though the land grant is not
confirmed that is still the base
because when people try to
establish a totally want to find
the earliest possible there is a
possible is the funding this
community through this land
grant from Mexico so it gives
opportunity for this community
for the CENIC and the record
will allow us land grants to
pursue land purchases there's
often lines that remained SS.
They can actually go to the
counties have of Taos look at
that assessed land claims.
Thank you madam chair editions
kind of convoluted Care.
Whatever three of the the other
land grants were.
Kind of conclusion.
With what.
But this one direction it's kind
of the big issues.
So
regional madam chair the
original eight ridge of the
Santa the real quick on a land
grant was and remember what was
never pandemic to the receive
federal funding from the
recreation but I think that if I
remember right the ranges and
from there surveys was or
somewhere between about twenty
and forty thousand acres now the
amount that was confirmed
individuals not to keep
themselves numbers probably in
the fifteen hundred acre range
and those are the areas that
were people's homes the garden
plots there right away.
Jurors and share a message it's
all kind of fashion and with it
comes comes through the cross
but that one right are we
helping them by doing this is a.
So that chair Senator Griggs
this requests action Senator the
real cold out grant.
Section affected by this
legislation they already are.
So what this does is brings all
of those other grand starting on
page three H. through.
X. into and although the into
chapter forty nine and all of
those requests I actually did
receive so there process is much
clearer than it is for someone
to.
So you know that that grant
itself is not actually affected
by this legislation the state's.
Well constructed.
The.
Thank.
Thank you.
Any other questions committee
members I move to pass.
So the question.
The ability to do that and for
the second by Senator Sanchez.
Senator Griggs yes.
Yes Sir Senator Sweetser yes.
This.
Senator yes service yes.
The six.
Committee said for health this
study to be the staff.
Senator the way I that's an echo
you don't turn over the ball
like that.
Shares.
If you would have heard me talk
to the public I just wanted a
few steps to be worried about
the funding.
I had seen.
