The hearing.
I.
Hey.
Or.
The.
The other.
I have you mean this year or in
the eleven years I've been here
and I've been here way too many
times managers.
I think I have yes once you.
As
well including
Thank you very much madam chair
and Mr vice chair and members of
the committee so I think we're
all pretty well aware that
something that we can't see has
begun to creep into our public
way of life and that is cyber
attacks in those can be in the
way of of financial the tax
information data gathering
compromising the privacy you
name it and so you know we do
have a very large state
government and in the large lot
of agencies that do transactions
with state government on the you
know second by second basis
throughout the day and
throughout the year
you know we we need to do
something that that that brings
minimum security standards to
all of our systems in state
government and that's
essentially what we're coming
forward with today I I will say
that there was a lot of work in
the interim there was a lot of
work in the interim with regard
to working with that chief
information security officers in
the various state agencies and
other agencies that do
transactions again with the
state of New Mexico and but we
also worked a lot with CIO's
because this is step directly
going to you know affect a lot
of the work that they do and so
there were multiple meetings
that occurred in the interim all
the way leading up to the
session we didn't file this bill
until a little bit into the
session because want to make
sure that we had a final product
for the cisos chief information
security officers to look at
provide feedback we've been made
a lot of changes to it to make
sure that we satisfy a lot of
the feedback that we receive
from them and so we feel like
we're in pretty good shape there
we.
I have seen since severe
cyber security attacks madam
chair in the last couple of
months that have been pretty
devastating one of them I think
we're all aware of is regulation
and licensing department are of
the and as a result you know
almost everybody that does any
type of business in the state of
New Mexico was was attacked was
was affected by it what you're
gonna see here in in this
legislation and after you know
what we answer any of your
questions is it this is a
proactive attempt verses or
react scenario that we're trying
to to propose here I do have our
current system chief information
security officer here to my
right and he's gonna make a few
comments before we get rolling
and take other feedback and I
will say that not just what
happened with our all the which
was probably the most noticeable
tab that we've had in a while we
had school districts completely
shut down as a result we've had
the City of Albuquerque Los
crucis a few other major Rio
Rancho so so that the city
governments have also had severe
issues essentially what we're
saying is these are gonna be the
minimum security requirements
information security
requirements if you want to do
transactions with state
government you must it here to
this minimum standard I know
that madam chair you have a
couple questions that you're
going to want to ask us about
other state agencies that are
executive agencies that we will
definitely are open to receiving
that feedback and and figuring
out where we go from there but I
am in the ask our chief
information security officer to
to make a few comments hello I'm
sorry can I just say one more
thing before our system begins
we literally had a cyber attack
last night that actually
affected twelve state agencies
so this is how urgent and
important this is to get this
rolling.
Mister chief information
security officer thank you
senator and chair and members of
the committee my name is Roy
this and been and currently I'm
the chief information security
officer for the state of New
Mexico so all very good I like
to start is to give you a
general sense of what I would
anywhere CENIC's likely be have
seventy five agencies boards and
commissions they all follow
video set of standards there is
no common uniformed that across
the ecosystem and that is
working in favor of half the bad
guys so if I choose your
password length is eight
characters some may choose some
maybe you'll stand so there is
no consistency of the
standardization what this bill
will do is bring that minimum
security standards so that I can
look at one agency and and
different agency and see our
security posture is universal
across the ecosystem bill this
have any or impact all of the
federal issues that answer is no
if they have federal agency
which has of oversight function
and that is applicable to a
state agency I'm if they just
standards out higher they of
local agency will follow highest
all we are trying to do is
establish a minimum baseline so
that the bad guys don't abuse
one single entity which may be
the weakest link in the
ecosystem that can bring the
entire state infrastructure down
because we are all connected.
Divided we fall United we stand
a good security posture so thank
you Russia that additional
discipline on the job for the
state government and is always
available whenever we need him
and so I don't want to I'm not
going to read to you madam chair
but if you take a look at the F.
I. R. if there's you know
approximately fifteen twenty
what what's there that give the
specifics of what this office
will be doing establishing
security standards developing
protocols detecting mitigating
in a proactive manner as I said
previously accessing other state
of our arms and other agency IT
systems to validate that their
meeting the minimum standards
creating models for incident
management
serving as as a resource
developing that service catalog
so that agencies can easily get
to and from what they need to be
doing to update their systems
ensuring that state agencies
meet the regulatory environment
requirements all the way to the
second page results are your
attention to any of our which is
also obviously in the
legislation which is the second
paragraph on page two which is
establishing a cybersecurity
advisory committee the committee
will regularly meet with
professionals and in this venue
in this area and they will find
the direction that the agency
that that the office needs to go
in to ensure that we're meeting
of minimum standards that that
keep us from these threats but
again proactive versus reactive
thank you madam chair.
You.
You have.
The rules we do yes that.
I would deliver that several
days ago so you but essentially
what the substitute that I
should mention that thank you
madam chair this actually this
is a lot of the feedback that
came in from the various chief
information security officers in
the various agencies that do
government business with the
state government and have
transactions with the state
government for Senator from
approval but this was emailed
out last week to to the
commissions on.
Just a Senate bill two eighty
and for purposes of discussion
you can pass the Senate rules
committee substitute percent
completely.
And madam chair out of respect
for the minority of of really
the choir for in the future with
these if we can get L. to R.
analyst.
just informed me he has not seen
it and I was under the
assumption that that he was
moved in so we're kind of flying
blind at this point Senator I
apologize I was in the.
Make sure that.
I didn't figure you did it on
purpose it's a little early for
that.
That.
And and we were lucky enough to
get into a five days ahead of
time so with with.
We are.
We have a.
Or appropriations subcommittee
right now
the official actions that just
go ahead and look at the working
on this proposal and once the
for more people to.
That but if you have any
additional presentation.
I don't think so.
Could could you explain what's
what's different in this from
members of the committee that it
incorporated budgeting corporate
what's different about I think
it is madam chair and and
senator Ortiz Y. Pino it it's
streamlined a lot of the areas
that would have been up pushing
rather than pulling
and and I think that the the the
various agencies that also
created the cybersecurity
advisory committee which would
allow for regular discussion
with the various agencies
outside of state government to
do transactions with state
government and then there there
was just a lot of unknowns so
that wasn't anything major that
came from that feedback but
there were a lot of unknowns
because we didn't have the the
original bill produced until
right is the session was
beginning so that there was
there was a need for some
cleaning of just small pieces of
language here and there.
Madam chairman Senator did the
meant that make up of the
advisory committee change no it
did not.
Okay thank.
so we'll go to the discussion.
Nobody signed up for COVID all
of us are actually yes no sign
of for home and other on support
or opposition
if you have any organized
support we want to present I.
I thought I had been the
committee before if I have it I
assume you might go to the
audience to us we still have
about I would think about ten
minutes left in our in our
window of time.
I have about ten minutes left so
if there's recognizes our budget
for two seconds are just up for
a show of hands anyone here to
insert the.
just has anyone here in
opposition of the bill.
Hello not online.
If there's about the only thing
I'll say then is that we have
the acting and the secretary
designate for a department of
information technology here
Peter Mentos and Todd Barrett
who is the chief counsel for the
department as well and they will
be serving as additional expert
witnesses should I need that
assistance thank you.
All right so roll Senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator
do their due to any other
departments currently have a
position similar to this just
within their department separate
from do it.
Madam chair and senator pirtle
are you referring to the
position of chief information
security officer any position
similar to the one that you're
creating yes the there are are
several all that the states is
so Senator thank you chair and
then Senator yes there are about
thirty six position as part of
this IT security and compliance
job family.
And out of that twenty five
positions of felt and the rest
of them is vacant so the larger
agencies have.
Many of these positions within
their function to meet federal
mandates and compliance with.
And madam chair and senator how
are we gonna have that many.
people operating independently
and then expect some how do it
to manage and to and basically
be in charge of people that are
under the purview of do it so
madam chair and senator I would
liken it in a lot of ways to
sort of how
PED might operates you would
have a secretary of the public
education and then you would
have a superintendent in that
which operates a Thomas Lee and
does bless you and does their
work based on what the
requirements are of the Public
Education Department so you you
could could kind of use that
model we don't have that today
the reason that we're probably
more vulnerable is because you
have everything being done every
which way from Tuesday and I
wouldn't say that they're doing
a bad job they're just doing
what they're HSD is ask them to
do now we're going to be setting
up a framework much like I was
using the example of PED these
are minimum standards that
you'll need to meet in order to
operate your in your environment
to do transactions with state
government so that yes Sir and
senator I think a more efficient
way would would possibly be to
have the employee be of do it
within the department so that
they answer back to this group
because again I think you're
gonna have thirty five or so
people who are in charge of
their own
cybersecurity and yet you have
this whole separate entity in do
it putting a lot of these things
forward hello how are we going
to have is going to come from
the direction of the governor to
then have the other department
heads the secretary say Hey
listen to the cyber security
person I mean I I think we're
gonna have a.
A real problem with
communication and implementation
because of that and maybe the
best way forward moving forward
with this is having these
individuals of thirty five or
thirty six positions within
these other the actual employees
of the the department of
information technology and
that's been an issue that that
I've seen since I've been
a legislator and and really get
my head the wall or the table or
whatever's closest to me as to
why we have a department of
information technology in this
separate from them within every
single department there's
somebody that does that job as
well duplication of effort
drives me insane it is wasteful
and ineffective inefficient and
then really I think we're just
with this legislation madam
chair and senator we're just
adding to that chaos and I think
there's got to be a better way
to do this said that would
really achieve the goals that
you're trying to achieve and I I
applaud you for for wanting to
do that but I don't think
growing government is the answer
thank you for the response is
needed madam chair thank you
for.
Happy to give a response.
There was a lot there more yes
yes thank you enter respectfully
Senator Pirtle I I hear you and
and and to let you know what I
hope this makes realize maybe
some of your fears that's
exactly where I started what you
just described that's exactly
what I was hoping to do
and efficiency drives me Batty
also that's why you see me come
in here every couple of years
with some new department a new
office for something to try to
streamline things and make
things work a little better but
we're we're the philosophical
the in and I hear you loud and
clear on in terms of how are you
going to get these departments
to participate and and operate
this way well the carrot in in
the sticker gonna be you know
I'm gonna have to be allowed to
have transactions with state
government until you meet these
minimum security standards and
so it's not that there's going
to have to be in single to make
a lot more sense to me to go
down this path first in this
this route this this
methodology first and that is
you know
it would entail you adhere to
the standards you're not going
to have transaction to state
government so it's going to be
impossible for you to do that
and that that's where the care
of the state comes from thank
you.
Thank you senator Senator.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you senator of this of course
there is a questions mostly
because.
I don't understand cybersecurity
very well but maybe you can help
me figure this out that last
thing you said about you will be
able to do business the state
government unless you meet
minimum standards that's why
this is that in this bill.
Where is that in the bill.
So the basically establishes of
the in on page three
Section three.
Established and right in the
middle of the page established
security standards and policies
to protect so this basically
this group would.
The advisory group pulled out by
in establishing that standard
set of practices and what not
for all agencies to
employment.
Madam chairman and and and to
secretary and and at that time
is a yes Representative not that
that that that alright so with
this includes people that
contacted the state.
His business with the state like
a Medicaid providers and are
CYFD providers and our health
department providers they would
all be subject to this as well
you thank you thank you chair
and senator.
If the that is a possibility it
could extend to some of those
vendors if they have state data
on their devices.
What we are trying to prepare
you for the data has a tendency
to move to have and with the if
the vendor is trying to hold on
to their data from one of our
purpose like testing purpose as
a politician and then they need
to have the minimum basic
protection that this would.
Recommend for example encrypting
the laptop that contains the
data so that the bad guys would
not walk away with that data.
Madam chairman of yeah I can see
that this advisory committee is
going to have a lot of work
because the diversity of those
arrangements is such a thing the
big NCOs for example the managed
care organizations of the the
billion dollar Medicaid contract
they're big enough they probably
wouldn't have any trouble with
the state that they already have
their own security but the
community clinics in the
individual providers that.
Have individual patient data
that identity and so on on their
I wouldn't spend that for madam
chair and members of the
committee Senator up it I I
don't think it will be impact
that because the existing but
standards will address the
baseline for that and in those
madam chairman and and says a
Senator and rather the those get
the standards include
cybersecurity standards they do
yes yes Senator yes a couple of
the questions madam chairman
do we ever pay ransom.
Madam chair and and Senator I
don't have the answer to that
the can I ask the secretary
designate to maybe he's willing
to comment on some of the money.
Madam chair Senator that's a
great question the answer is no.
Special in this oral the issue
related
to this issue of establishing an
office is also a fund and that
fund is we know that despite our
best efforts and and timing wise
we are going to get hit again on
you know all across the state
not just state agencies and this
fund every time we get hit
according to IBM and others it's
like four million dollars to
recover and and mitigate the
after effects of our see a
ransomware attack.
No we won't pay a dime for
ransom but it does cost money to
recover and we want to set up a
fund so that we can be ready to
help agencies if and when these
procedures fail and just while
you're there Madam chairman of
the same issue that some of our
school districts apparently have
been hit yes of of local
government this is that's
correct Bernalillo county we
don't pay ransom does that
extend to them.
We do not Senator thank you for
the question madam chair we do
not have that authority we were
to tell them to pay or not we
discourage them from doing so
they did ask for help we did
help and it was to mitigate and
prevent future occurrences but
no not not to pay and our
authority we cannot tell them to
pay or not to pay.
Thank you
And then you you alluded madam
chairman and and senator and.
Acting secretary of.
So I it's not in this bill that
is correct Senator where is that
Fund is it is it already created
or do we have a separate piece
of legislation is a separate
piece of legislation center does
anybody have the number of all
right Sir.
We will see that what will we
see that there's it's very
possible that you'll see it yes
this committee.
I don't know that it'll just
yeah and I don't want I can
certainly Jordan leader to
figure out where to send it.
At the fund is not for rents and
purposes of.
Mitigate the effects of the
these it's essentially to review
the right what will this that
the
This is the for the cyber
security office for its services
provided pursuant to the act so
the services this would be one
of them so madam chair and ask
Senator they ended up that fund
would be to assist any entity
that is impacted based on the
incident for the post of
recovery have.
Okay.
The speaker okay.
But thank you madam chairman I
think senator for for working on
this I mean I think this is
something that that.
Thanks a lot of us sitting
really worries a lot of us
because of the potential for a.
And and.
Just the if the affected
individual lives but also in
agency operations is so
catastrophic that happens
I am aware of the health
provider in in our neck of the
woods Senator that participate
rents and they just did the
calculation it was cheaper to
pay ransom and try to get out of
from hundred fifty you know as a
policy for the state that would
be I think there's a.
I agree madam chair Senator
eventually the the ransom is
going to be requested is going
to be so enormous that it's
going to cause catastrophic on
on on services you know of our
ability to deliver services so
that's why getting ahead of it
this way it's going to be so
important.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair.
Yeah additional.
Senator.
I.
I have too much time to look at
this.
One one.
I have a little okay
so first of all thank you for
coming with us.
That is **** on the line that
issues.
the state that is not just a lot
of issues that affect the rating
initiative grant
One of the issues.
It here is the top us yesterday
on so the HSD is fine it's fine
as.
But we have independent.
Executive agencies that break.
Well
who are going to have some sort
of.
Pretty specific to their
expertise
State
Probably are always on offices.
MFA.
That's correct and so my
speaking with secretary states
offices that day with one
clarification to this definition
agencies to make clear that.
That this and later in the day.
Executive agencies.
I just.
Limitations.
but AJ.
That.
The.
Others but this survey issue.
Times of agencies with that
relations of the cyber security
advisory committee however
compliance is four agencies are
county clerk from.
Voluntary and it just because
there's no as of yet or sectors
we don't define non committees.
Representative is the right time
and this is just for now.
And folks percent what is on the
HSD is.
I was just thinking at all very.
And
that is the same.
Specify.
Agency requests.
And the more I sat here.
We often.
Yes that includes that provision
of non.
I see
it right now that is just see
that is where the person who has
it was either alleged.
Secretary of state for the.
An officer.
I.
It sure helps I.
So
so we're going I'm sorry what
we're we're we're we're
definitely open you may I talked
about this on the floor I think
yesterday the day before and I
did deliver you know we did.
To let you know there was going
to be a substitute for the so
that I'd always just couple days
overall very busy so but we're
definitely open to the sec you
know the the amendment to
further clarify so that the
secretary of state's office and
other state agent non
executive swell.
Yeah I see that I see this that
the conundrum there like how do
you define it so I'm we're open
to that we just want to make
sure that it doesn't take any.
Of the seventy how many agencies
seventy five seventy five
agencies out of what we're
trying to accomplish here.
And some of them are here.
Going up.
In law I.
On to the US than those have
that act
on consistency.
Hi I just read there are a
consequences maybe.
I potentially.
Agencies.
This is
that's what it says I have the
case to get here and.
Just ask.
Work on this
and I fear the first thing I.
That is off the changes that
there are are.
That.
I.
So can we just yes so so another
thing that we're probably
dealing with you're too is even
than on.
Are the other executive agency
or the other executive offices
secretary of state's office
whatever they already have
requirements of federal
standards so where elections are
law enforcement are concerned
they already have to beat
homeland security U. S. homeland
security minimum standards as
well and nothing in the
legislation
Calls for anything less than
that so I don't that's another
reason we didn't feel like we
needed to go down the road.
bifurcating the legislation for
other departments or other state
Would you call them state
offices executive offices that
are not on.
Yes so that that's another
reason why we didn't think that
it was necessary
six.
This.
Why is this year.
Passed out there but I.
You can you give me an example
of the agencies that you think
we might be have some unintended
consequences.
Sectors.
Hello these windows and we
understand.
so that.
But I I.
it looks like our vision plans
is there and.
we were just one of the agencies
madam chair that has been
chatting with do it was on for.
We've already talked to them at.
what were you referring that
ensure to any of the seventy
five state agencies that are
under the purview of the
governor that okay.
That that gives me a lot more
coverage than with what you're
trying to do okay I I I Senator
says the that seventy five is
including some of these plans is
also set out to the extent that
there are hundreds of the
governor absolutely I.
Some may have in the back of my
head out for the.
FY like I said.
Another thought
On page three.
I I was thinking this to have a
full rulemaking for.
Yes and that would be a
direction given by the advisory
committee.
I I think it might be a good
idea absolutely was there Page
three line thirteen after that
one point average adopt so
stress abolition certain in
their adopt and implement the
rules establishing.
The minimum security standards
policies to protect people's
information technology systems
instructors taught strike
find is that certainly there
And to provide and providing
appropriate governance and
application of standards and
policies process not a problem
I'm gonna have one more session
to that that sentence but but
later stopped there
No disagreement happy that
switches clarify that you have
exposed is that from their
accent friendly.
I read so we have.
any special that in the.
Your smoker could you just read
it again so yes page three at
live.
Stride the staff.
Certainly there
adopt rules establishing.
That.
And that that's all this.
Page three line fifteen stride
provide certain provided stands
provided.
Sure last page three.
The substituting for find and
find.
Just.
So the special.
Any objections to the dolphins.
And that is adopted as we have
for now we are.
It is.
this up for discussion thank
you.
His injury on that line
On page three line eighteen
right now I have but we're
confidentiality and I'd like to
install the security.
overall it is
So that I have in front and the
committee access concerns with
our staff this and this really
addresses I think the the vast
majority of them are subject to
meetings act
But then but we don't any took
actually which is.
This specifically said this year
is presented to a generated by
Senator security advisory
committee
parts that for each of that.
But.
No it doesn't it's not and.
The language here that the
reports to the legislature our
office will second but.
I think.
You clearly address how is it
that works with us
so what does is all and realism
jump around here can I just jump
in for one second so there's
we're covering a lot there so
Representative Sarinana is
coming forward with a in April
bill related to this topic also
we didn't want to make it turn
it into a.
But but if we need to marry that
one with this one at some point
I.
But but there isn't an effort on
the part subject related to
cybersecurity coming your way
coming our way I guess I was
selected to be addressing this
bill and I think it's also
he's looking at case.
I'm gonna get that yes officer
for that yes okay that
confidentiality.
Because of on page eight.
The.
The.
Generated by Senator security
advisory committee is actually
open meetings act and I'd like
to answer after that and the
public records.
On and then.
With this subject to accept
section of their meeting this
year on.
Public is the ability.
One that information system
are operated by the orders of
superiors.
That.
So will maintain the secession
and.
That well I.
Just as well funds were aided
by doesn't lack I realize I
promise madam chairman chuckling
and just we had a huge debate
over this very issue because it
keeps.
Actually that and and I and I
talked to Paul about this.
and while I think a lot of that
the initial concern our
softwares this is still one I I
think the.
The stock has to protect the
electors.
Thank you because that was the
big nut to crack over this can I
have a five second huddle with.
This is.
Questions.
We'll go back to.
Okay we're we're good friendly
okay great that's an easier five
six seven seconds.
So so that in this case eight
one four.
After
meetings and.
So that it does apply to these
is that.
That is why I was also making
you want to make that change on
page three change the
confidentiality there to
security one because it would be
in keeping with the fact that
Pratt does generally applied to
otherwise this would might read
as though you could make rules
that would advocate for us which
is definitely never our
intention I think as a
legislature
said that amendment
and actually did we address the
first amendment about abroad
what I want the amendment on
page eight
inserting and at problem line
for meetings act from the moment
special on that amendment
Senator so madam chair which
point to spell it out not going
to put it yes yes thank you
legislative session and the
inspection of public records act
right.
It's from the.
Any objections that.
See that stuff to.
The exact page three the the
switch it out online state
competition percent.
Thanks for FY.
All the things that.
Actually advocated for a.
Because there is that yes the
links up with what's on it so.
And special that.
Seeing then that amendment is
also.
So I they.
That would want to go back one
more time to the state agencies
the state is.
We have a state official here no
she wants to see her I just.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair thanks to
the sponsor for a long we just
about in here so I am Stephanie
Garcia Richard we are state
agency of the State Land Office
with our own independent systems
and and also have you know
concerns that that potentially
these requirements could affect
us negatively and so we we are
actually in very close
communication with do it around
our cybersecurity and are of
standards on cybersecurity go
above and beyond what's even
contained in this bill so we
would
Very respectfully support the
mission of I guess what you're
calling non executive agencies
okay.
And so thank.
The state.
One eight.
striving.
Yes
chair of a non executive.
With that right HSD otherwise I
need a non executive agency
executive director State.
And all of that Representative.
That
that that
that that.
So all.
As a.
Well it is I I'm with you though
madam chair that I I don't have
a better with more artful would
put it
is there anything in the
constitution you can think of as
as I I don't have a country with
the.
Just word searches online
sellers.
Have not been into some language
not percent pop up.
We may have something for you
can we just a time my the
representative of the council do
it
give us a little more.
Thank you can stand up and
become.
The thank you madam chair
to.
I think the intent was to
capture the executive cabinet
level agencies and we can simply
state that would apply to the
executive cabinet agencies and
their administratively attached
agencies boards and commissions.
so that captures the seventy
five that we talked about that
make sure that you bring in the
boards and commissions as well
yeah I think that.
Means so the.
The HSD means executive cabinet
agencies there administratively
attached agencies boards and
commissions.
All of the status of that.
Thank you
so page one.
Twenty.
After
being.
Strike the remainder of that
line and line twenty four.
The.
And certainly there have.
Executive cabinet agencies.
For more.
Administratively attached.
I'm sure agencies boards and
commissions.
Agencies susceptible out.
And they're Mr leader taps
agencies boards and commissions.
And madam chair if I may
interrupt we do have one that's
called an office so we can say
offices as well.
The very minute surely Task
agency offices come up for
missions.
Madam chair.
Yeah just to madam chairman it
just the way the constitution
does that a they say the
executive branch.
Consist of a governor that shall
consist of.
The governor.
Secretary of state state auditor
state treasurer Attorney General
and commissioner of public lands
so if we say executive branch we
would be including all of them
and that is changes that's
exactly why we're making this
change because right now they
would all be included in that
and the current language we want
to make sure that we're making
clear that those independent
offices like the AG's office SO
Act would dismiss your public
lands are not not included.
So how have you done that
because of isn't the issue the
governor things that are done to
the governor's directive those
the ones you don't want to
include exactly we define
agencies say executive then
you're putting all of them well
so what we're saying is
executive cabinet agencies.
So we're making we're making a
specific to her cabin.
in order to add to capture those
ones that are under her feelings
I governor the simplest.
I think this I think this covers
and I think this doesn't.
Okay I mean it's but it just
seems like it's a round about
way.
This set so the way that it
would then right is that HSD
unless otherwise specified
means executive cabinet agencies
and their administratively
attached agency offices comma
four comma and commissions madam
chair should it be agencies come
offices come up.
Boards and commissions.
Well it's really R. as does it
have an agency have have another
agency within it well you'll
have madam chair office of
broadband access and expansion
verses.
Thank you have a sub agency
within an agency are we talking
about the offices boards and
commissions up in HSD.
Miss madam chair there can be an
administratively attached agency
to an agent's office and that
case yes it should be and and
you know how the LCS commas so I
don't know.
Okay those callers but
So agency unless otherwise
specified means executive
cabinet agencies and there
administrative we attach the HSD
is common boards are no agencies
call offices come up boards and
commissions thank you madam
chair silently got the offer
faster as my auntie told me what
I was was a third grade teacher
for twenty five years Michael
Commisso your friend.
And then the more I mean all
that.
Okay so that is the torture
which I can the state if anyone
needs at the mas but sure so
page one line twenty three.
striking and and then strictly
all one twenty four and
inserting in lieu there
Executive cabinet agencies and
their administratively attached
agencies comma office for common
conditions.
No no no no offer.
If I mean I think the unintended
consequence we have a member of
the executive here in the
audience with the State Land
Office that the now we would be
removing the state land
commissioner of the yes JG the
treasurer that's intended that's
that's includes the center yes
that's that's the intent the has
the that they could still that
so what it means is that these
minimum standards are voluntary
for them
but they are the independent of
the governor those agencies and
I think it's important to
respect that independence but
also some of them are going to
have had a need.
Other security issues like
secretary of state's office
who's and or other or AG's
office frankly if they're
they're gonna have some unique.
Things that probably they're
gonna want to do with our state
that we would hope that they're
still meeting the federal
minimum standards but we don't
want to find their hands
there is some madam chair thank
you and and I know that a lot of
people coming and leaving the
room the coming back but so
those agencies madam chair
center actually new to me state
where elections and law
enforcement concerns
specifically the others Land
Office I can't really speak to
with the they have to meet
minimum standards at the US
federal homeland security
standards set for them so in a
lot of so that they're already
meeting standards that we're
proposing here they're required
to.
Quick comment at legislation on
issues made a comment to help
their hands are tied they're
only tied when they want to.
That's what you have.
I would be very careful you may
have to do committees of the
amended this coverage and it may
need to go through this.
Trying to kill us with lots of
things.
We've been.
Right here sure we tried to do
this time or to match very
difficult.
So madam chair you know again we
we brought you a substitute and
we're anticipating that when we
leave you it will be a
substitute with these amendments
that you all agree to today so
it's much cleaner we get over to
finance to go through the
various pieces.
The full access thank you.
Then just for your adult it with
your diligence manager class the
acting secretary secretary
doesn't just thirty six you want
to add something.
Thank you madam chair just the
senator to help allay your
concerns about the non executive
agencies participation.
All over the years they have
been kicking and screaming and
dragging their feet on some
efforts but I'm happy to report
that some of the efforts that
we've implemented this year with
respect to cybersecurity
including phone bility
management.
All of them have participated
and it is true that the
the SLO has exceeded our
expectations for example we do a
monthly scan of vulnerabilities
they do it weekly.
we have implemented multi factor
authentication they are with us
they're doing this we have a
single pane of glass into the
state's cybersecurity posture
and they are participating thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
The only thing Madam chair I was
apologize.
Making the change on page one
starting at one twenty three do
you I thought you said we may
need to do this somewhere else
did you have anything else you
needed to have on that on that
point.
and right down the road I don't
think we do but I just want to
make sure with your.
Legal expertise that did not
there was anything else we
needed to on that topic the
rules of the.
I saw but if you please.
That.
Is that.
Of course on the amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting that amendment.
that is a doctor so yes.
In this place of show some
report on the subject.
that amendment is adopted
Senator Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
back on the so madam chairman
thank you and thank you senator
but the I just realized in
section six.
Three separate offices.
Maybe.
All the furniture record person.
Place in other properties
pertaining to the cyber security
of the depart Department of
information technology transfer.
Moving them out of the.
I thank you madam Mr chair and
the mission center yes they
would become their own office
much the same that we set up the
office of broadband access
expansion administratively they
will be attached to do it but
they but they will be their own
office with that their own
responsibilities advisory board
that we set up here and and all
that yes.
Because Mr chairman the met Mr
chairman and senator much like
broadband we made that decision
it was it was just there was no
centralized combines setting
standard setting policies it we
we had seventeen agencies trying
to deliver broadband this brings
it into one area so that there's
a unified standards based
methodology in terms of managing
this process for state
government.
And and that Mr Chairman do it
doesn't doesn't do that they do
some of it today but then you
heard a lot of discussion about
other agencies and how they
operate.
Our to do.
We have another office.
We're not adding any additional
staff.
Okay this.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you it does it does seem
like we are from proliferating I
mean we have a private office
and it was approved secretary
of.
Do it.
Not sure that makes a lot of
sense of the the whole point of
of of of the I have a central
place is one place where you get
all your information needs taken
care of but that's what this
stuff going on and that and the
information thank you thank you
senator any other comments or
questions.
The number of Senator Stewart.
Mr Chairman.
Have Senate bill two eighty pass
from Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty it'll be a point three
versions include.
There's been a motion is there
any opposition to that motion
Raul help please we could have a
roll call vote.
Top of.
Senator Baca no Senator Ingle
that.
Senator Ingle passed Senator
Lopez is excuse Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores is excuse Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle no Senator Pirtle
no Senator Stefanics yes and to
explain my vote.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes and to explain why
the.
Yes Senator Hermio yes thank you
yes and senator do you can see.
You have I yes to know and three
excuse thank you for that will
go to Senator budget later okay.
Sorry Senator Ingle did not fill
of of what now.
No twice.
Thanks.
I yes three male and three thank
you for that I will go to
Senator panic just wait explain
her vote followed by Senator
Stewart so Mr chair first of all
I have the same concern as
senator or to see Pino and I
hope this will be fleshed out
about creating another state
agency but secondly I asked for
a roll call vote because the
people on the webcast do not
know what we're doing if we
don't do it verbally thank you
very much.
Senator Stewart thank you madam
chair I just want to thank the
sponsor this is so much better
this substance it's clear we
need to this office this is not
a new agency this is having
security people have their own
place to work with each other
with their advisory committee in
the do it office already so
let's let's.
Doing it only moving this five
or six years the school setting
office wind within the agency we
need this we we needed it last
year.
It years ago and we will I'm
sure amend this as we go forward
in the years at least we thought
this and we can get started on
that so that is the reason of my
yes vote and I want thanks to
the thank you madam chair thank
you.
I think that this for less than
that.
Thank you.
I just on the point of cyber
security I was half this morning
and if anybody was asked to I
mean out part of either donated
either donated to domestic
violence shelter or just know it
was a half thank you very much.
Senator and I see you have
worked at that time with the
folks.
And that you want to four
minutes for rebuttal this you
have organized support I'm sorry
organized opposition sign up
so I will all help with time but
also asked if the.
Keep your speakers within within
the time that you have a lot of.
Thank you madam chair and I I
hope you got the email about
State Land Office Stephanie
Garcia who is also going to
speak and we're going to kind of
take it I sent the email but
because she has a limited time
of we're going to kind of move
for up if that's okay just
briefly introduce of the story
of the green amendment madam
chair committee members the
story of the New Mexico
environmental rights amendment
began two years ago.
Joanne I and and I learned about
its effectiveness in other
states I mean Representative
Ferrary and I learned about its
effectiveness in other states.
And we also saw that the Lujan
Grisham administration was doing
solid environment to work
through rulemaking.
Many of you know that I have
read article twenty section
twenty one the pollution control
amendment of our New Mexico
constitution on the floor many
times.
But I also know in the one case
that has been brought under
article twenty section twenty
one it failed to stop then
governor Martinez from reversing
governor Richardson's
administrations painstaking
rulemaking finding on the
environment and climate change.
The result was record record
methane poisoning environmental
chaos with regard to produced
water no climate goals and
little if any agency
enforcement.
That has changed with the
Michelle Lujan Grisham
administration.
With the passage of Senate this
Senate joint resolution six
voters will be allowed to vote
on whether they prioritize are
beautiful but environmental and
environmentally fragile
environment and if it passes the
environmental protections put in
place during the Lujan Grisham
administration rulemaking will
require a consideration of the
impact of I'm doing those
regulations on our air our land
our water and our health.
This amendment passed rules
committee in twenty twenty one
with a good free right I had
modeled it on Pennsylvania which
is a little forty an old
fashioned I I admit last year we
further home the amendment in
House Energy Environment and
natural resources of with
Representative McQueen doing
some really great work on it.
Because the community this year.
Gave us incredible feedback we
added an environmental equity
component to make it clear that
in New Mexico we care that all
people no matter their race
ethnicity tribal status socio
status and geography all people
are are given the benefit of
this ammendment because of the
time project like yes state land
commissioner Stephanie Garcia
Richard to make a statement
before Representative Ferrary
makes a statement.
Madam chair thank you so much
for having me so I am Stephanie
Garcia Richard on state land
commissioner I oversee thirteen
million acres of our state's
public statement and I I very
much appreciate the breach in
protocol to allow me to speak
today
You know what I really want to
say I I have been supporting the
green amendment since it was
first introduced I believe two
years ago and I I have had
numerous conversations with.
No it's an opponent's on this
particular piece of legislation
in this recommendation to before
you all today and really what
continues to resonate with me is
that we are trying just the same
way that we protect the other
rights that we enjoy both in
this country but in the state
of of freedom and and right to
speak and write to participate
in our government we are asking
the voters whether or not they
will prioritize their right to a
clean environment clean air
clean water and what this
particular proposal has done is
brought in voices that you don't
necessarily see when we are
making policy here in this
building and I I've seen some of
these voices in our in our
energy policy discussions I hope
you hear from some of them today
but they are basically the
future generation who are
looking at the the future of of
like of the the sponsor said a
very fragile ecosystem and
wanting to weigh in in a very
positive way by reinforcing
reinforcing their rights.
To clean air clean water in in
our state and so I'm very
hopeful that some of those folks
also will be able to speak today
I cannot stick around to listen
to them but I did want to be
here to stand in strong support
of of this proposal so thank you
so much for hearing from you
thank you thank you.
Now we'll hear a brief statement
from representatives of join
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members just briefly
breeding madam chair this of the
green amendment will add to the
bill of rights sections of the
constitution our constitutional
right to clean and healthy
environment and it will
establish a clear trustee
obligation on New Mexico
government officials to protect
the state's natural resources
for the benefit of both present
and future generations and by
placing environmental rights and
our constitutional
constitutions bill of rights we
are insuring that.
We are given the same legal and
constitutional standing as other
inalienable rights of
fundamental importance to all
New Mexicans and we recognize
the importance of protecting our
speech rights our religious
freedoms.
And our civil rights and it is
just as important to protect the
rights of our people to clean
water and air and healthy
climate and environment.
And having the green amendment
will help us to ensure that
existing environmental laws and
regulations are implemented to
give full potential and they
will also provide a basis for
advancing new needed protections
and it will also make clear that
protecting environmental rights
is the duty of all government
officials not just our
legislature.
And the amendment will not
undermine economic development
in our state it will just make
sure that economic industry and
business growth has to protect
our environment which itself is
essential to help the economy
and is essential for the health
safety and the happiness of all
New Mexicans.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative madam chair I'm
proud to introduce my of in
Boston who is the author of
green amendments for the
generations she's written an
inspiring book that's now in its
second edition.
Thank you madam chair for the
opportunity to testify and to
add some helpful points for
committee consideration.
I'd like to just offer that
there is nothing unique and how
this proposed environmental
rights amendment will operate
legally all of the same rules of
constitutional and legal
interpretation will apply to the
environmental rights amendment
at the plate to all other
constitutional bill of rights
protections and so New Mexico
judges who already deal with
constitutional challenges as
well as environmental cases on a
regular basis are already well
equipped to effectively use this
ammendment to strengthen
environmental protection and
environmental justice.
And to do so in a way that is
respectful of the other arms of
New Mexico government just as
the judges and the other three
green amendment states have done
so Pennsylvania Montana New York
in these other three green
amendment states that have
similar amendments the
legislative executive and
judicial branches of government
have all expectedly use their
amendments there is no
inappropriate usurpation of
authority by one branch of
government over the other in the
three states with similar
amendments there is no matter
massive rush of litigation in
every instance save for perhaps
one the cases that have been
brought citing the green and
then it would have been pursued
regardless based on other legal
claims the constitutional claim
is brought in either as an
additional claim but most often
is brought in to help interpret
and apply the existing laws that
are at issue in the case so
there's not a net increase in
the actual number of legal
actions that are brought forth
into the courts and no cases
have been dismissed as
frivolous.
The number of cases that do
actually make it into the court
system in the state for judicial
intervention intervention has
been less than ten a year there
are some administrative
challenges but does get resolved
at those very early stages and
don't make it up into the courts
and I would just like to
conclude by offering that the
Pennsylvania green amendment and
what we see in other states
in other states where the cases
include a green amending claim
that they have not cost and
frontier do hardship on the
agency resources the agencies
that have involved been involved
in those cases they actually
help to support agency focused
on prevention of environmental
pollution degradation and harm
which has provided a cost
savings to both state and local
government budgets thank you
madam chair for the opportunity
to testify.
Madam chair I'd like to improve
the to ask Kyle to still who is
a senior attorney with the
invest western environmental law
center.
I believe he's online saying I
have about ten minutes.
Please go ahead.
Yes thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Kyle
dissolved as the senator Sam a
senior attorney and I climbed
Energy program director for the
western environmental law center
and I work out of our house
office I'm speaking today to
offer support for S. year six
while New Mexico while New
Mexico has a tapestry of
environmental laws and
regulations there remains a
significant gap in the
protection of our water air soil
and climate.
The staff is made evident by a
persistent negative
environmental and health
outcomes that occur throughout
our state and in particularly
for the people and communities
at the front lines of extractive
industries.
Having the constitutional
authority offered through Esther
six will provided legal support
and forty for government
officials and communities to
address these negative outcomes
and safety net that currently
doesn't exist.
Looking specifically at article
twenty section twenty one is my
opinion that appealing this
language have no legal impact on
the state's authority or power
to legislate Environment
additions however this repeal
does have the benefit of
ensuring broad environmental
responsibility is shared by all
all government officials rather
than leaving that responsibility
solely to the legislature.
S. year six is focused on
protecting environmental rights
not simply pollution control.
Notably in the past year six
would help facilitate a just
transition for New Mexico by
promoting telling government
interests to address climate
change and environmental harms
as well as promoting more
equitable equitable process sees
to engage people in communities
and to avoid potential legal
challenges.
It is impossible piece Mealing
individual laws and regulations
to address every situation or
occurrence environmental harms
exist let alone anticipate
involving environmental and
health challenges our
communities will face in the
future.
Esther six can help we've this
existing tapestry of law
together to ensure more
equitable outcomes and help
bring environmental and climate
justice that our communities so
deserving the thank you.
Thank you madam chair and is it
as we talked this morning I
thought that we were doing this
Wednesday of the twentieth so I
had thought that you would all
have time to read over this why
do that you have been provided
with I believe the reason we did
this binder is because it was a
lot of misinformation floating
and legal memos that just really
for hypothetical upon
hypothetical and some want you
to have concrete answers we also
brought for mark freed in KC
Manahan I'm not sure if Casey
van and was able to stay a more
free is a public sector law of
is that a partner with public
sector law environmental law and
litigation I believe is on line.
Thank you madam chair of like
here members of the committee
it's an honor to be here in
front of you if I may just
briefly qualify myself on a
partner at the law firm of
Kernan he's here in Pennsylvania
I'm also elected Pennsylvania
county supervisor I'm a former
system council with Pennsylvania
department of environmental
protection and also a former
prosecutor with the attorney
general's trying to
navigate numerous cases on
behalf of local governments.
Organizations and individuals
involving Pennsylvania screen
amendment and have addressed
Greenman issues in states across
the country including Montana
New York both of which currently
have twenty minutes.
I just want to briefly address a
couple issues what the green
amendment is and and isn't
F. as we are
us R. six really proposes to
very basic items one is an
individual right of people to
clean and healthy environment
and to is that all levels of
state government the trustees
protect the state's natural
resources we've already heard
from miss van Rossum about some
of the litigation issues the
only comment I will make
generally the green amendments
in other states have been
applied as a limitation on
government overreach not as a
not as a basis for government to
to start taking
at least in the litigation is
additional action it's it's
really to to prevent over region
there's a number of examples of
that and in Pennsylvania other
states
outside.
Context it is also a powerful
tool for state at all levels
including state county and local
governments to protect drinking
water supplies from cancer
because of ten eighty.
Affect air resources from
pollution releases a secure
cleanup of hazardous site by
responsible parties and advance
good projects and government
decisions healthtech impairment
in a in a dress of climate
issues of it's really been used
to insure that
permits consider the full range
of involvement ramifications and
harms of there is been a lot of
discussion and I want to address
one last point if I may
that the there's been a concern
that is going to somehow impact.
Community mystery
we have not seen any evidence of
that in the states that have a
green amendments I'm not aware
of any cases attacking clean
energy and frankly I will tell
you that the the green amendment
is often cited as a basis and
resolutions that I that I see at
local government level business
my Mister freeze I'm sorry your
your time is up and
unfortunately we have we have a
set aside for minutes for
rebuttal and so I just wanted to
mention the committee we have of
that concludes the experts so it
looks like the only time we had
was for our experts which is
really unfortunate we have Paul
Gibson Nicole my answers so few
firmer Care Josi for yucca
Jonathan we we have several
people who are online and I was
hoping that some of them would
have time to speak and I just
want to apologize to all of them
because and to say it's your
voices that we're doing this for
so thank you madam with that and
I also do want to introduced by
one of the co sponsors we have
twenty people of coast cosigned
and we have a prime Sanchez
sitting be active for me again
with me with Senator Pinto.
Thank you.
Reserve affirmative for your
profile
we do have organized opposition
right to our rules committee
procedures so if the opposition
is organized state you have
twenty minutes to present they
will have fifteen and then you
will have here for the reserve
to offer I off so who is
speaking on behalf of the
organized opposition.
Hi y'all Representative organize
yourselves so please come up
and.
You but I ask that you.
Keep yourselves to your
individual to I'm not going to
cut you off but you guys should
be cut each other off of
someone's speaking longer than
than you have to thank you madam
chair and members of the space
States everyone speaks please
state your first last name for a
committee secretary the fact
that thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rikki Seguin and I work as
the executive director of the
Interwest Energy Alliance
Interwest is the regional
renewable energy trade
association headquartered here
in New Mexico representing
roughly forty of the largest
developers and manufacturers of
wind solar storage geo thermal
and transmission in the globe.
We're here today in opposition
to S. J. R. six.
An arrest and the renewable
energy industry are strong
believers in the goals of clean
air healthy environments and
stable climates and we support
the intention of this proposal.
We're very excited to be part of
New Mexico's clean energy
transition and are already
investing roughly ten billion
dollars into the state and
putting thousands of New
Mexicans to work.
We commissioned the Holland and
Hart legal analysis which was
distributed to every member in
the building and the reason for
that was to better understand
what the proposal would do for
and against renewable energy
development.
The language in the green
amendment is so broad that
unfortunately neither local
governments members of the
public or private developers can
accurately gas at what these
words mean.
This leads to incredible
inefficiencies legal risk and
uncertainty in the context of
renewable energy development.
Businesses need stable
regulatory environments in order
to receive project financing and
invest and unfortunately as J.
R. six will compromise that
leading to unnecessary expense
and delay that can compromise
project success reliability of
our power grid and are clean
energy transition again we are
very excited to be part of the
conversation about how to
achieve the goals of the green
amendment and we're grateful to
the work of the Sanchez and open
dialogue that they've allowed us
to have with them over the last
few months.
But again we're here today
because we strongly believe that
S. J. R. six will create a
chilling effect on renewable
energy development in the state
and we respectfully urge a no
vote thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee prime contact
on the executive director of the
New Mexico building and
construction trades council we
represent fifteen construction
trade unions in the state of New
Mexico and have been active in
the state for a hundred years we
have
looked at this very closely and
our our council has voted
unanimously to oppose this
proposal
Yes here are six
it is.
Very as was shared earlier a
very ambiguous and bay if we do
have a patchwork of
environmental bills in our state
in our view with thirteen
judicial districts and district
courts making decisions of all
different colors all across all
different parts of the state
this this proposal will have
significant
impacts on our ability to build
important infrastructure
including energy water waste
water on national laboratory
functions except us so we are
respectfully request that
respectfully request that you
oppose this measure thank you.
Madam chairman.
vice chairman and esteemed
members of this committee my
name is Patricia Madrid I am the
former chief judge of second
judicial district in Albuquerque
and the former Attorney General
in New Mexico for eight years.
Currently I am also on the board
and the a small New Mexico
copper company
of which is what drew my
interest to this proposed
legislation I must remind you
that this is a common.
I don't think.
Sorry.
I must remind you that this is
not a statute that you're voting
on this is constitutional
amendment that's being proposed
it cannot be easily changed or
amendment of and so you must be
very careful and voting for this
example a few years ago you
passed a constitutional
amendment concerning bond for
defendants it sounded very good
but it was had a lot of
unintended consequences and now
you are trying to correct that
and now when you try to correct
a constitutional amendment
oftentimes you cannot in court
because then it will be called
unconstitutional so be very
careful when you vote on this
overly broad constitution.
This amendment is couched in
language that will cause it to
pass when they call it a green
amendment it's almost like a
challenge to all of you to pass
it because otherwise you'll be
called against a clean
environment it's intimidating
and and it's also in language
that will cause the voters
automatically passes so once
this passes the legislature you
can count on it passing of the
electorate again the land the
language is simple but it's
overly broad vague and more
importantly it gives rights to
everyone the lawyer to spoke to
you drew up the language of this
so they can alleges in in court
please to give everybody
standing to complain about any
project that's being proposed to
be built.
so give expanding to anyone who
feels aggrieved now as it stands
you have to have something
called standing.
so it will fall on the judiciary
to decide on a case by case
basis.
Which will undermine our
regulatory framework in the
state there will be uncertainty
people will not be able to
undertake or invest in our state
without such uncertainty and so
they won't I'm I might add that
my company is invested already
fifty million dollars in a
project and now we've been
getting through the permitting
process for over ten years.
Okay.
I just want to say that this
will have a great effect on the
attorney general's office who
represents all these permitting
agencies and by the way they do
a very good job and I don't see
any evidence that they're not
doing their job this is really
an indictment against our
permitting agency I just think
that this ammendment is not well
thought out and should be voted
against.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in respectful
opposition to as tears our
state's farmers and ranchers are
some of the very best years of
our natural resources as their
very livelihoods directly depend
on them the joint resolution has
the potential to adversely
affect our state's agricultural
sector which directly supports
more than twenty three thousand
jobs and contributes over three
point four nine billion to our
economy constitutional
amendments are not needed one
whole bodies of law exists to
protect and regulate activities
that could affect the
environment deficiencies in
state programs should be
directly addresses policy
matters instead of through a
constitutional amendment that
provides a broad and vague
instruction a prime example of
this very action in successful
practice is a Derry rule which
is administered by the
environment department this role
is drafted is an agreement
between the depend fireman
Department the dairy industry
and environmental coalition that
collectively developed what the
permitting program would entail
this collaborative effort
resulted in New Mexico Derry's
having one of the most stringent
groundwater regulations in the
nation our producers responded
to this challenge with good
environmental stewardship and
one of the highest rates of
sustainability in the nation.
This is a prime example that
shows agencies and stakeholders
can achieve collective goals
without and overly burdensome
and vague constitutional
amendment for this reason and
many others we Senators buckle
up as Asian.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Katherine Kirk shot a and I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico counties counties already
work actively to protect public
health and safety but the green
green amendment places on clear
an unfunded responsibilities on
counties this resolution would
make counties a trustee of
environmental resources with the
right responsibility to conserve
protect and maintain them it
will require counties to expend
significant legal resources to
resolve the confusion and
conflict created by S. J. R.
six.
Further there are existing rules
and regulations that have been
vetted at length such as solid
waste regulations that include
environmental justice
considerations for
disproportional and pass and
look at cumulative impacts
county so please do not have the
resources to implement or
enforce this unfunded mandate
only seven counties in New
Mexico have planning and zoning
offices fostering a climate of
litigation without guaranteed
outcomes places and overly
burdensome mandate on counties
that they simply cannot afford
we urge you to vote against this
bill thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Clinton nicely
risk services director for the
self insurance fund registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
municipal league
with respect we think the
opportunities for exploitative
litigation are near limitless
when it comes to this amendment
as it has been proposed I think
courts are going to have to
wrangle with all kinds of really
weighty questions from whether
utility meters release cancers
materials into the environment
to some of the seasonal
allergies to they have standing
to bring suit under under this
language this may sound
hyperbolic on its face but it's
not because that litigation
already happened it's happened
elsewhere in Pennsylvania it
happens here because I just our
claims on behalf of the fund
we stand in opposition to that
this proposed amendment for at
least one other reason and
that's because cost to frame it
language in amendments is a high
bar for responsibility because
voters are gonna have a chance
to weigh in on this concept can
we say things like monetary
damages are not available or the
provisions in this are self
executing we need to make sure
that we are as candid as
possible with the voters who are
going to be left with the
impression that injunctive
declaratory relief are not
available to judges who are
going to be weighing in on these
concepts and obligating millions
in public spending for some of
the decisions are going to have
available to them and it is for
those reasons we stand in
opposition to this bill.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the Senate rules
committee my name is Daniel
Garcia and I am a the average
manager for we New Mexico I'm
also a lifelong multi
generational resident of our
beautiful state renew Mexico's
only statewide coalition focused
solely on advocating for the
development of renewable energy
projects through community
action resident mobilization we
currently have over fifteen
thousand supporters in New
Mexico alone we believe best
year six will negatively impact
our renewable energy progress
because no language in the bill
reasonably projects are states
for renewable energy development
goals from I'm just legal
challenges on current or future
public land leases this lack of
clarity in the current iteration
leaves too much room to pull
back on the progress our state
has made to support renewable
energy S. share six opens a door
for entrance to oppose our
renewable energy projects and
sue to stop developers of wind
and solar projects that would be
a lost both state and federal
budgets and hinder ability to
achieve the tease goals please
oppose Esther six until
consensus between advocacy
groups and renewable energy
developers has reached and
reflects the stances of all
parties thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee the rubber amero on
behalf of Kit Carson electric
coop K. Carson is over thirty
thousand electric electricity
customers twelve thousand
broadband customers and three
thousand propane customers
kickers and started as broadband
business in nineteen ninety nine
today they provide some of the
highest speeds in the state
kickers and made a huge
commitment to solar energy in
two thousand five as a result on
a sunny day Kate Carson through
a network of solar arrays in
their service area has no power
totally by solar during daytimes
out daytime hours in addition
there continue to add solar with
battery battery backup to Carson
is built to do this through the
existing regulated system this
bill could compromise species
consists success there's just
too many unknowns Carson urges
you to.
Vote no on this bill.
Well not need that much time
thank you madam chair members
the committee John with sheets
with The New Mexico federation
of labor for reasons previously
stated we stand in solidarity
with with brother Condit and the
building trades and respectfully
oppose this measure thank you.
Yes.
And I know that we got quite a
bit
written comments both both in
support and in opposition all of
which should be in everyone's
notebooks fair I believe and
anyone who's here would like to
raise their hand to indicate
support please do so.
Anyone who'd like to indicate
raise their hands indicate
opposition please do so.
I believe we have about twenty
four people in support who are
online is that correct yes
manager next half of the listen
to the secretary there there's a
couple more indicated for online
well.
Thank you give us a rough
estimate of online how many
people online have indicated
opposition sides of this I've
already given you as soon as and
other to individuals.
I would I I assume that this
list meant at was all people
supports this office there are
okay okay and then there's about
two online and officers are who
are in opposition yeah.
One second madam chair
and this is here.
Time eight.
One.
Four five six online in
opposition thank you.
and you have reserve I'm sorry I
should let you do to your
rebuttal before a.
We ask you about dental hand
iterations Adams is you you
reserve affirmative beer your
doctor thank you I think I can
do my rebuttal in two minutes
and I I would like to give the
other two minutes to at least a
couple of of the public members
who would like to speak
we met with Interwest and some
of the some of the other people
and their primary concern is
about the transmission lines
that they're going to have to
construct in the end the
sighting of them and I contend
that if they cite those lines
with with regard to you know in
compliance with state law and
sensitively to the environment
they should not have a problem.
The other thing they said is
that the constitutional
amendment is brought well that's
true of all constitutional
amendments constitutional
amendments that policy.
And one of the things that we've
seen in the other states is it
is not had a chilling effect on
renewable energy quite the
opposite.
Now labor opposes it because
it's ambiguous and vague and I
did have a conversation with
members of labor and they're
afraid afraid that it will slow
down construction we have heard
from people who in the other
states and they have not shared
with us at all that it's good
start construction in fact a lot
of renewable energy jobs have
been made more available.
I don't know what I thought
about going into this but the
whole issue standing is a red
herring because standing is a
separate legal requirement and
it requires that a plaintiff
suffer actual harm from the
polluter so that it is always
going to be the case this this
ammendment doesn't change that
it anyway sure PED to perform in
the first amendment they have to
to show expanding every
amendment requires a place to
show expanding.
It is not it has not adversely
impacted the agricultural center
that secretary in other states
they should not fear because
they are excellent stewards of
land and this would help the
state protect their land and
protect what they do.
With regard to counties counties
will be empowered to protect the
environment it's been used to
help local governments protect
the environment and.
I believe it's their
responsibility and should be a
policy of the state that they
look at cumulative impacts on
our vulnerable communities and
they should not be afraid of it
again I guess I want to conclude
by saying the parade of
horrible's it has been set out
has not occurred in any other
state and I don't think that our
judges are less capable our
attorneys are are just as
capable as other states I don't
see this parade of horrible's
happening and they all grow out
of fear so with that I'd like to
leave the rest of my time to two
more comments if I can from the
public.
Fifteen seconds perfect if they
if you can get them online or.
Jonathan okay Jonathan.
Madam there's a whole bunch of
people and I apologize to
everybody you can't.
You want to I'm sorry that
curious okay.
The service.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my apologies I
was trying to and use those
waiting to be given permission
by the host good morning again
my name is Jonathan what is I am
here today on behalf of the
United for climate crisis action
and we stand in strong support
of S. G. R. six.
The climate crisis is one of if
not the biggest threat to my
generation's future.
And despite scientists and
community members calling for
action for decades what should
be our intrinsic right to a
healthy environment has been
violated time and time again.
Indigenous frontline communities
in particular like my home in in
Laguna pueblo have continue to
face the irreparable harm caused
by pollution and industry and
this is unacceptable we deserve
to know that are.
Thank you for your.
Senator so we will go ahead and.
Discussion from the committee.
That are to be paid.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you senator and and the
representatives and senators and
representatives what what what
is the what is the reason.
Why.
We're striking out our existing
constitutional right to claim
it.
The healthy climate which is in
article
twenty section twenty one we're
gonna get rid of that why is
putting it in the bill of rights
better than what we already have
which would seem to be a
statement of state policy thank
thank you Mr the madam chair
Senator if you look at that
amendment it really is about
balancing and allocating
pollution and then some of the
language in our amendment is
duplicative of the language
there we actually took it from
the amendment so we felt that it
would cause confusion I know
that the Attorney General said
old article twenty section
twenty one and gives authority
to the legislature that is not
all correct the legislature is
always had the authority to
regulate in this area and and
the pot that provision doesn't
give us anything that the
legislature didn't already have.
The other thing is I do want to
reverse the results of the case
interpreting that where they
allowed
Senator Martinez the court
simply allowed Senator
rules within ten ten months and
so those are the reasons that
we're repealing it I understand
it could cause confusion but we
think that it to repeal it but I
think it could cause more
confusion not to not to repeal
it.
So we're trying to just do a
clean.
Bill of begin amendment in the
bill of rights and not the some
other additional language in the
miscellaneous section of the
constitution.
madam chairman one of the
question of what is section see
on page.
So thanks monetary damages shall
not feel for.
Forcible again states have these
this is valid.
Thank you
this became the the suffix
executing provision is important
because we wanted the amendment
to be used to strike down.
Of legislation and rules that
were inconsistent with it and
therefore if it's self executing
you don't need to have any
implementing legislation it
stands on its own you can have
implementing legislation but it
stands on its own the other
thing the next thing monetary
damages will not be awarded that
became necessary because we
passed the Civil Rights Act and
if you read the cases that have
use this ammendment in other
states all of them are striking
down state action or as were
reversing permits because a
constitutional amendment is a
limitation on government's power
and it's a check on government
power so we did not want this to
be viewed has or or or to.
To be a vehicle for monetary
damages people can have monetary
damages by suing
in nuisance in tort law against
the polluters so if this doesn't
stop an individual who is harmed
they don't need this ammendment
they can sue now but we felt it
was important because of the
Civil Rights then we thought
that the legislature's might be
concerned about how much this
might cost and we did not that
was not the intention and that's
not how it's been used in any
other state.
And the section this is
enforceable against the state
counties in Houston
municipalities that further
explained self executing so that
this could be used to take an
action against a county a city
or municipality and and that's
that's really important because
there's owning laws there they
can do some real damage to the
environment
and they need to be checked well
Senator other sources
say that were to be on for
minutes thank one of our members
have
for for meetings that they can
and and and I want everyone to
have a chance to have a full
discussion on this bill and and
the full.
and so what I'd like to do is
take out here on Friday I
continue to debate on the
stability.
That this is not a bill that I
think we want to rush through
just because.
Thank thank you madam chair we
look forward to the discussion
with that we will.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and real quickly because I don't
know if I'll be able to be here
on Friday and members of the
committee that we think that
some entities and what exists
right now is enough but if that
was the case then why in my area
do I have a company from Canada
still drilling for bore holes
since thanksgiving since
November so they are here
exploring uranium in the area
and where's the county where all
these entities that are supposed
to help our communities
maintain a safe community or
even have a clean community and
they're here it's happening
right now as we speak thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I also
want to thank senator pope who
joined us it's great I it was as
you know we found out about the
I found out about this yesterday
and I'm thrilled that so many
people are able to show up.
It was.
Act.
That we're going to pick up with
this on Friday we're not gonna
go back.
Right here.
that was.
