Regular.
I want to note taking action
okay yeah and it's just a
presentation so this morning we
have our agenda we have a
department transportation New
Mexico.
Patient just to clarify not.
At.
Senate
Bill.
Fourteen and.
The eight.
Yes.
Dissension.
Senator.
Your hair.
Senator is.
This is about yes.
Senator should there Senator
there Senator yes.
To give that to us.
Thank you and thank you for
joining us and you may introduce
yourselves in your presentation.
thank you so much my name is
Paul pressure of the district
engineer for district five
Mexico translations.
Good morning my name is Lisa
point break under the districts
engineer for district six and
DOT.
Morning madam chairman is trying
to level three in the interim
committees.
Good part in transportation
thank you for having this.
With that madam chair if I may
so we were asked to come in and
just give a brief overview of
district I and district six
focusing specifically on
projects of interest on for that
the subcommittee itself
we will have about five or six
minutes a presentation each
there were two handouts and one
for five for districts six.
With that or six minute
presentation that will allow for
plenty of time at the end for
questions from the subcommittee
and with that madam chair if if
you would like I'll turn it over
to Paul pressures will start
with district I.
Thank you madam chair Paul
fracture district I engineer
what you have in front of you is
the presentation of the projects
that we have the planning and
design right now our districts
will projects we have under
construction and maintenance
activities we've undertaken in
this area though this is a
district I the doctor's Gen from
you has a map of the district
and we're focusing on today is
the Shiprock area that would be
the northwest corner of the
state.
There's a budget on our or or
district on the front page there
you are the you see I use map
showing that district I income
this is the counties of San Juan
re request tiles Los Alamos
Santa Fe and of course County
Peter the sheet to the the first
she.
Is a project that we have the
study area there you decide
right now and just within the
Shiprock area right here the end
of we do have the civilization
of a Navajo.
Thirty six and three seventy
one.
Coming up there's the
construction you expect to start
this year let me
We have a very poor project to
the Navajo Nation which is the
province across the front edge
of the screen US sixty four west
of four ninety one.
interestingly when this project
started it was it had an extra
four million dollars to accept
over eighty million dollars now.
The plan is sixty percent
expecting some right of way
title it's from the Navajo
Nation right now so the next the
projects
Well the next the very next
project goes to the rockfall
study their state is cropping
known affectionately as the hard
back on US sixty four about my
post thirty one and rocks are
prone to slipping off into the
right of way problem that we
have perspiration throughout
this district so we lost a study
of indicated efforts that we
might undertake in the case of
Alvarado we think that fix is
gonna be a two million dollars
we don't have the.
Right now but we are.
Working with the devil nation to
so is there by and environmental
cultural.
Resources protection approval
before you do that.
Yeah.
Draw your attention to the very
last she.
If you're going which is a map
which is a plan.
Showing a plant in the profile
for nexus six US sixty four.
In the sixty four project it is
shown in five phases and there
hi table and this is what that
project looks like more less
graphically looking down the
Civil faces it's in we have
Part of it is funded right now
thanks to a bill creates that
we.
Recipients of over twenty five
million dollars appropriation
the legislature and we expect to
launch the first phase of this
year however now as we speak we
are still waiting on east
approvals from VA so.
Delegation.
Dutifully here.
Refuted right of way for the log
to be I a reading of the this is
very important to us it's
critical that this not slip so
we are a.
Working closely with the.
Navajo Nation partners the rest
of the faces of are shown up by
the for the years anybody
funding we think the price.
Originally project was going to
be around a hundred fifty
million our fiscal.
Forty seven million dollars is
probably over a hundred forty
million now if we haven't got it
thank you.
we have a just we have
undertaken a study and some
preliminary design for the
replacement of the ship
Rockbridge or somebody of
funding for the for the
replacement of it per se but we
have a design alternative
selection and that thirty
percent is designed we have a.
Under US forty one this is the
reach between.
Shiprock New Mexico state line
we've got to face the report
completed there's some
preliminary reconnaissance level
engineering.
Order engineering it did we
don't have money for that but it
is in the works because of the
page to the projects that we've
in the construction of such a
couple of these.
We have an interesting one at
the very first one list is US
sixty to US sixty is the root it
takes a that comes in between
your sort of Colorado New Mexico
has extensible mild use one
sixty it's the road that takes
you four quarters of fiction yes
I New Mexico five ninety seven
we six four quarters so agents
while long we are joint
venturing with seedot color
department transportation they
gave state your contractor to
repay about eleven miles this
was sixty I approach them about
as long as they're at it but we
what we stand there project H.
as well just get R. one sixty
well rounded we're doing at
center construction we expect to
be done by June is this the
instructions Colorado contractor
so it's a well underway and it's
a highly successful joint
venture between the New Mexico
and Colorado.
We have a that we so Gegard
installations on the use by
fifty we've got some roadway for
section one seventy three and
teach the best if you might be
knowing about US fifty five
fifty north of Aztec
between just statewide we have
a.
So a real reconstruction
lighting on U. S. sixty four
that last project eleven twenty
fifty perfect eleven twenty is
serialization intersection for
markets you know sixty four
something it's been a long time
coming if you will love.
If you will
Switched to the a couple pages
you see this map that I've put
together the location of these
projects right here projects a
study shows.
highlighted the general
locations projects construction
our income the three and don't
forget the noticed one of the
four quarters and then our other
right its activities which of
want to discuss right now so
Peter to the basic issue ahead
of that I will go through I will
go through the same kind of
activity detail but to show you
that there we are ready for
you activity if the shipwrecked
area on the.
All the routes that are
particularly important report to
work congestion management in
the air quality in the the
Shiprock area we have some that
we completed we have some other
coming up this year and we have
some that we tend to do that are
yet unfunded well they do have
quotes on them but I think I
should mention is that with
every project most projects that
we use our districts to six or
you just state we generate
Billings for the asphalt is
basically scraped up and
I was approached by the coveted
chapter and he creation and
Shiprock chapter thank you as to
the possibility of our donated
millions to them.
This is a
Process we have to highways
with.
We write a letter to federal
highways we study it determined
there's if it's a suitable use
proper it's going to this
It solves the problems these
militant no the use for us
we donate them so we have
donated millions according to
that total right there
they've they've picked them up
fix some of they're still
balance that thank you we offer
these kids so
with that is that whirlwind
visit this is this it does
anybody any questions let's get
through the whole presentation
certain thank.
Thank you madam chair so what
I'll do is I'll turn it over to
Lisa so she can cover districts
six.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee if you would
turn to the end of the district
six.
The.
We have the fact
that foundry my presentation
today rural
concentrate on the Chilean sea
the counties moving on to the
next she.
I just wanted to kind of
highlight some ongoing projects
there and and I will go into
very much detail into any of
these if you have any questions
I'd be happy to answer the and
we have their ongoing
construction projects are
completed construction projects
as well as our ongoing
maintenance projects that bottom
of the sheet and are completed
maintenance projects.
Moving on to the next.
To our
Projects that are currently in
our statewide transportation
improvement program
as you can see that there there
is quite a few that are in the
process right now and then
moving on to the next table we
have our otherfunded are not
fully funded projects so as you
are aware that we've been having
a lot of increases in
construction costs so a lot of
these projects that are actually
in our state are now short
funding so these are a list of
those projects and how much
funding that in order to make
them for.
Tampa though I have our other
unfunded major investment
projects in these are projects
that we can utilize our price
agreements to get done rather
quickly.
And then with the we've been
getting a lot of snow and and
moisture in district six and
with that comes a lot of
commitment issues that come out
last year and the freeze thaw
cycles that chatter.
Along with with the washer so
with that I I included I. for
the injuries for ninety one
needs.
Crews have been working very
diligently and trying to
accomplish and public patching
on I. forty but you know these
these are temporary patches
until we can get warmer weather
and will be able to do more
permanent patches but if you
know if we could actually get
some contractors out there to
help us out in kind of
accomplish some of these
projects would be a lot further
along.
And with that is the end of my
presentation.
Thank you.
Meeting.
Madam chair yes that is just one
more quick thing I would like to
cover before we get into
questions is our transportation
project fund which is our local
government I I apologize I don't
have a handout for but I just
got a spreadsheet submitted to
me sort transportation project
fund is basically a supplement
as a returning forty five
million dollar revenue
specifically to our locals and
specifically chart tribal
partners since two thousand and
nineteen we've awarded eighteen
total projects for a total of
twenty two point three million
dollars and if you would like
madam chair with after we finish
here I can certainly email it to
you but I wanted to be sure to
let you go through our local
government program were very
active with our tribal partners
the issue being that money
of that four point one million
dollars already been spent
seventeen million is currently
ten issued and projects are
currently ongoing.
It's quite a bit of money for
our tribal partners on those
eighteen projects just
specifically to district five
and district six.
That manager I'd.
You and I think that's an issue
thank you and thank you for your
presentation Senator o'neill.
Do you have any questions.
Shendo thank you madam chair
thank you
Of.
Secretary of state that almost
commented to my colleague to my
right is that I think we need to
secretary these do little more.
I do a lot.
Need to name of the
confirmation.
I appreciate your presentation
both engineers thank you for the
full year of.
I don't know if it's on here but
the district so I I know that a
some of these complaints are
always on my district but the
highway from ship we're going to
call of course this is a four
ninety one is that somewhere in
there or what's the status that
is for ninety one and that is
one of the projects that we have
on my listing of projects that
are others I write.
Finally this okay yes yes I can
call up and.
Right so what
but in my district but also to
ask so so is the biggest issue
are as and then
V. with sixty four from bill C.
she wanted to.
And I know there's a lot of
complaints from my constituents
in the career of about sixty
four school across.
It's a ultimately there will be
maintenance projects you very
space in that region sixty four.
We haven't we haven't had a
major construction project in
this is probably twenty thirteen
or so but we're continuing
maintenance the road is very.
Lacking shoulders and guardrail
systems with that we're aware of
the you're aware of the
conditions that we have a we
have or maintenance controls to
remain strong together to
address that route from still
safe to
Two important things.
Thank you madam chair then
without the district six.
The.
This is a very simple gentle The
presentation is on the county
and see what I know that I
represent a large portion of
Santa Fe County I know that that
I would for five as has been the
work has been done so we're with
that.
It would include thanks bye
right now right yes and so it's
currently not fully funded
because of the he said the
increasing costs and things like
that there's a value engineering
that has been done
we are at about ninety percent
design right now.
Okay R. so.
The most included in here
because since the district could
not include Sandoval County.
And this is.
Appreciate it at all all the
county.
Six of the.
So the so no I get close to the
design completion so because of
the work.
Thank you thank you Senator
Shendo any other questions that
with Google so you have a
listing tier of the employee
break down but is high rate of
making these are how are you
doing.
I.
Having staff.
Madam thank you as for a
district by.
Our biggest request pretty high
right Sen it's in the twenty
five percent or so the
interesting thing is
Look at my the employee break W.
support maintenance construction
and hearing it's about twenty
five percent each one of those
categories which make right it's
it's very high number but
We're a.
getting the job done despite
the.
The shortages of
The specialty would choose a
could you probably give some
examples of why are some reasons
you might be quieter your
vacancy rate I mean are we not
bringing in.
Do not have people coming.
Chair thank you very good
question.
Key question and
You can argue that working for
the department transportation is
challenging.
The professional at any level.
this is where you want to be
it's very important work
obviously it is very
challenging.
And what we're finding
What we're fighting or people
that we do interview find out if
essentially what we pay what the
state is willing to pay they
provide other opportunities more
lucrative elsewhere if we're
losing them to actually pay you
care.
You can't beat the nice people
you work with you can we do
challenging work and its the
Plenty of job opportunities in
all categories the system I
think this is the over riding
reason is probably that we still
to pay now I would say that on
the maintenance side we do have
those are maintenance patrols in
these four phones.
outposts thirty to control
statewide distributed
geographically bills for example
Shiprock Farmington Aztec
Bluefield.
And CEO.
The it's hard for workers who.
Available in included in those
areas right there but
fundamentally
We think that it's largely is
just period.
Mexico.
Madam chair if I can just add
just statewide secretary Sir has
created a committee for
retention and recruitment to you
know come up with creative ways
not just with salary but working
locations
Whether we can offer you know
some sort of administrative
leave you know bonuses those
kinds of things so secretary
center recognizes this is an
issue the one thing I will tell
you as I was previously in
district one down in Deming in
and we are working as a group to
also look at salaries to
potentially do in payments to
try to retain our current
employees I can tell you not
necessarily as much an opt ins
but in some of our designers
this issue of teleworking going
away there's been some concern
especially those that were
higher during the pandemic that
have been tell working the
entire time now coming into the
office some of those folks are
looking for jobs closer to home
rather than having to you and
this Paul mentioned a lot of our
patrols in our construction
offices are out in the field and
so with the with the price of
fuel in the away from home
that's been a challenge but I
can assure you madam chair if
that the secretary has a
committee trying to look into
these things to reduce some of
our vacancies
Paul Paul probably has our our
highest we can see department
wide
but I think overall as a
department worried sixteen or
seventeen percent which is to is
to high.
And madam chair and district six
are vacancy rate is about
thirteen percent.
There's no it's not due to heavy
like not having equipment or
anything like that as far as
what thank getting the contract
still this is my next question
to are are we.
In a delayed part or is it like
a funding delay or is it just
we're good madam chair it
members of the committee so we
are we are good when it comes to
the construction the
construction process our
contracts are are meeting its
price agreements at this point
in time we really haven't had
any delays associated with the.
I will recognize our contractors
are having some problems.
That they contract that problems
hiring labor
but we've been very flexible
with our contract leading
allowing additional ramp up time
at the beginning we're expanding
our contract time we're not as
tight on the time frame which
allows them to be more creative
when it comes to bringing in
people and equipment those kinds
of so at least from my
perspective Department Y. and
with recent Paul have any issue
specifically to the district but
I think the department order
contracting community are doing
a very good job managing the
money and spending spending the
the the allocation that would
give.
Eight
so we have the global lighting
and treatment and I know it goes
I think I've been down for
ninety one of over by two six
four and we've had I've had
capital outlay requests for that
lady Mr any kind of phase and
that we're doing like going down
the the the highway there and so
going from here to there to
there
it seems like we probably need
some kind of plan as far as
going well share the global
leading groups that we have for
the Navajo Nation speaks to the
ownership and maintenance of
street lighting as the as urged
all it's not a plan going
forward to light
a particular quarter but as they
are lit as funding becomes
available state and capital
outlay to of the nation it
likely gets lighting is
constructed in the right way the
agreement the is a
It sets forth the house lighting
will be installed maintained.
The cost of construction and and
electricity.
And so the previous services
such a sort of a blanket
agreement process that process
goes
The success of the process of
the contract the agreement
between the GOP and the nation
Stallis things we've done.
Originally I think the lady
agreement did identify some
intersections that would be that
it was going to apply to and
We need to patiently modify the
lighting to include other
intersections other locations
for street lighting and it's my
understanding that the school
would to the intersection where
the schools are the bus
transportation that those with
priority.
there they are the they are a
priority
we do that to New Mexico duty
does not go and spell the street
lighting the community is still
submits to the county or the
nation so where they want IT
this is just agree with how
that's all going to be handled.
Leading reserves very landmark
Roof for a working relationship
between the duty in the nation
so we don't have any amendment
standards as far stateLee has to
be solar or fifty percent
efficient or anything like that
as far as the state though state
is imposing standards on the
which is a light at the.
The higher a consultant there.
To do what's right.
I think that was one of the
things they get to be said that
capital outlay request on that
and I believe you are toward the
end yes Representative chair on
the money with the money comes
in so we managed.
Were you at that Cuba.
The what they were trying to
generate generate demo you.
In this all the different
jurisdictional roads out there
so you don't know the
combination of that meeting last
week.
Mostly something.
Okay.
All right well thank you for
your presentation and you can
get anywhere from a to B.
without even checked it just
real quick at home apartments
you right and recognize that the
questions just worry to make two
point four five percent vacancy
rate is five hundred four
positions as of January twenty.
I think it's a good thing
around.
That is.
Thank you thank you very much
and thank you for coming today
and I'm sure we'll be in touch
as we move forward after the
session of the committee we will
move on to our next.
Thank you.
Item on the agenda Senate bill
two seventy.
Okay.
Welcome.
Four million.
Representative.
Close.
That is
Of the.
It isn't out.
Okay do we have Senator Hemphill
here.
She those parts that.
I spoke.
Other
The committee meeting yes really
yeah.
so we'll go over to the Senate
bill one fifty five.
C..
Share
that so Senator Hemphill is
running late so we're gonna go
ahead and roll that over and
then we'll move on to Senate
bill one fifty five I know
Senator could do is just next
door so he'll be over unless I
Representative Sarinana is here.
This is a thank you madam chair
is it faces a committee I
Senator.
Yes it they said the intent they
range for others.
Senator okay we'll just we'll
we'll wait on Senate bill one
fifty five I think you're ready
to go Senator okay thanks right
right yes.
Another.
Close.
The state of the.
End up.
You want to start out with you.
To.
I have.
That's when it would be a.
Okay.
Committee chair.
You may begin said.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee really appreciate
your flexibility this morning as
many of us are multiple things
so today we have Senate bill two
seventy which is the
appropriation of two hundred
thousand dollars to that
cultural affairs department to
support all schools that choose
to participate in the natural
national history day and so with
that I have my experts within
like to.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
much NMC I get and the state
librarian
state library has supported this
program in the past I believe
the last time these or that was
and FY twenty one the amount of
a hundred and fifty thousand we
have not been able to support of
the last two years
in the past the funding has
flowed through us to the
humanities council and have the
director of the communities
council Brandon Johnson is here
today in the audience this
program
Supports teachers and students
to participate in their local
and regional contacts and then
also supports them to go to the
national contest and Washington
DC
estimated a hundred to a hundred
and thirty students reach for
every teacher who participates
of the reaches quite large and I
believe every single state
participates in the national
level so when we are not able to
participate we are one of our
the only state that does not
participate in the national
level as I understand it so this
reaches every region of the
state
and the contests are held in
late winter in Farmington Los
crucis and on the cricket.
And all of their thank you Sen.
Oh yes thank you madam chair one
correction in the fiscal
impact reports it states that we
have recurring thousand dollars
our budget for this we do not
currently have the funding our
budgets for this program.
Thank you madam chair we stand
for questions thank you.
The committee on the upside.
To do we have anybody in support
raise your hand and then do we
have anybody in opposition.
So those in support if you would
like to introduce yourself and
make a comment that sure hi
Brandon Johnson Jr is as you can
get a set I am the director of
the New Mexico humanities
council but I'm off the clock
today I'm here as a volunteer
and as a father so we.
Has had a this has several
children program I myself am a
product of program I thank you
for because of this.
I also have been a volunteer
judge again I am always amazed
at the kind of
Professionalism that young
people bring to the experts
and you know if this is
something where they stay can
choose their own project they
can write paper.
Documentaries are burning
technical skills and writing
skills another also in a
position where they have to get
out in front of him like this
and talk about the financial
professionals and so we it
really is a a a program that
produces well rounded young
people we did a
the the the the purpose engaged
in a bunch to pull study at west
mesa high school in Albuquerque
and the the the the study shows
at least for that population of
young people ninety four percent
of the students graduated high
school Under Secretary for
still.
Time.
Thank you for graduated and went
on to other of post secondary
education I think.
and as a as a parent
hi my fully supportive of the
program I think my children have
benefited.
Thank you the gentleman and.
Will you will often need to
resort to other schools we have
a robust it HB program district
our students begin the spoke
they flow through the high
school students there.
Well rounded cultural experience
they look at every Avenue of
history historically
the it's just a conversation
which to speak to the standards
that changing and it's been
updated news release puts our
students will experience we
definitely support is still for
students.
Thank you anybody else and we
have a very have.
Two individuals of indicated
support for this bill but would
not like to speak just like to
acknowledge there's a four thank
you in the but nobody in the
session hi.
And senator Munoz thank you
madam chair thank you senator
and you live in here today.
Thanks for the great working
done state park or just programs
access facilities the U. S.
As of.
History major once it hits major
policy has committed this is
growing for and I guess I'm I'm
wondering if if you were able to
achieve this funding in the
budget.
There's a chance to be easier
for recurring into you made a
choice to make a choice to come
in just for one time.
Do you can because of recurring.
To.
To create.
If you would like to do madam
chair if you like to do in
senators thank you for the
question we're totally open to
differing we just thought that
it might be an easier asked to
nonrecurring since there's a lot
of non recurring money this time
and we never know the answer
this is what might happen
between now and next year's
we just wanted to make sure that
we were funding.
And I'm just gonna stay in my
lane is.
Under nonrecurring but I think I
would I was part of that hundred
fifty grand a couple years ago I
think it might have been it was
house bill junior we were able
to get that government so so
that was okay great so anyway
good job and I really support
this thanks.
And it comes to the committee.
I have a couple
so who decides what will be
taught in the state.
This a new saying well
throughout these events because
I being for this Education
Committee that's something that
is
we know nationally there are
issues with what people are
wanting to include.
So who decides that madam chair
I believe and members of the
committee I believe that it's a
this program allows the students
to work with the local teacher
and they choose with the teacher
what their what their focus will
be and then they do a very in
depth research it's highlight of
this program that it gives
children a chance to study a
subject and much greater new on
to much greater depth than they
than they normally do so I'm
yeah madam chair thank you for
the question and I although I
spent twenty nine years and
public schools I did not
participate in this program so I
did a lot of research on after
agreeing to have this bill
drafted and it seems like the
just like my expert witness was
mentioning you swill choose a
order subject area and part of
the program is doing research on
that coming up with a
presentation and
Doing that just there is a would
help they created display that's
right like a distillation it's
more of judges and then you
could win a trip if you
when that particular
competition.
So do you know if we currently
funds like science projects
competitions robotic
competitions any other
competition factor in the school
system.
Madam chair
none of that funding comes
through me so I wouldn't be able
to answer that and the reason I
ask that is you know we're we're
still in this thing with
litigation over the hundred
Martinez and equity issue of
equity being a long cross toward
and single single seem scene
building out one particular day
verses actually really happy
funding which would be the
direction that just like to see
this go
That we're able to do anything
the schools want to that our
kids especially in my area
we don't have the the option to
fund rates to do these things
that that's anything it's really
going to be up to this one
family for that one student to
raise that money for them to go
yes I I know there's no pot of
money for them to draw from
unlike being in APS or Hobbs are
Los crucis where you have all
these entities basically
almost funding sports programs
to in which to me is another
inequity that hasn't been
resolved to
because you see kids get on the
bus in sports programs and you
don't see them having the same
Die our dinner like other
students get to in urban areas
so although I do think it's a
good idea hi hi.
as far as just doing it for one
particular.
Thing
that's why I find it difficulty
in.
So that I don't know if you want
to do that or what can be.
That should initiatives Madam
chair of maybe of how this a
school or class or teacher Madam
a Senator of choose to
participate obviously not
everybody's engaged so others
that happens in the initiative
of the teacher uses of whom
ever.
The size to participate in the
sure we could probably expect
work madam chair senator thank
you for the question is it's my
understanding that the teachers
would choose to participate that
program and help their students
do the research throughout the
school year join the competition
present their projects.
To a panel of judges and it's up
to each particular schools and
teacher so so so you madam chair
I I think you know.
Course this is far above and
beyond the regular history
classes that.
Folks are talk.
This is an extracurricular
activity that the teacher to
students take on in addition to
whatever history classes that
they may have so that the kids
are just one of those things
were of you know students
voluntarily and probably faculty
choose to participate to broadly
students experience and those
that use.
Chair just your question I know
that the it was an entity of
Bernalillo that was doing a lot
of.
The science programs robotics so
we have funded I can remember
the name of the organization.
profit they do a lot of work in.
in public schools providing you
know science competition
robotic systems are so attracted
to questions we have funded very
little extracurricular projects
outside of the school.
This one is so thank you madam
chair and thank you thank you
senator yes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for remote I just
have one question is this.
Ostrich which.
The first question is is for
only public schools in.
Madam chair and senator that's
correct it would be just for
public schools and so the other.
Senator Shendo I'm sorry it's
for all schools chair so
question of all but the other
day in another committee I mean
with Senator Shendo **** for but
B. R. A. schools and it covers
everybody all the tribal schools
we are Indian Affairs asana
question like in all tribal
schools all the not any private
or charter are all charter
schools not private or so
everybody across New Mexico will
be able to
apply for this madam chair and
senator that's correct any any
public any school could apply
for this and choose to
participate and request funding
from the.
And senator I your question
there was from the other day and
taxes you just a question about
the ice
created so I was just asking
kind of those thanks to this
also everybody is included on
the bill we have to do some
schools are not.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you senator the other
thing too is when you talk about
you money I mean if that's the
other funding streams.
The fate to keep having to go to
another committee if they can be
funded by eight did you because
if I don't get that much.
We're not talking millions of
dollars.
Sure that was correct one of the
challenges you're talking about
equity and being from a rural
community.
Tribal communities frontier
communities.
I didn't realize some of the
other limitations that we have
because of the way that capital
outlay junior funds are
distributed across our
legislative branch all of those
funds do get concentrated in
urban areas where you have more
concentration of legislators and
senators who sent on this
Committee and including myself
we understand the limitations
in our areas and how challenging
it is to have those needs Matt
and so I absolutely would have
supported something like this
with junior money but I know
that the needs and my expansive
districts are great and so if we
can find an additional way to.
You to get funds to support this
program that will also benefit
children in rural frontier and
tribal communities that would be
my preference so that our June
are precious in your money can
grow to address the needs of our
rural communities.
Because we only have eight okay
I think if.
That's.
Of those reasons thank you
Senator.
You're you're headed to LFC get
out of here the state of the
committee with rules and madam
chair that's correct that
channel entertain a motion over
to us we have a motion to to
pass by Senator Sanchez seconded
by Senator o'neal to the would
you please call the roll.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes Sir.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Senate to seventies fell.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee really.
You.
At.
yes we have Senate bill one
fifty five
you Senator but yeah it's a lot
more.
The promise.
Politicians.
That is supported.
But.
On this.
We have an amendment.
It's one of the.
These they are huge.
But that was Representative.
Yes Representative committees.
Because there's.
The way.
Experts the committee.
Trying to you know.
Hello guys.
This is the one you said.
It was.
Senator.
Actually it didn't it didn't go
down because.
The university state strategic
manager you may begin Senator
with.
Thank you madam chair.
so essentially
we've been here for madam chair
and I appreciate you allowing us
to come back and early in the
session so we can get our work
done here give you for able to
get through your committee today
but you know we've done some
massive reform to to the effort
that we're here to talk to about
today
In two thousand seventeen we
reform the roll universal
service fund just a small bit of
history it was valued at about
eighteen million dollars at the
time the vast majority of the
funds going to a dime to dying
technologies and things are
going away is you know one of my
major certainly answer the
legislature's to move broadband
on and and and do our work there
across the state every every
nook and cranny every square
inch of it and so we did take
the the fund to thirty million
that year we did because sort of
flipped the script and maybe two
thirds or sixty percent or so if
the money's available to new
technologies are you broadband
networks etcetera we have a
tremendous number of
Of of companies here in the
state that do really yeoman's
work with very little dollars to
get that done this this is an
effort that I believe is going
to turn the continue to turn the
page in that area
I do have several experts here
with me today that I'll talk
about here just a little bit
Madam chair but but essentially
there was discussion before we
arrive at your table to that to
how to how to make every single
person happy in this effort and
what I will tell you is in it
for the time that you've known
me and I know that that Senator
Shendo tear Shindo and center
o'neill we came into the Senate
the same on the same day
working in this when when
there's some years where we're
able to make some of the folks
to provide telecommunications
and broadband happy in
comparable for Representative
two there's other years were
somehow and then there's years
like two thousand seventeen
where we just continue to meet
to discuss and find solutions
and everybody's point of having
the three efforts that were done
that was the end the reform and
the modernization of the role
universal service.
The placing broadband the local
infrastructure act and then a
complete redesign rewrite it
cetera of the New Mexico
telecommunications act that
you're and that was a lot of of
of you know working wheeling
dealing negotiating etcetera I
think we're on that path this
year as well so we do have some
concerns and things that we're
gonna have to work out should we
have the privilege of getting
through this committee today
primarily with the wireless
companies that have some some
additional concerns and needs
but we are in need deep in
negotiations with them right now
and I feel very good all the way
up to last last night before we
came here I feel very good about
where those are going.
At this point these are what are
called broadband only loops so
that that this loop would just
again as the title says it would
it would provide broadband the
range that meets federal
standards for Federal
communication standards that are
so I have a few others and I
want to have say a few things
and then I'm gonna wrap up our
opening comments have fall
previews the general manager of
Baca valley telephone company
with this year the table this
morning Michael Moffitt whose
legal counsel for the New Mexico
exchange carrier group I also
have one Waller who was the
chief executive officer.
Of.
What's so excuse me I'm sorry
plateau and and also of former
president of in N. B. C. G. we
have need something on this who
is the chief government
individual leader for the New
Mexico exchange carrier group if
I just ask all the state very
few comments and then I want to
wrap up with a few things but
we'll start here good morning
thank you we appreciate you
inviting us and listening to the
bill and look forward to
hopefully it to making progress
and in passing it's very
important to the world part of
the state to telecommunications
covers the eastern side of the
state most of our subscribers
all part of.
In rural areas some of the
remote.
State and it's hard to get
service to them.
Building I work out to customers
for well over a decade and
because we are a member of phone
cooperative at our core and
we've also been building out
fiber towards the Rio Grande
scored or expanding our
our arms and legs to to
different parts of the state
that that first and foremost we
are for the world part of the
state and getting fiber service
to as many customers as
possible.
Thank you for members of the
committee impoverished Baca
valley telephone we're the
smallest of the small companies
in New Mexico excuse me and we
serve northeast New Mexico and
you and Colfax counties and
the bill doesn't do a lot except
help our rural parts of New
Mexico today if a customer calls
our office and said I want
internet.
but today's rules that have dial
tone.
We want to do is this is a C.
mobile or they don't have to
have a dial tone because as you
well know a lot of people on a
landline they just want internet
the user cell phone over the so
they that way they don't
necessarily have to have a land
line in this with this is what
this bill addresses the fund is
important except over the rural
companies because it gives us
the money to expand our fiber in
our network student Mexico is
one of our biggest customers
when the state DOT Office of the
state can reserve the state
science rural New Mexico need
internet or need access they
call us when the small companies
built fiber to those sites as
well as the wireless sites in
New Mexico wireless companies
our customers as well with the
have cell sites to build and
they need internet access or
access to our broadband they
call on rural companies so the
so the fund is very important to
us as well as you're trying to
get this so that our our
citizens and our customers and
people in New Mexico don't
necessarily have to pay for dial
tone of the.
Thank you for your time.
Madam chair Senators my name is
Mike Moffitt I'm legal counsel
for the New Mexico exchange
carrier group and following up
what Paul just said I just want
the members know what we're
proposing and what this bill is
proposing rather is a really and
furtherance of the purposes of
this act which is to provide
universal service at affordable
rates in rural areas and we
believe that what's being
proposed does for the purposes
of this act in addition to what
was newly added to the to the
act of the statewide broadband
purpose which is to ensure
digital equity additional
inclusion because we we think
that we need to try to include
all New Mexicans especially the
ones of the rural areas that
have harder access.
Members of the committee J. son
the honest registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico exchange care
group.
Thank you for having used today
we want to thank Senator Padilla
for bringing this legislation
forward Senate bill one fifty
five amends the rural
telecommunication act New Mexico
to to find a cure consumers
broadband only line as an access
line doing so our customer to
drop the dial tone line without
decreasing the excess reduction
for needed by the rural I lick
provider from the state rural
floral universal service for
service fund currently only
adulthood can be counted as
access line in order to receive.
They are just.
Well the of.
We're getting ever since the
pandemic the the company is
getting more more calls of for
broadband only lines they don't
necessarily want to self over of
the the land line they have cell
phones and so this will
accommodate that and it'll
reduce the cost of the customers
and maintain the support for
the.
Much of thank you madam chair.
those are opening remarks madam
chair and I just want to
underscore the fact that we've
done a lot of work off line a
couple of members of the
committee Senator Ivy Soto in a
few of those have been very
helpful and kind of waiting
through some of the feedback
that we're receiving and been
very helpful in in helping us to
put there to move where we are
at this moment in the get go she
ation to the wireless companies
and I wanna also underscore the
fact that there are fifteen
rural companies that operate
here in New Mexico and they are
all signed on as supporters this
ever so thank you madam chair.
We do have an yes that's right
thank you for.
It was delivered to your
committee on the thirty first
essentially what we're doing
here.
The final place.
And so if you go to page twelve
point six.
I just need to jump in here he
was in the middle of these
negotiations this was going to
happen is happening we would
just strike the word and online
sixteen.
And
On page twelve.
Yes.
So on page twelve line eighteen
straight through the period and
serve their and the and between
lines eighteen nineteen insert
the following language which is
providing that the number of
access lines used for the annual
calculation of access reduction
support payments for any
eligible to come in local
carrier shall not exceed the
number of access lines existing
for that carry on December first
two thousand twenty one which
was very important so that we
have proper accounting of what
they look like David versus what
they look like now and it would
also if this also promotes and
and pushes the company to
continue to build out their
networks and add additional
lines to reduce the cost of
support per Jeff.
Of.
Chair members of.
In the F. I. R. there are
comments regarding the stress to
the phone or possible stress to
the frontier with this
legislation.
this dresses the issue issue by
placing the cap on the number of
access lines eligible to be
converted to the sequel so this
will address that portion of the
of the FIR and it was it was a
concern brought up to us but but
some of the options.
And.
Two thirteen.
Representative documents about
the amendment.
The committee this.
Is there any opposition to
adopting them and the second
second so the motion is adopted
on Senate bill and I and we will
move forward thank you madam
chair Senate bill one to five
with.
Those are opening remarks thank
you thank you do we have anybody
in the audience in support of
the bill please raise your hands
and we have anybody in the
audience in opposition of the
bill.
So those in support of the bill
if you would like to state your
name and title and have a
comment.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
John.
All right now some of the state
would communications think of it
just give you very briefly a bit
history.
This is.
the I.
If you take a look at that
service to the statute in the
statute sixty three dash nine H.
six actually drafted passed by
the state legislature in
nineteen ninety nine in nineteen
ninety nine I was with eighteen
anti I live coalition of long
distance companies number of
them and and wireless companies
operating state of New Mexico to
reform what was then the excess
charges that funded worked over
kept the company's of float.
And what we agreed to working
with the public regulation
commission and the enemy CG that
we would form this universal
service fund a program that was
modeled after the FCC yes the C.
had already made for the forms
about three four years prior.
I love the same effort in
Arizona Utah and Idaho at the
time Mexico has the second
highest taxes charges the state
in the country which is slated
the the call long distance cell
phones.
So we had we had this agreement
the the legislation was passed.
These were the days when I also
voice service was preemption
especially in.
We're cell phone service was
much less of it is today for the
focus was on financial support
in place of the access charges
universal service fund financial
support to keep the world of
these hello.
Happened since nineteen ninety
nine is broadband has overcome
voice has been deleted alright
we had the public regulation
commission rural companies are
financially rewarded if they
continue to to find voice
service but they are financially
penalize if they get broadband
customers the broadband
customers only once per month
and not the voice this is been
articulated so we have a public
policy that sounds if you were
to describe this to anyone else
in of state forty SEC we have a
public policy is completely
flipped from everything else you
see.
With that Madam chair
representative we have any
questions we have thank you so
much for your time thank you.
Madam chair of the committee.
Been taking some of the elements
executive director for the New
Mexico change Kerry group also
registered lobbyist the enemy CG
is a telephone broadband
industry association comprised
of ten.
Incumbent local exchange
carriers that provide service
throughout rural New Mexico.
A way to fall into the real
telecommunications act all of
our company Sir fifty thousand
access lines hello the majority
of our our companies have ten
thousand just.
There's a.
A good percentage of our
companies that have five
thousand to eight thousand
access.
In again rural areas of the
state so the make up of the New
Mexico state engineers who are
six member owned companies and I
commercial companies I.
I commercial and they are
talking about communications and
device doubt telephone
cooperative city Texas in a more
planned to in Clovis legal role
telecommunications cooperative
and Hobbs it also valley.
Cooperative teacher we have to
have also faces telephone
company into the center valley
telephone the Department if it
will cost centers in western
telecommunications companies
service city and Windstream
communications headquartered in
Arkansas New Mexico
telecom communications at
Cooper to the tell us so I bring
this to as an information please
so you can see the vast area of
the state C. NG covers the other
enemies he to stand strong
support of Senate bill one fifty
five as amended and we think
Senator Padilla efforts in
sponsoring legislation.
The village just as as mentioned
areas in the state will personal
service fund
to accommodate growth customers
for stable finances mention and
still preserve the arch pay from
the S. R. U. S. at the animation
need supports the legislation
that amends the RTA to define
access line as a consumer I am.
This goes a long way towards the
affordability of.
areas are supposed to be doing
digital inclusion and alleged
police are both part of this
issues this makes sense supports
both of those initiatives
there's no harm to any provider
in this bill.
It is however a benefit to all
the real customers.
The secondary builders be
a test is the needs based
support.
The enemy CG supports this
section of the policy to create
a more predictable and
streamlined process for the
eligible to telecommunication
carriers or just were referred
to the TC's.
Seeking a based support from the
S. R. U. S. S. for the purpose
of financial stability so that
we can satisfy the goals with
the S. R. U. S. S. and meet the
demands of our customers the
amendment supported by the end
of the SCG would provide the
opportunity for the two seas to
find themselves in need support
they have so you just have to
maintain adequate I.
stability and accountability and
to support a specific network
construction costs.
Paying support to relatively
simple mechanisms that are
intended to be not only
physician streamline fifty.
Both in favor of boards.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Leo Baca
I'm the director of regulatory
and government affairs for
CenturyLink in New Mexico also
known as Lou I've been in this
industry for forty one years
I'll tell you the industry has
changed significantly time after
time over those forty years and
as Mr but all of the tribes in
trying to nine nine is continue
to change that so this bill will
help recognize the current
environment broadband becoming
more prevalent in our in our
world and also if you need that
the access plain old telephone
service as it goes down
broadband lines are coming up so
it's a it's a two counties
adequate counter how these lines
should apply to the funds to I
think it's on that the companies
under thank you mentioned.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Allison and
I'm representing the village of.
Anything.
To help us to have better
internet and cell service our
rural communities of thirteen
hundred people believe strongly
supported we have areas that are
town we drop our sales are
internet goes down by three one.
And we have more both rooms
committee and we think this or
you just.
Share your lowest office
broadband access expansion
operations manager and we also
support the Senate bill one
fifty five
I think we can't Avalos with all
the experts at the table but we
are very much Spartans be able
to bring broadband state.
Share this recession
this is more sufficiency in also
proper detoxification.
Would this be for a moment to
nurses this bill and how it
affects people of my nation so
back in twenty seventeen years.
Product coverage for the
southeastern part of the state
and as a result of FC at our our
state law we were actually able
to really about this is why
straight until communication for
members of our tribe which was
pandemic has resulted in a lot
of licensing during the time.
I want to see just very complete
to spend my time by inserting of
the people of this report well
this the I. H. S. facility in
Black Rock currently on that
side state there are options but
they are very expensive for many
of our our folks on the streets
state and as a result some of
them had severe delays here
resulting is yes so and some of
which I I actually your.
I stand sport single one fifty
thousand and did and just wanted
you to know that we are we in
the community of providers here
people who see the value in
telecommunications universal
access in addition the portable
for our patients and our
community members to support our
state so thank you so much for
your time but if.
Of course I what is that server
First of all thank you for
providing this be here madam
chair.
my name is Richard vote yes on
the telephone for the southeast
part of the state certainly no
terrible Chavis and and County
our our budget customers.
One.
One customer for two square
miles this so this program is
incredibly important to us and
and have had has been used to to
to reach those first customers
all of this one of the benefits
when we are in bill that I wrote
to that we do we do pass areas
were towers to be built and that
they can also connect to the
fiber that we connect a lot of
anchor institutions and so the
fund does great things and the
fund works we just need to
modernize where it does include
the C. Wallace but some
customers was to get our
broadband service to use their
cell phone they also have to
take our land.
and that's that's what this
that's how it works for so with
that in mind I would just ask
for your support to.
Madam chair representative.
Committees I'm hosting Mexico
with members of this point of
tension try and as you know they
have to restoration in
particular New Mexico to be
cleaned give me and auspices I
think stands for this bill
Senate support for them but I
like to make a comment I would
still choose to go for senator
Jeff Bingaman when you Original
Bill Kenya's for about four the
universal health the universal
services and it's very education
person and help and our as I
agree that this bill is I have
to make sure that that stuff
reduced rates for
black and safely do.
I think it's well needed state
not just in our little small
this invitation to apples thank
you very much for introducing
this activity across and spends
a quarter of it.
Thank you I think that helps for
comment the availability of
these in.
Our I have a common.
One
comment my next slide towards
the in the school board member
was from the school of school
district however most of the
state my project manager for the
tier two I and I project that is
currently now is of the western
part of the state San Juan of
Cibola and the county county of
setter on top right now I and so
we're full support anything that
would increase the of the
ability capabilities for
families in those areas to have
access to broadband and working
with the ISPs.
Your.
And and that's going on with
that as well so there are some
things happen.
I just want to make you aware of
that I am.
Contracted by PGD by HB I early
childhood and by the way and so
I work with of the office I am
very closely for.
More.
Broadband for that area.
As a hi Jeff hopefully and
that's not anything we can use
for that asset but most
importantly.
Support for the cost to our.
areas to.
Thank you and we have one of
those in Madam we have one of
the.
We also have a couple other
details were in support.
Have.
Thank you to it and then.
Allergan nudity.
Yes my name is Bob Caroline I'm
a memory that are in the
statement military families
caught this we support SB one
fifty five because it it it
expands broadband service
veterans living in rural
communities.
Rural veterans are often older
and face may face significant
health problems and it's
difficult for them to travel
physical medical facility so
access to telemedicine would be
especially beneficial rural
severance of broadband also
provides access to online job
resources educational
opportunities not just for the
veterans but also to their
families in rural areas our
caucus therefore recommended to
pass determination on this
committee thank you.
Of the.
For the last the mass zero this
alley.
Hello who
area of New Mexico supports.
The
bills we also have.
It's you know the hello coming
out of the county to point it
out and
That Representative them to the
representation telephone company
office.
Thank you thank you and we have
any questions for committee
members.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Up madam chair so what is not
reading of these bills is trying
to figure out.
What the sentence is being.
The up but I but but in this you
you had a definition of a vote
for access on.
With with the adult online
Attractive for with that is.
What's folks will go live with
our Pacific constant by local
state service from Paris which
equipment.
One termination because first
network interface and access
line does not include.
The official lines hi look for
the official official lines that
did not find one.
unbundled network elements or
platforms.
Retail sales wholesale resale
aside retail resell was L..
Special access lines or private
lines I also look for
definitions special access
lines.
Once I did not find definitions
for those.
For the rest of it I think is is
relatively self explanatory but
could you could you explain to
me what is the official line was
slides as line was a private
line and how would I know that.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Senator I'm gonna ask need to
define if they wanted to time so
official line would be as I
understand it something related
to a government agency maybe
lines that are things are done
along the rails you know
somewhere in the country but if
you can.
Of.
Members of the committee the
centers correct to official
lines are that as a matter of
fact this of.
This act did not have a
definition for access line and
access line well as defined by
rule in the I see.
And the so a nexus one by rural
and and this is basically the
same this is a carryover from
the roll it's a dial tone or
functional equivalent that
provides local exchange service
for the carrier switching
equipment point of termination
at the customers or interfaces
not limited to wireline or any
other technology for the purpose
of this role in access line does
not include official lines
unbundled network elements
platforms retail re resale
wholesale resale or special
access lines and private lines
so that.
Actually came from the rural and
the.
I I'm not sure about the exact
interpretation maybe our turn
you can talk to to to those
about the unbundled network
elements platforms.
madam chair and senator I I do
not know why the PRC put that in
there for the PRC is the of the
governing body the expert if you
will to come up with the
definition of skating right now
to see if they've added anything
any other definition of the rule
and I do not see it for.
Okay said so do so do we know
what a private line is and madam
chair.
Senator.
We have anybody for PRC here.
I'm just going to try to.
In order prevalence madam chair
Senator there's no definition
for me to provide that
information from various.
Our product line okay outside of
madam chairman Sir Senator.
sees.
Rural do you know what a private
plans.
I do not so the Senator Ivey
Soto of the Mr but all.
Committee of these definitions
of the terminology
is defined.
So it by the FCC and the federal
statutes
a private line is actually a
line that's owned by a it could
be a governmental entity or a
private sector entities that
connects one the department with
another department and there's
no public access.
To that line a number of those
network elements.
Takes me back but I years this
was an issue is also defined by
by the federal government and on
the mobile network element is a
piece of the net that the
incumbent.
CenturyLink had to make
available to any competitor and
it is not actually eight eight a
route open to the to the public
it is one piece of of of the
network that is leased to that
company.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
Ivey Soto.
No I I I appreciate the purpose
that's that's very helpful in
terms of center parties a party
we have another comment yes
chair Senators
Is actually lines that we as
they tell you to facilitate our
business so it maybe yes lines
it may be lines that we use that
are that that we would assess
Certain components available
consumption pundits on official
lines is really lines that are
used by the telco retail resell
and hold so resell are those
that we find to other companies
for providing to actual end
users so they would be the ones
that would assess in the end
user charges on the line there
wouldn't be anything that we
would set off of providing to
other companies for resale or
basis if that's helpful.
At a special assessment.
Special access lines are
typically
Circuits smaller circuits and
there there's an array of of
items of those could be.
Okay up so madam chair I just.
Up this is going to need to
Judiciary next is a.
This gets taxed at all okay is
going to issue.
What I up you know I.
I do think.
These.
The to be defined.
in the in the axe.
For some of the act you need to
provide Mr but also phone
number.
Or or else you know and and and
while well let's council is is
is not keen on doing so a lot of
times you have to say as defined
by.
The FTC or or or FCC or still
somebody else right
they don't they don't like the
the amendment by reference sort
of a thing but that you know but
but on the other hand is a
highly technical area and you
know you don't want to you don't
want to get a you know different
definitions.
What not but it is if we moving
this definition from rural to
statute.
it does seem that these the to
be
to provide.
you know and
And so I mean I would.
I would ask that you do that
before food for those that this
committee is this figure some of
that some of that power issues.
as you go through and do that
seven look this is ghetto the
the
I think it's more like
establishing the basis that they
can be built upon and if we
don't completely agree we can.
as wanted to Senate Majority
analyst right to respond
to you also Senator Ivey Soto in
twenty twenty two percent of the
part of the axis will top
mutations that through the
exact.
Raul help communications at if
you're referring to section
three ninety three.
All of the definitions that
other questions that you're
asking the basic services.
All of the exchange.
This particular act from your
they do is they are faring.
Is titled amending the rural to
telecommunications act New
Mexico so he's actually and then
the man Act it's already statute
that already has the
definitions.
Questions on.
This call from the legislative
Senator I set of any instance
for.
Thank you so many of these madam
chair and sent to the Ms I don't
remember sometimes but I we will
validate that each one that you
mentioned is actually defined
there's will will make sure that
that's has I'm actually looking
at six two three nine eight
three so so yeah
is.
Of you know it is just that as
we are fiscal year.
Trying to figure out how to.
Preserve access to people in
rural areas.
And the and there's a.
There's a transfer.
Of of funding.
as as part of these funds in
order to do so.
it's a it's a at it's it's
important that we that we have a
clear understanding of of what
is included what's not.
And and so.
You know I do want to seven look
this is the the terribly complex
area.
And the and so you know I do
appreciate
madam chair all the work that.
separately is been doing in and
they care the load on this and
what not and I'm and I'm also
very grateful that that you guys
are continuing conversations
even at as this is a proceeding
through.
you know I think.
I'd I will know though that I'm
on page twelve where we did a.
It amended.
We with them broadened the
definition of access line.
for for this for for for this
subsection only.
To.
I was hoping that this is not
intended to supersede the other
definitions.
It's it's and it's intended to.
To expand the definition for
that section for the subsection.
And and I guess my my question
is.
Why why would we not included
consumer broadband loop
properly.
what a regulated traditional
voice services not used in the
definition throughout.
Chairman of the chairs of
senators so important of.
In section of K. E. of
The on page twelve that refers
world universal service fund the
the
Education Act is is where we
define access line and then we
further to for that understate
we're only worsened service fund
for the purposes of this
subsection two as an access line
to include consumer broadband
only loop when a regulated.
Traditional voice services not
used this applies only to the
universal service fund portion
of that.
And madam chair and listen to us
I understand that that will the
that the effect of it is that it
only applies to that my question
is.
This is why don't we included in
the in the in the definite what
the impact will be the impact or
included in the definition of of
access line.
for the tire Act.
terms Mr Senator.
The reason why it needs to be
limited only to this particular
provision because because access
lines are used in in tallying
up.
As a part of the equation for
the surcharge that funds the
fund.
And.
Because this is a broadband only
section
dealing with the sequel line you
can't include that in this count
of access lines to fund.
So it has to be pulled out.
And limited to pay on.
And so it access line
foreseeable can be counted for a
R. S. payments tax reduction
support payments but would not
be counted in the
Computation for the access lines
for the surcharge that this
charge on access lines to fund.
And that's because the FTC the
FCC regulates property it's
specifically set forth in our
statute our our commission
cannot.
Regulates broadband so madam
chair survive undersecretary so.
So.
Could survive better in the
loop.
What special voice service is
not used.
Then is not counted for the fees
that go into the fund.
But discounted for the grants
out of from the fund.
And every year Mr minutes madam
chair and every year it's
reassessed what are those.
What would that look like for
each of the companies you for
trouble so that there's not so
it's fair and it's not.
One company over.
And we have one.
Chair Senators
Aloof jurisdictional we just
kind of state service.
And so in terms of state service
internet isn't interstate
service so it's FCC regulated
but also another piece to that
is the federal government the
FCC had a preemption that
internet could not be assess
certain surcharges fees and
taxes and so consumer broadband
only looping interstate service.
We couldn't have by federal law.
Put these kind of tax surcharge
or fee on that that's why that's
not able to do that the state
the connection only charge two
other lines that are deemed in
inner and prostate jurisdiction
only.
And it's just does that help
practice that has had public's
yes thank you.
Okay thank you very
thank you Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Shendo thank you madam
for your on the on page three of
the.
Of course some of the.
Office internet access is off of
the stage caring that does not
include the service and I
this definition of locust.
What is all this explained that
to I don't know what amended so
much to so that.
Your is Senator Shendo of the
local state care your
the low is the ilex and the the
local exchange services
basically your phone line.
Okay so here is the full line
you're just reading three
iterating that that this is a
well just twenty third for
reconfiguring how those lines be
support versus the new
technology which is the big
reform we did that that the
Senate bill three wasteland in
the seventeen okay there's a
raise questions a script to put
more money toward new
technologies rather than a dying
to come okay all right okay
thank you thank you for the
clarification that on the.
The age of thirteen under and.
I noticed the change the
commission shall.
This explaining the rationale
for that.
All in all the rest of the.
Yeah so this is just a it gives
more direction to to to the
commission whereas before they
could simply do whatever they
thought whether they had called
in.
Staff could help them we were
just giving them more clear
direction on what to do with
this.
The did have.
What it was maybe the committee
could not is that your director
of the show.
Chair Senator Shendo.
In this section.
Of limiting it it creates a more
predictable said streamlined
process for the EDC to secretly
based support of were.
In the process that that is
structured.
The the company can go and find
all the information that the of
for the need based.
Process and then the commission
can say okay thank you and the
oil we don't we're not going to
consider that's the NMAA so the
show is if someone has the the.
All of the information that they
require for need based support
of the commission has to act on
it and and and they will they
will authorize payments to the
extent that the fund can afford
drugs into my next question at
what point do these funds get
exhausted if you're next in line
for.
No there's there is going to be
madam chair and senator
motivation to get your you know
your application all your date
all your information in a timely
manner early in the in the
process and the fund will
replenish itself over time so
there will be in a period of
time.
More money available to do
whatever you're.
Possibly proposing for
appreciated madam chair and then
I know that there's also a lot
of money come from other sources
for the federal government so
this is not the I assume that
this is not the only pool of
money that the exchange carriers
can also access at all other
federal funding is coming down
the pike the.
As always stuff there's there's
a lot of money from for profit
and that is correct we obviously
only have say over how we
minister are funds should I
thank you thank you for any
other questions the committee
and chair of the just will
quickly follow up on so should
we also not on page thirteen.
That the change the maintenance
out they also sent part of
finding by the commission so
that the commission doesn't
doesn't outsource it to a
hearing officer and never gets
to the commission for decision.
So we should yes.
We're hoping that the newly
designed commission is much more
Well the and staffed
appropriately.
You know to to do this type of
work.
But yes.
This is great I should the
white fish.
See here.
I guess the story if you're next
pass committees.
The TV to see that there are
just construction and I'm
further options of.
Worksheets additional where
would.
Just for you talking about the
change from maybe shall usually
also in the world there shall
also show.
So that just.
The
problem was.
Get their side with some of the
state.
We also.
Thank.
Cations will look at.
The Czecho also.
All the other questions with
committee members.
Dan table eighteen wishin.
This is a half space Senator
Sanchez as a member.
For Senate bill one fifty five
one segment did force the also I
our.
Right off.
