Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator mantas.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Center my Estes.
Here.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Morris.
Thank you mean yes.
Senator did at dove.
Senator Pirtle.
Santo poco.
center share.
Senator Shendo.
Etcetera souls your Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You do not have a quorum Mister
president.
Also the chamber we're lacking a
quorum.
Hemphill positive care chaplain
the fiscal church USA.
And to remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance with that
this morning by Senator Ingle.
The pledge of allegiance is
source of life and holiness
thank you for this new day.
We pray that we not miss a
minds and hearts to see and hear
a new what is possible beyond
our familiar patterns of
thinking and feeling for the
best and highest good of the
the weighty responsibility to
serve and governed and make
policy in this and this are in
chanting New Mexico home.
fountain of wisdom whose law is
truth and love guide New Mexico
Senate it's Senators their
staffs and advisers and
colleagues in the house as well
A light in our darkness
illuminate the shadows of
confusion and despair and reveal
your paths that lead to shared
shelter of your wings this we
pray with joyful expectation
that today and always we may be
instruments of your best and
Once again would like to welcome
all of you to the Mexico state
Senate thank you for joining us
today with that I'll turn it
over term majority floor leader
senator Peter Wirth to take the
Senate to the next order of
our business announcements and
miscellaneous no objection or in
that order business announces
this and miscellaneous senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
thank you chaplain Hemphill for
you know it's easy to get sucked
into the little issue of the
moment or the bill or something
that's very micro focus and I
just thank you know pulling it
up and realizing the big picture
Senate memorial twelve UNM day
at the legislature from the
president's table in place that
on today's counter no objection
we will remove the senator
Morris twelve off the
president's table and it will be
of the journal today if you
didn't see that but.
What's acquired will have him
read that memorial on that I
know Senator Ortiz and and
got a number of senators with
gas to introduce in a let them
do that before we do the
memorial in terms of events.
The UNM alumni association is
holding its annual legislative
reception it'll Fonda on the
plaza from six to eight PM by
invitation and the Clovis
economic development is hosting
contractors of New Mexico will
have a meet and greet breakfast
at innovate plus educate for
twenty two old Santa Fe Trail
eight to nine by invitation and
the P. R. A. building if you'd
like to make an appointment call
five oh five eight two seven
four three eight five with that
Mr president now is the time for
members to introduce their
announced some of the senators
and few after that so we have
Senator Kernan followed by
Senator Steinborn Senator Pinto
Senator Hamblen and Senators
to welcome our State tech career
and technical education center
Hobbs students of hops High
School and today my shadow is
Abigail Trammell who is a
is on the team who publishes
daily announcements and a
newsletter for C. tech students
we also have hops high school
administrators who have
accompanied them we have
Carlos Medina and they may be in
the gallery I'm not sure that
that we're very happy to have
Garcia tech students this is the
first class of students to go to
the new C. tech school and
vocations or to college and so
if you'll help me welcome
Abigail.
Hearing no objection cameras to
be allowed only on the Senate
floor center for them thank you
very much Mr president and I
believe they return but to
unanimous consent to excuse
We have Senator Steinborn
followed by Senator Pinto
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president Mr president I want to
welcome all the Los crucis in
Thank you thank you Mr president
is really remarkable the chamber
of commerce every year organizes
what we call Las Cruces day it
probably needs a little re
capitol to learn about the
legislative process to share
their priorities from the second
biggest city in the state and
and we really get to have a good
time together and and learn more
come and as you know Los crucis
is the second biggest city in
the state that is one of the top
places in the state to make
movies.
Has the best green chili in the
state.
And and since we are could have
aerospace state were also one of
the first and leading and maybe
only put maybe not aerospace
Senator Pinto followed by
Senator Hamblen the incentive
for the Senator Pinto thank you
you will find a an invitation to
the I a museum where you can
just present your badge at
dimensions desk for the week in
side to St of the cathedral and
it is U. N. M. day we do have
some students I think this is
probably the most we have had in
the gallery since opening day
will thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pinto.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent to introduce
community members who are here
to not only highlight the great
work that is being done in Los
crucis but to also show this
incredible collaboration from
those in the business sector and
Cruces chamber he is the board
chair and also fellow
Wisconsinites found out did his
research and found out my family
is of cheese royalty I'll be
more than happy to explain that
community member kill Hoffman
who is from pioneer bank a
former Los crucis chamber chair
keel is everywhere in Los crucis
and supporting many many local
work wife that I get to say with
permission from my wife is
Debbie Moore who is the greater
Las Cruces chamber president and
CEO these folks were here
because of Los crucis days and
And if I may Mr president there
is one thing I'd like to bring
to attention thank you to the
greater Las Cruces chamber you
do have a gift that is a no pad
and one of the things that I
Cruces chamber of commerce
myself thank you for accepting
this gift and I hope you enjoy
thank you Mr president thank you
so much Senator Hamblen welcome
to our guests on this Senator
the guest speaker and and then I
waited and I waited and I didn't
see you should did you finally
show up.
I did senator thank you as a
wonderful reception I got I I
thank the governor for hosting
us yesterday.
Of the the state gets a lot of
things right but inevitably
whenever we do Los crucis stays
we always do it in the middle of
governor what room we were going
to be watching the game in and
she told me that was on you Miss
present so I I will I would like
for you to be able to respond to
why we were unable to watch the
invited to the private residence
where I told was told you were
actually watching the game on
the big screen TV that was
inaccurate so Senator about this
there wasn't a big string
watching the football game with
him well miss present I'm
envious of that but I I thought
maybe you were in the private
part of the residence may be
measuring some of the drapes Mr
president but but since you are
not and not watching the game
I'm sorry I missed the The
tell the the breakfast this
morning briefly we spent a lot
of time and attention up here
the last two years on economic
development we talk about the
new cannabis industry we talk
about the good work of virgin
combined in the state in terms
of economic development managing
that for just a second
everything we talk about doing a
film everything we talk about
cannabis and pot everything we
come and go in time but our
border with Mexico will never
change and the economy and the
possibilities that we have with
that sure border is a permanent
new cabinet secretary of state
you all remember that I see all
the blushing of their center
I'm always introduces the New
Mexico state center site house I
think cabinet secretary for
you so much Senator about this
and all the gas to U. introduced
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr president I
do have a quite a few folks
summon introduce here with
unanimous consent.
No objection for state senator
thank you Mr president group
that I was heavily involved in
I call your name if you'll
please stand whether you're on
the Senate floor or in the
gallery Teagan McKay the money
well a on the global.
And Mr president I just like you
we have madam president here
today and she is our state
president of business
professionals of America mia
of America state officer
coordinator Leslie Farris Mr
president she's here as well
thank you Leslie for the work
that you do to help these young
folks get on in the life we also
have the family career and
here as well we also have the
first vice president Alyssa
Spencer who is with us in the
gallery we have the Clovis High
School chapter adviser for
chapter advisor Patricia irons.
And a very dear friend of mine
Mr president of coming Kaling
from Pecos New Mexico she and I
went through a lot of high
school programs together we were
these guests.
Thank you very much and thank
you to our guest I do have a few
behind me I was joined by some
additional gas the hosted by our
anti plus since you if you'll
stand.
Hosa advisor Tanya Masih.
And if we can thank you very
much Mr president lots more
guests to come up thank you
thank you senator there we do
have on the list we have
do have a number of guests today
but first I want all the people
in the building look at all of
the young people who we have
these are people who are in our
our support to ensure that we
have jobs ready and available
for them and anyone involved in
the business community please
open up your business to the
students for internships
as the schools are pushing to
ensure they've got opportunities
for real life practice in high
school headed into your business
but these are our future
Munoz who is a part of the host
a program at Oregon might
mountain high school where I
used to teach then also up in
the gallery of all of the
in the country regularly wins
competitions what a great
program they have all the time
and there also are a number of
others from centennial high
all down here on the floor of
different places both of these
high schools are in my district
and Mr president with your
permission I've got a couple
more people that are still
trying to get badges to get onto
school and their sponsors.
Thank you Mr president thank you
social.
Mr president Barney I appreciate
the opportunity today we have
this young man from a current
technical education center Hobbs
known as C. tech and it's a
Trevor and he's a twelfth grader
in C. tech his pathways
transportation automotive
automation when center soldiers
trying to get them to have some
get into the career path that is
going he's also also is creating
interest is in secondary
education and history and he's
he's part of SkillsUSA and
educator rising program at Hobbs
high school like the body to
help me welcome and Senate.
ear no objection proceed
Senator.
Thank you Mr president I am
delighted to introduce introduce
Desiree CEO we're trying to
figure out if we have a
and she gonna studies she is she
graduated from Albuquerque high
she lives in Albuquerque's west
side and she is a descendant of
the three three school land
education there her goal is to
work with her family and
community whether it is has a
lawyer a social worker or policy
advocate so please join me in
in the gallery who are students
from Los Lunas high school
representing future health group
of professionals through our up
their advisors came Russell who
Chavis was a sophomore okay
let's go Romero who is a
freshman Isaiah Lopez who is a
freshman.
These students have taken or are
career technical student
organization that supports their
interest and desire to be in the
health care industry after
graduation.
Also from Valencia high school
honor Abby also bellow.
Zero comment on Elijah court of
us.
Joseph field not a simple.
welcoming them today yeah there
they are all over.
Thank you so much Mister
president thank you Senator
and Senator about this.
Senator Shendo up Mr president I
ask unanimous consent introduce
a guest here no objection
crossing Senator thank you Mr
introduce some individually of
if you can stand for folks
continue claim contain junior
Alisha guy goes from the goon
Act money in American studies
family studies and senior.
Of Lisa Riano Santo Domingo
family studies a senior
graduating may.
have entry Ozzie Navajo masters
public administration a grad
student and then the.
Lucia may of.
of American in student services
program miss PAM go oil whose
Cochiti Q. and okay we gay and
also serves as the a a special
assistant to the president for
a summer program that many of
these freshmen it's a volunteer
program units not mandatory but
students come into that program
that come into that summer
bridge program have a eighty
four percent retention rate at
UNM and for the regular
retention rate I believe is a
the what's necessary to make
sure that not only that the
students you know matriculating
UNM but they also graduate so
Thank you Senator Shendo Senator
how to meal.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to introduce my guest no
objection proceeds of the thank
would proudly displaying as a
former member of the U. eleven
chair team and we're able to
school from a lot of sense for
the lot isa I'm the first
generation to graduate from the
Alessandro then the just leave
that I both to play critical
roles at the university of New
Mexico to ensure Latino students
have the support that they need
and college about first
generation college students can
the house Senate again if that
was allowed.
And he also did volunteer to be
the Senate coach if we need one
That comes back to give
regularly to New Mexico Kenny is
working on a couple of major
projects one of them is the last
gives them tools and allows them
for mental health to be easily
accessible he also does that
youth basketball clinics and
camps across New Mexico
now passing that on to students
he's part of the make a wish
foundation to this on that board
ladies and gentlemen if you
could help me welcome home and
Know the Alamos make a vote and
lead everyone in the chair but
also save that for the
basketball game Mr president
thank you so much thank you
senator mail.
okay I'm sorry.
I'm almost as tall as Kenny
Thomas as you can see I I what
do you guys think we should have
a Mr Senator on the mail due
this year.
know you did that a lustrous the
state.
That I bet no disrespect Mr
president thank you so much.
today are also part of the
career and technical education
day other New Mexico technology
students and their members of
that association so let me start
Is a student at the school of
dreams academy in Los Lunas and
he's the TSA state secretary.
officer and coordinator for or
for the college of engineering.
And then I have many Clawson
education which we all realise
is one of the the biggest needs
in our state to help our state
grow and provide opportunities
Image present one more thing.
Go ahead you should.
souls is ready we'll go with the
with you for a second time okay
and then senators about this for
a second time Senator Pinto
thank you Mr president Eunice
consent to introduce my guess.
Mexico I have Brianna Ramirez
class of twenty twenty five and
me opted aka class of twenty
twenty four twenty twenty five
Thank you mispronouncing deep
ties and everybody asked me the
games I see at the football
an election year not so mid
agency president hi I'm pleased
to introduce my my guests today
standing alongside a Mason
Gruber's Act.
colleagues and probably one of
the more colorful and
entertaining senators who I I
serve with when I was my house I
jongleurs Act
mom data was of my college
classmate one of my best friends
in law school on with senator
Wirth and others and so do Dana
and Mason's mom John is that in
managed to get into the press a
look at our center worth because
it senator Wirth would have been
I think in the chamber right
here in the Senate with John
were you is there no in the
house all right well
one of the more fears some
debaters very passionate very
brilliant lawyer but also could
put things in a way that most of
career but please welcome I
enter this week Mason groups
that.
honorable members I'm joined by
Jacob Vigil very honored to have
and I look forward to learning
from him all week is a fellow
from UNM he grew up in my that I
have a New Mexico and graduated
Law so please welcome my fellow
Jacob eagle.
Thank you thanks M. S..
unanimous consent energy some
gas no objection from the Santo
today in the gallery we have
some representatives from New
Mexico FFA we have Gary Aycock
we have Russell Walter and
the blue corduroy jackets up
there soon thank you Mr
president.
Leader worth to take us the next
order of business Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so we're
going to go ahead as senator
Ortiz Pino are you ready with
the and center more center Morsi
present over so announcements
and miscellaneous in nabbing
eleven fifty nine AM I move we
adjourn until twelve or one PM
the Senate will come in order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended the record show that
the journal's been read in full
and approved subject to revision
and approval of the Judiciary
some while twelfth Senator is
aware that order business
serving the legislation and I
would just remind senators to
please keep the volume down to
minimum anytime we're on third
reading we want to make sure
Mr president I choose this after
a three years of not putting on
bills
I forgot how to do this I pick
moved Center memorial twelve not
be put on the table and open to
final passage so to debate
amendment and substitution.
Senator Moores that put it on
I ask Miss president that it be
Representative.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read.
contributions to education
research and public service on
behalf of the residents of New
Mexico whereas the University of
New Mexico was founded in
students and employees employing
tens of thousands of New
Mexicans including employees of
the university of New Mexico
hospital and whereas University
of New Mexico students attain
and whereas the University of
New Mexico annually awards over
ninety eight million dollars in
scholarships and whereas there
Mexico is celebrating a century
of graduate studies giving
students access to nationally
recognized faculty cutting edge
research professional and
celebrating fifty three years of
identifying promoting and
supporting the interests of
nearly five thousand five
hundred graduate and
health care treatment research
and education organization with
national recognition for primary
care rural medicine family
medicine nursing and midwifery
provides a research driven
education for effectively
members engage in investigation
and scholarship that create new
knowledge which brings sustained
and celebrates a culture of
contrast rather than a contrast
of cultures and whereas the
University of New Mexico is the
UNM day in the Senate in
recognition recognition of the
University of New Mexico service
and dedication to the residents
of New Mexico and be it further
Fe Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
Senator Mark Moores Mimi Stewart
president pro tem sherry do
amateurish I move that sent
memorial twelve.
now be put on final passes in
open for debate amendment or
substitution Mr president see no
objections center more six
sweated taking concussions hurt
my ankles
to this or for the university
I'm very proud of that you and
giving opportunities recruited
me out of high school I think
and put the name New Mexico on
the front of the Jersey for four
years out as an offense of
linemen
coming Representative Baca and
those you might not know this
interesting stories to tell has
some people limping caller call
Kansas right now because the two
of us and that's something we're
really proud of being able to
obviously our Canada's also
being in Albuquerque graduate
and then moving on to U. N. M.
and and and successful so you
have three letter for letter
winners in this chamber right
would graduate college without
that experience and being able
to play football go to classes
and it definitely changed my
life in it for the better and
farm Kenny.
Center our meal.
Come over your guys is here come
on can you points on you know it
all the more as we can we can
get to that that's going to get
through this and then get the
vote there that will come back
and open up to debate in the
Thank you Mr president and that
I eagerly accepted the
opportunity to join Senator
Moores in in introducing the the
the guests here today in an
interview since the memorial.
the athletic director of the
university and the provost of
the of the health sciences
centre those not provost
whatever's new title whatever.
director and we have doctors it
down as the the head of the
health sciences center they're
all with this here today and
along with them I'd like to
introduce the vice president for
appointment in the department of
chemistry and chemical biology.
She oversees all research and
scholarly activities on the
central campus as well as a
accounting doctor Fisher seeks
to purposefully purposely built
a research infrastructure in
collaboration develop UNM
strategic initiatives and
experiences for students at all
levels through research
innovation and discovery
activities Dr Fisher holds a
doctorate in physical analytical
Senator moral twelve anybody
else wishing to debate Senator
Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr president
you have some comments about U.
that ahead of time I want to
thank Senator Ortiz Pino and
senator Morris for bringing this
terrific memorial to all of us
we just love the University of
tell you that the moment I moved
out of their Mr president you to
I I just was a great great place
to live I would go to work in
the evening I come back can you
plug anything into one of the
reason they had to remodel it
though I want to let you know
that.
But but I but I will say that
there was a lot of.
Great community spirit that was
regularly give a ring out to you
know
athletic director and and
executive I'm on all the titles
noon yes just a phenomenal human
attention to what's going on in
the communities all the way down
to the smallest communities that
feed into the University of New
Mexico Mr president I think we
should recognize that as well
the leadership is very very
re upped and I'm I'm really
happy about that Mr president
because then you can begin to
slowly do some really good long
term meaningful planning for
such an enormous institution in
thank you thank you senator
Senator as we're debating Center
memorial twelve anyone else.
Center on a meal thank you Mr
president I stand in strong
support of U. N. M. day as I
afford to send me with the
laptop I used to wait out one in
the morning for the computer lab
to open up so I could type of
paper and I didn't have the
option of writing a first draft
policy allowed me to do school
work using their computers when
they found out is waiting at the
computer lab at one in the
morning and tell you what I'm
hold a very special place in my
heart not only as a former
what you do for students thank
you am I owe gratitude of the
twelve to because I learned not
only so much for your help to
break the cycle of poverty thank
you Mr president thank you
strong supports as a nineteen
ninety graduate of the
university of New Mexico Law
School I will tell you it
changed my life and here in the
after all served together
including Senator Servan tastes
and I who were moot court
partners in law school all those
years ago and so to be able to
it just the the law school gave
me an incredible platform.
To really effect change and it's
change not only in the day to
day practice of the law but then
impacted so many folks and the
fact that we're able to kind of
come back here and celebrate UNM
is a good thing so I'm happy to
stand up and support thank you
Mr president.
eighty three from the school of
architecture and I need the
three is a school of
architecture was not that big
beautiful building that is now
on Central Avenue we were an old
carpet of warehouse building but
did most of our best work and it
was some a really great memories
later on in life I changed
careers became a lawyer and
graduated as the center Wirth
said from the school of law in
colleagues on the anniversary
Committee for the school of law
we're celebrating our seventy
fifth anniversary this year the
school on so well senator Wirth
I've got Senator center group
sex son behind me maybe Law
School so we we I think we have
some future lawyers I'm looking
at you Senator Stewart you're
looking at me like maybe a
have at the national level in
our congressional delegation
elsewhere so something be very
very proud of and our governor
our governor of course is a
graduate of U. N. M. school of
law to so we should recognize
affection I have for my family
my daughter's.
One of them is a graduate of
your UNM School of medicine
who's now an obstetrician in
Houston that's my daughter
Isabella my oldest daughter is a
graduate if you in law school
doing good service to our state
so thank you and.
Think about this further debate
we have Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman I wanna
not I actually spent seventeen
years there as an assistant and
associate professor of internal
medicine teaching in the wards
and in the clinics and I have to
coming and the great service
that they're providing and so I
really want to recognize them
for what they're doing for the
also you know it would be remiss
if I didn't point out that the
university itself in partnership
with the Medical Center is the
such a difference to the public
health of the state and work
with the department of health
and so I want to thank you for
this wonderful resource that
Si no further debate.
Senator Moores to close.
Thank you Mr president before
too close I wanted to
acknowledge James Holloway I
appointment in nuclear
engineering Mister president
that's pretty impressive so I'm
really pressed our profile
pressed with him I really
appreciate you being here and
to a political science just like
our was sciences in the name and
he's also really happy to have
him here today is that a really
good job of following us in
Mexico I'm honored to have four
three other alumni lettermen
with me if they're if they're
brave enough to get up and join
us we got Representative Baca
who played football as I
mentioned we have our your squad
everything go and just a just
take the vote.
Going to the performers will
agency presentation this at the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called in all
those presents voted informative
person.
All Fortythree that I was going
seven twelve UNM day has passed
the Senate Senator to take it to
the next senator Morris he was
further so the probably no news
of us ready ready guys.
Right to any.
We'll.
The for the.
When we pledge our fate to the.
Members shall we go.
Thank you Mr president go Lobos
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president a
unanimous consent we go to that
Mr president your Education
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill twenty has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
Senator pope.
Mr president move adoption the
committee report.
Etcetera but we do have several.
Okay.
I moved it option of the
vote on them with one motion and
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually
then no objection the richer in
the committee reports.
Senate bill twenty four do not
Senate bill sixty do pass as
amended and that's referred to
the finance committee.
Senate bill seventy eight do
Senate bill one fifty four do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Respectfully submitted William
P. souls chairman.
aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the Canadian
border been adopted in the
records show that they're all
acted upon individually.
The reader to read Mr president.
reports with same recommendation
that it to pass as amended and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
on them with one motion but that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually.
Hearing no objection the reader
to read.
Senate bill eighty one to pass
bill eighty four do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill eighty nine two
passed as amended.
amended and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill ninety six do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
finance committee Senate bill
one thirty nine do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill one forty
move the adoption of the
committee report Senate emotions
about the committee reports all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Georgia Florida were to take us
to the next order of business
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation from
that order business introduction
legislation.
Serrato and Roybal Caballero and
act relating to employment and
acting the paid family and
medical leave act created the
bond with a new child or to care
for a family member they're
moving the time allowed for paid
family and medical leave
accepting certain employees
advisory committee making an
appropriation Senate bill
eleven.
Senate bill eleven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Trent Tax business
to civil liability enacting the
wildfire recovery act
establishing recovery for damage
caused by wildfires providing
economic recovery for property
providing a definition Senate
bill two sixty eight Senate bill
two Sixtyeight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate bill two sixty nine
introduced by Senator Padilla
and Representative Sarinana and
act relating to information and
title is ordered printed
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee dance
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two sixty nine.
national history day program
Senate bill two seventy Senate
bill two seventy having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the San
Indian rules and cultural
defining echoing and
substituting that term for our
revising procedures for FY
mystery mysteries.
Amending the livestock code and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two seventy one.
And act relating to the health
coverage and acting sections of
the health care purchasing Act
and the New Mexico insurance
limitations on coverage for
other types of health care
services provided for ensure
compliance making an
appropriation Senate bill two
seventy three.
Senate bill two seventy two
introduced by Senator Campos and
act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
Senate conservation committee
then Senate finance committee
Senate bill two seventy two
Senate bill two seventy four
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and act relating to law
seventy four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
tax business transportation
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two
sixty six article six NMSA
nineteen seventy eight to raise
the registration fees for
passenger vehicles trucks truck
tractors road tractors and buses
transportation committee and
Senate finance committees Senate
bill to Senate I.
Senate bill two seventy six
introduced by senator guy eagles
Senate bill two seventy six
having been read twice by title
is ordered printer referred to
the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
of the special needs adopted
child tax credit Senate bill two
seventy seven Senate bill two
seventy seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
goes an act relating to parental
rights providing for the
termination or permanent
suspension of parental rights
when criminal sexual penetration
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two
seventy eight Senate bill two
adult residents failure to
provide fingerprints or submit
to a criminal history record
check declaring an emergency
Senate bill two seventy nine.
seventy nine.
Senate bill two eighty
introduced by Senate by the
representative Sarinana and act
relating to cybersecurity.
officer providing duties
establishing qualifications
creating the cyber security
advisory committee provided
exemptions to the open meetings
rates and fees for services by
the cyber security office in the
duties of the information
technology right committee
title is ordered print referred
to the Senate rules committee
and Senate finance committee
Senate bill two eighty.
Senate bill two eighty one
enacting sections of the
construction industry licensing
act Senate bill two eighty one.
Senate Bill.
Committee Senate bill two eighty
one.
Senate bill two eighty two
introduced by senator Maestas an
act relating to the legislature
directing the Legislative
statutes as a member of the
advisory committee to the New
Mexico compilation commission
making appropriation Senate bill
two eighty two Senate bill two
introduced by Senator pope an
act relating to children and
acting the reducing the reducing
suspensions and expulsions Act
providing a definition for
Senate bill two eighty three.
Senate bill two eighty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate Education Committee
vehicles requiring the motor
vehicle division of the taxation
and revenue department to issue
a special New Mexico Special
Olympics vehicle registration
plate making an appropriation
transportation committee that's
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two eighty four Senate bill
two eighty five introduced by
senators Pirtle diamond Neil and
making technical changes Senate
bill two eighty five.
Senate bill two eighty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the Senate health Public Affairs
and Ortiz the Pino and act
relating to real property
prohibiting the submission of a
deed or other instrument of
writing to the office of the
county clerk that has attached a
discriminatory restrictive
the removal of on lawful
restrictive covenants
restrictions and conditions from
instruments affecting the
transfer of real property before
instruments can be recorded
public policy Senate bill two
eighty six.
Senate bill two eighty six
having been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate Judiciary
section one of the constitution
of New Mexico to find that a law
enacted by the legislature may
be repealed by resolutions of
three fourths of the ten
having been read twice by title
is ordered printer referred to
the Senate rules committee then
send Judiciary Committee Senate
joint resolution ten Senate
twenty three as the year of
bilingual multicultural
education Senate Joint Memorial
six Senate Joint Memorial six
having been read twice by title
Senate memorial fifteen
introduced by senator Correa
Hemphill the more memorial
honoring Lauren and Barbara
Nelson and recognizing their
outstanding public service and
not printed not refer to
committee to be placed on the
president's table Senator moral
fifteen.
Senate memorial sixteen
introduced by Senator Tallman
Senate memorial sixteen center
memorial sixteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee then
Senate health Public Affairs
citizens date in the Senate
Senate memorial seventeen
senator Morris seventeen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed not refer to
committee to be placed on the
cultural significance of the
black them homesteader colony in
Travis county and requesting the
cultural Affairs Department to
convene convene a task force to
Senate rules committee events in
Indian rule in cultural first
committee center memorial
eighteen Senate memorial
nineteen introduced by Senator
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed not refer
to committee to be placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial nineteen Senate
memorial twenty introduced by
Senate memorial twenty.
Senator moral twenty having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not refer to
committee to be placed on the
president's stable Senate
memorial twenty.
go back to that order business
committee reports hearing no
objection run out of business
committee reports the reader to
read the report.
Mr president your rules
committee has approved the
friends upon the death of Janie
Marie Hooper and directs the
chief clerk to prepare suitable
documents to express the
condolences of the Senate
Hi Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all of the
committee reports and
certificates that we put upon
them with one motion in the the
journal reflect that they were
Move adoption the committee
report centers we have a motion
to adopt the committee report
Mr president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificate of
recognition certificate number
one to the following Valory
Wangler M. D. for her compassion
respectfully submitted Katy M.
Duhigg chair.
The committee report have a
motion to adopt was there.
Senator there's three would you
like to amend your.
Emotion.
Yes thank you Mr president.
individually see no objection
the reader to read.
Certificate number two to the
following Paul McCollum for
working tirelessly to make
Gallup and McKinley County
women for its tireless
commitment to serving school age
children of Sandoval County and
directs the chief clerk to
prepare several documents to
express the recognition of the
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposing the eyes have it
committee report is been adopted
in the journal so they were
acted upon individually.
Williams executive director N.
M. C. O. G. region one for his
service to the late senator John
Pinto and the native community
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
put upon them with one motion in
the the journal reflect their
performing at the twenty twenty
three New Mexico Senate
legislative session jade all
right and got that lost his for
performing at the twenty twenty
myocardial and for performing at
the twenty twenty three New
Mexico Senate legislative
session.
Naomi the solo date for
performing at the twenty twenty
AM Garcia for performing up to
twenty twenty three New Mexico
legislative session maven
Dinakaran for performing at the
twenty three New Mexico's Senate
legislative session Finley
Johnson for performing at the
twenty twenty three New Mexico
Senate legislative session James
M. Nash for performing at the
twenty twenty three New Mexico
twenty three New Mexico Senate
legislative session Isaac
Ramirez for performing at the
twenty twenty three New Mexico
Senate legislative session
laughter Senator for performing
twenty twenty three New Mexico
Senate legislative session and
directs the chief clerk to
prepare suitable documents to
express the appreciation of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Centers level motion to adopt
the committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the committee
part is been adopted as journal
and reports that same has been
duly rules and in gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Senator Hamblen.
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report.
Centers in a motion to adopt
committee part all those in
office is the Senate have signed
an open session Center moral
eleven.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
day will be in at eleven
tomorrow just before chairs make
their announcements though I
know Senator Lopez is going to
ask for a moment of silence I
Mister president members I would
like for to ask for a moment of
silence
four eight community leader from
the south valley and actually
again what I met her back many
few years back she already had a
renowned name in their community
working around early childhood
and I Mr president you know with
the constitutional amendment
that was passed to we're
removing forward with all these
different funds and such that
was always a dream of miss
Dudley.
not here and I believe Mr
president Purcell is still with
us and I just would like to ask
us for a moment of silence in
her honor
and to send peace and love to
take a moment and reflect on the
life of commissioner bill sapien
John sapien was our colleague
and his dad a past
commissioner sapien was.
always here on opening days and
certainly to all of the sapien
family I just like to ask us to
have a moment's silence keep
them and in our thoughts we can
Thank you.
Thank you Mr president.
Sentiment us thank you Mr
president everyone knows that
the junior money is out.
If you need help drafting
language Adrian in three twenty
two will help you.
junior money is due by Friday so
make sure you guys get that done
I know the advocates and
everybody else listening so get
that bill out of out of finance
on Monday so we can get into the
house and to the floor in the
house we can start tracking on
house bill two Senate finance
we're going today at two o'clock
talk about this every single
item in the in the state in New
Mexico does not have the correct
payments to hire the right
people at the right rate so we
can get those directors deputy
at two o'clock because thank you
senator Senator Ingle thank you
Mr president cinnamon you know
she'll send me a special who
present I I don't drive a feed
The centers of applied and then
Senator Campos.
Applies to you W. the older you
are the less reoccurring you get
have to come to rise up and rain
all over you and you won't like
it it'll be bad.
Because if there's anyone that
of the senior centers around
here learn how to how to sneak
in and take money and and
they'll send you the other way
or tell your cars on fire in the
parking lot and it also and you
For an announcement Mr president
Senate Bill thank you Mr
president I don't know if they
will make it today or tonight
tomorrow maybe there's a group
done a three thousand mile from
West Africa they're gonna land
in Antigua either today or
tomorrow depends on how the
weather treat some they're
raising money for mental
body because that will probably
make the news the next day or
two certainly three guys were
very proud of they have a very
sophisticated rowboat and it's
been quite a quite an effort to
president thanks Seneal further
announcements of Senators cels.
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate conservation committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
will be coming at nine AM to
talk about the State Land
offices conservation programs
then we will hear from Santo
Novell and worse Senator Stewart
Senator Steinborn myself and
meet at a quarter of two today
that meeting is in room three
eleven and we have a of of the
short agenda but there's some
pretty controversial bills it'll
firearms Act and financial
crimes against vulnerable adults
the wheels of bills by Senator
you Mr president of your Indian
rural and cultural affairs
committee will be meeting for
the first time tomorrow that is
Tuesday January thirty first at
one eighty eight by our stellar
basketball centers Senator
tools.
presumptive detentions
detentions based on a
presumption of guilt or crime
we're gonna today look at the
constitutionality of that
subject in so those of you who
have an interest in that
We're a young individual stopped
for a routine traffic stop ends
up dead.
As a result of an excessive use
legislature which we we should
be proud of at the end of the
last session with what was
called the crime omnibus bill.
To try and address the issue of
the use of force by law
enforcement and what we're
the state and what we did what
will all this past year the of
the last session.
Trying to come up always with
better better ideas and
improvement for that so well
thank you Senator what this.
There any other senators wishing
to make an announcement.
I see none senator Peter Wirth
report.
Mr president your rules
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one eighty
has had it under consideration
and reports of the same with
chairwoman Senator Mr president
I move adoption of the committee
report centers we have a motion
to adopt the committee portals
in favor signify by saying aye.
All those opposed may.
miscellaneous on that order
business announces miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so there's no other
announcements I'd ask unanimous
consent that the Senate stand in
recess until eleven o'clock
