Since due to technical
difficulties are anymore just
not.
There's no it's not on yet so
now it is just came on okay
okay.
Thank you everyone for showing
Committee it's not a standing
committee so we work a little
bit differently is designed to
help the Senate I have a
democratic process for choosing
committees chairs etcetera so we
don't take public input and we
we can meet when there is a need
of the need now is to be ready
for the session in January a we
don't have very many changes
we're going to make at this time
but they're needed because we
have committees I have to start
immediately that are not able to
organize without their
leadership so I have emailed
everyone changes that I am
proposing and I have spoken to
everyone who is impacted by that
so I'll just go through them.
Of for you.
So this is for us to for our
consideration and conservation
there are no changes and finance
there are no changes.
Let me also say that part of
these changes are necessitated
because of a change in
membership a change in the we
have a brand new Senator that we
have to put into committees and
so.
The reasons for these changes
are multiple and if we want to
talk about any of them we can do
that I've made no changes to any
Republican Senate members.
So conservation no changes
finance no changes education we
are proposing to replace check
the Candelaria with our new
Senator mo Maestas and then
remove Senator McKenna.
And health and public affairs
I'm proposing that we replace
again a check up Candelaria with
uh Senator mo Maestas.
To remove list of phonics and to
add Martin Hickey an Indian
rural and cultural affairs
proposing to add Senator Ivey
Soto.
In Judiciary.
Posing to remove Senator Lopez
and to add Senator Wirth and
rules our proposal is to have a
Senator Duhigg the chair to
remove senator Wirth to remove
Senator Ivey Soto to add Senator
McKenna and to add Senator
Stefano.
And finally in tax business and
transportation proposed changes
are to remove Martin Hickey and
to add Senator Lopez.
So of course our committees
committee works under the
approval of the Senate so these
changes that I'm proposing now
will not go into full effect
until the first day of the
session if we approve them today
then we will approve them as the
Senate.
Hopefully and so those are the
proposed changes and I'm ready
for any questions or comments or
motions.
And let me just say that we do
have a quorum.
We have nine members of our live
in members press.
Seeing no.
Debate madam chair I move
adoption.
All right we'll hang on to that
a motion and a call on Senator
Baca I thank you madam chair I
just want to point out that I
think there is some discussion
and debate or whether this
committee can actually need in
the interim I know that we've
had some input from eight
council but there is still some
debate over that but I I'm sure
are we ready to participate the
reason being for the continuity
of the Senate understand their
sin staffing challenges that
will face if we don't at least
plan I I do want to I did want
to make that statement that I
I've I don't completely assents
to the to the meeting of this
committee during the inner but I
do understand the purpose of it
seems to have a pragmatic
of automatic a reasoning behind
it so anyway thank you madam
chair and thank you for that
Senator Baca I did go over this
thoroughly with our director of
the Legislative Council Raul
Burciaga because it's not a
standing committee I'm allowed
to call it when we need to do
this type of thing
certainly what my predecessor
did all the time so and that the
issue the current it's correct
about the rules committee we
have hundreds of confirmations
waiting for us and we must start
working that first week if we
don't allow the chair to and and
other staff to move forward with
hiring people we will not be
ready so that's really the main
purpose is to try to just get a
head start on staffing.
And I appreciate you being here.
Thank you the other thing I'd
ask madam chair is if we could
rather than doing all of them in
one motion go through the
committee individually for vote
on each committee.
You really want to do that.
So I I don't think it'll take
much time much more time than
what we're gonna use anywhere
how many committees have changes
and for.
We have eight standing
committees for changing set X..
We can do that that's not a
problem right anyone else.
Senator Brandt you're moving
around is that when you're
trying to get my attention or is
that just your.
Okay so Senator Padilla one of
you redo your motion and well
let's let's start at the top
with education.
Madam chair revise my motion to
adopt the.
Committee of the recommendations
for the Senate Education
Committee.
All right is there any
opposition to that.
Sure I'll second that motion.
I don't think we need to second
that's right the second okay any
opposition to that motion.
Seeing none we've approve that
one next Senator Padilla I'm
just gonna rely on you for all
of these health and public
affairs I would move adoption of
the health and public affairs
recommendation committee member
recommendations.
Right in the conversation not
that any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing none we've proved that
next Indian rural and cultural
affairs chair all move adoption
of the recommendations for
committee members on the.
Rural that that India's.
Erlin Indian Affairs Committee.
Any opposition to that.
Saying we're okay with that a
Judiciary.
I move adoption madam chair of
the committee structure for the
Judiciary Committee.
Any opposition to that.
Seeing none if you prove that
the nexus rules.
Madam chair I move adoption of
the recommendations I recommend
committee members for the rules
committee.
Okay any opposition to that.
Is not my opposition to that
change right what also your all
right.
Motion passes seventy two
next is tax business the
transportation manager on the
adoption of the recommended
committee structure for the
Business the tax.
Contracts business treasury TBD
TBD TBD committee that I was on
for nine years I apologize
thank.
Any opposition to that.
I see none we've approved that
so thank you all very much I had
several other things but let's
I'm gonna wait till opening day
for that so I appreciate you
very much we will move forward
with these changes they will
require full Senate approval on
opening day appreciate your
mentor requests to conservation
just to make sure for the
record.
there's no changes in
conservation or finance got it
thank you okay it's just a major
yes.
Yes.
The notice thank you so much
provided the well I actually
check it during the interim.
What should you just a separate
message we're well it.
You know wanted to do that to
Sanders and she will send you
these list of changes that we
just made and then.
Nope I had sent to me I'll give
it to her and make sure we use
the right email thank you thank
you okay anything else.
Seeing nothing thank you all
very much and see ten minutes
not to bet plus we got to see
the lovely Office of center box
and are you are to offering all
of us to come down now.
Absolutely this meeting conclude
you're all welcome.
If all right well thank.
And those of you who I won't see
have great holidays.
Right.
